
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
VA/06971/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On 22 June 2016                        |  On 6 July 2016               |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C N LANE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs HINA ADNAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr H Sayadyan, solicitor, of Gulbenkian Andonian,
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  we
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Entry Clearance Officer brings this appeal  but  in  order  to  avoid
confusion the parties are  referred  to  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
Martins, promulgated on 2  November  2015,  which  allowed  the  Appellant's
appeal.



Background

3. The Appellant was  born  on  13  December  1991  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan.

4. On 14 October 2014 the respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application
for entry clearance as a visitor to the UK for four weeks.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Martins ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on article 8 ECHR Grounds.

6. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  21  April  2016  Judge  P  J  M
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that  the  Judge  has  made  insufficient  findings  in
      relation to the evidential foundation for the  conclusions  stated  at
      paragraph 36 of the decision in relation to family life.

The Hearing

7. Ms Isherwood, for  the  respondent,  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
reminded us that this case originated as an application  for  a  visit  visa
and therefore has restricted rights of appeal. She told us that despite  the
fact that the only competent ground of  appeal  was  on  ECHR  grounds,  the
Judge dwelt on the fact that the appellant's son is a  British  citizen  for
whom the appellant wants in education in the UK. Miss Isherwood took  us  to
[36] of the decision. She told us that it is  there  that  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant satisfies all of the requirements of paragraph 41 of  the
immigration rules, and then, without any analysis of proportionality,  makes
an unreasoned finding

      ..... that the decision of the ECO is a disproportionate  interference
      with the right of the appellant to enjoy family life with her  in-laws
      in the United Kingdom.

(b)  Miss  Isherwood  told  us  that  the  decision  does  not  contain  any
meaningful findings of fact nor any analysis of the article 8  ECHR  grounds
of appeal, which form the only competent ground of appeal in this case.  She
told us that the failure to properly analyse article 8  ECHR  grounds  is  a
material error of law. She reminded us of the case of Kaur  (visit  appeals;
Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487, and urged us to set  the  decision  aside  and
substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

8. Mr Sayadyan, for the appellant,  told  us  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. He adopted  the  terms  of
the skeleton argument and  argued  that,  in  reality,  the  respondent  was
simply  trying  to  re-litigate  an  appeal  in  which  she  had  not   been
successful. He told us that the Judge  carefully  analysed  the  grounds  of
appeal between [4] and [11], and that [10]  clearly  demonstrates  that  the
Judge understood that the only competent argument was an appeal  on  article
8 ECHR grounds. He told us that the Judge clearly considers paragraph 41  of
the immigration rules in line with the case of Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry
clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC),  and,  having  found  that  the  appellant
could fulfil the immigration rules, adopted those findings of fact  as  part
of the article 8 ECHR balancing exercise. He urged us to dismiss the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9. In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261  (IAC)  it  was  held
that (i) The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal  to
grant entry clearance as a visitor  where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is  not,
which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction
to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules  and
should not do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at
the extent to which the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
balancing exercise that must follow. Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)
[2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any  contrary  proposition;  (ii)
As compliance with para 41 of HC 395  is  not  a  ground  of  appeal  to  be
decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning  that  will  carry  little
weight, especially if based upon arguments advanced only by  the  appellant.
If the appellant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the
ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard to the assessment  carried  out
by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to treat the  appellant
as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
requirements of paragraph 41.

10.   In Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 it was held  that
(i) In visit appeals the Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot be  made  in
a vacuum.  Whilst judges  only  have  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  the
decision is unlawful under s.6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (or  shows
unlawful discrimination), the starting-point for deciding that must  be  the
state  of  the  evidence  about  the  appellant's  ability   to   meet   the
requirements of paragraph 41 of the immigration rules; (ii) The  restriction
in visitor cases of grounds of appeal to human rights  does  not  mean  that
judges are relieved of their ordinary duties of fact-finding  or  that  they
must approach these in a qualitatively different way. Where relevant to  the
Article 8 assessment, disputes as to the facts must be  resolved  by  taking
into account the evidence on both sides: see Adjei at [10] bearing  in  mind
that the burden of proof rests on the appellant; (iii) Unless  an  appellant
can show that there are individual interests at stake covered by  Article  8
"of a particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise to  a  "strong  claim
that compelling circumstances may exist to justify the  grant  of  leave  to
enter outside the rules": (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  at  [40]  and
[56]) he or she is exceedingly unlikely to succeed.  That  proposition  must
also hold good in visitor appeals.

11. Between [4] and [11] the Judge discusses the grounds of appeal.  Between
[13] and [29] the Judge summarises the evidence lead at the hearing.  It  is
not until [31] the judge commences his "findings and conclusions", and  then
only devotes 9 paragraphs to combined findings and conclusions.

12. In his findings, the Judge dwells on paragraph  41  of  the  immigration
rules; it is only at [36] that the Judge makes any reference  to  article  8
ECHR grounds.  At  [36]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  meets  the
requirements of paragraph  41  of  the  immigration  rules,  and  says  that
because the  appellant  meets  the  immigration  rules  the  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right  to  respect  for
family life.

13. The difficulty with the decision is that there are no findings  of  fact
focusing on article 8 ECHR. That difficulty is compounded by the absence  of
an analysis of the proportionality of the decision  &  the  absence  of  any
clear finding that family life within the meaning of article 8  ECHR  exists
for the appellant in the UK.

14. We find that those failings in the decision are material errors of  law.
We must therefore set the decision aside. Although we set  the  decision  is
set side, there is sufficient material before us to enable us  to  make  our
own findings of fact and substitute our own decision.

Findings of fact

15. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 December 1991.  On  28
April  2012  the  appellant  married  her  husband.  15  November  2013  the
appellant's husband was diagnosed with lung cancer. The appellant's  husband
was immediately admitted to hospital, where he remained until he died on  24
May 2014.  The  appellant's  late  husband's  remains  were  repatriated  to
Pakistan on 29 May 2014, where his funeral rites were carried out.

16. The appellant has one child, born on 6 September 2014; he is  a  British
citizen  and  has  always  lived  with  the  appellant  in   Pakistan.   The
appellant's late husband's brothers and sisters, and his  mother,  all  live
in the UK. The appellant's mother-in-law has travelled to Pakistan to  visit
the appellant and her son five times since September 2014.  The  appellant's
mother is in her mid-50s.

17. The appellant lives in Pakistan  with  her  parents  and  her  son.  The
appellant is in paid employment. The only relatives  the  appellant  has  in
the UK are her brothers and  sisters  in  law  and  her  mother-in-law.  The
appellant is in almost daily  contact  with  her  in-laws  using  the  Skype
messaging service.


Discussion

18. The first question is whether or not family life within the  meaning  of
article 8 ECHR exists for the appellant or  her  son  in  the  UK.  For  the
appellant, it is argued that she and her son  enjoy  family  life  with  her
brothers and sisters in law and her  mother-in-law.  Neither  the  appellant
nor her son had ever lived in the UK, nor have  they  ever  lived  with  the
appellant's brothers and sisters in law nor the appellant's mother in law.

19. The appellant is an adult. All of her in-laws are adults.  There  is  no
evidence before us of anything more than the normal emotional  ties  between
the appellant and her in-laws. They have always lived  separately  but  they
maintain contact by instantaneous messaging services.

20. The appellant's son was born in 2014. He recently celebrated his  second
birthday. He has always lived with his mother and his maternal  grandparents
in Pakistan. In so far as family life within the meaning  of  article  8  of
the 1950 convention exists it exists for the both the appellant and her  son
within their own family unit in Pakistan. The appellant fails  to  discharge
the burden of proving that family  life  within  the  meaning  of  the  1950
convention exists for either the appellant or her son in the UK.

21. The respondent's decision has no impact at all on  the  family  life  of
either the appellant or her son. The appellant and her  son  (together  with
the appellant's parents) remain together. The appellant can  receive  visits
from her late husband's family  in  Pakistan.  The  established  contact  by
telephone on Skype messaging services continues.

22.  The  appellant's  appeal  cannot  succeed  because  we  find  that  the
appellant does not establish family life within the meaning of article 8  of
the 1950 convention in the UK.  If  we  needed  to  go  further  and  assess
proportionality, we would have to find that the respondent's  decision  does
not amount to a disproportionate breach of any of the  rights  enshrined  in
the 1950 convention
      (a)  because  of  the  remoteness  of  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant (together with her son) and the appellant's in-laws;
      (b) because the decision does not create  separation.  Separation  has
      always existed;
      (c) because the appellant's in-laws can (& do) visit the appellant  in
      Pakistan, and
      (d) because the decision does not stop the appellant from submitting a
      renewed application for a visit visa.

Decision

23. The decision of Judge Martins promulgated on 2 November 2015 is  tainted
by a material error of law. We must set the decision aside.

24. We substitute the following decision.

25. The appeal against the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  dated  14
October 2014 is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date:
6th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
