
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06466/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                    |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FLORENCE DUBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Siwela, a legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman, promulgated  on  21  August  2015,  in
    which she allowed Ms Dube's (the claimant) appeal against the  decision
    of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  of  1  October  2014  refusing  her
    application for entry clearance as a visitor to the UK.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Zimbabwe; her stated date of  birth  is  4
    September 1952.  On 22 September 2014 the appellant applied  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor to visit family in the UK.  That application was
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer because  he  was  not  satisfied
    that the claimant could meet the Immigration Rules. In particular, that
    the claimant intended to leave the UK at the end of the visit  or  that
    she was genuinely seeking entry as  a  visitor.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered that the claimant had provided little in the way  of
    documentary evidence of her personal  and  financial  circumstances  in
    Zimbabwe.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  As set out by the First-tier Tribunal  judge,
    in June 2013 the full right of appeal against refusal of a  visit  visa
    sponsored by a family in the United Kingdom was abolished.   An  appeal
    can only be pursued on human rights  or  race  discrimination  grounds.
    The judge found that there was private  and  family  life  between  the
    claimant and her children, although the judge noted that  the  children
    are adults and not dependent on the claimant.  She concluded  that  the
    decision has consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage  the
    operation of Article 8.  The judge allowed the appeal under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On  22  December
    2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish  granted  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer permission to appeal.  The grant of permission  sets  out  that
    paragraph 35 of the First-tier Tribunal decision indicates an  arguable
    application  of  the   old   approach   rather   than   the   foregoing
    considerations beyond a brief reference to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

Summary of Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the appeal is restricted to  residual
    grounds contained in Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act.  On 25 June 2013 Section 52  of  the  Crime
    and Courts Act was commenced.  This restricted  the  appeal  rights  of
    visitors coming to visit family members in the  UK.   The  restrictions
    apply to any applications made on or after 25 June 2013.   The  instant
    application was made on 23 September 2014.  The grounds assert that the
    judge made a  material  misdirection  of  law.   It  is  asserted  that
    established case law  has  established  that  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8 will not normally exist  between  adult  siblings,
    parents and adult children.   If  family  life  does  not  exist,  then
    generally Article 8 will not be engaged.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer
    relies on paragraph 8 of MS (Article 8 - family  life  -  dependency  -
    proportionality) Uganda [2004] UKIAT 00064.  Reliance is also placed on
    paragraph 25 of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and on ZB (Pakistan)
    v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and Ghising and  Others  [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC).  It is asserted that an application to  come  to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor is a temporary visit of limited duration and  the  requirements
    that need to be met to  qualify  under  the  Rules  are  necessary  for
    legitimate aims and are proportionate.  It is also  asserted  that  the
    proportionality assessment undertaken by the judge is  inadequate.   It
    does not explain why the refusal  of  a  visa  which  only  allows  the
    parties to be together temporarily is a  disproportionate  interference
    with Article 8 rights.  It  is  asserted  that  the  claimant  has  not
    demonstrated that the interference with her right to  a  family  and/or
    private life resulting from the refusal  of  the  entry  clearance  has
    given rise to such grave consequences as to engage Article 8.

 6. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the judge
    at paragraph 32 of the decision essentially  said  that  the  appellant
    clearly has a private and family life, however it is evident  that  the
    judge has not considered whether or not the appellant has a family life
    with her children or grandchildren and the finding is contrary  to  the
    case law.  He relied on the case of Kugathas.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge did not undertake an adequate assessment of  proportionality  and
    that the reasons were entirely inadequate for the judge's  findings  on
    proportionality.  He asserted that this was a short period family visit
    visa that had been refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on the  basis
    that he was not convinced that the appellant was only coming to the  UK
    for the purpose of a family visit.  He referred to paragraph 37 of  the
    judge's decision and submitted that there were no reasons given by  the
    judge for the conclusions reached.  The judge has not indicated why the
    family ties are so strong that the  proportionality  exercise  requires
    that it falls in the appellant's favour.  Mr Tarlow accepted that there
    is a private life but that the judge has not adequately dealt with this
    matter under either limb of Article 8 of the ECHR.



 7. Mr Siwela submitted that the judge has done all that needed to be  done
    and has  made  the  correct  decision  and  has  undertaken  a  correct
    assessment.  He submitted that the Home Office  appeal  does  not  take
    into account private life.  In this case it is not just the appellant's
    children but her grandchildren.  He submitted that on the evidence when
    possible the family will go to visit each other, they are in touch with
    each other via  media,  however  their  opportunities  to  visit  their
    grandmother are limited as they can only go during school holidays when
    it is more expensive.  He submitted that the  new  grandchild  is  very
    young.  He  asserted  that  it  is  important  at  this  stage  of  the
    children's lives to establish a private life with their grandmother.  A
    relationship at this age has a  substantial  effect  on  children.   He
    submitted that the grandmother has not seen the latest grandchild.  The
    judge found that one of the daughters was unable to travel as a  result
    of her health problems.  He relied on a case X v Iceland  in  which  he
    asserted that it makes clear that Article 8 includes both  private  and
    family life and that private life includes the right to  establish  and
    develop relationships with other human beings.  He submitted that it is
    the private life of the sponsors and that those most affected  are  the
    grandchildren, they have a right to establish family life and that  the
    less that the grandchildren see their grandparent they would be  unable
    to establish that relationship.  He submitted that the judge looked  at
    the evidence of the witnesses and came to the conclusion that there was
    private life.  He submitted that the judge was entitled to look at  the
    factors that the appellant would return as the judge can  look  at  the
    strength of a visa application insofar as it is relevant for  assessing
    proportionality.  He submitted that the judge weighed those factors  up
    in the process and came to the decision that  the  private  and  family
    life outweighed the public interest.


 8. In reply Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  case  simply  was  that  the
    appellant was not in the UK, she wishes  to  come  here  but  has  been
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The judge has failed  to  give
    inadequate reasons as to why Article 8 considerations  should  fall  in
    the appellant's favour.


Legislative Provisions


 9. Section 117A of the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 sets  out  the
    scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article 8 of the ECHR; Public Interest
    Considerations" as follows:
         117A Application of this Part


         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life
         under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the
         considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of
         whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and
         family life is justified under Article 8(2).




10. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable  to  all  cases  and
    are:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public
         interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
         because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
         because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person
         at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with
         a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.



Discussion

11. The correct approach to consideration of a  'visit  appeal'  where  the
    only grounds available are on the basis of Human Rights does not result
    in the claimant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules as  irrelevant.
    As held in Kaur (visit appeals; Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00487  (IAC)
    ('Kaur'):

         "27.     This background fortifies us in  our  view  that  a  judge
         limited by s.88A to deciding whether the refusal of entry clearance
         to an appellant is compatible with Article 8 cannot - and must  not
         - avoid taking the factual situation as regards the ability of  the
         appellant to meet paragraph 41 as a  starting  point.  In  deciding
         whether Article 8(1) is engaged, for example,  the  judge  must  be
         satisfied that there is a factual content to  the  claimed  private
         and family life. If the evidence relating to the  ability  to  meet
         the requirements of paragraph 41 discloses to the  judge  that  the
         visitor has no real family  ties  or  that  the  visitor  does  not
         genuinely intend a visit, that may have a direct  material  bearing
         on the decision as to whether Article 8(1) is  engaged.  Similarly,
         evidence regarding the applicant's ability to meet the requirements
         of  the  rules  may  sound  on  whether  the  decision  constitutes
         interference and also on whether, if there is interference,  it  is
         proportionate. Overall, unless an appellant can show that there are
         individual  interests  at  stake  covered  by  Article  8   "of   a
         particularly pressing nature" so as to give rise to a "strong claim
         that compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of LTE
         outside the rules" (see  SS  (Congo)  at  [40]  and  [56]),  he  is
         exceedingly unlikely to succeed. That proposition  must  also  hold
         good in visitor appeals."

12. The claimant's ability to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  the
    question to be determined by the Tribunal but is  capable  of  being  a
    weighty factor. The judge has considered the claimant's ability to meet
    the Immigration Rules. Although there is no explicit finding it can  be
    inferred  that  the  judge  considered  that  the  claimant   met   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

13. The judge correctly adopted a, albeit brief, structured approach to the
    Article 8 exercise following the five stage test identified  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27. The judge's findings and conclusions are very brief and
    I set them out in full below:

         "32. However, the appellant has children in the United Kingdom  and
             grandchildren.  There  is  clearly  private  and  family  life
             between the appellant and her children, although I  note  that
             they  are  adult  children  who  are  not  dependent  on   the
             appellant.  The decision therefore has  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of  Article  8.
             The decision is in accordance with the law and is necessary in
             the interests of maintaining an effective immigration control.
               The  key  question  here  is  whether  the  interference  is
             proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be
             achieved.

         33.  The appellant has not previously come to the  United  Kingdom.
             She does not have a poor immigration history.  She has  proved
             that she can adhere to immigration control when visiting other
             countries.

         34.  The appellant has two sons living in the  United  Kingdom  and
             four  grandchildren.   She  has  only   met   three   of   her
             grandchildren.

         35.  The appellant has strong links with Zimbabwe.  She has  worked
             as a teacher for over 30 years, and has recently retired  from
             her post.  She owns a farm and has both cattle and chickens.

         36.  I note that one of her daughters-in-law is unwell, and medical
             evidence has been provided to explain that  she  is  unfit  to
             travel.  Her eldest grandson lives with Ms Tacadao.

         37.  Taking all these points into consideration  I  find  that  the
             appeal should be allowed under Article 8".

14. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal  centre  around  family
    life within the meaning of Article 8.  A number of cases are  cited  in
    support of the proposition that there is no presumption of family  life
    between an adult and his  parent  unless  something  more  exists  than
    normal emotional ties.  In Kaur the Upper Tribunal set out:

         "39.     We bear in mind that  ties  between  a  parent  and  adult
         children or between a grandparent and children will not as  a  rule
         constitute family life for Article 8(1) purposes  unless  there  is
         dependency over and  above  normal  emotional  ties:  see  Kugathas
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Singh and Another [2015] EWCA Civ 74."

15. The Tribunal, in this case, has not identified  any  factors  over  and
    above the normal emotional ties that exist between  the  claimant,  her
    sons and her grandchildren. The judge therefore erred in  finding  that
    there was family  life  between  the  claimant  and  her  children  and
    grandchildren.

16. The Entry Clearance Officer does not assert that private life does  not
    exist between the claimant and her children and  grandchildren  in  the
    UK. The core element of  private  life  is  the  ability  to  establish
    relationships with other human beings.  The refusal of entry  clearance
    is an interference with the private  lives  of  the  claimant  and  her
    children and grandchildren.  The  first  of  the  steps  was  correctly
    applied by the judge in accordance with the test in Razgar.

17. The judge has not,  however,  undertaken  an  appropriate  or  adequate
    proportionality exercise.  The judge has not weighed  the  factors  set
    out in statutory form in the balancing exercise as she was required  to
    do under Section 117A and 117B of the Nationality and  Immigration  Act
    2002.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore contains  a  material
    error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant to  Section  12(2)(a)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007.   I  re-make  the
    decision.

19. There was no challenge to the judge's conclusions that the  refusal  of
    entry was an interference in the private lives of the claimant and  her
    children, that the interference was in accordance with the law and  was
    necessary. The two issues are whether or  not  that  interference  will
    have consequences of such gravity to engage Article 8 and the  adequacy
    of the proportionality exercise.  The  starting  point,  as  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer sets out, is that the claimant was intending to visit
    for a short period. Any  interference  in  the  private  lives  of  the
    claimant, her children and grandchildren is likely to be  modest.   The
    private life that exists between the  claimant  and  her  children  and
    grandchildren in the UK is effectively being maintained at present. She
    last saw them in 2012. It is not the case that the private life  cannot
    be continued by any other means other than by the claimant visiting the
    UK. I consider that on the facts  of  this  case  the  interference  is
    unlikely to be of such gravity as to engage Article 8.



20.  However,  even  if  Article  8  were  engaged,  in   undertaking   the
    proportionality exercise I consider that the scales fall in  favour  of
    the maintenance of effective immigration control. Section 117B requires
    this court to  place  weight  on  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public  interest.  As  regards
    the other provisions of section 117B, there was no issue with regard to
    the sponsor providing the claimant with maintenance  and  accommodation
    during her visit. The public interest expressed in section 117B(3) does
    not therefore arise. None of  the  other  section  117B  considerations
    arise. In favour of the claimant is that  the  judge  appears  to  have
    considered that she met the Immigration Rules therefore this weighs  in
    her favour when considering whether the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing
    immigration control  is  proportionate.  However  this  is  a  case  of
    interference in private life. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) at paragraph 24 it was considered that:

         "24.  ...We are, however, prepared to say that it will only  be  in
         very unusual  circumstances  that  a  person  other  than  a  close
         relative will be able to show that the refusal of  entry  clearance
         comes within the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
         child and even then it will not necessarily be  extended  to  cases
         where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim  or  will
         not add significantly to the time that the  people  involved  spend
         together."

21. Weighing against the claimant is that the visit is for a short  period,
    is not a relationship of husband and wife or a parent and a minor child
    and will not add significantly to the time that  'the  people  involved
    spend together'. There cannot be said to be  family  life  between  the
    claimant and her adult children and grandchildren.  In entry  clearance
    cases there must be some compelling circumstances  that  would  require
    entry clearance to be permitted under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  on  the
    basis of a private life between  the  claimant  and  her  children  and
    grandchildren in the United Kingdom.  No compelling factors  have  been
    identified.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  I set aside that decision. The Entry  Clearance
    Officer's appeal is  allowed.  The  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer stands.



23. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 28 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


