
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/06438/2014
                                                               VA/06436/2014
                                                               VA/06443/2014
                                                               VA/06446/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff                              |Determination issued         |
|on 24 May 2016                                |on 31 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               M N ANWARI + 3
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Grubb, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors, Newport
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are  as  described  above,  but  for  continuity  they  are
    described in the rest of this decision as they were in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are husband, wife and 2 children, all  citizens  of  and
    resident in Afghanistan.  Two older children are also  members  of  the
    family unit, but no applications were made for them to  visit  the  UK,
    and they are not part of these proceedings.

 3. The "sponsors" are the brother and sister, both adults,  of  the  first
    appellant.

 4. The first appellant was lawfully in the UK as a visitor in  October  to
    December 2012 and in January to February 2013.

 5. The four appellants made family  visit  visa  applications  which  were
    refused on 18 September 2013.  They appealed  those  decisions.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 6  June  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Archer found that the appellants' finances and intention to return were
    as they said (paragraph 19), but there was no appeal in respect of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In respect of Article 8 of the ECHR the judge found
    that the appellants had no family life with their relatives in the  UK,
    because the sibling relationships were among adults with no evidence of
    any emotional or financial dependence (paragraph  22)  so  the  appeals
    were dismissed.

 6. The appellants then made the applications leading to these proceedings,
    which the ECO refused on 10 September 2014.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson allowed all four appeals by
    decision promulgated on 10 August 2015.   At  paragraph  46  the  judge
    found that the relationship between the first appellant and the  second
    sponsor was "far beyond  what  is  normal  with  adult  siblings".   At
    paragraph 47 she found it in the best interests of the third and fourth
    appellants, being children,  to  develop  personal  relationships  with
    their cousins.  At paragraph 49 the judge said:

         "It is clear that for this family it will be almost impossible  for
         them to see each other if the [first] appellant is not  allowed  to
         visit the UK, either alone or with some or all of  his  family.   I
         consider that to be  entirely  disproportionate  and  I  allow  the
         appeal."

 8. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on these grounds:

         "...

          3.     It is established case law that  family  life  within  the
             meaning of Article 8  will  not  normally  exist  among  adult
             siblings, parents and adult children.  If family life does not
             exist then generally  Article  8  will  not  be  engaged.   An
             application to come to the UK as  a  visitor  is  a  temporary
             visit of limited duration ...

             [paragraphs 4 and 5 cite MS [2004] UKIAT  00064  and  Kugathas
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31 for the proposition that among adult family
             members there needs to be more than the normal emotional  ties
             for Article  8  purposes,  and  that  such  relatives  do  not
             ordinarily share family life within the meaning of Article 8].

         6. The  proportionality  assessment  is  inadequate,  it  does  not
             explain why refusal of a visa which only allows the parties to
             be together temporarily is a disproportionate interference ...
             the appellants have not demonstrated  that  interference  with
             the right to family and/or private  life  resulting  from  the
             refusal has given rise to such grave consequences as to engage
             Article 8.

         7. ... The  respondent's  decision  does  not  interfere  with  the
             established pattern of family life ... while the judge makes a
             finding that there is family life between the first  appellant
             and [second] sponsor there is no such finding  concerning  the
             second, third and fourth appellants."

 9. Mr Richards submitted further to the grounds as follows.  The judge did
    not adequately explain why family life was constituted  for  Article  8
    purposes among adult siblings who carry  on  their  lives  on  separate
    continents.  It was acknowledged from the phrasing of the decision  the
    judge had in mind the case law on which the grounds are based,  but  no
    adequate reason was given to justify  such  unusual  conclusions.   The
    factor on which the judge relied was the first appellant's sympathy for
    his sister following upon her divorce.  That did not go "far beyond" or
    even "beyond" what might be expected between brother  and  sister,  and
    was simply irrational.  In  any  event,  the  decisions  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer did not interfere with such family  life  as  existed
    among the parties.  The outcome of the decisions left matters  as  they
    were, and did not even approach a disproportionate  interference.   The
    decisions had been based on lack of intention to return,  an  important
    point on which the judge had not expressed any findings.  The  decision
    should be set aside and remade.

10. I raised the question whether there might be  different  considerations
    applying to the various appellants, a point arising from paragraph 7 of
    the grounds.  I also observed that the prospective development of links
    among cousins might be thought a somewhat far-fetched basis for finding
    a breach of a fundamental human right.

11. Ms Grubb submitted thus.  It was fairly acknowledged by the  respondent
    that the judge had not misdirected  herself  about  the  correct  legal
    approach.  She had used the terms of the case law cited in the grounds.
     There was no inadequacy of reasoning.  Any error was immaterial,  once
    the appellants' case  reached  stage  3  of  Razgar.   Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson had rightly taken the findings of Judge Archer as her starting
    point.  On those favourable findings, the interference of  family  life
    brought about by the decisions was not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Judge Suffield-Thompson  had  thought,  like  Judge  Archer,  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were  all  met.   The  appellants
    could not succeed on that point alone, having  no  statutory  right  of
    appeal under the Rules, but once they had  shown  that  Article  8  was
    engaged, their cases succeeded.  There  was  no  point  of  distinction
    between present and previous appeals, so far as the  Immigration  Rules
    were concerned.  As to the  absence  of  any  finding  on  whether  the
    appellants would return, Judge Suffield-Thompson had found the sponsors
    to be credible witnesses, and they had stated that the appellants would
    do so.  The judge was entitled to find that there were more than normal
    ties between siblings, for the reasons she gave.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    should be slow to disagree with the factual findings of a judge who had
    properly directed herself as to the law.  If there were no error in the
    finding that family life was constituted for Article 8 purposes,  there
    was no material error.  In any event, paragraph 49, read in the context
    of the whole decision, was an adequate explanation.

12.  Turning  to  the  point  about  possible  differentiation  among   the
    appellants, Ms Grubb accepted that lines have  to  be  drawn  somewhere
    among extended families for the purposes of the Immigration  Rules  and
    of Article 8.  However, she submitted that in this case the family unit
    of the appellants should be considered only as a whole.  It should also
    be kept in mind that there is an  obligation  on  the  state  to  allow
    family ties to develop.  Collective family ties were part and parcel of
    the family life to be protected.  Any  point  of  differentiation  gave
    rise to considerations of procedural fairness.   There  is  no  general
    right of appeal under the Rules, so if only the first appellant were to
    succeed in terms of Article 8, the other three appellants would be left
    only with proceedings by way of judicial review.  Given the history and
    the findings in their favour they would have  a  powerful  case.   They
    should not  have  to  take  multiple  proceedings  to  vindicate  their
    position.

13. Finally, Ms Grubb said that she had been instructed to request that  if
    the decision were to be set aside, the Upper Tribunal should proceed to
    remake it on the basis of the evidence  and  submissions  to  date,  in
    which the case for the appellants has been fully advanced.

14. I reserved my determination.

15. I think it is immediately clear that there is nothing in  the  decision
    of Judge Suffield-Thompson, or in the evidence on which it  was  based,
    by which the  outcome  in  favour  of  the  second,  third  and  fourth
    appellants might survive the criticisms made  in  the  SSHD's  grounds.
    The decision contains no finding that they have family  life  protected
    for Article 8 purposes with either  of  the  sponsors.   There  was  no
    evidence on which such a finding could sensibly be reached.

16. It may of course be a normal healthy expectation in many families  that
    relations should be promoted among  cousins  or  among  uncles,  aunts,
    nephews and nieces; but such  natural  wishes  fall  well  outside  the
    established jurisprudence  on  the  extent  to  which  family  life  is
    protected as a fundamental human right through Article 8.

17. I find it somewhat more problematic whether the judge went wrong in law
    by finding family life to exist between the  first  appellant  and  the
    second sponsor.  I accept in principle the submission by Ms Grubb  that
    even if many judges might not have found family life to be constituted,
    so long as the correct test was applied and adequate reasons given, the
    Upper Tribunal should not interfere.

18. Ms Grubb referred to Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112 to support her  argument
    on the importance of the findings in this case, based on the  decisions
    of both judges, that the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    met.  That was a well taken point, so far as  it  went.   However,  the
    final paragraph of Mostafa is of some importance:

         "24.     It is the very essence of Article  8  that  it  lays  down
             fundamental values that have to be considered in all  relevant
             cases.  It would therefore be extremely foolish to attempt  to
             be prescriptive, given the intensely  factual  and  contextual
             sensitivity of every case.  Thus we  refrain  from  suggesting
             that ... any particular  kind  of  relationship  would  always
             attract the protection of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of
             relationship would never  come  within  its  scope.   We  are,
             however, prepared to say that it will only be in very  unusual
             circumstances that a person other than a close  relative  will
             be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
             within the scope of Article 8(1).  In practical terms this  is
             likely to be limited to cases where the relationship  is  that
             of husband and wife or other close life partners or  a  parent
             and minor child and even  then  it  will  not  necessarily  be
             extended to cases where, for example, the  proposed  visit  is
             based on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that
             the people involved spend together ..."

19. This is not a case of husband and wife, or similar partners, or  parent
    and child.  The proposed visit is not based on a whim,  and  might  add
    quite significantly to the time the siblings spend  together,  but  the
    expectation is that they will continue to live their long  term  family
    and private lives separated by a great distance.  I find force  in  the
    Presenting Officer's submission that sympathy for a  divorcing  sibling
    does not go beyond what might naturally be expected.

20. In my opinion, the judge went wrong in law by holding  family  life  to
    exist between the appellant and second sponsor.  The evidence which she
    took to support that conclusion was legally inadequate for the purpose.

21. There were in this case no  "very  unusual  circumstances"  taking  the
    limits of protection beyond the usual core limits.

22. The judge's  findings  at  paragraph  49  are  illogical.   It  is  not
    impossible for the family members to see each other  unless  the  first
    appellant comes to the UK.  The same expenditure would cover travel  in
    the other direction,  or  meeting  in  a  third  country.   It  is  not
    explained why the first appellant's right, if he had one, would  extend
    to all or any of his wife and children.

23. Even if the judge was entitled to  find  a  relationship  protected  by
    Article 8, there was nothing  to  justify  a  finding  that  the  ECO's
    decision-making represented a serious interference with that right.

24. Put another way, the evidence did not lawfully admit of a finding  that
    the case went beyond Razgar questions 1 and 2.  The  decisions  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not constitute  an  interference  with  the
    exercise of the appellants' rights to respect for  private  and  family
    life, and did not have consequences of such gravity as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.

25. Regarding intention to leave, the judge ought  perhaps  to  have  dealt
    with that explicitly; but the point is incidental.

26. Article 8 is for the protection of fundamental rights where family life
    exists.  It is not an alternative route to an appeal under the Rules.

27. The decision of Judge Suffield-Thompson is set aside, and the following
    decision is  substituted;  the  appeals  of  all  four  appellants,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, are dismissed.


            [pic]


            26 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
