
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/06993/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NEW DELHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BABUL AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison (Counsel)


                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

1.    In this matter the Appellant is the Entry Clearance  Officer  and  the
    Respondent is Mr Ahmed.  For convenience and for ease in following this
    decision I shall continue to refer to Mr Ahmed as the Appellant and the
    Entry Clearance Officer as the Respondent.

2.    This appeal relates to application for  entry  clearance  made  by  Mr
    Ahmed to enter the United Kingdom as a  visitor.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [ECO] had refused that application by way of a decision dated 9
    October 2014. The Appellant had appealed against the ECO's decision and
    his appeal was heard thereafter at Taylor House by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Moore.  The Judge had allowed the Appellant's  appeal.   The  ECO
    had sought permission to appeal and  that  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page Nicholson stating:

         "2.      ... for all applications submitted from 25  June  2013,  a
         person refused entry clearance to visit relatives in the UK will be
         unable to appeal against that immigration decision  except  on  (i)
         human rights and (ii) race relations grounds by virtue of  s.52  of
         the  Crime  and  Courts  Act   2013-the   commencement   date   and
         transitional provisions being set out in the Crime and  Courts  Act
         2013 (Commencement No.1  and  Transitional  and  Saving  Provision)
         Order (SI 2013/1042). 3 The Judge did not consider  the  appeal  on
         human rights and made no finding as to whether there was  a  family
         life that could engage Article 8 ..."

3.    I heard submissions  from  both  parties  today.  I  had  reserved  my
    decision but had indicated to the parties that if I was minded to  find
    that there was an error of law then this was a case  in  which  it  was
    important for the findings of fact to be preserved if possible. On that
    basis both parties submitted that it would be appropriate for there  to
    be a remittal of the  matter  to  the  same  Judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider the appeal further.

4.    Having reflected on the decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge  and
    having now read the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Kaur  (visit
    appeals: Article 8) [2015] which neither party had cited, I come to the
    clear view that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    Judge.

5.    The Judge materially erred in law because he allowed the appeal  based
    on the Immigration Rules but there was no such appeal before him and no
    basis upon which an appeal could be allowed based  on  the  Immigration
    Rules. The only basis of the appeal was in respect of  Article  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights as Race Relations did  not  feature
    as part of the grounds.

6.    I  note  the  reference  to  the  public  interest  and  section  117B
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  the  Judge's  decision,
    but that does not get close to a proper consideration  of  the  matters
    required in an Article 8 assessment.

7.    As was made clear by the Upper Tribunal in Kaur, there needs to  be  a
    clear and proper assessment of Article 8:

         "39.     We bear in mind that  ties  between  a  parent  and  adult
         children or between a grandparent and children will not as  a  rule
         constitute family life for Article 8(1) purposes  unless  there  is
         dependency over and  above  normal  emotional  ties:  see  Kugathas
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Singh and Another [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.  In
         light of these authorities we are  prepared  to  accept  that  even
         though not financially dependent on her sponsor son,  the  claimant
         enjoyed ties with him and has family that went  beyond  the  normal
         emotional  ties  between  an  elderly  mother/grandmother  and  her
         sponsor son/grandchildren and fall  within  the  scope  of  Article
         8(1). Although we have set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge, we consider  that  in  relation  to  the  issue  of
         whether  Article  8(1)  was  engaged  he  was  entitled  to  attach
         particular weight to the evidence that the claimant  had  played  a
         central role in bringing up the two grandchildren (the judge  heard
         evidence about this from one of them). There may have  been  a  two
         and a half year gap, but it was known she had tried  unsuccessfully
         before to get a visa.

         40.      Whilst in entry clearance cases it is not  to  be  assumed
         that there will always be an interference  with  family  life  (see
         e.g. SM and Others (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ  233;  see  also  more
         generally VW (Uganda) (2009) EWCA Civ 5), we are prepared to accept
         that the decision in this case  did  interfere  in  the  claimant's
         right to respect for family  life  (or,  as  the  Strasbourg  Court
         prefers to describe it in entry clearance cases, did  amount  to  a
         lack of respect for family life).

         41.      Regrettably we are wholly unpersuaded, however,  that  the
         decision lacked proportionality. Like  the  ECO,  we  consider  the
         claimant had not shown she met the requirements of paragraph 41  to
         show that  she  intended  only  a  genuine  visit.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge would appear to have concluded otherwise but gave no
         or no adequate reasons for adopting that  view.  In  re-making  the
         decision we must now, of course, have regard, inter  alia,  to  the
         claimant's letter of January 2015. This letter certainly assists us
         in providing some further details of her  family  circumstances  in
         India, but it does not persuade us that her family  ties  in  India
         were as meaningful to her as those  with  her  third  son  and  his
         children whom she had brought up. (In this regard we would  observe
         that we do not accept Mr Bramble's  contention  that  this  further
         letter casts doubt on whether she had  in  fact  brought  up  these
         children, as the reference she makes to having "hardly resided with
         him" was a reference to the sponsor, who had gone to the UK leaving
         his  children  behind;  it  was  not  a  reference  to  these   two
         grandchildren.)"

8.     In  this  case  the  Judge  did  decide  that  Paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules was met and therefore the Upper Tribunal's  reference
    to Mostafa and Adjei at paragraph 28 needs  to  be  considered  against
    that background.

9.    Therefore with the relatively unusual circumstances of  this  case  in
    which there have  been  favourable  findings  of  fact  in  respect  of
    Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules but no assessment of  Article  8,
    in my judgment it would not be appropriate to deprive the Appellant  of
    the relatively advantageous position  through  no  fault  of  his.  The
    Respondent was not represented at the hearing.  Instead  therefore,  in
    accordance with the submissions of the parties, I do consider  that  it
    is appropriate for there to be a remittal of  this  case  to  the  same
    Judge at the First-tier Tribunal.

10.   The Judge will be able to consider  the  submissions/evidence  of  the
    parties at a further  hearing  which  will  focus  on  Article  8.  The
    findings of fact which have been made shall remain  in  place  and  are
    preserved. It will be open to the Judge to make further findings and to
    make his assessment in respect of Article 8  guided  by  the  case  law
    particularly that referred to above.

Notice of Decision

11.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contains  a  material
    error of law is set aside to the extent referred to above.

12.   The decision in respect of Article 8 ECHR shall be re-made  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Moore at Taylor House. If Judge Moore  is  not  available
    then the Resident Judge at the First-tier Tribunal shall allocate  this
    case for hearing before a suitable First-tier Tribunal Judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

