

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
VA/06970/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     | Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29th January 2016                       | On 30th March 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR HASEEB AKRAM KHAN
                                           (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


For the Respondent:  Mr Tsalikis (First Law Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,
   with permission, against the Decision and Reasons of First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Mitchell promulgated on 20th May  2015  in  which  he  allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal, on Human Rights grounds, against the Entry  Clearance
   Officer's decision to refuse to issue  him  with  entry  clearance  as  a
   visitor.

2. For the sake of continuity we shall continue to refer to Mr Khan  as  the
   Appellant and the Entry Clearance  Officer  as  the  Respondent  in  this
   decision.

3. The Appellant, born in September 1988,  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  He
   applied, along with his mother, to enter the United Kingdom to visit  his
   brother. On 29th September 2014 the Entry Clearance Officer  refused  his
   application. The Appellant's mother's application was granted.

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  his  appeal  was
   dealt with by Judge  Mitchell  on  the  papers  on  12th  May  2015.  The
   Appellant had opted for a paper consideration of his appeal.

5. In his decision the Judge set out the Entry Clearance  Officer's  reasons
   for refusal. These were that  the  Appellant  appeared  to  have  regular
   monthly payments from his salary but also  large  payments  in  September
   2014 some 4.7 times his claimed income. The origin  of  those  funds  was
   unclear and as they were inconsistent with the account history the  Entry
   Clearance Officer was not satisfied that they reflected  the  Appellant's
   income or financial circumstances. On  that  basis  the  Entry  Clearance
   Officer was not satisfied that the employment or financial  circumstances
   of the Appellant were as claimed. This led him to doubt  the  credibility
   of the Appellant's claim to be seeking entry as a visitor for  a  limited
   period.

6. The Judge noted that in his appeal the  Appellant  claimed  to  meet  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules and that the decision of the  Entry
   Clearance Officer was wrong. The appellant had, the Judge  said,  clearly
   and concisely outlined where the funds originated, explaining that he had
   sold gold jewellery inherited from his father and that the proceeds  were
   paid in instalments which he then paid into his bank.  An  affidavit  was
   provided by the buyer of the gold which was duly translated and  included
   in the papers.

7. In addition to his claim that he met the requirements of the  Immigration
   Rules the Appellant also claimed that the decision  breached  his  "basic
   human rights to visit his family members who are legally resident in  the
   United Kingdom." He and his mother had wanted to enter the United Kingdom
   to welcome his brother and sister-in-law's new baby  girl.  It  was  said
   that his mother, who had been granted entry clearance, had cancelled  her
   visit as she was unable to travel on her own.

8. In his findings the Judge set out the  case  of  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
   entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC)  and  quoted  the  head  note
   thereof. He then started his consideration with the Appellant's claim  to
   meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules   and  at  paragraph   16
   stated:-

          "The Appellant at question 75 of his  application  form  explains
          exactly why he wishes to travel to the United Kingdom and that he
          is taking his mother with him and she is quite old and unable  to
          travel alone. This does raise an obvious article 8 ECHR issue  in
          that the decision is interference with the Appellant's family and
          private life."


9. He then goes on in the following paragraphs 17 - 19  to state:-

          "I do consider that the Appellant has discharged  the  burden  of
          proof and showing that he is a genuine visitor  who  would  leave
          United Kingdom at the end of the proposed visit. I am  unable  to
          allow the  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules.  It  has  been
          submitted that the Appellant's rights  and  his  family's  rights
          under article 8 ECHR were breached by the refusal decision.


          There clearly would be family life between the Appellant and  his
          mother and his brother.


          The decision to refuse entry clearance was not in accordance with
          the law and the  Appellant  can  meet  the  requirements  of  the
          Immigration Rules."


10. The judge then goes on to consider paragraph  117  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Article 8 in accordance  with  Razgar
   [2004] UKHL 27. He concludes at paragraph 24:-

          "The Appellant in this case however would appear to  be  able  to
          meet the immigration rules. I have taken the decision of  Mostafa
          into account. I do consider the fact that the Appellant can  meet
          the immigration rules is a weighty but not  determinative  factor
          in my decision. I do consider the fact that the Appellant will be
          travelling with his mother to the United  Kingdom  to  visit  his
          brother and niece and that his mother is unable to travel without
          him at this time is both a compassionate and  compelling  factor.
          The decision would not appear to be in accordance with the law as
          the Appellant can meet the requirements of the immigration rules.
          The  decision  would  not  appear  to  be  proportionate  to  the
          legitimate  public  aim  of  maintaining  effective   immigration
          control. There do not appear to be any other legitimate  aims  in
          the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer. I therefore consider
          that the appeal should be allowed under article 8 ECHR."

11. The Entry Clearance Officer sought and was granted permission to  appeal
   by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that  the  finding  of
   family life between the Appellant and the sponsor, his  brother,  was  in
   conflict with settled law as to the need for something more  than  normal
   emotional ties in order to establish family life between adults.  It  was
   also said to be arguable that  there  was  an  absence  of  reasoning  at
   paragraph 18 as to the existence of family life  between  "the  Appellant
   and his mother and his brother"

12. Thus the matter came before us. Our first task is to decide whether  the
   First-tier Tribunal made an error of law in its decision and reasons  and
   if so whether and to what extent the decision should be set aside.

13. Mr McVeety relied on the grounds save to point out that the  quote  from
   Mostafa at paragraph 12 of the decision and reasons  is  only  a  partial
   quote and missed out the second and crucial  part  which  indicated  that
   success is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is  close
   such as between husband and wife or parent and  minor  child.  He  argued
   that the Appellant in this case was visiting an adult  sibling  with  his
   mother and Mostafa was incorrectly applied by the Judge.

14. On the Appellant's behalf it was argued that the Judge directed  himself
   correctly and that his findings did not conflict with existing case  law.
   It was argued that the relationship between the two brothers  was  indeed
   beyond that between normal adult siblings as the brother in the  UK  had,
   since the death of their father, taken on  the  role  of  parent  to  his
   brother.

15. In our view the First-tier Tribunal did err  in  its  decision  and  did
   indeed misapply the wisdom of Mostafa.

16. The case of Mostafa, relied upon by both sides in this case,  states  in
   its head note:-

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control".


17. However, at paragraph 24 the Tribunal said this:-

          "It  is  the  very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
          fundamental values that have to be  considered  in  all  relevant
          cases.  It would therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to  be
          prescriptive,  given  the  intensely   factual   and   contextual
          sensitivity of every case. Thus we refrain from suggesting  that,
          in this type of case, any particular kind of  relationship  would
          always attract the protection of Article 8(1) or that other kinds
          of relationship would never  come  within  its  scope.   We  are,
          however, prepared to say that it will only  be  in  very  unusual
          circumstances that a person other than a close relative  will  be
          able to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes within the
          scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this is  likely  to  be
          limited to cases where the relationship is that  of  husband  and
          wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor child and
          even then it will not necessarily be extended to cases where, for
          example, the proposed visit is based on a whim or  will  not  add
          significantly  to  the  time  that  the  people  involved   spend
          together. In the limited class of cases where Article 8 (1)  ECHR
          is engaged the refusal of entry clearance must be  in  accordance
          with the law and proportionate. If a  person's  circumstances  do
          satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not acted  in  a  way
          that undermines the system of immigration control, a  refusal  of
          entry clearance is liable to infringe Article 8".



18. We have highlighted the relevant part. The judge in  this  case  appears
   to have ignored completely the body of the decision,  relying  purely  on
   the head note finding baldly that the relationships engaged Article 8.

19. The Judge also erred in starting his deliberations with whether  or  not
   the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules as this  will
   only ever be relevant if it is found that Article 8 is  engaged.  Whether
   or not the Appellant meets the requirements of the Rules will then  be  a
   factor to be taken into account when assessing proportionality.  In  this
   case the Judge started with his decision as to whether the Appellant  met
   the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  before  considering  whether
   Article 8  was engaged.

20. On the basis that he approached the appeal incorrectly and on the  basis
   that his finding that Article  8  was  engaged  was  entirely  unreasoned
   (paragraph 19) we find that he made an error of law. As his conclusion in
   relation to Article 8 was determinative of the appeal we set the decision
   aside. With the agreement of the parties we  proceeded  to  redecide  the
   appeal.

21. We are entirely unpersuaded by the argument  that  the  sibling  in  the
   United Kingdom has taken over the role of father to  the  Appellant.  The
   Appellant is aged 25 years. The sponsor has been in United Kingdom for  a
   considerable period of time where he  has  settled  and  is  raising  his
   family.  The  Appellant  is  employed  in  Pakistan  and  has   a   close
   relationship with his mother. Even if the UK Sponsor has assumed the role
   of head of the family, that does not render  his  relationship  with  his
   adult brother one of dependence over and above what  is  to  be  expected
   between adult siblings, or indeed an adult and  parent  (Kugathas  [2003]
   EWCA Civ 31).We are entirely unpersuaded that Article  8  is  engaged  as
   between the Appellant and his brother in the United Kingdom. This  family
   has chosen to enjoy its family life across continents over  a  number  of
   years and thus the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer represents  no
   interference in the exercise of that family life.  There  is  nothing  to
   prevent the Sponsor from visiting the appellant in Pakistan or indeed the
   family meeting for a holiday in a third country.

22. Similarly, we are entirely unpersuaded  that  the  relationship  between
   the Appellant and his mother would be interfered with by the  refusal  of
   entry clearance. We are entirely unpersuaded that the mother's ability to
   travel is entirely dependent upon the Appellant accompanying her. Even if
   she were unable to travel alone, she could travel with someone other than
   the Appellant. Airlines deal on a daily basis  with  elderly  and  infirm
   passengers who require support at the airport  and  on  to  and  off  the
   plane. We do not accept therefore  that  the  Appellant's  mother  cannot
   travel without him accompanying her. She could either be  accompanied  by
   another member of the family or use the good offices of  the  airline  to
   assist her if she is taken to and collected from the relevant airports by
   family members.

23. Furthermore, even if there were family life between  the  Appellant  and
   his mother in Pakistan, which we did not find that there is, that  family
   life would not be interfered with by  mother  travelling  to  the  United
   Kingdom for a holiday.

24. For all of the above reasons we find the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
   error of law. Having set the decision aside we remake it and dismiss  the
   Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision.
   Accordingly, the Entry Clearance Officer's appealed to the Upper Tribunal
   is allowed.

25. We would simply add that the Judge's finding that the Appellant met  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules has not been challenged.  That does
   not entitle him to succeed in  his  appeal  but  is  a  finding  that  we
   preserve.


Signed                 Dated 11th March 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

