
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber              Appeal Number: VA/06005/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
(via video link to Bradford)      On 21st Aug 2014
On 28th May 2014
                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                 Hameed Khan
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. W. Khan, nominated sponsor.
For the Respondent:            Ms.  R.  Petterson,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Jaffer promulgated on 21 November  2013,  dismissing  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  20  February  2013  to
      refuse to grant entry clearance as a family visitor.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  5  January  1987.  He
      made an application for entry clearance to visit his brother Mr Waheed
      Khan ('the sponsor'). The application was refused for reasons set  out
      in a Notice of  Immigration  Decision  dated  20  February  2013  with
      reference to paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The  sponsor  attended  the  appeal
      hearing and gave evidence in support of  the  appeal.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal for reasons set out in
      his determination.

   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 4 April 2014.

   5. The Respondent has filed a  Rule  24  response  dated  22  April  2014
      resisting the appeal.

Consideration

   6. The reasons given in the Notice of Immigration Decision  for  refusing
      the Appellant's application for  entry  clearance  indicate  that  the
      Respondent  was  satisfied  in  respect   of   the   maintenance   and
      accommodation  to  be  provided  by  the  sponsor.  As   regards   the
      Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan, he had stated that he was self-
      employed as an agriculturalist with a poultry business: the Respondent
      was satisfied that he was self-employed, however,  was  not  satisfied
      that his financial circumstances were  as  claimed.  The  Respondent's
      reasons in this regard were based on the fact that a letter  from  the
      Appellant's bank only provided a balance at a specific  date  and  did
      not therefore show the history  of  transactions  in  the  Appellant's
      account; further copies of prize bonds (similar to premium bonds)  did
      not bear the name of the holder and were  therefore  not  accepted  as
      belonging to the Appellant.

   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  the  sponsor,  and
      also noted the production of evidence showing the Appellant's business
      activities in respect of his poultry business. The Judge accepted that
      the Appellant  was  a  landowner,  was  married,  and  had  a  poultry
      business.  However,  the  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
      established the income that he  derived  from  his  business  and  had
      failed to establish that the prize bonds belonged to him.

   8. The Judge then said this  at  paragraph  12:  "As  he  has  failed  to
      establish his income is as claimed his failed to establish the  origin
      of savings in his account. He has not therefore established  that  the
      visit was for the period or purpose stated" (my emphasis).

   9. I remind myself that there is no income  threshold  requirement  under
      the Immigration  Rules  for  a  family  visitor  -  although  economic
      activity may be a relevant consideration in evaluating intentions.  In
      my judgement there is a logical disconnect in  the  Judge's  reasoning
      between premise and conclusion: a failure to  prove  income  does  not
      equate with a failure to establish the intention behind a visit or the
      intended duration of a visit. Moreover, the Judge failed to  make  any
      findings in respect of the sponsor's evidence: the sponsor's  evidence
      supported the Appellant's claim that the prize bonds belonged  to  the
      Appellant, and also addressed the Appellant's intentions.

  10. In my judgement the Judge's reasoning is deficient to an  extent  that
      it amounts to an error of law. It is not possible to discern  on  what
      basis the Judge reached his conclusion in the  appeal.  The  error  is
      material as it forms  the  core  of  the  Judge's  determination.  The
      decision  in  the  appeal  requires  to  be  set  aside   and   remade
      accordingly.

  11. I am satisfied that it is possible  to  remake  the  decision  in  the
      appeal without remitting the matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
      heard evidence briefly from the sponsor.

  12. The Respondent's reasoning in support  of  the  refusal  is  extremely
      thin. In my judgement it amounts to little more than speculation as to
      the Appellant's intentions. The Appellant produced supporting material
      that he was economically active - which was accepted by the Respondent
      and the First-tier Judge. I find that there was nothing  of  substance
      to suggest that his intentions were anything other than he  had  said.
      The Appellant lives with his wife in Pakistan.  Moreover,  on  appeal,
      the sponsor indicated to the First-tier  Judge  that  the  Appellant's
      parents (also the sponsor's  parents)  resided  in  Pakistan  and  the
      Appellant would return to support  them:  "He  will  not  abandon  his
      family there" (paragraph 8). This was repeated to  me,  and  I  accept
      this assertion at face  value:  I  note  that  at  no  point  did  the
      Respondent cast doubt on the integrity of the sponsor. A further  bank
      statement has now been produced covering the period 1 February 2013 to
      19 November 2013. Whilst most of this period is post-decision,  in  my
      judgement it is  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  claimed  economic
      activity, and is supportive of the notion that  at  the  date  of  the
      Respondent's decision he was generally able to support himself and his
      family from his own funds. Whilst no precise income figure is  readily
      to be derived from the bank statements, as noted above, this is not  a
      requirement of the Rules. On the strength of the sponsor's evidence  I
      also accept on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  prize  bonds
      produced by the Appellant belong to him.

  13. I find that the Appellant has demonstrated strong ties with Pakistan -
      he is economically active there, owns land there, and has  immediately
      family there. There is  no  evidential  foundation  for  doubting  the
      Appellant's and sponsor's assertions with  regards  to  the  intention
      behind his visit (to visit his brother and to meet  his  sister-in-law
      and nephew), or its intended duration  -  all  of  which  is  entirely
      consistent with the requirements of the Rules.


  14. In the circumstances I am satisfied on a balance of probabilities that
      at the date  of  the  Respondent's  decision  the  Appellant  met  the
      requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii). There  is  no  dispute  with
      regard to any of the other requirements of the Rules.

  15.  Accordingly  I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules, and that the  Appellant  should
      properly have been granted entry clearance.

Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. I remake the decision in the appeal.

  17. The appeal is allowed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     20 August 2014
