
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/06587/2014
                                                               VA/06588/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   E M O U
                                   P I I U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs CO (appellants' mother)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellants because of their young ages.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar, promulgated on 25  June  2015.
Which allowed the Appellants' appeals on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The first appellant was born on 9 May 2001  the  second  appellant  is
his sister.  She  was  born  on  1st  February  2000.  Both  appellants  are
nationals of Nigeria.

4.     On  17  September  2014  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused   the
Appellants' applications to visit their mother in the UK for two weeks.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Khawar  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decisions on article 8 ECHR grounds.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 17 September 2015 Judge Cox  gave
permission to appeal stating

    "I am not sure how carefully the author of the  grounds  has  read  the
    judge's decision. The Judge in fact did not really  get  to  the  fifth
    Razgar question of  proportionality  because  he  stopped  at  question
    three, finding that R's decision was not in accordance with the law. He
    gives reasons for that at [17] and [18], reasons that  look  very  much
    like a rejection of the decision on the merits basis. Arguably,  if  he
    was going to look at the  merits,  the  place  to  do  so  was  in  the
    proportionality assessment. Interestingly, I note  from  [19]  that  he
    says in terms "consequently I would be bound to rule in favour  of  the
    respondent on  the  issue  of  proportionality,  the  fifth  and  final
    question in Razgar.

    4. Thus I feel bound to conclude  that  the  Judge  may  arguably  have
    materially misdirected himself in law, albeit on a  somewhat  different
    basis from that put forward in the grounds."

The Hearing

7.    For the respondent Ms Everett  told  me  that  the  decision  contains
material errors of law. She took me straight to the final sentence of  [19],
which says "consequently  I  would  be  bound  to  rule  in  favour  of  the
respondent on the issue of proportionality, the fifth and final question  in
Razgar". Ms Everett told me that, on  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the
Judge,  allowing the appeal was perverse; that there was no basis  on  which
the appeal should have been  allowed  which  is  supported  by  the  Judge's
findings. She asked me to set the decision aside.

8.    Mrs O was clearly nervous so I discussed with her [16] to [19] of  the
decision. I told her that I understood that she had come  to  tell  me  that
there was no material error of law in the decision and that she wants me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand. Mrs O told me  that  she
deeply disagreed with the entry clearance  officer's  decision,  because  it
stood in the way of regular contact to the appellants, who are in the  early
to mid-teens. She reminded me that  both  of  the  appellants  have  a  good
immigration history and told me that periodic brief visits  to  the  UK  was
essential to the preservation  and  growth  of  her  relationship  with  the
appellants. She is in regular telephone contact with  them  but,  given  the
ages and needs of the appellants there is no substitute for  direct  contact
between mother and child.

Analysis

9.    The respondent's focus in the last sentence of [19]  of  the  decision
is misplaced. As is pointed out in the grounds of appeal,  the  decision  in
this case was not taken on the question of proportionality. It  is  at  [17]
and [18] that the Judge  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
decision is not in accordance with the law. He does so  by  considering  the
facts and circumstances of the appellants' cases and comparing  those  facts
and circumstances  to  the  reasoning  behind  the  respondent's  decisions.
Having completed that  exercise,  the  Judge  finds  that  the  respondent's
decisions are not in accordance with the law by reference to irrationality.

10.   It is not surprising  that  the  respondent  does  not  challenge  the
Judge's findings at [17] and [18]. It is not surprising that the grounds  of
appeal do not seek to challenge the finding that  the  decision  is  not  in
accordance with the law. It is to Ms Everett's credit that she did not  seek
to argue that the third Razgar question should have  been  answered  in  the
affirmative. However, the Judge should have gone  on  to  either  remit  the
matter to the respondent so that a decision which is in accordance with  the
law could be made or he should have considered  the  immigration  rules  and
substituted his decision. He did neither. The incomplete assessment  carried
out by the judge amounts to a material error of law.

11.   In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  it
was held that in appeals against refusal of entry clearance  under  Article,
the claimant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules is not the  question
to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a weighty,  though
not  determinative,  factor  when   deciding   whether   such   refusal   is
proportionate to the legitimate aim of  enforcing  immigration  control.  At
paragraph 9 it was said that where the ground of appeal is limited to  human
rights " Clearly there can be no  question  of  entertaining  an  appeal  on
grounds alleging that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law  or
the immigration rules. These are not permissible grounds. However if  ...the
claimant has shown that refusing him  entry  ...  does  interfere  with  his
...family life then it will be necessary to assess the evidence  to  see  if
the claimant meets the substance  of  the  rules.  This  is  because...  the
ability  to  satisfy  the  rules  illuminates  the  proportionality  of  the
decision to refuse him entry clearance". At paragraph 23 the Upper  Tribunal
said "We have considered carefully the effect that this decision could  have
in other cases. Plainly this will mean that  the  underlying  merits  of  an
application and the ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules,  although  not
the question before the Tribunal, may be capable of being a  weighty  factor
in an appeal based on human rights but they will not be determinative.  They
will only become relevant if the interference is such as to  engage  Article
8(1) ECHR and a finding by the Tribunal that an appellant does  satisfy  the
requirements of the rules will not necessarily lead to a  finding  that  the
decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  is  disproportionate  to  the  proper
purpose of enforcing immigration control.  However  it  may  be  capable  of
being a strong reason for allowing the appeal that must be weighed with  the
others facts in the case".

12.   In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) it was  held
that (i) The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal  to
grant entry clearance as a visitor  where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all. If it is  not,
which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction
to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the rules  and
should not do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at
the extent to which the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
balancing exercise that must follow. Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)
[2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any  contrary  proposition;  (ii)
As compliance with para 41 of HC 395  is  not  a  ground  of  appeal  to  be
decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning  that  will  carry  little
weight, especially if based upon arguments advanced only by  the  appellant.
If the appellant were to make a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the
ECO will, if requested to do so, have regard to the assessment  carried  out
by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to treat the  appellant
as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
requirements of paragraph 41.

13.   There is no criticism of the Judge's  finding  that  the  respondent's
decision is not in accordance with the law. There is  no  criticism  of  his
fact-finding nor of his self-direction. Ms Everett was correct to  highlight
the last sentence of 19. Whilst the Judge's findings  up  until  that  point
are sustainable  I  cannot  uphold  his  finding  that  the  proportionality
assessment  would  favour  the  respondent,  because   the   proportionality
exercise has not in reality been carried out.

14.   The decision is tainted by a material error of  law,  because,  having
found that  the decision is not in  accordance  with  the  law,   the  Judge
neither remitted the case to the respondent for a decision  to  be  made  in
accordance with the law, nor made his own  decision  after  considering  the
Immigration Rules. I therefore find that the  Judge's  determination  cannot
stand and must be set aside.

15.   Although I set aside the decision  promulgated  on  25  June  2015,  I
preserve the Judge's findings of fact and proceed  to  remake  the  decision
myself on the basis of those findings of fact.

16.   The facts of this  case  are  that  the  appellants  are  the  teenage
children of Mrs O, a British citizen who lives in the  UK.  They  live  with
their maternal grandmother in Nigeria. Their parents  have  divorced;  their
father continues to live in Nigeria and has regular supervised contact  with
them. The appellant's mother is a victim  of  domestic  violence.  She  last
visited Nigeria in September 2014, when she was so scared of her  ex-husband
and his family that she only left  her  mother's  home  on  three  occasions
throughout her visit, and on each of those occasions she was escorted.

17.   I am satisfied from a combination of the Judge's findings of fact  and
the documentary evidence available to me  that  the  appellants  fulfil  the
requirements  of  paragraphs  41  to  43  of  the  immigration  rules.   The
respondent relied on paragraph 41(i) & 41(ii) of the rules.  The  appellants
have a settled life in Nigeria. Their home, their school, their friends  and
their father are all in Nigeria. The appellants have a flawless  immigration
history. On the balance of probabilities the appellants intend  to  come  to
the UK for a limited period of less than six months, and  intend  to  return
to their home, their education, their relatives and  their  established  way
of life in Nigeria at the end of the brief visit to the UK.

18.   I therefore find that the appellants fulfil the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules. The cases of  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry  clearance)
[2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) & Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  0261
(IAC) remind me that the ability to fulfil  the  rules  is  a  factor  which
weighs in their favour in assessing the proportionality of the  respondent's
decision.

19.   In the decision of 25 June 2015 the Judge found that family  life  was
engaged  and  that  the  respondent's   decision   is   a   disproportionate
interference with the right to respect for  family  life.  I  consider  that
this case turns on the question  of  proportionality.  In  determining  this
issue I am bound to give effect to the governing statutory regime, to  which
I now turn.  Section 117 of the 2002 Act  is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
account in determining proportionality. I  appreciate  that  as  the  public
interest provisions are now contained in primary legislation  they  override
existing case law, Section  117A(2)  requires  me  to  have  regard  to  the
considerations listed in Sections 117B and  117C.   I  am  conscious  of  my
statutory duty to  take  these  factors  into  account  when  coming  to  my
conclusions.  I am also aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon me the  duty
of carrying out a balancing exercise. In so doing I  remind  myself  of  the
guidance contained within Razgar.

20.   The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the  public
interest.  S.117B(4)(5)  &  (6)  are  not  relevant  to  this  appeal.   The
appellants speak English and are financially  independent.  Therefore  there
are more factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act weighing in favour  of  the
appellants than weighing against them.

21.   The effect of the respondent's decision is to prevent two children  in
their mid-teens from visiting their mother. Because their  mother  has  been
the victim of domestic violence (and  still  bears  a  residual  fear  as  a
result of her treatment at the hands of her ex-husband)  meaningful  quality
contact is  not  available  in  Nigeria.  The  appellants  have  a  flawless
immigration history and have  demonstrated  that  they  can  be  trusted  to
adhere to the terms of  the  immigration  rules.  The  public  interest  and
effective immigration control is not compromised by  allowing  children  who
adhere to the  immigration  rules  and  respect  the  need  for  immigration
control to temporarily  entered  the  UK  to  visit  their  British  citizen
mother. There is a significant benefit to  both  the  appellants  and  their
British citizen mother in maintaining  regular  contact  and  enhancing  the
already  established  means  of   contact   (by   electronic   instantaneous
communication) with regular visits.

22.   I  am  therefore  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
decision is a disproportionate breach of each of the appellant's  rights  to
respect for family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR.

Conclusion

23.   I therefore find that the Judge's decision is tainted  by  a  material
error of law. I remake the decision. I set aside the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal because it contains a material error of law. I substitute  the
following decision.

Decision

24.   Both of the appeals are allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds


Signed      Date 26 October 2015

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

