
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06723/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 9 March 2016                      |


                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                    [A E]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sirikanda, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a 56-year-old a citizen of Turkey was  refused  a  visit
    visa for the purpose of making a 9-day family visit to see her son, her
    daughter, her sister and two brothers, all of whom are British citizens
    or are resident in the UK. The decision to refuse her visa was made  on
    25 September 2014. Her appeal against the decision was heard at  Hatton
    Cross by Judge David Taylor, a Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    heard oral evidence from the sponsor - the appellant's son  named  [IA]
    and her brother [KE]. With regard to the evidence of  the  sponsor  and
    the appellant's brother the Judge in paragraph 8 of  his  determination
    said, "I find firstly that I can accept the evidence of the sponsor and
    his uncle. I had no reason to doubt the truth  of  anything  that  they
    told me." He then went on to conclude  that  family  life  between  the
    sponsor and her other relatives that she wished to visit does not exist
    and the consequences of denial of visit visa to her  are  not  of  such
    gravity as to engage Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. In concluding that family life between the sponsor and other  relatives
    of the appellant does not exist, the Judge first found that there is no
    dependency by the one of them on the other.  In  paragraph  10  of  his
    determination the Judge said, "They are adult family members who simply
    would like to be able to visit each other. I bear in mind the Court  of
    Appeal decision in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  which  held  that,  as
    between adults, for the purposes of Article 8, there must be more  than
    the normal close emotional and other ties  that  exist  between  family
    members." Judge David Taylor  said  in  penultimate  paragraph  of  his
    determination, "I  bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant's  brother  and
    possibly her daughter have refugee status and are unable to  visit  her
    in Turkey but there is nothing to prevent them from all  meeting  in  a
    safe third country if so minded."

 3. The appellants were granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    on 20 January 2016 by Judge Zucker, a Designated  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge. In granting permission Judge Zucker said,  "The  grounds  submit
    that the Judge's approach to article 8 ECHR was flawed. In the light of
    the guidance in the case of Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry  clearance)
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) it is arguable that the Judge erred."

 4. I received submissions from Ms Sirikanda and Mr Jarvis at  the  hearing
    before me. My attention was drawn to the relevant authorities  by  both
    advocates but the main focus was placed on the  Kugathas  decision  and
    the guidance set out in Mostafa  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  Presidential
    panel. Ms Sirikanda argued that in family visit cases it was  necessary
    to make findings on requirements under  immigration  rules  as  in  the
    proportionality assessment made for the  purposes  of  determining  the
    appeal under Article 8, the  extent  to  which  an  applicant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules was a relevant  though  not  a  determinative
    factor. She submitted that there had been a  singular  failure  on  the
    part of Judge David Taylor to engage  with  evidence  relating  to  the
    intention of the appellant, her financial ability,  accommodation  etc.
    as provided for in Rule 41  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applicable  to
    visitors. This failure in itself was a material error  of  law  as  the
    respondent himself had made adverse findings / observations /  comments
    in relation to fulfilment of requirements under  the  Rules.  She  also
    argued that the principle set out in Kugathas and applied by the  Judge
    in this case was a misdirection as  the  dicta  in  Kugathas  had  very
    limited relevance to the facts of this case as some  of  the  relatives
    that the appellant wished to visit are refugees and hence incapable  of
    going  to  see  the  appellant  in  Turkey.  She  contended  that   the
    jurisprudence that followed the decision in Kugathas had mitigated  the
    harshness of the dicta in Kugathas especially  in  cases  where  people
    were seeking entry for temporary purposes such as visits. In support of
    this submission she  relied  on  the  Presidential  Panel  decision  in
    Mostafa and also the decision of the  Grand  Chamber  in  the  case  of
    Khoroshenko v Russia - a judgement delivered in Strasbourg on  30  June
    2015 as well as that of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Kaur  (visit  appeals;
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487. She asked that the decision of Judge  David
    Taylor be set  aside  as  being  in  material  error  of  law  for  his
    misconceived view of Kugathas decision and his failure to make material
    findings of fact. She asked that the appeal be  directed  to  be  heard
    afresh by the First Tier Tribunal as the appellant had so far not had a
    fair hearing.

 5. Mr  Jarvis  in  his  submissions  reminded  me  that  he  had  personal
    connection  with  the  case  of  Mostafa  as  he  had  represented  the
    respondent in that appeal too. Mr Jarvis argued that  the  decision  of
    the First Tier Tribunal was not in material error of law. The Judge had
    correctly and properly dismissed the appeal based upon his reliance  on
    the dicta in Kugathas. He submitted that the decision  in  Adjei  [2015
    UKUT 0261 (IAC) made by the Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern  should  be
    followed and preferred to the guidance given in  Mostafa.  He  drew  my
    particular attention to paragraphs 8, 9 and 15 of the determination. Mr
    Jarvis also relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Singh  &
    Another v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 630. He argued that the decision in the case of Khorashenko had  no
    relevance to the facts of the case before me. He submitted that as  the
    determination of Judge David Taylor was not in material error  of  law,
    it should not be disturbed.

 6. I have given careful consideration to all the relevant  documents,  the
    oral submissions made before me and the case law  relied  upon  by  the
    parties. On first sight the case law tendered by the parties appear  to
    be in conflict but a closer analysis makes the position clearer. Whilst
    a family visit appeal cannot be allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    (Mostafa, Adjei and Kaur) that  does  not  mean  that  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal is absolved from its responsibility to make findings on  facts
    relevant under the immigration rules (paragraph 41). As was said in the
    decision in Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 487  (IAC)  "In
    visit appeals the Article 8 decision on an appeal cannot be made  in  a
    vacuum. Whilst judges only have  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  the
    decision is unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  (or  shows
    unlawful discrimination) (see Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry  clearance
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visa- Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT
    0261(IAC)), the starting -point for deciding that must be the state  of
    evidence about the appellant's ability to  meet  the  requirements  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the immigration rules." I  respectfully
    follow that dicta and prefer it to the apparently contrary view of  the
    Tribunal in Adjei.  Facts that are relevant to the claim to seek  entry
    to the United Kingdom have to be engaged with and clear  findings  made
    thereon before the law on Article 8 is brought into the fray. Of course
    Article 8 engagement requires a finding on family and private life  but
    the making of that finding has to take  account  of  all  the  relevant
    facts which may or may not have a bearing, determinative or  otherwise,
    on the engagement of Article 8 of the ECHR. In  the  appeal  before  me
    Judge David Taylor  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant's brother and said, "I had no reason to doubt  the  truth  of
    anything that they told me." Yet the Judge  made  no  findings  on  the
    adverse credibility comments made by the respondent.  Although  it  can
    perhaps be implied that the Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her stated period of
    stay and that the purpose of the visit was none other than that stated,
    that there were no issues on finance and or  accommodation,  the  Judge
    did not put these factors in the balancing exercise for  engagement  of
    Article 8. With the greatest respect Judge  David  Taylor  applied  the
    dicta set out in Kugathas too narrowly  leading  him  to  the  somewhat
    absurd observation that the appellant could meet up with her relatives,
    some of who are refugees and cannot visit her  in  Turkey,  in  a  safe
    third country. As British citizens or lawful residents of this country,
    they cannot, in normal circumstances be denied the right to be  visited
    by their close family members  without  good  reason.  The  immigration
    rules set out those good reasons for refusal and each case has to  [be]
    decided on its own facts. In this context I  am  reminded  of  how  Sir
    Stanley Burton described the decision or facts in Kugathas. He said  in
    Paragraph 8 of his judgment in Singh that "the facts of  Kugathas  were
    extreme." In Kugathas the relevant facts were materially  different  to
    the facts in this visit visa appeal and where it is accepted that  some
    of the relatives supporting the grant of visit visa  to  the  appellant
    cannot visit  her  in  her  country  of  residence  because  they  fear
    persecution in that country. These are factors that need  to  be  aired
    and resolved before the First Tier Tribunal when it hears  this  appeal
    afresh.

 7. For the reasons given above I set aside the  decision  of  Judge  David
    Taylor as having been made in material error of law. I direct that  the
    appeal be heard afresh by any Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  other
    than Judge David Taylor.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
29 February 2016
