


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06738/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 27 May 2014                              |On : 28 May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                                tarlock singh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fateh Singh (the Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a citizen of India, was born on 20 May 1946. He  has  been
   given permission  to  appeal  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge McDade dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  family
   visitor.

2. The appellant applied for entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
   family visitor, on 18 February 2013, to visit his  daughter  and  son-in-
   law, the latter being his sponsor. His application was refused on 7 March
   2013 on the grounds that he had failed to show  that  he  had  sufficient
   personal, economic or financial circumstances  in  India  to  ensure  his
   return. There was no adequate evidence of the property he claimed to  own
   and neither was there evidence of any family ties in India, since he  was
   a widower. It was noted  that  he  was  financially  dependent  upon  his
   daughter and  son-in-law  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  accordingly  the
   respondent did not accept that he intended to leave the United Kingdom at
   the end of his visit or that he was genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor
   for a limited period.

3. In his Notice of Appeal the appellant stated that he  had  four  children
   in India and had a property there. He only wished to come to  the  United
   Kingdom to see his  other  children,  his  son  Ujjal  and  his  daughter
   Varinder, and their children. It was difficult for them to afford to come
   to India and he wanted to spend some time with them.

4. With his Notice of Appeal the appellant produced the election  commission
   of India identity cards for his two sons, Ram Singh and Sham  Singh,  and
   for himself; an undated affidavit; his wife's death certificate; the deed
   of sale for his  property  and  for  property  owned  by  his  wife;  and
   valuation reports for the properties.

5. The Entry Clearance Manager,  having  reviewed  the  application  in  the
   light of the grounds of appeal,  maintained  the  decision,  noting  that
   there was no evidence of any income from the appellant's  property,  that
   the appellant was entirely financially dependent  upon  the  sponsor  and
   that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  had  contact  with  his
   children in India.

6. In his determination dismissing the appeal  on  the  papers  before  him,
   First-tier Judge McDade concurred with the ECO's reasons for refusing the
   application and noted that the appellant appeared to have no family  ties
   to India and was financially dependent upon his daughter  and  son-in-law
   in the United Kingdom. He considered that it was  more  likely  than  not
   that the appellant would not return to India after his visit.

7. Permission to  appeal  was  sought  by  the  sponsor  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant. On 31 March 2014 permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal
   Judge Kamara on the grounds that the judge had arguably erred in  law  by
   concluding that the appellant had no ties to India when  his  grounds  of
   appeal referred to four children in India.

Appeal Hearing

8. The appeal came before me on 27 May 2014.

9. Mr Smart was without any papers other than  the  Notice  of  Refusal  and
   initially put his case on the basis  that  the  judge  had  not  had  any
   evidence before him of family ties in India. However when I  advised  him
   of the evidence in the respondent's appeal bundle, as  mentioned  in  the
   ECM Review, he conceded  that  the  judge  had  made  an  error  of  fact
   amounting to a material error of law and that the decision had to be  set
   aside.

10. Mr Smart was content for me  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the  papers
   before me. He did not have any questions for the  sponsor,  but  I  asked
   some questions myself. Mr Singh assured me  that  he  was  a  law-abiding
   citizen who was prepared to guarantee his father-in-law's departure  from
   the United Kingdom. He told me that his father-in-law had two  daughters,
   two sons, grandchildren and property in India. He initially  stated  that
   he had four grandchildren, but when prompted by his wife  sitting  behind
   him said that there were ten. There were five grandchildren in the United
   Kingdom.

11. Mr Smart, in his submissions, relied on the  refusal  decision  and  the
   fact that the appellant was dependent upon  the  sponsor  in  the  United
   Kingdom and that, whilst there  were  relatives  in  India,  he  was  not
   dependent upon them. Mr Singh had nothing further to add.

Consideration and findings

12. It was Mr Singh's evidence that the appellant, his father-in-law,  would
   return to India after his trip and he assured me that he would  guarantee
   his departure from the United Kingdom.  However  assurances  are  not  in
   themselves sufficient to discharge the burden of proof,  when  there  are
   otherwise reasonable grounds for doubts and concerns and where  there  is
   an absence of supporting evidence that could reasonably  be  expected  to
   have been produced. Indeed it seems that the appellant has  already  been
   refused entry clearance on three previous occasions  in  2011  and  2012,
   albeit that the basis for those refusals is not known,  but  nevertheless
   he can reasonably be assumed by now to be familiar with the  requirements
   of the immigration rules and  the  burden  upon  him  to  demonstrate  an
   ability to meet those requirements.

13. It is clear from the refusal decision that  the  respondent's  concerns,
   in refusing the appellant's application, were very much  related  to  the
   lack of evidence of any ties to India particularly in view of the  strong
   ties to the United Kingdom. The appellant has had plenty  of  opportunity
   to  address  those  concerns,  having  been  put  on  notice  on  various
   occasions. Whilst he responded to the ECO's initial concerns by providing
   further evidence, it was clear from the ECM Review that that evidence was
   considered to be inadequate. Reasons were given for considering  that  to
   be the case, in particular that the ID  cards  produced  as  evidence  of
   family ties did not demonstrate that there was any  contact  between  the
   appellant and those family  members  or  that  there  was  any  financial
   dependency. Indeed I note that the identity cards show no more than  that
   in February 2008 Ram Singh  and  Sham  Singh  were  registered  with  the
   election commission of India at the same address as  the  appellant.  Yet
   despite the ECM's comments, no further evidence has since  been  produced
   and, other than the appellant's statement in his affidavit, that remained
   the totality of the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  now,
   together with the sponsor's oral evidence,  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   Accordingly, aside from the appellant's statement and the sponsor's  oral
   evidence there is nothing to show that the  appellant  had  any  children
   remaining in India or that they had any  contact  with  or  provided  any
   support to him.

14. I do not consider that I am able to accept the sponsor's  oral  evidence
   at face-value, given that the limited evidence  he  gave  was  singularly
   unhelpful. Whilst stating that the appellant's  incentive  to  return  to
   India lay in his  property,  his  children  and  his  grandchildren,  the
   sponsor was not even  able  to  state  how  many  grandchildren  he  had,
   changing his evidence from four to ten  when  assisted  by  his  wife.  I
   accept that it is his wife  who  is  the  direct  family  member  of  the
   appellant, but would nevertheless expect the sponsor  to  know  how  many
   grandchildren his wife's father had, particularly when giving that  as  a
   reason for his incentive to return to India.

15. Accordingly it seems to me that there  is  an  absence  of  satisfactory
   evidence of ties to India providing incentive for the appellant to return
   there after his stay in the  United  Kingdom.  Although  he  may  have  a
   property in India, that cannot alone provide  sufficient  incentive  when
   considering his age, his status  as  a  widower,  his  reference  in  the
   grounds of appeal to being lonely  in  India,  the  absence  of  reliable
   evidence of family ties in India and the fact that he has  no  source  of
   income other than that from his United Kingdom sponsor.

16. In all of the circumstances I find that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
   discharge the burden of proving a genuine intention to  return  to  India
   after a limited period and of proving that he was genuinely seeking entry
   to the United  Kingdom  only  as  a  visitor.  His  appeal  is  therefore
   dismissed under the immigration rules.  Article  8  is  not  specifically
   pleaded but in any event plainly could not succeed as a ground of appeal.



DECISION

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  therefore
   set aside. I re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  all
   grounds.







                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
