
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/06576/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25 February 2016                      |On 1 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                          MRS YASMEEN VIRK ALI RAZA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     no appearance by the sponsor
For the respondent:    Mrs C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  the
    respondent is Mrs Ali. However, for the  sake  of  convenience  I  shall
    continue to refer to her as the appellant and the Secretary of State for
    the respondent which are the designations they had before the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on born on  1  January  1981,
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of Immigration Judge
    PJM Hollingworth  allowing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing to grant her entry clearance to  visit  her  brother
    under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted the respondent permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, stating that there is a lack of  reasoning
    for why the Judge allowed the appeal on the basis of family life between
    two adults purely based on financial support and how it could amount  to
    something over and above the usual emotional ties expected between adult
    relatives.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's  appeal  and  made
    the following findings which I summarise. Following the case  of  Razgar
    the SS HD UKHL [2004] INLR 349, family life has been established between
    the appellant and her sponsor for the reasons set  forward  by  Counsel.
    The only question is one of proportionality.

 5. The Judge found that the death of the sponsor's wife  has,  led  to  the
    dependency  emotionally  of  the  sponsor  upon  the  appellant  as   is
    graphically set out in the appellant's witness statement. The Judge said
    "I do not find that a relatively short visit to  Pakistan  paid  by  the
    sponsor with the children  even  on  the  footing  that  such  would  be
    organised provides a satisfactory alternative to or  obviates  the  need
    for the visit by the  appellant  since  I  find  that  it  is  perfectly
    apparent that a relatively long period of time is  required  to  provide
    the children of the sponsor and the sponsor  himself  with  an  adequate
    opportunity to come to terms with their grief and to move on with  their
    lives thereafter".

 6. The Judge found that normal emotional ties have been  exceeded  in  this
    case between the appellant and the sponsor  given  the  degree  of  real
    committed an effective support characterising the  relationship  between
    the appellant and the sponsor against the background of the death of the
    sponsor's wife. "I accept that the appellant does not intend  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom. I accept that the appellant will proceed to Saudi
    Arabia on the bases which he has given and that has  been  explained  by
    her husband". The Judge added that applying s55 that the best  interests
    of three children of the sponsor who are British citizens  can  only  be
    served in the current circumstances by the  presence  of  the  appellant
    that this country. It would be unjustifiably harsh if the appellant were
    refused entry clearance.

 7. The Judge found that the Article 8 rights of both the appellant and  the
    sponsor will be breached and the sponsor's children's rights  will  also
    be breached. There is corroborated documentary evidence provided by  the
    appellant.

    The grounds of appeal

 8. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states that the  Judge  has  not
    considered  the  case  of  Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]  EW  CA   Civ   31,
    appropriately. The respondent noted that the  sponsor  stated  that  the
    appellant will return to Pakistan  whereas  the  Judge  finds  that  the
    appellant intends to go to Saudi Arabia. The judges erred in law.

    The hearing

 9. At the hearing the appellant sponsor did not attend. I satisfied  myself
    that the appellant and her sponsor had  been  served  with  the  hearing
    notice and in the absence of any explanation for  the  nonappearance,  I
    proceeded to determine the appeal after hearing short submissions by the
    respondent. Mrs Johnstone said that the  appellant  has  never  met  the
    sponsor's children.

    Error of law decision

10. I have no hesitation in finding that the Judge has materially  erred  in
    law in allowing the appellant's appeal pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights by finding that  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor have a family life which will be interfered with. The  Judge
    has not given adequate reasons  for  why  refusal  for  the  appellant's
    temporary visit to the United Kingdom would breach  the  rights  of  the
    appellant, her sponsor and the sponsor's children. I therefore set aside
    the decision and remake it.

11. The appellant wants to come to the United  Kingdom  to  look  after  her
    brother's children due to the death  of  his  wife.  Therefore,  it  was
    abundantly clear that the purpose of her visit was to stay in the United
    Kingdom to look after the children and that suggests that she would  not
    leave the country after the conclusion of her visit. The appellant  does
    not therefore meet the requirements of paragraph 41 (iii)  and  (vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

12. The appellant and her brother have lived apart in  different  continents
    and I find that there is no  family  life  which  has  been  established
    between them in terms of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights. I therefore find that  there  is  no  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her sponsor which requires consideration or protection.

13. The appellant does not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41  of  the
    Immigration Rules and there is no breach of Article 8 for any member  of
    this family.

Decision

14. The appeal is dismissed.





      Dated this 29th day of March 2016

Signed
.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






