
[pic]
|Upper Tribunal                        | Appeal Number VA.06465.2013   |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:   North Shields
On:         Friday 11th April 2014
                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                           Mrs Sabriya Qader Qader


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           Entry Clearance Officer


                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:           Ms S Rogers
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                                  Decision


   1. This matter appears before me  following  a  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal from Designated Judge Baird in the following terms:

      "1.    Permission is sought to appeal  against  the  determination  of
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  issued  on  10   December   2013,
      dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of   the
      Respondent made on 25th July 2012  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a
      family visitor under paragraph 41 of HC395 (as amended).

      2.     The grounds seeking permission are rather verbose and  scathing
      of the conclusions reached by Judge Holmes but it seems to me that  in
      essence what is submitted is that Judge Holmes erred in taking account
      of irrelevant factors, failed  to  give  inadequate  reasons  for  his
      conclusions and improperly found that the Sponsor had  gained  British
      Citizenship by deception.

      3.    The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application  because  he
      was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  provided  satisfactory
      evidence of her circumstances in Iraq. A bundle of documents was  then
      submitted with the grounds of appeal. Judge Holmes devotes much of the
      Determination  to  the  immigration  history  of  the   Sponsor,   the
      Appellant's son. He considers whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
      Sponsor to travel to Iraq to  visit  the  Appellant.  This  is  not  a
      requirement of the Rules. He  does  find  at  paragraph  20  that  the
      Sponsor had been  guilty  of  deception  in  2002,  a  deception  that
      resulted in him being granted Exceptional Leave to remain in  the  UK.
      Judge Holmes also relied on a spelling error in a document purportedly
      from  Suleimaniyah  University  but  this  document  was  a  certified
      translation and the alleged error was in the spelling of  Suleimaniyah
      which in my experience has appeared in several different versions over
      the years.  No or insufficient reasons are  given  for  rejecting  the
      other evidence relative to the Appellant's circumstances.   There  was
      for example objective  evidence  before  the  Judge  of  the  lack  of
      reliance on banks in Iraq.  I consider it to be  arguable  that  Judge
      Holmes took account of irrelevant factors relating to the  Sponsor  to
      the extent of indulging in  speculation  and  failed  to  give  proper
      account to the evidence before him relative to the Appellant  himself.


      4.    All the grounds are arguable."


   2. Ms Rogers relied upon her written grounds which take  issue  with  the
      factual findings of the Tribunal and in particular argued that  whilst
      the First Tier Tribunal judge had made many findings about the sponsor
      the core of the application had been lost. The case of Tanveer Ahmed v
      SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318 it was suggested was relevant  only  to  asylum
      cases.


   3. Mr Kingham argued that it was  a  sound  determination  based  on  the
      evidence and no irrelevant features were considered.


   4. It was accepted that  the  point  made  by  the  Designated  Judge  in
      granting leave about the spelling mistake being in  a  translation  is
      incorrect, and in fact the First Tier Tribunal judge  was  correct  in
      pointing out the spelling error in what purports  to  be  an  original
      document from Suleimaniyah University.


   5. The First Tier Tribunal judge made comprehensive  findings  about  the
      sponsor, and whilst it is correct to say he was not the appellant,  he
      was an important part of the appellant's case, not  only  was  he  the
      person that  it  was  intended  to  visit,  but  the  judge  was  also
      considering whether the sponsor might be able to visit  the  appellant
      as part  of  his  consideration  of  Article  8,  thus  this  was  not
      irrelevant as argued. The sponsor had a larger role  however  in  this
      case,  because  he  was  offering  explanations  in  respect  of   the
      documentary and written evidence of the appellant put before the First
      Tier Tribunal. An example of this can be found at paragraph  18  where
      he is recorded as giving evidence about bank accounts and  employment.
      The  judge  makes  specific  reference  to  the  importance   of   the
      appellant's evidence to the appeal at paragraph 19.


   6. It is suggested in the grounds that the judge cannot be emphatic about
      the appellant being unable to recall what  he  said  in  an  interview
      several years ago at paragraph 13, and it is correct this  is  perhaps
      not well expressed, but the general point is  clear,  that  the  judge
      prefers the evidence of the interview record from  the  time  and  the
      general evidence  about  the  issue  to  a  bald  assertion  from  the
      appellant several years later.


   7. The point made with regard to the case of Tanveer Ahmed
       is incorrect,  it  is  a  case  indicating  that  documents  must  be
      considered carefully in the round with all of the other  evidence,  it
      is often applied in  refugee  cases,  but  the  applicability  of  the
      principle is  general.  Its  use  in  these  circumstances  cannot  be
      faulted.


   8. The Judge came to clear findings based  upon  the  evidence  that  was
      before him after a  consideration  of  all  of  that  evidence,  those
      findings may make uncomfortable reading about matters  from  what  the
      appellant may have considered was the distant past,  but  all  of  the
      findings are properly placed in context and the  decision  is  logical
      and properly reasoned. There is therefore no error of law  within  the
      decision and the appeal is dismissed.


                                  Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


                                                                       [pic]
                                                                Judge Aitken
                                             Deputy Chamber President (HESC)
                                                      Wednesday, 14 May 2014
