
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06823/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2016                          |On 12 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD ANWER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant applied for entry clearance as a family visitor to  visit
    his brother Muhammad Ali the sponsor for a period of three weeks.   The
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 12 March 2014
    on the basis that he was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395, in particular with  respect  to
    the fact that the bank statement provided did not reflect  his  claimed
    income, that he had said the sponsor  would  accommodate  him  but  the
    sponsorship declaration did not show that the  sponsor  had  agreed  to
    sponsor the trip or had the means to do so and also the  appellant  had
    not provided details of the current whereabouts or circumstances of his
    wife and child.

2.   The judge noted that the case was limited to race relations  and  human
    rights grounds.  She considered the evidence  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not shown that his  circumstances  in  Pakistan  were  as
    claimed and that he had not addressed the concerns raised by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  She noted what had been said in Abbasi [2015]  UKUT
    00463 (IAC) in relation to the fact that the appellant had submitted  a
    request to have his appeal expedited  as  his  brother  in  the  United
    Kingdom had died after the appeal was lodged and he wished to enter the
    United Kingdom to participate in death prayers and share the  grief  of
    the family in the United Kingdom.  It had  been  held  in  Abbasi  that
    refusal of a visa to a foreign national seeking  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom for a finite period for the purpose  of  mourning  with  family
    members the recent death of a close relative and visiting the grave  of
    the  deceased  was   capable   of   constituting   a   disproportionate
    interference with the rights of the persons concerned under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3.   The judge examined the evidence in this regard.   She  noted  that  the
    copy death certificate submitted was of very poor quality and  appeared
    to state the name of the deceased as Ihsan Ahmad Muneeb.  There was  no
    evidence as to the claimed relationship or as to Mr Muneeb's status  in
    the United Kingdom.  In his application form  the  appellant  had  been
    asked for details of his family in the United Kingdom and gave  details
    of the sponsor and another relative, Bushra Ali and did  not  mentioned
    Ihsan Ahmad Muneeb.  There was no explanation as to  why  this  brother
    was not mentioned.  She went on to say that  unlike  the  situation  in
    Abbasi the appellant had not applied to come to the United  Kingdom  to
    visit his ill brother or come to the United Kingdom for death  prayers.
    There was no evidence as to the funeral or burial arrangements  in  the
    United Kingdom if they had taken place or  were  taking  place  in  the
    United Kingdom at all.   She  concluded  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence before her to establish the relationship between the appellant
    and the deceased or as to the arrangements in the  United  Kingdom  for
    mourning and  burial.   She  acknowledged  that  this  was  capable  of
    amounting to a breach of private and family life  but  did  not  accept
    that in this case the claimed death of the appellant's brother  in  the
    United Kingdom amounted to a breach of his  private  and  family  life.
    She went on to note that the original  application  was  to  visit  the
    sponsor whom the appellant had visited previously but there was nothing
    to indicate that the  relationship  went  beyond  that  normally  found
    between adult siblings nor that there was any evidence to show why  the
    sponsor could not travel to Pakistan to maintain  the  relationship  or
    why the appellant and  the  sponsor  could  not  meet  elsewhere.   The
    Article 8 claim was dismissed.
4.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis  among  other
    things that he had said in his grounds of appeal that he had applied as
    a family visitor for three weeks for compassionate reasons and  on  the
    humanitarian basis that his brother was seriously injured, and attached
    the concerned evidence.  The compassionate circumstances of the  appeal
    had been acknowledged in the Entry Clearance  Manager's  review  noting
    the fact of the accident and an update in which it had been  said  that
    unfortunately the appellant's  brother  had  passed  away.   The  Entry
    Clearance Manager had considered the compassionate circumstances of the
    appeal in that he wished to visit his brother but now  wished  to  take
    part  in  the  prayers  for  him  but  was  not  satisfied  that  these
    circumstances outweighed the concerns  over  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances in Pakistan.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis that the relationship  had  been  conceded  in  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review contrary to the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant had not shown that he had family in the United Kingdom.

6.   There was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing before me.  I was satisfied that notice of the date,  time  and
    place of hearing had been communicated to the appellant.

7.   Mr Avery argued  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision, and  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  had  not  conceded
    anything but simply made a comment  about  the  update  that  had  been
    received.

8.   I agree with the submission made by Mr Avery.  There is  no  concession
    to be found in the Entry Clearance Manager's letter but simply a noting
    of the  fact  that  the  appellant's  brother  had  unfortunately  died
    subsequent to being in an electrical explosion  at  work  in  which  he
    suffered burns to his body.  It seems that the issue of the appellant's
    brother was raised initially in his grounds of appeal.   As  the  judge
    noted, it was not referred to in the initial application.  The  judge's
    concerns expressed at paragraph 13 of her determination  were  open  to
    her.  The appellant had not given details of Ihsan Ahmad Muneeb in  his
    application.  There was no evidence as to the claimed relationship  nor
    as to Ihsan Ahmad Muneeb's status in the United Kingdom.  There was  no
    explanation as to why this brother was not mentioned on the application
    form when the appellant was asked for details of his  family  and  gave
    details of the sponsor  and  another  relative,  Bushra  Ali.   In  the
    circumstances, and bearing  in  mind  the  point  noted  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager about the death, I consider that it was properly open
    to the judge to find that there was insufficient evidence to  establish
    the relationship between the appellant and the deceased or  as  to  the
    arrangements in the United Kingdom for mourning and burial.  I  do  not
    consider that the Entry Clearance Manager can be seen as having made  a
    concession of any kind in considering an assertion that was made in the
    grounds of appeal.  If the dates are as claimed by the  appellant  then
    of course no issue would have  arisen  as  to  visiting  an  unwell  or
    injured brother at the time when the application was made as far as one
    can tell from the dates, but nevertheless in particular the absence  of
    any mention of this relative on the application form and the  vagueness
    as to the details about Mr Muneeb are such  as  amply  to  justify  the
    judge's conclusions in this case.  Accordingly I find there is no error
    of law in her determination and  her  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
    stands.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


