
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06569/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 13th November 2015                    |            On 7th December 2015     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             miss Karisik Emina
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - warsaw

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla, promulgated on 2nd June 2015,  following  a  hearing  at  Hendon
    Magistrates' Court on 27th May 2015.  In the determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR.
     The Respondent subsequently applied for, and was  granted,  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  who  was
    born on 4th October 1976.  She is the wife  of  Tarek  Adel  Abdelkader
    Mostafa, an Egyptian national  born  on  24th  October  1977,  and  the
    Sponsor is living and working in the United Kingdom but, at the time of
    the hearing before Judge Aujla, the nature and duration  of  his  leave
    was not clear from the documents before the  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
    had applied for entry clearance to come to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    family visitor for six months and she was  sponsored  by  her  husband.
    The Respondent rejected the application  because  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  genuinely  seeking
    entry as a visitor for a limited period as stated by her.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was that she had previously been  issued  with  a
    visa on 29th January 2014 to come to the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor
    for her marriage.  She arrived on  11th  February  2014  and  left  the
    United Kingdom on 9th June 2014.  The Appellant was working but  was  a
    student and was engaged in  a  doctoral  study  at  the  University  of
    Ljubljana and her sponsoring husband was  on  temporary  leave  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant still had to finish her  doctoral  study
    in Slovenia before the couple could decide upon their future residence.



The Judge's Decision

 4. The  judge  applied  the  decision  in  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112, and referred to the headnote which states
    that,

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control." (See paragraph 18 of the determination)

 5. This  clearly  suggested  that  the  same  Article  8  principles  were
    applicable  in  entry  clearance  cases  as  is  the  case  in  general
    immigration law.  The judge held that the Respondent did  not  question
    the relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.   He  did  not
    interview the Appellant.  Any concerns that the  Respondent  there  had
    were not raised.

 6. The Sponsor was working in the United Kingdom as a  neurosurgeon  in  a
    hospital and the Appellant  was  completing  a  research  degree  at  a
    doctorate level.  The judge reasoned that, "she had commitments to  the
    course and that was the reason which kept the couple apart" even though
    they were recently married  (paragraph  20).   The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds in these circumstances.





Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because it
    had not been explained how  the  Immigration  Rules  were  met  and  no
    consideration had  been  given  to  the  public  policy  considerations
    required by Section 117A to D of the Immigration Act 2014.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th November 2015, Mr Mills, appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent submitted that this appeal was now academic on
    the part of the Respondent authority.  The reason was  that  subsequent
    to the visit visa appeal having been allowed, the  Appellant  had  been
    granted entry as the partner of her husband who was employed in the  UK
    as a neurosurgeon.  Therefore, the Appellant had the right to remain in
    the UK legally in any event.  In any event, however,  as  far  as  this
    particular visit visa appeal was concerned, Mr Mills said that he would
    simply argue that the judge had not done enough to allow the appeal  on
    the basis of Article 8.   It  was  true  that  in  Mostafa,  the  Upper
    Tribunal had said that Article 8 should be considered in just the  same
    way in visit visa appeals as it is  in  other  cases.   This,  however,
    meant that there has to be proper consideration  given  to  the  public
    interest in such cases.  This was despite the fact that  the  Appellant
    was in the UK lawfully now.

 9. For her part, Miss Emina, not being legally represented or being versed
    in the law, simply stated that after the refusal of her visit visa, she
    had to apply as the dependant of her husband and  was  able  to  secure
    entry.  She said that her project work in Slovenia had to be  suspended
    whilst all of this was going on and this was disruptive  to  her  life.
    She said that the prime considerations in her life were her  study  and
    the completion of her PhD doctoral dissertation and the  marriage  that
    she had entered with her Egyptian husband  who  was  from  a  different
    culture, and where she had to make her own cultural  adjustments  given
    that they had only been married recently.

10. In reply, Mr Mills said that he would simply rely upon the  grounds  of
    application.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, the judge has had  regard
    to the relevant legal authorities, setting out in terms the application
    of Mostafa [2015] UKUT 00112 and applying  it  in  the  correct  manner
    before him on the facts.  Second, that decision is in itself consistent
    with the latest decision of Kaur (Visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT
    00487.  This confirms that the starting point for deciding an Article 8
    claim must be the state of the evidence about the  Appellant's  ability
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules,  and
    the judges are not relieved of their ordinary duties  of  fact-finding.
    In the instant case, however, it cannot remotely  be  argued  that  the
    judge did not make appropriate fact-finding decisions.  These  are  set
    out at paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination.

12. The judge makes it quite clear that, given that the sponsoring  husband
    was working as a neurosurgeon in the UK, and  that  the  Appellant  was
    completing a doctorate dissertation, "in the meantime the Appellant was
    proposing to spend some  time  with  the  Sponsor  and  return  to  her
    studies, as she did last year" (paragraph 20).  It is to be noted  that
    the Appellant only entered the UK in order to marry the Sponsor,  which
    she did after entering on 11th February 2014 and then left  the  United
    Kingdom on 19th June 2014 (see paragraph 14).  There was plainly here a
    history of the Appellant fully complying with  the  Immigration  Rules.
    She had in fact returned back to her own  country  after  marrying  the
    Sponsor.

13. The Respondent authority did not interview the Appellant  and  did  not
    raise any concerns about the Appellant's intentions and could not point
    to any risk for her not complying with the Immigration Rules such  that
    her intention was other than what she claimed it to  be.   Accordingly,
    given that the test is on a balance of  probabilities,  the  judge  was
    entirely correct in reaching the conclusion that he  did.   He  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.   He  did  not  allow  it
    under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

14. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

15. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th November 2015




