
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/06119/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 January 2014                              |On 18 February 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Nosa Idemudia
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - abuja

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Harrison, Halliday Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Nosa Idemudia, was born on 5 December 1994 and is a male
    citizen of Nigeria.  The  appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 21 February  2013
    to refuse him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor.   The
    United Kingdom sponsor is the appellant's mother,  Harriet  Egberanmwen
    Uyikpen  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the  sponsor).   The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) in a determination promulgated on 21  November
    2013 dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appellant's application was refused under  paragraph  41(i),  (ii),
    (vi) and (vii):

         41. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave  to  enter
         the United Kingdom as a general visitor are that he:




         (i) is genuinely seeking entry as a general visitor for  a  limited
         period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months or not exceeding 12
         months in the case of  a  person  seeking  entry  to  accompany  an
         academic  visitor,  provided  in  the  latter  case   the   visitor
         accompanying the academic visitor has entry clearance; and




         (ii) intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  the  period
         of the visit as stated by him; and does  not  intend  to  live  for
         extended  periods  in  the  United  Kingdom  through  frequent   or
         successive visits; and




         (iii) does not intend to take employment in the United Kingdom; and




         (iv) does not intend to produce goods or  provide  services  within
         the United Kingdom, including the  selling  of  goods  or  services
         direct to members of the public; and




         (v) Save to the extent provided by paragraph 43A, does  not  intend
         to undertake a course of study; and




         (vi) will maintain  and  accommodate  himself  and  any  dependants
         adequately out of resources available to him  without  recourse  to
         public funds or taking employment; or will, with any dependants, be
         maintained and/or accommodated adequately by relatives  or  friends
         who can demonstrate they are able and intend  to  do  so,  and  are
         legally present in the United Kingdom, or will be at  the  time  of
         their visit; and




         (vii) can meet the cost of the return or onward journey; and




         (viii) is not a child under the age of 18.




         (ix) does not intend to do any of the activities  provided  for  in
         paragraphs 46G (iii), 46M (iii) or 46S (iii); and




         (x) does not, during his visit, intend to marry  or  form  a  civil
         partnership, or to give notice of marriage  or  civil  partnership;
         and




         (xi) does not intend to receive private  medical  treatment  during
         his visit; and




         (xii) is not in transit to a  country  outside  the  common  travel
         area.




         (xiii) where he is seeking leave to enter as a general  visitor  to
         take part in archaeological excavations, provides a letter from the
         director or organiser of the excavation stating the length of their
         visit and, where appropriate, what arrangements have been made  for
         their accommodation and maintenance.

 3. Judge Shimmin found that the appellant  had  "not  provided  any  basis
    credible to the  required  standard  for  challenging  the  assertions,
    analyses and conclusions in the ECO's refusal of entry clearance".  The
    judge observed that the sponsor is a naturalised British citizen but he
    noted that the sponsor had entered the United Kingdom herself illegally
    and had been given indefinite leave to remain under  a  legacy  policy.
    He described her immigration history as "very poor".  The  judge  noted
    that the appellant was leaving paid work in Nigeria to go to university
    and regarded this as an indication that he had "no incentive to  return
    on that account" [20].  The judge doubted that the  documents  produced
    by the appellant which indicated he had a place at the university  were
    credible "bearing in mind that he had spent the last three years  on  a
    shoemaking apprenticeship rather than advancing his  academic  career".
    The judge also noted at [22] some inconsistency as to the  evidence  in
    relation to the appellant's accommodation.  He found that there was  "a
    considerable difference" between  the  length  of  time  the  appellant
    claimed to have lived at his address with his grandmother (five  years)
    and his sponsor's estimate of the period (eleven years).  This led  the
    judge to doubt whether "the appellant really has settled  accommodation
    to return to [in Nigeria]".  Finally, the judge was not satisfied  with
    the accommodation proposed for the appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The sponsor claims to live alone with her four children but a man named
    "Edwin" (whose surname or address the sponsor could  not  give  to  the
    judge) was looking after her youngest child in the waiting room  during
    the Tribunal hearing.

 4. There are some problems with the judge's analysis.  It is not  entirely
    clear why the fact that the appellant should  have  decided  to  change
    from his shoemaking apprenticeship to take up  a  place  at  university
    should cast doubt on the documents he had produced concerning  his  new
    academic career.  Likewise, it was not entirely  clear  why  the  judge
    considered it somewhat sinister (in the sense of having  an  impact  on
    the appellant's appeal) that the sponsor's child was being looked after
    at court by a friend whose full name and address the sponsor could  not
    provide.  However, I find that most of  what  the  judge  has  said  is
    entirely valid.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  have  regard  to  the
    circumstances and immigration history of the sponsor and,  although  he
    does not say so in terms, it is clear the judge was concerned that  the
    sponsor (who had a very poor immigration history) is the mother of  the
    appellant.  The appellant is not yet 20 years of age.   He  appears  to
    have had a manual job in Nigeria which he is giving up.  The  appellant
    is visiting his closest relative in the United  Kingdom,  a  woman  who
    herself has made a life  here  having  had  no  legitimate  reason  for
    entering the country in the first instance.  I consider that those  are
    circumstances which the judge was entitled to consider and which he was
    entitled to find cast serious doubt upon the appellant's  intention  to
    return to Nigeria at the end of his proposed holiday.  Matters were not
    improved for the appellant when he and the sponsor were unable to  give
    consistent evidence about the length of time the  appellant  had  spent
    living with his grandmother.  The burden of proof was on the  appellant
    and I am fully satisfied that the judge was right to conclude that  the
    appellant had  failed  to  discharge  that  burden  by  satisfying  the
    provisions of paragraph 41(i) and (ii).   As  I  have  noted  above,  a
    number of the judge's findings carry less force but I do  not  consider
    that those findings have in any  way  "infected"  the  perfectly  sound
    findings he has made elsewhere in the determination.

DECISION

 5. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 11 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
