
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: VA/07705/2014
      VA/07706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 October 2016                        |On 6 October 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER WARSAW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr BANUSH HAKA
                               Mrs FATIME HAKA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R Haka, the sponsor
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO),  for
    convenience I will refer to the parties in the  determination  as  they
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are husband and wife  and  nationals  of  Albania.  They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decisions of the ECO of
    10 November 2014 to refuse their applications for  entry  clearance  to
    visit their son, the sponsor, in  the  UK  for  one  month.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miller allowed the appeals. The  ECO  now  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3.  As  highlighted  in  the  decisions  to  refuse  entry  clearance  the
    appellants' right of appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the  ECO  was
    limited to the grounds referred to in section 84(1) (b) and (c) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (race relations and  human
    rights grounds).

 4. However the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  determined  the  appeals  under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules and did not refer  to  the  human
    rights ground which had been pleaded in the grounds to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. The ECO contends in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  that
    this failure amounts to an error of law and Permission  to  Appeal  was
    granted on the basis that it is arguable that the Judge failed to  make
    any findings or decisions on the only two grounds  of  appeal  open  to
    him, namely human rights and race discrimination.

Error of law

 6.  The  ECO  refused  the  applications  not  being  satisfied  that  the
    appellants met the requirements of paragraph 41  (i),  (ii),  (vi)  and
    (vii) of the Immigration Rules. The ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellants had demonstrated their financial or  personal  circumstances
    in Albania, or that they were able to finance their  portion  of  their
    travel costs or afford their living costs in the UK or  onward  journey
    from the UK. In these circumstances the ECO was not satisfied that  the
    appellants are genuinely seeking entry as visitors.

 7. Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended section 88A of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  from  25  June  2013
    restricting the right of appeal in  family  visit  appeals  to  grounds
    alleging that the decision shows unlawful discrimination or is unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. In this appeal  there  is
    no allegation of race discrimination  in  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal or elsewhere. However the grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contend that the decisions breach the
    appellants' right to family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 8. The issue for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  therefore  to  decide
    whether the decisions to refuse entry clearance breach the  appellants'
    right to family life with their son and his family in the UK.

 9. In reaching his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the
    appellants' travel costs would be paid by the sponsor  who  would  also
    cover their accommodation and living expenses. The Judge  took  account
    of the fact that the appellants  had  previously  visited  the  UK  and
    returned to Albania,  that  the  appellants  live  with  their  son  in
    Albania, that their daughter lives nearby, and that the appellants farm
    three hectares as a vineyard. He  concluded  that  the  appellants  are
    likely to return to Albania at the end of their visit.  He  found  that
    the requirements of paragraph 41 had been met and allowed the appeals.

10. The Judge made no reference  to  the  limitations  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal. He made no findings or decisions in relation to  Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

11. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his approach
    to this appeal. The only ground of appeal which he could  consider  was
    Article 8 of the ECHR. He failed to do so and therefore made a material
    error of law. The findings in relation to the  Rules  cannot  stand  as
    they were not open to the Judge. In these circumstances I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

Remaking the decision

12. As set out above the only ground of appeal relevant  in  this  case  is
    that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The relevant provision of the European Convention on Human Rights
    is Article 8 which protects the right to private and family life.

13. An assessment under Article 8 involves consideration of  the  5  stages
    set out by Lord Bingham in the case of R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27. Lord Bingham set  out  the  following  five  questions  to  be
    addressed where removal  is  resisted  in  reliance  on  Article  8  as
    follows, these questions equally apply in the case  of  a  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance;

         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or family life?

         (2)      If so, will such interference have consequences of such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
         society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
         legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

14. As set out above the first stage is to establish  whether  family  life
    exists between the appellants and their son and his family in  the  UK.
    In the case of Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT  0261  (IAC)
    the Upper Tribunal gave the following guidance  as  summarised  in  the
    head note:

         "1.      The first question to be addressed in  an  appeal  against
         refusal to grant entry clearance as  a  visitor  where  only  human
         rights grounds are available is whether article 8 of  the  ECHR  is
         engaged at all. If it is not, which will not  infrequently  be  the
         case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment
         of the decision of the ECO under the rules and should not do so. If
         article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at  the  extent
         to  which  the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
         requirements  of   the   rule   because   that   may   inform   the
         proportionality  balancing  exercise  that  must  follow.   Mostafa
         (Article 8 in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  is  not
         authority for any contrary proposition.

         2. As compliance with para 41 of HC 395 is not a ground  of  appeal
         to be decided by the Tribunal, any findings  concerning  that  will
         carry little weight, especially if based  upon  arguments  advanced
         only by the appellant. If  the  appellant  were  to  make  a  fresh
         application for entry clearance the ECO will, if  requested  to  do
         so, have regard to the assessment carried out by the judge but will
         not be bound by those findings to treat the appellant as  a  person
         who,  at  least  at  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 41."

15. In considering whether family life such as to engage Article  8  exists
    in this case I note that the appellants live with their son in Albania.
    Their daughter also lives there. The sponsor told me that  the  purpose
    of the proposed visit was for the appellants to visit the  sponsor  and
    his wife for Christmas when they intended to tell the  appellants  that
    they were expecting their first child. Their child has since been  born
    and the sponsor and his child visited the appellants in Albania  during
    the summer. The sponsor said that he can visit his parents in  Albania.
    He said that they have no health issues and are both working.

16. In the case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the  Court  of  Appeal  said
    that there is no  presumption  of  family  life  between  adult  family
    members and that "relationships between adults...would not  necessarily
    acquire the protection of Article 8 of the Convention without  evidence
    of further elements of  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal
    emotional ties ".

17. On the basis of the evidence before me I  find  that  the  relationship
    between the appellants and the sponsor and his family is not enough  to
    establish that they have ties over and above the normal emotional  ties
    between adults and their parents.  In these circumstances I  find  that
    the decision of the ECO to refuse to grant  entry  clearance  does  not
    interfere with the appellants' right, or that of  the  sponsor  or  his
    family, to private or family life. Article 8 is not  therefore  engaged
    in this appeal.

18. I find that the appellants have not demonstrated that the decisions  of
    the ECO interfere with  their  private  or  family  life.  I  therefore
    dismiss the appeals.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by dismissing it.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 5 October 2016

A Grimes
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed      Date: 5 October 2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



