
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 30 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                JAGDEEP SINGH
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       For the Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      R Rai, Counsel, instructed by Gills Immigration Law
For the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal is brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  however  for
         convenience I shall refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

         Background

      2. The appellant is a national of India born on 8  November  1994.  In
         October 2014, he applied for entry clearance to visit the  sponsor,
         but the application was refused on 25 November 2014 because the ECO
         was not satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated  sufficiently
         strong ties to India or that he would leave on  completion  of  his
         visit. The appellant argued that the requirements of the rules  had
         been met and also that the decision breached his  human  rights  in
         that it  prevented  him  from  visiting  extended  family  members.
         According to the visa application form, the appellant  was  refused
         entry clearance previously on 30 October 2014.

      3. The thrust of the appellant's article 8 claim was that he  and  the
         sponsor's son, A, were like  brothers.  The  latter  had  developed
         Guillen  Barre  Syndrome  (GSB)  in  2014  and  was  autistic   and
         epileptic.  It was proposed that the appellant would assist him  in
         his recovery for two months because they got  on  well  and  A  was
         inclined to listen to the appellant. A and  the  sponsor  had  made
         regular annual trips to India and had last been there in the Easter
         holidays. The sponsor  is  said  to  be  the  appellant's  maternal
         grandfather's  sister's  son.  The  sponsor's  son   is,   however,
         described as a cousin by the judge although, plainly, that  is  not
         what he is.

      4. The appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Widdup  at
         Harmondsworth on 8 June 2016 and in a determination promulgated  on
         20 June 2016, the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

      5. The judge applied the Razgar steps. He found the sponsor  to  be  a
         credible witness and noted that there had been no challenge to  the
         sponsor's or appellant's financial circumstances. He accepted  that
         the sponsor had made frequent visits to India and that his son  had
         therefore developed a close relationship with  the  appellant.   He
         found that there was "a dependency of sorts" on the appellant,  and
         that the relationship was  "either  a  significant  part  of  their
         private lives or  amounts  to  some  degree  of  family  life".  He
         considered the guidance in Mostafa (article 8 in  entry  clearance)
         [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC)  which  covered  a  narrow  range  of  very
         closely related appellants but, nevertheless,  concluded  it  could
         apply to cousins. He found that the relationship could continue  by
         way of visits, telephone, skype and emails as it  had  always  done
         but that the appellant had been unable to assist  his  cousin  with
         his recovery from GBS which made the decision a breach  of  article
         8. He considered that as A was a minor (he was born in June  2000),
         his welfare was of primary importance.

      6. The respondent obtained permission to appeal on the basis that  the
         judge had failed to adequately reason his article  8  findings  and
         conclusions.

         The Hearing

      7. The sponsor attended the hearing and I heard submissions  from  the
         parties. For the respondent, Mr Melvin  submitted  that  there  was
         insufficient analysis of family  life  and  pointed  out  that,  in
         granting permission, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  had
         found  that  to  be  an  arguable  point.  He  submitted  that  the
         relationship between the two parties  was  remote;  they  saw  each
         other during  annual  visits  and  made  use  of  modern  means  of
         communication the rest of the year. As such, the finding of  family
         life between them, by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Widdup,  did  not
         stand up to scrutiny. He submitted that the decision should be  set
         aside and that the appeal should be dismissed.

      8. Mr Rai submitted that the judge had properly  directed  himself  on
         the facts and had been mindful of the best interests of  the  child
         and the law. The judge had found the sponsor to  be  credible.  The
         sponsor's son, A, was epileptic and autistic and had been diagnosed
         with GBS. Just a month  later,  the  appellant  applied  for  entry
         clearance to visit and assist him. He referred me  to  the  witness
         statements of the appellant and the sponsor.  It  was  acknowledged
         that the appellant and A  were  not  brothers  as  claimed  in  the
         statement but Mr Rai submitted that they viewed one another as such
         and the judge was faced with a unique situation of  a  relationship
         akin to brothers. The judge properly directed himself  in  law  and
         concluded that the  relationship  was  an  important  part  of  the
         appellant's private life. The appellant's presence was required  to
         assist A. The family had a good immigration history. The rules  had
         been met. It was not in A's best interests  for  the  appellant  to
         make a fresh application for entry clearance relying on the judge's
         positive findings as time was of the essence and a delay was not in
         A's best interests.

      9. Mr Rai submitted that the respondent was wrong  to  only  cite  two
         paragraphs of the  determination  as  containing  the  analysis  on
         family life. He  submitted  that  the  respondent's  challenge  was
         unfounded and the determination should be preserved.

     10.  Mr  Melvin  responded.  He  argued  that  the  determination   was
         inadequately reasoned. It was difficult to see  how  a  finding  of
         family life could be made in circumstances where only  a  two-month
         visit was proposed.  In the absence of  medical  evidence,  it  was
         also difficult to see how the appellant would be able to assist  A.
         The doctor's letter had been written at the request of the sponsor.
         The circumstances did not amount  to  family  life.  There  was  no
         evidence of dependency and the findings came close to justifying an
         irrationality challenge. He referred me to  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
         article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) and argued that for an appeal  to
         succeed outside the rules, there had to be compelling  reasons.  No
         such reasons existed  in  this  case  and  the  judge  should  have
         considered whether article 8 was engaged at all.

     11. Those were the submissions on the issue of whether or not the judge
         had made an error  of  law.  I  then  invited  submissions  on  the
         substantive merits in the event that I  proceeded  to  re-make  the
         decision.

     12. Mr Melvin submitted that in article 8  cases,  the  nature  of  the
         relationship was very important. He questioned whether family  life
         could be envisaged in this case, where there was no dependency.  He
         submitted that A's welfare was not dependent  upon  the  appellant.
         Whilst they spoke on skype, this was not part of family or  private
         life.

     13. Mr Rai submitted that the circumstances were unique. The welfare of
         the child must be considered. The matter should be considered in  a
         sensitive manner.

     14. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.

         Findings and conclusions: error of law

     15. The respondent takes issue with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on family life. I have considered the submissions and  the
         evidence with great care and appreciate I am dealing with sensitive
         matters. I also appreciate that A's illness  must  be  causing  the
         sponsor and his family a great deal of anxiety and stress.

     16. The fact remains, however, that Judge Widdup has failed to properly
         consider what constitutes  family  life  for  article  8  purposes.
         Whilst the authorities do not rule out other relationships, article
         8 is designed to  maintain  close  family  ties,  such  as  between
         parents and minor children and spouses  or  partners.  It  may,  in
         certain cases extend to grandparents  and  grandchildren,  siblings
         and parents  and  adult  children.  I  have  not  come  across  any
         authority where a relationship between cousins  permanently  living
         in different countries is considered to be family life deserving of
         protection, still less of a relationship between an individual  and
         his mother's father's sister's son's son, where both  parties  live
         in their own nuclear families, lead separate lives and have contact
         via annual visits and modern means of communication.

     17. I fully appreciate that the appellant wishes to visit A  so  as  to
         help him whilst he is unwell and also that the sponsor is keen  for
         the appellant to visit so as to help with his  son's  recovery  but
         these amount to good reasons for a visit and are not a basis for  a
         finding that there is family life between the appellant and A.

     18. I agree  with  Mr  Melvin  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  are
         inadequately reasoned. Judge  Widdup  commences  his  analysis  and
         findings at paragraph 27 by setting out the  Razgar  questions.  At
         paragraph 28, he finds the sponsor's evidence to  be  credible  and
         finds that there was no challenge to the evidence relating  to  the
         financial circumstances of the sponsor and the appellant's  family.
         The absence of any challenge in that respect goes to the  issue  of
         whether the requirements of paragraph 41 can be met.

     19. At paragraph 29 the judge  accepts,  presumably  on  the  sponsor's
         evidence (as nothing else is referred to), that the appellant and A
         have a close relationship as a result of frequent visits  to  India
         and, perhaps, because he does not have any brothers  himself  (only
         sisters). From this, however, he reaches the conclusion that  there
         is "a dependency of sorts" and "more than the usual emotional ties"
         between them.  No  reasons  are  given  for  why  he  reached  this
         conclusion. The form of dependency is  not  clarified  or  expanded
         upon and it is not  explained  why  a  relationship  presumably  of
         camaraderie between extended family members constitutes  more  than
         what would usually be expected. The judge then goes on to find that
         the relationship is "either a significant  part  of  their  private
         lives or amounts to some degree of family life".  No  clarification
         is provided.

     20. The judge then  considers  Mostafa  and  notes  that  the  guidance
         applied to a "very narrow range of  claimants"  but  he  concludes,
         nevertheless, that "there will still be cases in which an appeal on
         human rights grounds against  the  refusal  of  a  visit  visa  can
         succeed even if the relationship is between cousins (sic)". He does
         not say why he takes that view.

     21. He finds at paragraph 34 that article 8 is engaged as the  decision
         means that the "relationship cannot  be  developed  at  a  time  of
         particular importance" to A who will not "receive  such  assistance
         with his recovery as the appellant can provide". I presume here the
         judge is seeking to address the second Razgar question  but  it  is
         unclear what development he has in mind if he  is  already  of  the
         view that there is family or private life.

     22. In considering proportionality,  the  judge  essentially  concludes
         that as the appellant meets the requirements of the visitor  rules,
         and as the welfare of a minor  is  involved,  there  is  no  public
         interest in requiring a fresh entry  clearance  application  to  be
         made.  For   that   reason,   the   decision   is   found   to   be
         disproportionate. What the  judge  fails  to  do,  however,  is  to
         consider how the refusal of a visa which only allows the parties to
         be  together  for  a  short  period  can  be   a   disproportionate
         interference with article 8 rights. In so far  as  A's  welfare  is
         concerned, he has failed entirely to consider the help and  support
         provided to A by his parents, sisters and the NHS and the  progress
         A has made in that he was discharged from hospital.

     23. For these reasons, therefore, I conclude that the judge made errors
         of law such that his decision must be set aside.

     24. I acknowledge that there was no challenge to the  findings,  albeit
         brief, on the requirements of paragraph 41  having  been  met,  and
         despite the judge's reliance on a post decision fact in respect  to
         the appellant's education (at paragraph 43). Normally  those  would
         be preserved but in view of the guidance in Adjei (to which I shall
         refer later), the Tribunal only has jurisdiction to  make  findings
         under paragraph 41 where article 8 has been found to apply. As  the
         judge's decision on that aspect of the case has been set aside,  it
         follows that those findings cannot be preserved.

         Re-making the decision

     25. Having indicated to the parties that I would proceed to re-make the
         decision if an error of law were found  and  having  provided  them
         with an  opportunity  to  make  any  further  submissions  in  that
         respect, I now proceed to do so.

     26. I have taken account of the authorities to which reference was made
         and which were submitted to Judge  Widdup.  In  the  case  of  Kaur
         (visit appeals; article 7) [2015] UKUT 00487  (IAC),  the  Tribunal
         held that "unless an appellant can show that there  are  individual
         interests at stake covered by article 8 'of a particularly pressing
         nature' so as to give rise  to  a  'strong  claim  that  compelling
         circumstances may exist to justify the grant  of  LTE  outside  the
         rules': (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]) he or
         she is exceedingly unlikely to succeed. That proposition must  also
         hold good in visitor appeals" (head note 3).

     27. In Mostafa (article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112  (IAC)
         the  Tribunal  said  "that  it  will  only  be  in   very   unusual
         circumstances that a person other than a  close  relative  will  be
         able to show that the refusal of entry clearance comes  within  the
         scope of article 8(1). In practical terms  this  is  likely  to  be
         limited to cases where the relationship is that of husband and wife
         or other close life partners or a parent and minor child  and  even
         then it will not  necessarily  be  extended  to  cases  where,  for
         example, the proposed visit is based on a  whim  or  will  not  add
         significantly to the time  that  people  involved  spend  together"
         (paragraph 24).

     28. In Adjei (visit visas - article 8)  [2015[  UKUT  0261  (IAC),  the
         Tribunal directed that "The first question to be  addressed  in  an
         appeal against refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor  where
         only human rights grounds are available is  whether  article  8  is
         engaged at all. If it is not, which will not  infrequently  be  the
         case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment
         of the decision of the ECO under the rules and should  not  do  so"
         (head note). That case also warns that whether an  applicant  meets
         the requirements of paragraph 41 should not be the  starting  point
         for an article 8 assessment (at paragraphs 8 and 9).

     29. There was no challenge to the contents of  the  witness  statements
         prepared by the sponsor and the appellant and  I  accept  that  the
         appellant is fond of A and that he is  sincere  in  his  desire  to
         assist him. I  also  accept  that  they  have  a  good  friendship.
         However, I  cannot  find  that  this  amounts  to  family  life  in
         circumstances where the parties live thousands of  miles  apart  in
         different countries, where they see each other once or twice a year
         and where they live with their respective families and  have  their
         own family lives with  those  relatives.  No  dependency  has  been
         shown. The appellant is a young adult and claims  to  be  dependent
         upon his own parents for support. A is under 18 and dependent  upon
         his family in the UK  for  support.  The  interaction  between  the
         appellant and A does not amount to dependency of any kind.  Rather,
         it characterises their friendship.

     30. The appellant's case focused on the need for  him  to  visit  A  in
         order  to  assist  in  his  recovery.   That  is  a  laudable   and
         understandable reason for a visit application but despite the  able
         submissions made by Mr Rai cannot amount  to  family  life  between
         them. Whilst I accept that the decision to seek entry clearance  to
         visit was not made on a whim (see Mostafa), it  equally  cannot  be
         said to add significantly to the  time  the  people  involved  will
         spend together. Moreover, it was accepted on the appellant's behalf
         that  his  relationship  with  A  continues  via  modern  means  of
         communication and, presumably, it  will  also  continue  by  future
         visits when A has recovered  or  when  the  appellant  gains  entry
         clearance. Meanwhile no reasons were given as to why the  appellant
         could not assist A by way of Skype or telephone  conversations,  if
         it is his ability to persuade A to take medication and so on  which
         is considered particularly helpful.  I have had regard to the  best
         interests of A but find that these are met by his being in a family
         unit with his parents and sisters and having  the  support  of  the
         NHS.

     31. For all these reasons, I conclude that the appellant has failed  to
         show that he has family life with A and it follows that  article  8
         is not engaged in this case.  Given  that  conclusion,  I  have  no
         jurisdiction to make any findings on whether  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 41 have been met.

     32. Should the appellant make a fresh application for entry  clearance,
         I would hope that it would be considered as  a  matter  of  urgency
         given the particular circumstances of A and  the  reasons  for  the
         visit.




     33. Decision

     34. The determination contains errors of law such that the decision  to
         allow the appeal is set aside. I substitute a  fresh  decision  and
         dismiss the appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer
         (via the Secretary of State).




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 30 November 2016


