
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07695/2014
                                                               VA/07696/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15 August 2016                             |On 16 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                          (PAKISTAN c/o ABU DHABI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MUHAMMAD ALI AYUB KHAN
                             NAHEED ANJUM BIQEES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A. Malik, counsel instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Entry Clearance
    Officer is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellants appealed against the  respondent's  decision  dated  10
    November 2014  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  family  visitors.  The
    appellants could not appeal on the ground that the decision was not  in
    accordance with the immigration rules. They could only  appeal  on  the
    limited grounds that the decision was unlawful on human rights or  race
    relations grounds.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert ("the judge") allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds. The judge set out the reasons given for  refusing
    the entry clearance applications [4-11]. He also took into account  the
    grounds of appeal [12] and noted that the Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)
    review simply reiterated the reasons for refusal  albeit  that  it  was
    noted that the first appellant visited the UK on  a  previous  occasion
    [13-15]. He directed himself to the  correct  burden  and  standard  of
    proof [16]. The judge went on to note the immigration history  of  both
    appellants, which included a number of previous visits to the UK.  Even
    if the first appellant stayed a little  longer  than  intended  on  his
    previous visit in 2008, the judge noted that  he  did  not  breach  the
    conditions of his visa [18-19]. The fact that the second appellant  had
    visited the UK on six previous occasions was ignored  [20].  The  judge
    also noted that the ECO failed to take into account the fact  that  the
    first appellant had a settled job as the Deputy Assistant Director of a
    company since 2012 [21]. The First-tier  Tribunal  also  observed  that
    there had been a previous appeal in which the UK sponsor was  found  to
    be a credible witness [25].

4.    The focus of the judge's findings was on the respondent's  failure  to
    give weight to material matters such  as  the  appellants'  immigration
    history. He concluded that "the rationale and logic adopted by the  ECO
    and in fact by the ECM fell far below the  standards  that  one  should
    normally expect in such a serious decision" and took a  selective  view
    of their immigration history [29-30]. He made the following findings:


         "32.     I also have regard to the level of distress that is  often
         caused to families [where] legitimate visits are refused  for  what
         appears  to  be  gratuitous  reasons  which  bear  little   or   no
         relationship to the information placed before the ECO or ECM.


         33.      The UK citizen and his family have a right  to  see  their
         extended family provided they comply  with  the  immigration  rules
         applicable. I have absolutely no doubt  that  both  the  first  and
         second appellant will comply with the  conditions  of  their  visit
         visa as they have done in the past.


         34.      I consider  their  application  as  well  not  only  under
         section 41 of the immigration  rules  of  HC  395  but  also  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR.


         35.      I have considered the five stage  test  set  out  by  Lord
         Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. I do not  seek  to  rehearse  the
         five steps but the determinant factor is  whether  or  not  such  a
         decision is proportionate legitimate aim  to  maintain  immigration
         control."


5.    In assessing whether  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining an effective  system
    of immigration  control  the  judge  took  into  account  the  positive
    immigration history of  both  appellants.  He  took  into  account  the
    previous positive First-tier Tribunal decision. He found that the entry
    clearance decision failed  to  take  into  account  matters  that  were
    clearly relevant. He also found that there was a lack  of  security  in
    many provinces in Pakistan, which meant that "the sponsor cannot easily
    go to north-western province" to visit  his  family  because  it  would
    render him and his family vulnerable to kidnapping [36-41].

6.    The respondent seeks to appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:


      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to make any clear findings
         as to whether family  life  between  adult  relatives  was  engaged
         and/or whether there would be an interference with family  life  of
         sufficient gravity to engage the operation of Article 8: Kugathas v
         SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 referred.


     ii)  The  First-tier   Tribunal   failed   to   conduct   an   adequate
         proportionality assessment.


Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

8.    The points made by the judge regarding the failure of  the  respondent
    to consider material issues such as the appellants' previous compliance
    with immigration control and other evidence of ties that were likely to
    act as incentives for them to return to Pakistan had some force on  the
    facts of this case. It was open to the judge to  make  those  findings.
    The judge clearly considered that the entry clearance officer had given
    little scrutiny to the individual facts of the application.

9.    However, it is incumbent on a judge to give  adequate  reasons  for  a
    decision: see MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  and
    Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85.  While  a
    judge need not provide extensive reasons on each  and  every  point  he
    must give sufficient reasons to explain how and why  he  comes  to  his
    conclusions.

10.   In this case it is not clear  from  the  decision  whether  the  judge
    appreciated the fact that  the  appeal  was  limited  to  human  rights
    grounds. The  wording  of  paragraph  34  suggests  that  he  may  have
    considered the terms of the immigration rules. His summary at paragraph
    42 states that the decision "flies  in  the  face  of  the  immigration
    rules". It is not clear from  the  conclusion  whether  the  judge  was
    purporting to allow the appeal under the immigration rules or solely on
    human rights grounds.

11.   I bear in mind that some consideration of the immigration rules  might
    be relevant to the overall assessment of Article 8. In Mostafa (Article
    8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant's ability to satisfy the  immigration  rules  is  capable  of
    being a weighty factor but was not determinative when deciding  whether
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration
    control.

12.   In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 the Tribunal  found
    that the first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal of
    entry clearance as a family visitor where only human rights grounds are
    available is whether Article 8 is engaged at all. If  it  is  not,  the
    Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  embark  upon  an  assessment  of  the
    decision under the rules. If Article 8  is  engaged  the  Tribunal  may
    consider the extent to which the appellant might meet the  requirements
    of the rules, but it was only relevant in so far as it might inform the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

13.   In Kaur (visit appeals;  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  487  the  Tribunal
    considered the previous decisions and concluded that the starting point
    for consideration of an appeal on human rights  grounds  should  be  to
    make findings of fact on  the  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    ability to meet the requirements of paragraph  41  of  the  immigration
    rules. Disputes about the facts must still be  resolved.  The  Tribunal
    considered the Court of Appeal decision in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others
    [2015] Imm AR 1036. While the ability  of  an  appellant  to  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules might be relevant to the issue of
    whether the decision shows a lack of  respect  for  Article  8  rights,
    unless an appellant can show that there are individual interests giving
    rise to "compelling circumstances" that might justify a grant of  entry
    clearance outside the rules, he is unlikely to succeed.

14.   In light of the guidance given in the above cases it was open  to  the
    judge to make findings regarding the genuine nature of the visit and to
    come to some conclusion as  to  how  closely  the  appellants  met  the
    requirements of the immigration rules. Given that the  appellants  have
    visited the UK on previous occasions, and there were positive  findings
    from a previous First-tier Tribunal judge, it was open to the judge  in
    this case to conclude that the appellants were genuine visitors.

15.   However, in an appeal that was restricted to human rights grounds,  it
    was still incumbent on the judge to make adequate findings in  relation
    to the five-stage test in Razgar. While he referred to the case  it  is
    clear from his brief statement in paragraph 35 that he made no findings
    in relation to the first two questions outlined by  Lord  Bingham  i.e.
    whether the decision showed a  lack  of  respect  for  the  appellants'
    family life and any interference was of sufficient  gravity  to  engage
    the operation of Article 8.

16.   There is some distinction between the terms of the immigration  rules,
    which assess the intentions and affordability of a visit, and the terms
    of Article 8, which is designed to protect fundamental rights  relating
    to family life. In assessing whether 'family life' is engaged  for  the
    purpose of Article 8 it was necessary for the judge to  consider  basic
    principles relating to Article 8 arising out of cases such as Kugathas.
    On the facts of this case the appellants are adult relatives  who  live
    in a different country  to  the  sponsor.  It  was  necessary  to  make
    findings as to whether 'family life' existed for the purpose of Article
    8.

17.   Whether refusal of entry clearance interfered with  Article  8  rights
    also required consideration of whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the sponsor to visit the appellants in Pakistan. While the  judge  made
    some  reference  to  problems  in  north-west  province  he   gave   no
    consideration to the possibility of a visit to one of the larger cities
    elsewhere in Pakistan where conditions might be quite different.  These
    considerations were relevant to  the  issue  of  whether  the  decision
    amounted to  an  interference  with  their  right  to  family  life  of
    sufficient gravity to engage the operation of Article 8. While  I  bear
    in mind that a judge is not required to give extensive reasons, in this
    case, it was insufficient for  the  judge  merely  to  state  that  the
    appellants  had  a  "right  to  see  their  extended  family"   without
    explaining how or why he considered the  first  two  questions  of  the
    approach outlined in Razgar were satisfied.

18.   The points that the judge  took  into  account  when  considering  the
    proportionality of the decision were ones that were open to him to give
    weight to.  However,  I  find  that  his  overall  assessment  was  not
    consistent with the approach required by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS
    (Congo) and the various tribunal decisions outlined above.

19.   Although it was not argued in the grounds I am also  obliged  to  note
    that since 28 July 2014 courts  and  tribunals  are  required  to  have
    regard to the public interest considerations outlined in  section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002")  when
    considering whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for family life is justified under Article 8(2). In this case the entry
    clearance decision was made on 10 November 2014. The judge's failure to
    consider those public interest considerations also amounts to an  error
    of law.

20.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of  law.  It  is
    necessary to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

21.   The findings of fact made by the judge were open to  him  to  make  on
    the evidence. It was also open to the judge, and there  was  some  real
    force in what he said, to find that the decision failed  to  take  into
    account material considerations such as the lawful immigration  history
    of both appellants. The respondent has a public law duty to  take  into
    account relevant matters in coming to her decision, not  least  because
    applicants are now required to pay increasingly  large  fees  for  visa
    applications and are entitled  to  fair  and  proper  scrutiny  of  the
    application in return.

22.   The judge made a clear and unambiguous  finding  that  the  appellants
    are likely to be genuine visitors.  Given  that  the  only  reason  for
    refusing the entry clearance applications was said to be  doubts  about
    their intentions it would be open to the  respondent  to  review  these
    applications in order to consider whether to  exercise  discretion  and
    grant entry clearance. This might avoid further delay and  the  expense
    of a fresh hearing. However, it  is  entirely  for  the  respondent  to
    decide whether this is an appropriate course of action in light of  the
    sustainable findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 16 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








