
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07446/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2016                   |On 07 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                          ENTYR CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                    ABUJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Oluwafunmilayo Janet Oyekunle
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Walsh of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lal promulgated on 14 April 2016 allowing the appeal of Ms Oyekunle.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the Appellant and  Ms
    Oyekunle is the Respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Ms Oyekunle as the Appellant and the Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    Respondent.

3.   The Appellant applied for entry clearance as a visitor  on  23  October
    2014.  In  her  Visa  Application  Form  ('VAF')  at  question  64  she
    specified the details and plan of her visit as being "visit to  my  son
    to celebrate Christmas together and I will also do some shopping during
    my visit".  The Appellant's son,  the  sponsor  herein,  is  Mr  Kayode
    Adewale Oyekunle (d.o.b. 15 September 1976).  Mr Oyekunle is a  British
    citizen.

4.   The Appellant made  no  specific  reference  in  her  VAF  to  visiting
    grandchildren, although there  was  a  reference  to  grandchildren  at
    question 67 in the context of the possibility of grandchildren visiting
    her: "Again at years old [sic.] this seems reasonable  so  that  I  can
    enjoy the presence of grandchildren who may choose to visit  me  in  my
    home".  The Appellant's application also made reference to two previous
    visits to the United Kingdom pursuant to entry clearance as  a  visitor
    in 2008 and 2011, and also referred to the refusal of visas in 2009 and
    2011.

5.   The application refused  on  13  June  2011  was  refused  because  the
    Appellant had submitted in support of her application a  tax  clearance
    certificate which was found to be a false  document.   In  her  current
    application the  Appellant  sought  to  address  this  circumstance  by
    indicating that the tax clearance certificate had been provided to  her
    by a third party, that she had acted in good faith in  respect  of  the
    matter and indeed had subsequently reported this  circumstance  to  the
    police in Nigeria.  In that regard the Appellant made  observations  at
    question 67 in the VAF and submitted  with  her  application  a  letter
    dated 20 October 2014 addressed to the British High Commission together
    with a copy of a police report.  The  police  report  was  made  on  24
    October 2013 which, it may readily be observed, was some 2 years and  4
    months after the date of  the  refusal  premised  upon  the  false  tax
    clearance certificate.

6.   The Appellant's most recent application was  refused  for  reasons  set
    out in a Notice of Immigration Decision  dated  30  October  2014  with
    reference to paragraphs 320(7B) and 41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii) of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Essentially the  Respondent  had  relied  upon  the
    previous use of a false document to invoke  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
    Rules, and had considered also that the circumstance of the  submission
    of a false document in the earlier application  was  such  as  to  cast
    sufficient doubts as to the Appellant's bona fides and intentions  that
    he was not  satisfied  that  she  met  the  requirements  of  the  sub-
    paragraphs of paragraph 41 as identified above.

7.   The Appellant appealed to  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.  The
    right of appeal was restricted by virtue of Section 52 of the Crime and
    Courts  Act  to  grounds  under  section  84(1)(b)  and  (c)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In essence the Appellant
    was  restricted  to  appealing  on   grounds   in   respect   of   race
    discrimination  or  human  rights  grounds.   In  the  event  no   race
    discrimination grounds have been pursued.

8.   Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant's  son,  the  sponsor,
    attended to give evidence in support of the appeal  and  to  act  as  a
    representative, there being no legal representative  based  in  the  UK
    appearing before the  Tribunal.   The  Appellant's  son  has  not,  for
    reasons which are unclear, attended the hearing today but the Appellant
    is now represented by Mr Walsh of Counsel.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal.

10.  The Respondent sought permission to appeal.  The  Respondent's  grounds
    essentially argue that there was no family life in accordance with  the
    Rules; that the Judge made no finding on private life; no reasons  were
    given by the Judge in respect of interference with private  life;  that
    there had been no proportionality assessment; and that  no  regard  had
    been had to section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It was also  argued  in  the
    grounds that the Judge had in effect misused Article  8  as  a  general
    dispensing power to give effect to findings that he had made under  the
    Immigration Rules (in respect of which there was no available ground of
    appeal).

11.  The First-tier Tribunal's Decision does indeed in  the  first  instance
    address the Appellant's case with reference to the  Immigration  Rules.
    Paragraph 9 of the Decision addresses paragraph 320(7B); thereafter the
    Judge goes on to consider the case, albeit  briefly,  by  reference  to
    paragraph 41; then at paragraph 11 the Judge states the following:

         "In the circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the  Appellant
         has discharged the legal and evidential burden upon her. The appeal
         is allowed under the Immigration Rules. However, noting the limited
         right of appeal the Tribunal considered the issue of Article 8".

12.  It is of course the case that the Judge had no  jurisdiction  to  allow
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. (It is perhaps for this  reason
    that that particular finding does not find its  way  into  the  summary
    under the concluding heading 'Notice of Decision', which simply  allows
    the appeal "on human rights ground".

13.  The approach whereby the Judge considered the  Rules  first,  whilst  I
    acknowledge as being not inevitably fatal to  his  decision,  does  run
    contrary to the guidance from this Tribunal in the case of Adjei (visit
    visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261.  In a case decided shortly  before
    Adjei, Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) the
    Tribunal found as per the headnote:

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control."

    In Adjei the first paragraph of the headnote reads as follows:

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the Rules and should not do  so.   If  Article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow.    Mostafa  is  not  authority  for  any contrary
         proposition."

14.  The recommended approach emphasises, and thereby  directs  a  decision-
    maker's mind to, the fact that the appeal is on  human  rights  grounds
    and is not an appeal under  the  Rules.  As  I  say  this  is  not  the
    structure to which the Judge adhered in determining the instant appeal.
     Whilst it is not inevitably fatal, it is perhaps  troubling  that  the
    Judge did not go straight to Article 8 - and more troubling that he  at
    least in part gave the impression that he believed  that  the  Tribunal
    could allow the appeal under the Rules as stated at paragraph 11 of his
    Decision.

15.  In terms of general  approach,  there  is  one  further  observation  I
    should make. It is not clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided
    the appeal by reference to the date of the  Respondent's  decision.  It
    appears from paragraphs 3 and 14 that  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the
    presence in the UK of two grandchildren  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    previously seen.  However, the youngest grandchild would have been born
    post-decision - which suggests that the Judge's focus was on the  wrong
    point of time.  Be that as it may, on the acts of this particular  case
    this is unlikely ultimately to be a material consideration.

16.  These matters aside, I am in any event satisfied that the findings  and
    conclusions in respect of Article 8 as set  out  in  the  Decision  are
    unsupported by cogent reasoning  to  an  extent  that  they  amount  to
    material errors of law.

17.  The Judge considers Article 8 at paragraphs 12-15 of the decision.   At
    paragraph 12 he makes reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act and the
    fact  that  public  interest  considerations  apply  pursuant  to  that
    section.   There  is  no  further  consideration  of  those  individual
    elements under section 117B although I acknowledge that to a very large
    extent - particularly with references to factors  such  as  integration
    into the UK - they do not all have an obvious place  in  a  visit  visa
    application or visit visa application appeal.  The Judge otherwise sets
    out the five Razgar questions at paragraph 13, and then  says  this  at
    paragraph 14:

         "The Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  any  intention  to  refuse  the
         Appellant will interference with family and  private  life  of  the
         broader family unit, which includes the  UK  sponsor  in  that  the
         visit has been prompted by the desire to deal with an intention  to
         visit never before  seen  grandchildren.  Question  (2)  [i.e.  the
         second of the Razgar questions] is also  perhaps  answered  in  the
         affirmative.  The interference is clearly lawful in that  it  seeks
         to maintain effective  immigration  control,  this  would  likewise
         provide an affirmative  answer  in  respect  of  question  (4)  [of
         Razgar] above. The real issue is one of proportionality."

    At paragraph 15 the Judge says this:

         "The Tribunal notes the  Guidance  in  respect  of  the  effect  of
         Section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act  2013  and  that  the  vast
         majority of cases the refused  person  can  reapply.  However,  the
         Guidance also makes clear by reference to the phrase the  "majority
         of cases" that this must imply that a minority of  cases  may  well
         engage Article 8.  In the Tribunal's  assessment  this  is  one  of
         those cases because of the unique particular facts".

18.  The Respondent, through her grounds and through Mr Norton  today,  seek
    to impugn the Judge's reasoning in each of those paragraphs.

19.  In my judgment I accept that the Judge has failed  to  give  any  clear
    explanation as to his conclusion in respect of family and private life.
    Indeed Mr Walsh in the course of his submissions acknowledged that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had "found family life without much reasoning
    and without much explanation".  I find that  there  is  no  attempt  to
    engage at all  in  respect  of  the  first  Razgar  question  with  the
    reasoning in cases such as Kugathas and Marckx,  (copies  of  which  Mr
    Walsh has helpfully  provided  to  the  Tribunal,  and  are  on  file).
    Perhaps more troubling still is the  Judge's  purported  conclusion  in
    respect of the second Razgar question which he characterised  as  being
    "perhaps answered" in the  affirmative.   With  respect,  that  is  not
    adequate.

20.  As  regards  the  proportionality  question,  I  can  find  nothing  in
    paragraph 15 which relates proportionality to the facts of the case  at
    all.  The Judge is merely addressing the alternative possibility of  an
    Appellant applying for entry clearance a second time - which  might  be
    an appropriate course in a case where an application had failed because
    it was defective in some way, or where inadequate supporting  documents
    had been presented.  But by simply concluding that this case  turns  on
    its own "unique particular facts" without saying any more  about  those
    facts, or what was unique  about  them,  or  demonstrating  a  reasoned
    evaluation of 'proportionality', is again quite simply not adequate.

21.  I have given some consideration to whether it might be  said  that  the
    Judge's decision could be preserved,  or  'saved',  by  reason  of  his
    favourable findings  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Respondent's
    grounds do not expressly  challenge  the  Judge's  findings  under  the
    Rules,  but  -  perhaps  not  surprisingly  -  emphasise  the   limited
    jurisdiction consequent upon the restricted right of appeal. Be that as
    it may, in considering whether I can disregard the  Judge's  errors  as
    being immaterial, it seems to me it would be unrealistic  to  disregard
    manifest concerns over what is said in the Decision at paragraph  9  in
    respect of paragraph 320 of the Rules.

22.  I accept it was  indeed  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    conclude as he did at paragraph 9 that the Respondent had not shown  on
    a balance of probabilities dishonest intent by the Appellant in respect
    of the tax certificate, and as such the application did not fall to  be
    defeated by reference to paragraph 320(7B).  However  it  seems  to  me
    that the circumstance of the submission of a  false  document  was  not
    otherwise adequately explored.  Even  if  it  were  not  sufficient  in
    itself to engage paragraph 320(7B), the fact of  the  use  of  a  false
    document in an earlier application was a  matter  that  could  properly
    inform an evaluation of paragraph 41 of the Rules: but there is no such
    analysis in the findings of the Judge. In those circumstances it  seems
    to me that I cannot conclude that the Judge's decision is saved by  his
    findings under the Immigration Rules.

23.  Accordingly I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge contained material errors of law, and the decision is  set  aside
    accordingly.

Remaking the Decision

24.  The decision in the appeal requires to be remade.

25.  The sponsor is not present today and there is no  explanation  for  his
    absence.  No witness statement has been provided by the sponsor  or  on
    behalf of the Appellant, and little if  anything  is  recorded  in  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal by way of evidence,  or  indeed  in
    the Record of Proceedings which is on file.   The  standard  directions
    issued by the  Upper  Tribunal  do  require  the  Appellant  and  their
    representatives to be ready and prepared to  deal  with  a  substantive
    remaking of the decision in the light of an error of law. In all of the
    circumstances I can see no reason why I should not  proceed  to  remake
    the decision in the appeal today, notwithstanding the  absence  of  the
    sponsor.

26.  What I am essentially left with is an assertion  that  a  family  visit
    was intended for the purposes set out in the VAF and  amplified  before
    the First-tier Tribunal by reference to the wish to  see  a  grandchild
    with whom the Appellant had already had some contact  on  her  previous
    visits, and another grandchild that had been more  recently  born  whom
    the Appellant had not yet seen.  In my judgment those circumstances are
    not in and of themselves sufficient to  constitute,  or  to  support  a
    finding that, a family life existed at the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision (or even now exists) between the Appellant and the sponsor and
    the sponsor's family in the United  Kingdom.   There  is  quite  simply
    insufficient material to overcome the threshold identified, for example
    in the case of Kugathas.

27.  Even if I am wrong in that regard, in  circumstances  where  there  has
    seemingly been a complete absence of any explanation as to how  contact
    is otherwise maintained between the Appellant and the sponsor  and  the
    sponsor's family in the United  Kingdom,  or  any  exploration  in  the
    evidence of the possibility of the sponsor and his family travelling to
    visit the Appellant in Nigeria (or some other third country),  I am not
    satisfied that the second of the  Razgar  questions,  that  is  to  say
    whether any interference would have consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8, can  be  answered  in
    the Appellant's favour - notwithstanding that  it  is  well-established
    that the threshold in respect of that question is relatively low.

28.  I find nothing here to suggest that Article 8 is  engaged.  Accordingly
    it is not necessary to go any further into  the  consideration  of  the
    Immigration Rules following the guidance in the  case  of  Adjei.   For
    those reasons the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

29.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.

30.  I remake the decision. The appeal is dismissed.

31.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represent a corrected version of a transcript  of  an  ex  tempore
decision given at the conclusion of the hearing


Signed:                                 Date: 4 November 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the circumstances there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 4 November 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
