
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                KOKAB TABRIZI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Salam, Salam & Co
For the Respondent:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  She is the mother of the first
         sponsor.  He resides in the United Kingdom with indefinite leave to
         remain and is married to a British national,  the  second  sponsor.
         They have a son, who is of course the  appellant's  grandson.   The
         appellant's application for entry clearance to visit  the  sponsors
         and her grandson was refused and she appealed that decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      2. In a decision promulgated on 21 May 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Chambers dismissed the appellant's appeal on Article 8 of the  ECHR
         grounds.  Judge Chambers was correct to limit his consideration  to
         Article 8.  By virtue of an amendment to s.88A of  the  Nationality
         and Immigration Act 2002, there is no  right  of  appeal  in  visit
         cases even in a family visitor case except on grounds alleging that
         the decision shows unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under s.6
         of the Human Rights Act 1998. In consequence, in an appeal  brought
         on human rights grounds, judges have no jurisdiction  to  allow  or
         dismiss it on the basis that it is not is or is not  in  accordance
         with the rules or is or is not otherwise  in  accordance  with  the
         law.

      3. In the instant case Judge Chambers did not accept  that  there  was
         family life for the purposes of Article 8(1) between the  appellant
         and the first sponsor.  In grounds seeking permission to appeal  it
         was submitted that the judge failed to apply the guidance contained
         in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112  (IAC)
         and Adjei (visit visas) [2015] UKUT 0261 and failed to consider all
         and make findings of fact in  relation  to  the  relevant  evidence
         available before making findings regarding the  appellant's  family
         life.

      4. After permission to appeal was granted the SSHD submitted a rule 24
         response in which it is submitted that the failure to consider  the
         relevant case law was not material  because  the  judge's  findings
         were open to him in light of that guidance.

      5. At the hearing Mr Salam relied upon his grounds of  appeal  and  Mr
         Harrison relied upon the rule 24 notice. I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now provide with reasons.

      6. I am satisfied that the judge has erred in law in his  approach  to
         family life.  First, the judge cast the  net  of  potential  family
         life too narrowly.  The judge considered whether there  was  family
         life between the appellant and her son and found that the son  (the
         first sponsor) could exercise family  life  with  his  mother  (the
         appellant) in Iran.   The  judge  however  failed  to  address  the
         relationship between the appellant  and  her  son's  family.   This
         included a non-Muslim British wife and young  British  citizen  son
         (and the difficulties that might be involved  in  their  travel  to
         Iran).  As set out in Mostafa, the decision in  Shamin  Box  [2002]
         UKIAT 02212 is to be followed to the  effect  that  the  obligation
         imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family  life  of  all  those
         affected by the decision.  The judge erred in  law  in  failing  to
         consider the wider ambit of the relevant family  life.   There  was
         evidence before the judge that the second  sponsor  and  her  child
         would find it difficult to travel to Iran.  The witness  statements
         before the judge made it clear that one  of  the  purposes  of  the
         visit was for the appellant to meet his  wife's  family  and  their
         son, and this could not take place in Iran. In these  circumstances
         the judge has failed to  consider  whether  there  was  a  lack  of
         respect for the promotion of family life and instead  focussed  too
         narrowly on the  fact  that  the  first  sponsor  could  visit  the
         appellant in Iran.

      7. Second, the judge failed to  take  into  account  the  evidence  of
         financial dependence.  As noted in Kaur (visit appeals; Article  8)
         [2015] UKUT 487 (IAC) at  [38]  it  is  well-established  that  the
         notion of family life is not confined to parents and  children  and
         can  include   the   ties   between   near   relatives,   including
         grandchildren since such relatives  play  a  considerable  part  in
         family life.  In this  case  there  was  also  a  large  degree  of
         financial dependence on  the  part  of  the  appellant  toward  the
         sponsors, yet this was not taken into account by the judge.

      8. Third,  the  judge  has  not  made  any  clear  findings  regarding
         paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.   Kaur at  [31]  establishes
         that it is beyond doubt that (i) evidence relating to  the  ability
         of an appellant to meet the requirements of paragraph  41  must  be
         relevant to the assessment of  whether  there  is  a  violation  of
         Article 8; (ii) this means that it  is  essential  for  a  tribunal
         judge deciding the Article 8 question to make any findings  on  the
         basis of all the evidence in the case.  I appreciate that Kaur  was
         promulgated after the decision under appeal however the  issue  was
         flagged up in the headnote of Mostafa as noted in Kaur [28].  It is
         nonetheless surprising that clear findings of fact were not made in
         this appeal.  As I have said the judge had detailed evidence in the
         form of witness statements dealing  with  the  sole  issue  arising
         under paragraph 41 - whether there was an explanation for  payments
         into the appellant's bank account and the role this played  in  the
         appellant's intentions to leave the UK.   The  sponsors  gave  oral
         evidence  about  the  issue  and  this  evidence  related  to   the
         circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.  The  judge
         does not appear to dispute this evidence.  Yet he  makes  no  clear
         findings upon the issue.  The issue is important (not just for  the
         purposes of paragraph 41 which was plainly not  before  the  judge)
         but  because  it  was  relevant  to  the  assertion  of   financial
         dependency and the extent of family life.

      9. It follows that the judge has erred in law  in  his  assessment  of
         family life.  I have considered whether or not  I  can  remake  the
         decision for myself or whether detailed findings of fact need to be
         remade such that it would be more appropriate for the matter to  be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with 7.2  of  the
         relevant Practice Direction.   The judge has  not  made  any  clear
         findings of fact relevant to the appellant's intentions,  financial
         dependence, or the wider ambit of family life.  This  needs  to  be
         done.  Mr Salam also sought to highlight a number of hurdles to the
         second sponsor and her son travelling  to  Iran.   He  was  however
         unable to point to evidence to support much of this.   In  all  the
         circumstances it is appropriate for the decision to  be  remade  in
         the First-tier Tribunal.  Any further evidence  that  is  submitted
         must of course be relevant to the circumstances appertaining at the
         date of decision.

Decision

     10. I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an
         error of law and I set it aside.

     11. The matter needs to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

    (1)    The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
         shall make clear  findings  of  fact  in  line  with  the  relevant
         authorities referred to above. TE: 1.5 hrs.

    (2)    The appellant shall file and serve a  paginated  indexed  bundle
         containing all evidence she wishes to rely upon 28 days before  the
         hearing.

    (3)    The respondent shall file and serve a summary of her position in
         light of the appellant's evidence 7 days before the hearing.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 November 2015

