

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/07525/2014
                                                               VA/07526/2014
                                                               VA/07528/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 September 2016                     |On 16 September 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between


                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AMIR ALI KHAN (1)
                          MOSAMMAT SELINA BEGUM (2)
                           ASMA AKHTER BHUYIAN (3)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel



                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.   The appellant in this case  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who
      appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M J  Gillespie  to  allow
      the appeals of  Mr  Khan,  Mrs  Begum  and  Mrs  Bhuyian,  Bangladeshi
      nationals born on 7 January 1939, 7 January 1955 and 4  February  1983
      respectively, against decisions dated 9  October  2014  refusing  them
      entry clearance in order to visit family members in the UK.


   2.   The sponsor, Mr Md Shah Alam Khan, is the adult son of the first and
      second respondents. He resides in the UK. His brother, Mr Samsul  Alam
      Khan, also resides in the UK. The third respondent  is  his  wife  and
      therefore the daughter-in-law of the first and second respondents.

   3.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. From now on I shall refer  to  Mr  Khan,  Mrs
      Begum and Mrs Bhuyian as "the appellants" and to the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer as "the respondent".


   4.   I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.

   5.   The appeals were allowed by Judge Gillespie, who found the decisions
      represented a disproportionate lack of respect  for  family  life.  In
      reaching that conclusion he  overturned  the  decision  of  the  entry
      clearance officer that the appellants had used deception in a previous
      application  by  presenting   false   bank   documents.   A   document
      verification report was relied on but the Judge noted that a  copy  of
      the alleged forged document had not been provided  and  there  was  no
      evidence the second and third appellants were aware of it. The  appeal
      had been adjourned in order to  give  time  to  obtain  the  documents
      relied on in the document verification report but it  transpired  that
      the documents were unavailable. The Judge found that deception had not
      been established. That aspect of his decision has not been challenged.
      It is fair to say the  whole  of  the  reasoning  for  refusing  entry
      clearance rested on the deception allegation.


   6.   The Judge then decided the appeals as follows:

         "14. The effect of my decision is to  show  that  the  decision  to
         invoke the general reason for refusal has not  been  shown  by  the
         respondent to be in accordance with the law. The consequence of the
         same is that the decision to refuse the visit visa is based upon an
         unlawful consideration. Nevertheless, I may  not  intervene,  as  I
         have  already  mentioned,  in  the  absence   of   disproportionate
         interference by the respondent in the rights of family and  private
         life of the  appellants.  I  consider  that  such  disproportionate
         interference has been demonstrated. The effect of the refusal is to
         impose a ban upon issue of entry clearance for  up  to  ten  years.
         This, enforced against elderly parents separate  from  their  sons,
         and against a young wife, newly married to her husband and  wishing
         to join him, is disproportionate, at least in  circumstances  where
         the respondent has failed to show the truth of  the  allegation  of
         deception against one or other or any of the appellants.  There  is
         no public interest in the perpetuation of a potential unfairness of
         this nature."


   7.   Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "... it is arguable that the  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  in
         concluding that compelling  circumstances  or  family  ties  beyond
         those usually existing between adults existed such as to mean  that
         article 8 was engaged, and  that  even  if  it  was  engaged,  that
         consequences of gravity may exist such as to mean that it was  even
         necessary to consider proportionality, or that if  it  did  why  it
         would be disproportionate to require  the  Sponsors  to  visit  the
         Appellants in Bangladesh."


   Error of law


   8.   I heard submissions as to whether the Judge erred in law.


   9.   Mr Tufan described the decision  as  "perplexing"  because,  in  his
      opinion, the Judge had not dealt directly with article 8. In the  case
      of the first and second appellants, the Judge had  not  grappled  with
      the question of whether there was extant family life for the  purposes
      of article 8.

  10. Mr Balroop argued strongly that the  decision  does  not  contain  any
      material errors. He pointed out  the  respondent  accepted  there  was
      family life between the third appellant and her husband in the UK. The
      husband's witness statement made clear he had  a  pending  application
      for indefinite leave to remain. It  was  clearly  disproportionate  to
      impose a ten-year ban on the third  appellant  re-applying  for  entry
      clearance. He also argued that article 8 was also clearly  engaged  in
      the case of the first and second appellants. He relied on Kaur  (visit
      appeals: Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) in which the UT  upheld  a
      finding that there was family life between the appellant and her adult
      son.

  11. Mr Balroop also argued that the inability of the Judge  to  allow  the
      appeals outright on the deception point was a breach  of  article  13,
      the right to have an effective remedy.

  12. I have carefully considered the arguments made although,  for  reasons
      which will become clear, it was not necessary to decide  Mr  Balroop's
      point about article 13. He was,  after  all,  seeking  to  defend  the
      decision.


  13. I have decided the decision is vitiated by material error of  law  and
      should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  additional
      findings. My reasons are as follows.

  14. The Judge correctly identified the restricted  ground  of  appeal.  In
      paragraph 3  he  identified  that  the  appeals  were  grounded  on  a
      complaint of a breach of article 8. He  cited  the  three  leading  UT
      decisions on article 8 in  the  context  of  visitor  appeals  and  he
      reminded himself that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  investigate
      the merits of the decision under the rules. However, where  article  8
      was engaged in principle, then whether the rules were met or not was a
      potentially weighty factor  which  might  inform  the  proportionality
      balancing exercise.  As  seen,  in  paragraph  14,  having  found  the
      allegation of deception was not made out, he reminded himself that  he
      could not intervene unless the appellants could show there had been  a
      disproportionate interference with their protected rights.

  15. It is for the appellants to show there would be an  interference  with
      their right to family life, although  in  entry  clearance  cases  the
      correct approach to this issue may be to assess whether the  decisions
      amount to an unjustified lack of respect for family life, focusing  on
      the UK's positive obligations to facilitate family reunion (Shamim Box
      [2002] UKIAT 02212). Article 8 is a qualified right expressed in  such
      a way as to allow for exceptions and it is for the respondent to  show
      that the lack of respect is lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.
      It  is  then  necessary  to   assess   whether   the   decisions   are
      disproportionate to that aim.

  16. It is important that, in  deciding  an  article  8  ground  of  appeal
      outside the rules, the Tribunal addresses the five questions  set  out
      in paragraph 17 of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The importance of  doing  so
      was confirmed in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
      00112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)
      and this approach was also applied in Kaur.


  17. With the greatest of respect to the Judge,  I  do  not  consider  that
      paragraph 14 of his decision adequately addresses the five-stage  test
      or provides a sufficiently structured  approach.  My  reasons  are  as
      follows.

  18. In relation to the first and second appellants, they wished  to  visit
      their adult sons in the UK, as they have done on a number of occasions
      in the past. Both sons are married and the sponsor has children.

  19. In Mostafa the UT stated as follows:



         "24. It is the  very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
         fundamental values that have  to  be  considered  in  all  relevant
         cases.  It would therefore be extremely foolish to  attempt  to  be
         prescriptive,  given   the   intensely   factual   and   contextual
         sensitivity of every case. Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in
         this type of case, any particular kind of relationship would always
         attract the protection of Article  8(1)  or  that  other  kinds  of
         relationship would never come within its scope.  We  are,  however,
         prepared to say that it will only be in very unusual  circumstances
         that a person other than a close relative will be able to show that
         the refusal of entry clearance comes within the  scope  of  Article
         8(1). In practical terms this is likely  to  be  limited  to  cases
         where the relationship is that of husband and wife or  other  close
         life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it will not
         necessarily be extended to cases where, for example,  the  proposed
         visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the  time
         that the people involved spend together. In the  limited  class  of
         cases where Article 8 (1) ECHR is  engaged  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance must be in accordance with the law and proportionate.  If
         a person's circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and  they
         have not acted in a way that undermines the system  of  immigration
         control, a refusal of entry clearance is liable to infringe Article
         8."


  20. The Kaur case, relied  on  by  Mr  Balroop  was  decided  on  its  own
      particular facts. The appellant's grandchildren had been  living  with
      her. The UT recognised the finding of family life between adult family
      members was unusual (see paragraph 39).


  21. The question of  whether  family  life  exists  between  adult  family
      members was considered in detail in paragraphs 50  to  62  of  Ghising
      (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160  (IAC).  The
      guidance given by the UT in that case was subsequently approved by the
      Court of Appeal in paragraph 46 of Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ  8.
      Most of the case law has been concerned  with  adult  children  living
      with their parents. The thrust of  the  guidance  is  that  each  case
      depends on its own facts. However, in the circumstances such as  those
      pertaining in the current case that the first and  second  appellants'
      sons have left home, moved abroad and found their own  life  partners,
      it is difficult to see how, without more, it should be  accepted  that
      there is extant family life.

  22. There was scant evidence regarding the relationships before the  Judge
      in this case. The issue of dependency was not explored. The reader  of
      the decision cannot know on what basis the Judge decided article 8 was
      engaged, simply through the reference to them being  elderly.  Plainly
      the Judge was of the view that the decisions were disproportionate and
      his reasoning on that count is unimpeachable. The problem is  that  he
      did not show how he reached that question.

  23. The issue in  relation  to  the  third  appellant  is  different.  The
      respondent acknowledged in her grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal
      that the finding of family life was not challenged. As set out  above,
      the UT in Mostafa acknowledged that there could be cases of visits  by
      partners not engaging article 8 because "the proposed visit  is  based
      on a whim or will  not  add  significantly  to  the  time  the  people
      involved spend together."

  24. The Judge in this case states that the third appellant is a young wife
      wishing to join her husband.  According  to  the  witness  statements,
      whilst the third appellant's husband  had  applied  for  ILR  and  was
      therefore planning to remain in the UK for the foreseeable future, she
      intended only a short visit to  see  family  and  sight-see.  That  is
      perfectly plausible and she has always abided by the terms of her visa
      in the past. The husband's indeterminate status meant  she  could  not
      yet apply to join him on a permanent basis. On  the  other  hand,  the
      question of her intentions does not appear to have  been  explored  at
      all by the Judge. His use of the word "join",  in  place  of  "visit",
      might not be an  intentional  indicator  that  he  foresaw  the  third
      appellant seeking to remain in the UK  for  longer  than  the  planned
      visit but it is another matter about which the reader of the  decision
      is left in the dark due to the paucity of reasoning.

  25. I am therefore driven to conclude that the respondent's appeal must be
      allowed and the decision  set  aside.  The  appeals  are  remitted  to
      another Judge to make findings on whether article 8(1) is engaged with
      respect to any of the appellants. It is likely that, if  it  is  found
      that  article  8  is  engaged,  the   Judge's   conclusion   regarding
      proportionality  would  be  restored.  His  finding  on  deception  is
      preserved.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  his  decision
    is set aside.

The appeals must be re-heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  findings
    under article 8(1).

No anonymity direction.


                               Signed                 Date 14 September
                                   2016






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal



