
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/07430/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 July 2013                                 |On 30 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                               PERVAIZ HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer ABU DHABI


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mushtaq Sarwar (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Pervaiz Hussian, was born on 12 July 1974 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  On 12 January 2012, the  appellant's  application
    for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor was  refused  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) Abu Dhabi. The appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fisher)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18 September 2012, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the  appeal  hearing  on  16  July  2013,  Mr  Mushtaq  Sarwar,  the
    appellant's United Kingdom sponsor, attended.  Mr M Diwnycz,  a  Senior
    Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared for the respondent.

 3. Judge Fisher had proceeded to hear the appeal in  the  absence  of  the
    sponsor.  He noted that the appellant had indicated (when he had  filed
    his notice of appeal) that he wished to have the matter  determined  at
    an oral hearing.  The  sponsor  had  not  attended.   The  sponsor  and
    appellant claim that they had requested an adjournment of  the  hearing
    because the sponsor would not be available but that no  action  appears
    to have been taken by the Tribunal in  response  to  their  request.  I
    accept what they say  and,  in  the  circumstances,  I  set  aside  the
    determination and have remade the  decision.  For  reasons  which  will
    become apparent, however, there was no flaw  in  the  analysis  or  the
    outcome of Judge Fisher's determination. I set aside his  determination
    for procedural irregularity  (which  had  been  beyond  Judge  Fisher's
    control) only.

 4. Leave to enter the United Kingdom had been  refused  to  the  appellant
    under paragraphs 320(7B) and paragraph 41 of HC 395.  The appellant had
    been refused entry clearance for using deception on 19  December  2010,
    having submitted false documents in support of his  application.  There
    is in  the  papers  a  document  verification  report  concerning  that
    previous application and I have also seen the  determination  of  Judge
    Hague who heard the appeal in Manchester in January 2011.  Judge  Hague
    had found that false documents had been submitted  in  support  of  the
    application. His determination was not appealed by the  appellant.   At
    [9] Judge Fisher wrote:

         "The appellant  must  understand  that  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
         Immigration Rules is mandatory in its application. It affords me no
         discretion.  Where an applicant has previously  breached  the  UK's
         immigration laws by using  deception  in  an  application  (whether
         successful or not), future applications will  be  refused  for  ten
         years. It is clear that deception was used in the last  application
         which was within ten last ten years,  and  so  the  current  appeal
         cannot succeed. The issues of whether the appellant  is  a  genuine
         visitor for a limited time and whether he intends to leave  the  UK
         at the conclusion of his visit are, therefore, purely academic, and
         I am satisfied that I need  not  deal  with  them  in  view  of  my
         conclusion under paragraph 320(7B)."

 5. I endorse that analysis entirely. Indeed, the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Nigeria) [2010]   EWCA Civ 773 held:

    First, "false representation"  is  aligned  in  the  rule  with  "false
    document". It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a  lie
    about itself. Of course it is possible for a person to make  use  of  a
    false document (for instance a  counterfeit  currency  note,  but  that
    example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the  context  of
    this discussion) in total ignorance  of  its  falsity  and  in  perfect
    honesty. But the document itself is  dishonest.  It  is  highly  likely
    therefore that where  an  applicant  uses  in  all  innocence  a  false
    document for the purpose of obtaining  entry  clearance,  or  leave  to
    enter or to remain, it is because some  other  party,  it  might  be  a
    parent, or sponsor, or agent, has dishonestly promoted the use of  that
    document. The  response  of  a  requirement  of  mandatory  refusal  is
    entirely understandable in such a  situation.  The  mere  fact  that  a
    dishonest document has been used for such an important  application  is
    understandably a sufficient reason for a mandatory refusal. That is why
    the rule expressly emphasises that it applies "whether or  not  to  the
    applicant's knowledge".

 6. Although I am grateful  to  the  sponsor  for  attending  the  Tribunal
    hearing on this occasion, it follows from the above that I must dismiss
    the appeal.

DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.










Signed                              Date 31 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
