
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07645/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 21st November 2016               |On: 23rd November 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Muhammad Ali
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of birth 3rd  July  1972.
    On the 14th July 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Higgins)  allowed
    his appeal, on human rights grounds, against a decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him a visit visa to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) now has permission to appeal against that decision.


 2. When the appeal was called on before me there was, for obvious reasons,
    no appearance by the Respondent  (he  is  in  Pakistan).  Nor  did  his
    nominated representatives,  'UNQ  Immigration'  attend.  There  was  no
    communication from UNQ. An email was  on  file  from  the  Respondent's
    previous representatives, London Law Associates. This asserted that the
    firm had never represented the Respondent at  all.  This  was  somewhat
    surprising given that the record of proceedings and  the  determination
    both record the presence of their Mr Mananan at the hearing, and  there
    is correspondence from the firm on file.  I noted that  the  notice  of
    hearing had been delivered  to  the  last  address  supplied  for  UNQ.
    Shortly after 10.00am a message was left with UNQ Immigration,  but  by
    11.20 no response had been received.  In the absence of any  indication
    that an adjournment might result in the attendance by either  of  these
    firms,  and having had regard to the overriding objective to dispose of
    matters fairly and efficiently, I proceeded to hear the appeal.

 3. There was no  application  for  an  order  for  anonymity  and  in  the
    circumstances I did not consider it necessary to so order.



    Background and Matters in Issue


 4. The Respondent made his application  on  the  11th  October  2014.  The
    stated purpose of the trip was in order to facilitate his attendance at
    a hearing of  the  family  court  at  Bow,  a  hearing  concerning  the
    Respondent's application for contact with his three children  who  were
    living with their mother in the United Kingdom.   The Respondent stated
    that he was working in Pakistan and that he would only be in the United
    Kingdom for eight days.


 5. The refusal, issued on the 29th October 2014, did not take  issue  with
    the claimed reason for the visit. I have seen correspondence  from  Bow
    Family Court and it is clear from this that the  Respondent  is  indeed
    seeking contact with the  children.    It  is  further  clear  that  an
    earlier application for contact had been  dismissed  precisely  because
    the applicant father could not enter the United  Kingdom  in  order  to
    take part in proceedings.

 6. The ECO's refusal was based on an assertion that the Respondent had, on
    the 17th April 2014, attempted to exercise deception. He  had  made  an
    application for entry and in doing so had relied upon  bank  statements
    which were considered by the Respondent to be false.   In light of that
    earlier finding of deception the application fell to  be  refused  with
    reference to paragraph 320(7B) of the  Immigration  Rules.  Furthermore
    the ECO could not  be  satisfied  as  to  the  claims  made  about  the
    Respondent's income and circumstances in Pakistan.

 7. Given the subject matter it is  a  matter  of  great  regret  that  the
    Respondent's appeal did not come before the First-tier  Tribunal  until
    May 2016. Having had regard  to  the  evidence  and  submissions  Judge
    Higgins made the following findings:

              i) The ECO had not discharged the burden of proof  in  respect
                 of the allegation of deception. It was  not  at  all  clear
                 what the alleged deception was supposed to have  been.  The
                 Respondent  had  previously  submitted   bank   statements,
                 purportedly issued in March 2014. The ECO's  enquiries  had
                 shown the account in question to have been closed  down  in
                 April 2014.  Judge  Higgins  found  these  facts  were  not
                 capable of supporting a finding of deception.


             ii)  The  substantive  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
                 Immigration Rules were met. The  only  ground  for  refusal
                 (aside from 320(7B)) was that the  ECO  was  not  satisfied
                 that the Respondent intended to leave the United Kingdom at
                 the end  of  his  trip  (ie  was  a  genuine  visitor)  and
                 maintenance. The Judge was, on the evidence,  satisfied  as
                 to both.  The application had been supported by evidence of
                 earnings,  but  not  of  paying  tax;  the  Respondent  had
                 explained that he could not produce documents such  as  tax
                 returns because he was not in fact paying any. The Tribunal
                 noted the "considerable determination" the  Respondent  has
                 shown in wanting to re-establish contact with his  children
                 and that this ambition could well have been thwarted by any
                 breach of the rules: it was in his interest to comply  with
                 the terms of his visa.

            iii) The Respondent was trying in good faith to "resuscitate the
                 family ties which had previously existed  between  him  and
                 his children and to develop them"

 8. Having made those findings the Tribunal allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds, concluding [at 29]:


         "The ECO was obliged by article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
         Human Rights to  respect  such  family  life  as  [the  Respondent]
         enjoyed and was endeavouring to promote with his children"




    [and at 30]:


         "Public policy considerations did not  justify  his  exclusion  and
         there were very compelling reasons in his case why entry  clearance
         should have been granted."


 9. The ECO has appealed on two grounds.  First it is submitted that it was
    improper for the Tribunal to accept evidence of funds  which  were,  on
    the Respondent's own admission, available at least in part as a  result
    of not paying tax in  Pakistan.  Secondly  it  is  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal found as fact that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    Respondent and his children: the appeal could not  logically  therefore
    have been allowed on  human  rights  grounds.   The  Judge  is  further
    criticised for failing to embark on full-scale Razgar assessment[1].




    My Findings


10. I deal first with the question of family life. Mr Duffy highlighted the
    finding of the Tribunal at paragraph 29 that the Respondent  sought  to
    "resuscitate  the  family  ties  which  had  previously  existed".   He
    submitted it to be self-evident from this that there were no  currently
    existing family ties and ergo that Article 8 could not  be  engaged.  I
    reject that argument. Firstly it  is,  I  would  respectfully  suggest,
    evident from the language used that the  family  ties  were  not  dead:
    otherwise there would be little utility in trying to resuscitate  them.
    The point that the Tribunal makes is that the Respondent's family  ties
    to his children have been weakened by time  and  distance,  but  he  is
    making strenuous efforts to strengthen them again [see for instance  at
    27]. It was consistent with both Article 8  and  s55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 that the ECO permit him to do  so:
    see the passage I  cite  above,   where  the  Tribunal  recognises  the
    Respondent is making efforts to promote his family life.  There  is  no
    error of law in that approach. It is supported  by  the  jurisprudence.
    In, for instance, Keegan  v  Ireland  [1994]  18  EHRR  342  the  ECtHR
    considered the complaint of a biological father that his child had been
    adopted without his consent. Finding a violation it said:


         50.   According to the principles set out by the Court in its case-
         law, where the existence of a family tie  with  a  child  has  been
         established, the State must act in a manner  calculated  to  enable
         that tie to be developed and legal safeguards must be created  that
         render possible as from the moment of birth the child's integration
         in his  family  (see,  mutatis  mutandis,  the  Marckx  v.  Belgium
         judgment of 13 June 1979, Series A no. 31, p. 15, para. 31, and the
         above-mentioned Johnston and Others judgment, p. 29, para. 72).  In
         this context reference may be made to the principle  laid  down  in
         Article 7 of the United Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the
         Child of 20 November 1989 that a child has, as far as possible, the
         right to be cared for by his  or  her  parents.  It  is,  moreover,
         appropriate to recall that the mutual enjoyment by parent and child
         of each other's company constitutes a fundamental element of family
         life even when the relationship between the parents has broken down
         (see, inter alia, the Eriksson v. Sweden judgment of 22 June  1989,
         Series A no. 156, p. 24, para. 58).


11. The second ground concerns the  Respondent's  rather  candid  admission
    that he had not paid tax in Pakistan and this  was  why  he  could  not
    produce tax returns.  The Judge was not impressed [at 27] but  accepted
    that the Respondent had shown sufficient funds to pay for  his  tickets
    and hotel in advance, and to maintain himself  for  his  very  brief  -
    eight day - trip to the United Kingdom. That was, on  the  evidence,  a
    sustainable finding.  The  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  that  the
    Respondent was the proprietor of a clothing manufacturing  business  in
    Lahore and his bank statements disclosed a "notable" level  of  income.
    Although the deposits made did fluctuate in size  this  was  consistent
    with the  Respondent  running  a  business  (as  opposed  to  being  an
    employee).    There are clear public policy reasons for excluding  from
    consideration ill-gotten gains, but that was  not  the  evidence  here.
    The evidence was not, in fact, that the Respondent had sought to  evade
    paying tax in Pakistan. The evidence in the bundle  indicated  that  he
    had registered as a taxpayer as long ago  as  2006  [see  National  Tax
    Number Certificate at page 34] and was a member of the  Lahore  Chamber
    of Commerce. His evidence in his witness statement was simply  that  no
    tax was ever collected. He refers to  numerous  media  reports  in  the
    public domain to that effect.   I would further note that on the  level
    of income shown, and having regard to the relatively small cost  of  an
    eight-day  trip,  the  Respondent  could  likely  have  satisfied  this
    requirement even if the Tribunal had excluded from its calculations the
    money that would have been paid in income tax had the Central Board  of
    Revenue ever bothered to collect it.


12.  It perhaps follows that I do not find any legitimacy in  the  argument
    that the determination is flawed for a  failure  to  conduct  a  Razgar
    assessment.  There was a clear finding that Article 8 was engaged, both
    by the nature of the relationship in question and  the  ECO's  lack  of
    respect for it. The questions  of  necessity  and  proportionality  are
    adequately addressed in the reasoning at paragraphs 29  and  30.   This
    was a paradigm case of a visit  visa  appeal  that  could  properly  be
    allowed on human rights grounds.



    Decisions


13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

14. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                       22nd November 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27

