

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
VA/07704/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19th July 2016                         | On 20th July 2016               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR UTA ULLAH KHAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Azhar, instructed by Monk and Turner Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 26th July 1935. He  is
       therefore 80 years old. He wished to come to the UK to visit his six
       children and their spouses, and his eight grandchildren who live  in
       this country as well as some more distant relatives.

    2. The claimant applied for entry clearance to come  to  the  UK  as  a
       visitor on 25th August 2014. His appeal against the decision of  the
       entry clearance officer dated 28th August 2014 refusing him a  visit
       visa was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wellesley-Cole  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 1st March 2016.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       JM Holmes on 9th June 2016 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing  to  determine  the
       appeal on the basis that the only right of appeal against refusal of
       a visit visa is (since 25th June 2013) on human rights grounds,  and
       in failing to determine the appeal with reference  to  the  relevant
       human rights law principles or case law.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. Mr Walker relied upon the grounds of appeal. In these it was  argued
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by  failing  to  make
       findings as to whether an Article 8 ECHR  family  life  relationship
       existed between the claimant and sponsor. It was argued further that
       there was no evidence that such a relationship of  dependency  going
       beyond normal emotional ties, as required by the case  law  (see  MS
       (Article 8 -  Family  Life  -Dependency  -  Proportionality)  Uganda
       [2004]  UKAIT  00064,  Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  ZB
       (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 and GHISING & ORS [2013]  UKUT
       00567) was present to make such  a  finding.  In  addition  even  if
       family life had been found to exist there was no evidence that there
       would be an interference with that family life due to the finding at
       paragraph 12 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the  UK
       based family visit the claimant in Pakistan regularly. In  addition,
       if refusal of entry clearance were found to interfere with the right
       to  respect  to  family  life,  the  proportionality  assessment  is
       defective as it fails to explain why the refusal of entry  clearance
       is of sufficient consequence in the context of these  family  visits
       to the claimant. It was insufficient and unlawful for the appeal  to
       be allowed simply because the First-tier Tribunal found the claimant
       to meet the Immigration Rules.

    6. Ms Azhar submitted that the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal
       were ones open to the judge, but accepted that she could  not  point
       to any findings that family life existed between  the  claimant  and
       sponsors in the UK, or that refusal of  entry  clearance  interfered
       with that family life.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The Home Office Presenting Officer before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       reminded the Tribunal that the only relevant  ground  of  appeal  in
       this matter was under s.84(1) (c) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002, as is recorded at paragraph 5 of the  decision.
       The representative for the claimant also submitted that it would  be
       a breach of the claimant's Article 8 ECHR rights in submissions,  as
       is recorded at paragraph 12 of the decision.

    8. However in paragraphs 13 to 15 of the decision, in which the  First-
       tier Tribunal makes the findings on the  evidence  and  submissions,
       there is no reference to this correctly identified legal  basis  for
       determining the appeal. The decision simply makes (validly reasoned)
       findings  that  the  sponsors  were  credible  witnesses  and   then
       concludes that the claimant met the requirements of paragraph 41  of
       the Immigration Rules. This was not  a  lawful  basis  on  which  to
       determine the appeal as since 25th June 2013 s.52 of the  Crime  and
       Courts Act has restricted the appeal rights of those  refused  entry
       clearance as visitors only to arguments  that  the  decision  was  a
       breach of the claimant's human rights.

    9. The approach the First-tier Tribunal ought to have  adopted  is  set
       out in Adjei (Visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261:

"The first question to be addressed in an appeal against  refusal  to  grant
entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights grounds  are  available
is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If  it  is  not,  which
will not infrequently be the case,  the  Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to
embark upon an assessment of the decision of the ECO  under  the  rules  and
should not do so. If article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look  at
the extent to which the  claimant  is  said  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
requirements of  the  rule  because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
balancing exercise  that  must  follow.[1]   Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  is  not  authority  for  any  contrary
proposition"

   10. As the Secretary of State has argued  to  establish  whether  family
       life exists the First-tier Tribunal ought  to  have  considered  the
       principles in the cases relating  to  Article  8  ECHR  family  life
       between adult children and their parents. The key issue  would  have
       been to identify whether there were more than normal emotional  ties
       resulting in dependency for mutual support. This was not done by the
       First-tier Tribunal. Further there was no consideration  of  whether
       the decision to refuse entry clearance interferes  with  any  family
       life relationship, or whether if there is an  interference  this  is
       proportionate to the legitimate aim. The finding that at the date of
       decision the claimant met the Immigration Rules  is  only  a  factor
       relevant to the proportionality of the refusal if there is a  family
       life relationship which is interfered with so as to engage Article 8
       ECHR at all.

   11. I therefore find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
       adopting an approach to the determination of this appeal  which  did
       not accord to the only legally valid ground of appeal  available  to
       the Tribunal. I therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

   12. Mr Saeed Anwar Suleman attended the Tribunal and gave oral evidence.
        He confirmed his statement is true and correct. In short summary in
       this statement and in oral evidence he says  as  follows.  He  is  a
       British citizen who works for the Royal Mail. The  claimant  is  his
       father-in-law. The claimant had previously held a  five  year  visit
       visa and come between 5 to 10 times on visits to the UK in the  past
       17 years, and stayed on average for 3 months on  each  occasion.  He
       was certain his father-in-law would return to Pakistan if allowed to
       visit again. He had property, friends and  family  in  Pakistan.  He
       just wants to visit the UK for a short time and go back there. He is
       a financially self-sufficient man. It was not satisfactory if he and
       other family members travelled to Pakistan as  they  could  not  all
       gather together (the 20-30 family members) as  they  could  not  all
       travel at the same time due to work (as all of the children  of  the
       claimant worked) and school obligations (of  the  grandchildren)  in
       this country. Family gatherings required all of the  family  members
       to be present. This was only possible if the claimant to come  here.
       His wife had visited the claimant recently as the claimant had  been
       unwell and because the claimant's wife had passed away a  year  ago.
       He speaks with the claimant about twice a week on the telephone.

   13. Dr Muhammad Ali Khan attended the Tribunal and gave  oral  evidence.
       He confirmed his statements is true and correct. In short summary in
       this statement and in oral evidence he says the following.

   14. He is a medical doctor currently working in Whipps Cross Hospital, a
       British citizen and son of the claimant. The  claimant  had  visited
       between 4 and 5 times during the currency of  his  previous  5  year
       visa, for between one and five  months  on  each  visit.  He  stayed
       longer when there was a family  occasion  such  as  a  wedding.  The
       claimant is a very law abiding man who has never overstayed his visa
       in the past and would not do so in the future. When he worked he had
       been based in Saudi Arabia and could have moved to the  UK  at  that
       time, but he preferred to return to Pakistan where he has status and
       position in society. There were property and  land  deeds  that  the
       entry clearance officer had not properly considered showing his ties
       to Pakistan. The claimant owns his own  residential  and  commercial
       property in the centre of the  town  of  Jhelum,  and  also  manages
       property for his nieces and nephews as  their  father  (his  younger
       brother) has passed away. He supports himself financially from these
       assets.

   15. The claimant has a close relationship with his UK  based  family  as
       all of his six children and eight grandchildren live here. He  is  a
       physically  fit  and  mentally  well  80  year  old  gentleman,  but
       emotionally it is important that he is allowed to have  free  access
       and contact with his UK family especially after his having  suffered
       the loss of his wife, and to be in the UK for celebrations with  the
       full family group. He had been very unwell with stomach problems  in
       2013 but had come through these problems due to keeping fit, a  good
       diet and a positive mental attitude. The family here do also try  to
       provide him with extras such as fans and a bottled  water  dispenser
       to make his life easier. It was very important to the  claimant  and
       his daughter (the claimant's granddaughter) that he be able to  come
       to the UK and do face to face things like collect his three year old
       granddaughter from school. It was important to all the family and to
       the children to see how family ties really work by having periods of
       living together, and these visits provide the claimant  and  the  UK
       based family with great joy. The claimant loves  to  travel  and  to
       have a break with his UK based family. Whilst they try to  call  him
       three or four times a week it is not always possible to make contact
       that way as the claimant is often out of his home, and this is not a
       sufficient way to conduct their family relationships.

   16. Mr Walker relied upon the entry clearance refusal  notice,  although
       it was noted that this did not provide any reasons why the  claimant
       was not entitled to entry clearance in  accordance  with  Article  8
       ECHR. Mr Walker  conceded  that  the  claimant  has  a  family  life
       relationship with his UK based family due to the extent of emotional
       ties between this elderly widowed gentleman and his children (all of
       whom lived in the UK  with  their  spouses  and  children)  and  the
       extensive history of visits between the claimant and the sponsors in
       addition to the telephone  contact  ;  and  that  in  light  of  the
       cultural need for family  gatherings  in  the  UK  with  all  family
       members  present  which  could  not  be  arranged  in  Pakistan  for
       practical reasons it was accepted that the refusal  interfered  with
       the claimant's family  life.  Mr  Walker  accepted  that  there  was
       evidence before the Tribunal which indicated that the claimant would
       return to Pakistan in the form of  his  ownership  of  property  and
       management of property for his late brother's children, and that  he
       did have family in Pakistan including nephews, nieces and a  sister.
       He also accepted that the claimant had a history of only staying  in
       the UK for short visits complying with the Immigration Rules  before
       returning to Pakistan.

   17. Ms Azhar relied upon the case of Kaur  (visit  appeals;  Article  8)
       [2015] UKUT 00487. She submitted that as Mr Walker had accepted that
       there was family life between the claimant and his UK  sponsors  and
       that  the  refusal  interfered  with  that  family  life,  that  her
       submissions only  needed  to  focus  on  whether  the  decision  was
       disproportionate. She said it was disproportionate as  the  claimant
       clearly would leave at the end of his visit. He had  done  so  after
       short visits on many occasions in the past and  had  not  previously
       tried to settle,  even  though  in  the  past,  in  accordance  with
       previous version of the Immigration Rules, he would have  been  able
       to do so. It could therefore properly  be  argued  that  there  were
       compelling circumstances which required a grant of  leave  to  enter
       given the need for meaningful  family  gatherings  with  all  family
       members present.

   18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions - Remaking

   19. I am guided by Adjei and Kaur in the approach to  the  re-making  of
       this appeal.

   20. I find that the sponsoring witnesses before me were  both  credible.
       They gave their evidence in a straightforward and heartfelt way;  it
       was obviously that Dr Khan was deeply attached  to  his  father  and
       heartbroken that his father had not been able to have the contact he
       would have wished with his child, but none the less I do not find he
       exaggerated his evidence. The oral evidence given by both  witnesses
       was consistent with their written statements,  and  with  the  other
       documents in the case.

   21. It is conceded by Mr Walker, acting for the Secretary of State, that
       there is a family life relationship between  the  claimant  and  his
       children and grandchildren in  the  UK.  I  accept  that  there  are
       unusual circumstances in this case with the claimant  being  a  very
       elderly widower with all of his children and  grandchildren  in  the
       UK, and being in very regular contact with those  children  in  this
       country on the telephone several times a week and via regular visits
       which have historically involved his traveling to the UK and the  UK
       based family travelling  to  Pakistan.  Whilst  the  claimant  is  a
       physically capable gentleman and there is no evidence he has is  not
       mentally sharp, he is elderly, without a day to  day  companion  and
       emotionally needs to be part of his UK family in a way which exceeds
       normal  emotional  ties.  This  emotional   closeness   is   clearly
       reciprocated by the UK based family.

   22. It is also conceded by Mr Walker for the Secretary of State that the
       refusal of entry clearance interferes with that family life.  I  too
       accept that this is the case for two reasons. Firstly culturally the
       family  have  a  need  to   be   all   together   for   family   and
       religious/cultural occasions such as Eid and this is not possible to
       arrange in Pakistan with all the adult children  working  and  their
       children having school commitments in the UK.  Secondly  the  family
       life relationship between the claimant and his young  grandchildren,
       such as the child of Dr Khan who is aged just 3 years,  cannot  take
       place in a full sense via Skype or  telephone:  they  need  physical
       contact and presence, and seeing the child's UK home and  school  is
       an important part of this family relationship.

   23. When considering proportionality it is necessary to consider whether
       the visit Immigration Rules at paragraph 41 were in fact met at  the
       time of decision.  The notice of  refusal  raises  issue  only  with
       paragraphs 41(1) and (ii), and thus bases the refusal  on  the  fact
       that the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant
       would leave the UK at the end of his short visit and that he  was  a
       genuine visitor. This was contended  to  be  the  case  because  the
       claimant could not show he was in receipt of his  claimed  level  of
       income or that he had significant ties to Pakistan. It was  accepted
       that all other aspects of the Immigration Rules, most  significantly
       that there would be adequate accommodation and  support  in  the  UK
       were met.

   24. The claimant has produced evidence that he owns, and  owned  at  the
       time of decision, property in Jhelum and has a power of attorney  to
       manage other property (previously owned by his deceased brother)  in
       Jhelum. I accept this evidence combined with  the  witness  evidence
       demonstrates that the claimant owns property and  has  a  more  than
       adequate income from this property in Pakistan, and is involved with
       the management of his late brother's properties for his  nieces  and
       nephews, and that this was the case at the time of decision. I  also
       accept the evidence of the witnesses that the claimant has a  sister
       in Pakistan, as well as these nieces and nephews and so  lives  (and
       lived at the time of decision)  in  an  area  with  extended  family
       member nearby. I find that the claimant  had  demonstrated,  through
       his history of a number of previous visits to the UK,  that  he  has
       not wished historically to remain in the  UK  longer  than  for  the
       period  of  a  short  visit  within  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  am
       satisfied, given this evidence, on the balance of probabilities that
       the claimant was, at the time of decision, a genuine visitor who had
       sufficient ties and assets in Pakistan to mean that he  would  abide
       by the terms of his entry clearance and return at  the  end  of  his
       visit which would not  extend  beyond  six  months,  and  that  this
       remains the case today.

   25. I find that there are compelling circumstances in this case relating
       to the need for a close family  to  be  able  to  meet  together  to
       celebrate social and religious occasions inclusive of the oldest and
       youngest members of the family, which for practical reasons of  work
       and schooling must be in the UK given the family make-up of employed
       and school age British citizens with the exception of the  claimant.
       I conclude that given the claimant's ability to meet the Immigration
       Rules, whilst  giving  proper  weight  to  the  public  interest  in
       maintaining immigration control, that it would be a disproportionate
       interference with the claimant's right to respect for family life to
       refuse to grant him entry clearance for a visit of a period of up to
       6 months.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
      grounds.





Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  19th July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







    -----------------------
[1] Now see SS (Congo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
EWCA Civ 387.

