
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/07866/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 22 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                FARIDA BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford (counsel instructed by Hunterstone
Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal of Farida Begum,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  2
   November 1989, against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  26
   January 2016 dismissing her appeal, itself brought against the  decision
   of  19  August  2014  by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  her
   application for entry clearance to visit  her  father,  Zomir  Uddin,  a
   British Citizen settled in the United Kingdom since 1960.


2. The application was made in July 2014, supported by the  Sponsor  Sultan
   Ahmed,  the  Appellant's  brother,  who  confirmed  that  he  would   be
   responsible for her maintenance and travel costs arising from the  trip,
   and was based on the  wish  of  the  parent  and  child  to  spend  time
   together: Mr Uddin was unable to  travel  abroad  due  to  his  multiple
   medical conditions, and had not seen his daughter  for  many  years  and
   wished for her to visit him in the United Kingdom for a  few  weeks:  he
   feared he would not otherwise see her again. A supporting letter from Dr
   Misra stated that a short visit from her would  definitely  relieve  the
   father's stress and help his general well-being.


3. The Entry Clearance Officer refused her application, noting that several
   other applications had previously been refused, and concluding that  she
   had not provided adequate evidence of her employment in Bangladesh or of
   her personal financial circumstances  generally,  leading  the  decision
   maker to question whether she was employed as  stated.   No  weight  was
   placed on an invitation to her  wedding  that  she  provided.  An  Entry
   Clearance Manager  upheld  that  decision,  taking  the  view  that  the
   assertion that the refusal infringed the family's human rights  did  not
   overcome the general starting point that  relationships  between  adults
   did not constitute family life absent evidence of  dependency  exceeding
   the norm.


4. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the Appellant had previously  applied
   for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, on five occasions,
   one refusal of that application leading to an appeal in 2012,  at  which
   the Judge found that the Sponsor's claim  to  be  able  to  support  the
   Appellant was not credible. The First-tier Tribunal was also unimpressed
   by the evidence that the Appellant's father would be unable to return to
   Bangladesh.


5. The Sponsor gave evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  contending
   that notwithstanding the  past  settlement  applications  made  for  the
   Appellant, her future was now settled firmly in  Bangladesh,  given  her
   forthcoming wedding and her new life with her husband  and  in-laws  who
   were all established there. His father  had  last  been  able  to  visit
   Bangladesh in 2011. By the date of the hearing,  that  marriage  had  in
   fact taken place, on 21 January 2015. The Tribunal  noted  the  doctor's
   letter, observing that he had not explained why it was that  he  thought
   the father unable to travel.


6. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal because


   a) It was unclear to a non-medical person why the Appellant's father
      could no longer travel to Bangladesh, and bearing in mind the evidence
      that his visits had only ever been infrequent, it was not established
      that the lack of a visit since 2011 necessarily showed that he could
      no longer travel there;


   b) Article 8 ECHR was not engaged given the Appellant was 24 at the date
      of decision and was an independent young adult, living with her
      husband and his parents by the time of the appeal hearing; her
      relationship with her father had never comprised more than occasional
      visits.


7. Grounds of appeal argued that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
   by


   a) Failing to apply the civil standard of proof in  its  requirement  for
      precise clarity as to the reasons for the father being unable  to  fly
      to Bangladesh  given  the  self-evident  confidence  of  the  doctor's
      opinion on the  subject  and  its  own  observation  that  the  father
      suffered from an atypically large number of medical conditions;


   b) Failing to address the medical evidence which  demonstrated  that  the
      father  suffered  from  diabetes,  immobility,   frequent   dizziness,
      breathlessness,  anxiety  and  depression  and  failing  to  draw  the
      appropriate inference that his health had declined  as  shown  by  his
      development of  knee  osteoarthritis  and  an  ulcer  and  his  recent
      admission to hospital with pneumonia;


   c) In failing to take account of the severity of the  father's  condition
      as shown by the medical evidence, the First-tier Tribunal had in  turn
      failed to take account of the fact that the father's state  of  health
      meant that this visit represented their last opportunity to enjoy  any
      real family life together, all of which had been evidenced  orally  in
      the father's evidence that  he  was  bitterly  disappointed  at  being
      unable to attend her wedding;


   d) Wrongfully labelling the Appellant's father as her "stepfather"  which
      indicated  that  the  strength  of   their   relationship   had   been
      underestimated.


8. The First-tier Tribunal  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  all  those
   grounds, in particular noting that it seemed that there was insufficient
   analysis as to whether Article 8 was  engaged  and  thus  a  failure  to
   consider proportionality.


9. The medical evidence states that the Appellant suffered active  problems
   over the years: community-acquired pneumonia in November 2015, an  ulcer
   in September 2015, knee  osteoarthritis  in  December  2013,  Vitamin  D
   deficiency in March 2012, and Prurigo in Feburary 2011: "He is attending
   surgery  frequently  with   multiple   symptoms   such   as   dizziness,
   breathlessness on walking few years and anxiety and depression." In  his
   witness statement the Appellant set out that he still desired seeing his
   daughter in this country: "Please consider this the  desire  of  elderly
   frail old man. I do not have much to look forward to in my life at  this
   age. Seeing my daughter would be great comfort to me."


10. The parties make submissions as per the grounds of appeal and  the  Rule
   24 response, and I reserved my decision.  Mr Gaisford argued  that  were
   the rejection of any establishment of Article 8 rights to be overturned,
   for failing to take account of relevant considerations,  then  a  lawful
   assessment of proportionality would surely require the  grant  of  entry
   clearance, positing the question whether a  sick  elderly  father  could
   realistically put forward more evidence than  had  been  done  here.  Mr
   Wilding submitted that there were no emotional ties exceeding  the  norm
   here and that the appeal  amounted  to  challenging  legitimate  factual
   findings without any lawful basis for doing so:  the  telephone  contact
   between the father and Sponsor could not meet  the  high  threshold  for
   establishing family life between adults. Mr Gaisford argued  that  if  a
   material error of  law  was  established,  then  the  appeal  should  be
   determined on the papers whereas Mr Wilding argued that a  further  oral
   hearing would be required.


Findings and reasons

11. The First-tier Tribunal effectively found that the  evidence  before  it
   did not surmount the high threshold  required  to  elevate  the  natural
   affection between parent and  sibling  to  family  life  exhibiting  the
   additional emotional and physical  dependency  required  by  authorities
   such as Advic v UK (1995) 20 EHRR CD 125. If that  finding  was  lawful,
   then there was no requirement for it to assess  the  proportionality  of
   any interference with  Article  8  rights;  for  none  would  have  been
   accepted.


12. Advic is sometimes cited for the proposition that the  normal  emotional
   ties between a parent and an adult son or  daughter  will  not,  without
   more, be enough: Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31. As  shown  by  the  useful
   review of the authorities in Ghising) [2012] UKUT 00160, this is not the
   whole picture, however. In Kaya v Germany (Application no 31753/02)  the
   ECtHR held that a young adult who had lived with his  parents  until  he
   was sent to prison in 1999 still enjoyed family life with  them  on  his
   deportation in 2001, as he had kept in touch  with  his  family  through
   visits and letters; in Boughanemi v France (1996) 22 EHRR 228 the  ECtHR
   held that the deportation of a 34 year old man was an interference  with
   his family life with his parents and  siblings  although  he  no  longer
   lived with them. All this led Buxton LJ to emphasise  in  MT  (Zimbabwe)
   [2007] EWCA Civ 455 at [11] that Advic, "whilst stressing the  need  for
   an element of dependency over and above the normal  between  that  of  a
   parent or parent figure and adult child, also stresses  that  everything
   depends on the circumstances of each case".


13. Although the arguments in favour of finding  an  error  of  law  in  the
   decision below are closely balanced against those  to  the  contrary,  I
   find that Mr Gaisford's submissions  just  carried  the  day.  I  do  so
   because relevant considerations were overlooked:


   a) Firstly, the Doctor was clearly of the opinion that the father was
      unfit to travel, and the First-tier Tribunal did not positively reject
      his evidence: it instead acknowledged the "atypically large number of
      medical conditions" and then glossed over the expert's own opinion on
      this issue, which was clearly given in good faith; whilst one might
      have agreed with reasoning to the effect, had the father suffered only
      from minor ailments, that the Doctor's thinking was inscrutable, it
      seems to me that the severity of the father's problems clearly
      supported the physician's conclusion;


   b) Secondly, the father had clearly stated that the probability that he
      would not live for much longer, and this unusual evidence arguably
      bestowed his relationship with his daughter with a special character
      which might reach the Advic threshold bearing in mind the need for
      that to be approached via a common sense appraisal in which
      "everything depends on the circumstances of each case".


14. There is the  further  factor  present  in  this  appeal,  in  that  the
   Appellant has previously sought to settle in this  country.  That  is  a
   matter that could potentially have counted against her credibility as to
   the likelihood of her complying with immigration control, albeit  to  be
   balanced against the fact that she now has far  greater  connections  in
   Bangladesh than hitherto. However, the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
   so treat it, and it was not a consideration that the First-tier Tribunal
   held against her. Once that premise is established, it is apparent  that
   her connections with her father are significantly  stronger  than  might
   otherwise have been the case: they have  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
   until relatively recently, rather than having been residing in different
   countries for most of their respective lives.


15. This is not an appeal where there are  meaningful  findings  upon  which
   the Upper Tribunal can build, and thus it is allowed to the extent  that
   it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law.
    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                                            Date: 18 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

