
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/08868/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 June 2014                                  |On 30 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - ATHENS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                miranda zoto
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is an Albanian national born on 4  April
    1966.  On 3 April  2013  she  applied  to  the  Respondent  for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules  to  visit  her
    husband Charilaki Zoto, a  Greek  national  born  on  23  May  1959  in
    Albania, and their two daughters, both Greek nationals.

 2. On 24 April 2013 the Appellant (the ECO) under  Post  Reference  262712
    refused her entry clearance.  The Respondent noted  the  Applicant  had
    not provided any evidence of her daughters' circumstances in the United
    Kingdom, that she was unemployed and had produced evidence of  a  Greek
    residence card issued to her as the wife of a Greek national.  The  ECO
    was not satisfied the Applicant's economic, family and personal ties to
    Greece or Albania were sufficiently strong to show she would leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of her proposed visit.   He  therefore  found
    she would not be a genuine visitor and did not intend to leave  at  the
    end of her proposed visit.

 3. The ECO went on to note no evidence  of  the  funds  available  to  the
    Applicant's husband had been shown so that the Applicant had failed  to
    establish she would be maintained and accommodated during her  proposed
    stay and also that she had sufficient funds to pay for  her  return  or
    onward journey.

The Appeal and the First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. On 16 May 2013 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  amended.   The
    grounds refer to additional documentation which  accompanied  them  and
    include the comment that the only airline flying to her  local  airport
    refused to allow her to purchase flights until she was able to  provide
    them with sight of a valid visa.  The Applicant requested her appeal be
    determined without a hearing on the basis of the papers in the Tribunal
    file.

 5. By a determination promulgated on 7 March  2014,  Judge  of  First-tier
    Tribunal A W Khan allowed the Applicant's appeal.  He found her husband
    was a Greek  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  and  would  be  able
    lawfully to accommodate and maintain the Applicant during her  proposed
    visit.  He concluded the Applicant wished genuinely to  make  a  family
    visit and the fact her husband and daughters were living in the  United
    Kingdom did "not necessarily mean that the Appellant would  not  return
    to Greece ...".

 6. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the grounds the Judge had  erred
    in law by dealing with the Applicant's appeal as  a  full  appeal  when
    there was no evidence her husband and  children  were  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom for purposes of Regulation 3 of the Immigration  (Family
    Visit)  Regulations  2012.   Further,  there  was   no   evidence   the
    Applicant's husband had a permanent  right  of  residence  pursuant  to
    Regulation 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended.  On
    9 April 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lloyd  granted  the  ECO
    permission to appeal on the  sole  ground  referred  to  in  the  ECO's
    grounds for appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. There was no indication in the Tribunal file  the  Applicant  had  ever
    instructed any representatives and she had not named her husband or any
    other person as her  Sponsor.  I  requested  the  Tribunal's  clerk  to
    contact the Applicant's husband on the mobile  telephone  number  given
    for him and she informed me that the line was no longer in service.

 8. I noted that in consequence of the failure to identify her  husband  as
    her Sponsor, the Applicant's husband had not been given notice  of  the
    hearing although notice had been  sent  to  the  Applicant  in  Greece.
    Having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  Regulation  2  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as  amended,  I  was
    satisfied I could properly consider the error of law appeal without the
    Applicant's husband being present.

 9. Mr Nath referred to the grounds for appeal and submitted the Judge  had
    not  adequately  addressed  the  ECO's  ground  for  refusal  that  the
    Applicant had not shown her intention to leave the  United  Kingdom  at
    the end of her proposed visit.

Findings and Consideration

10. I find that the Applicant did not have a full  right  of  appeal  under
    Section 82 of the 2002 Act  for  the  reason  mentioned  in  the  ECO's
    grounds for appeal  and  that  the  Judge's  statement  that  fact  the
    Applicant's husband and daughters live in the UK does  not  necessarily
    mean she would not return  to  Greece  does  not  amount  to  a  proper
    consideration of the issue of the Applicant's intention  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of her proposed visit.  The burden  of  proof
    to the civil standard was on the Appellant and effectively the  Judge's
    choice of words reverses the burden.

11. For these reasons the determination contains errors of law and  is  set
    aside.

Future Disposal

12. Having regard to the lack of evidence that the Applicant's husband  had
    had any notice of the hearing, I did not consider it would be  just  to
    proceed with a substantive re-hearing  of  the  appeal.   There  is  no
    evidence in the Tribunal file to show when the Applicant's husband  and
    their daughters came to the United Kingdom and when her husband started
    to exercise Treaty rights here.   In  these  circumstances  and  having
    regard  to  the  provisions  of  Practice  Statement  7.2,  I  find  it
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  hearing
    afresh before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  A  W
    Khan and that notice of the time, date and place  for  the  hearing  be
    sent to both the Applicant and her husband.

Anonymity
13. No  anonymity  direction  had  been  previously  requested  and  having
    considered the documents in the Tribunal file I find there is  no  need
    for one.

Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date 06. vi. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



