
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/08987/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th May 2014                                |4th June 2014              |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                       Miss Asma Sayyed Shabbir Qadri
                          (Anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 16th June  2004  is  a  citizen  of  India.   The
    Appellant together with her mother had applied to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom as visitors under the terms of paragraph 41 of the  Immigration
    Rules and those applications had been refused by the Respondent on 30th
    April 2013.  Both Appellants  had  appealed  that  decision  and  their
    appeal was heard at Bradford before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Dickson on 14th February 2014.  He had allowed their appeals.

 2. The Respondent had appealed solely against  the  decision  relating  to
    Miss Qadri and the grounds seeking permission to appeal indicated  that
    the original decision of the Respondent did  not  attract  a  right  of
    appeal in respect of this Appellant as her application  had  been  made
    after the introduction of  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)
    Regulations of 2012.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    who found  that  the  grounds  disclosed  an  arguable  error  of  law.
    Directions were issued and the matter comes  before  me  in  accordance
    with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. The Sponsor in this case Mr Basharat was present.  The  Respondent  was
    represented  by  Mr  McVeety  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   I
    explained to the Sponsor the nature of the proceedings.

 5. It was unnecessary to hear any specific submissions from the Respondent
    who brought this appeal as it is clear from the agreed  background  and
    evidence that the second Appellant as she was in  the  original  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal namely Miss Qadri did not have  a  right
    of appeal against the Respondent's refusal in that her intention was to
    visit a relative in the UK  who  fell  outside  the  family  parameters
    outlined in the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  of
    2012.  It is also clear that the date of  such  application  was  after
    such Regulations had taken effect.  It was also clear from the  Grounds
    of Appeal, which appear to have been placed in by the Sponsor, did  not
    include any submissions that the  Respondent's  decision  was  unlawful
    under the terms of the Race Relations Act or the Human  Rights  Act  of
    1998.

 6. I explained the matters with some care to the Sponsor and have provided
    below a decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The applications of Miss Qadri and her mother had  been  made  together
    and considered together by the Entry Clearance Officer.   It  is  clear
    from the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer that he had  not  been
    satisfied that the mother fulfilled the requirements of paragraph 41 of
    the Immigration Rules with  particular  regard  to  her  financial  and
    personal circumstances within India.  Having  refused  her  application
    the refusal of Miss Qadri's application  had  essentially  flowed  from
    that decision on the basis that if the mother was refused  entry  there
    was no satisfactory evidence that suitable arrangements had  been  made
    for her travel, reception and care  in  the  UK.   The  case  had  been
    reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager  who  had  been  provided  with
    further documentary evidence on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   He  had
    however maintained that refusal.

 8. Regrettably within both the Entry Clearance Officer and Entry Clearance
    Manager's letters there is no reference to the second Appellant  having
    no onward right of appeal although the first Appellant did have such  a
    right of appeal as it was her intent to visit a sister in the UK.

 9. When the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  it  would  appear
    from the determination that the judge and  the  Presenting  Office  may
    well have had in mind the  legislation  passed  in  2013  that  removed
    entirely rights of appeal in respect of  family  visitor  applications.
    However it does not appear that the Presenting Officer or the judge had
    in their mind the statutory provisions referred to above which prior to
    this application had limited rights of appeal to a narrower  definition
    of family than had hitherto applied.

10. The judge's decision to hear the appeal  of  the  first  Appellant  was
    correct and the determination discloses that he gave clear  and  proper
    reasons for reaching the decision that  he  would  allow  that  appeal.
    Indeed the Respondent does not seek permission to appeal  against  that
    decision reached in respect of the mother.

11. However the judge did not in fact have jurisdiction to hear the  appeal
    of the second Appellant Miss Qadri as he had no jurisdiction and it was
    an error of law for him to hear that appeal in the first instance.

12. As I indicated at the hearing before myself I have  sympathy  with  the
    Sponsor's position as at no stage was it either made clear to him or by
    inference that there was no right of appeal in respect  of  the  second
    Appellant.  I am also bound to observe  that  in  reality  the  initial
    basis for refusing the second Appellant's application was intrinsically
    linked to the decision to refuse her mother's application which has now
    been allowed on appeal.  It may be,  that  in  those  somewhat  unusual
    circumstances, the Entry Clearance Officer may seek to  reconsider  the
    position of the second Appellant given the decision reached in  respect
    of the first Appellant based on the totality  of  the  documentary  and
    oral evidence that was presented.

13. However an error of law was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    case in that the Tribunal  did  not  have  jurisdiction  in  the  first
    instance to hear the appeal of the second Appellant.

Decision

14. An error of law was made by the First-tier Tribunal in this case  which
    was material in that the First-tier Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal of this Appellant against the decision reached  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager.  I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and find that the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal of this Appellant.

15. No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
