
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/08719/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 July 2014                               |On 29 July 2014              |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                               SIMRANJIT SINGH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Harvinder Kaur, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a  citizen  of  India  born  on  10
    February 1990, against the  decision  of  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who in a determination promulgated on 4 March 2014,  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellant against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 26 March 2013 to refuse the Appellant an entry clearance to visit
    his  British  sister  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  three  weeks.  The
    application was refused both under  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 (as amended) and under paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules that
    states that entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom is  to
    be  refused  where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
    documents or information had been submitted (whether or not material to
    the application and whether or not to  the  applicant's  knowledge)  or
    material facts have not been disclosed in relation to the application.

2.   It is right to say that the requirements of paragraph 320 (7A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules are in mandatory form  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in the present case, properly considered this ground  of  refusal
    first, since a decision on that might be  dispositive of the appeal.

3.   It was recorded in the Entry Clearance Manager's  Review  at  paragraph
    3.2 as follows:

         "3.2 The Appellant has submitted Crop receipts (forms J) in support
             of his application.  Thorough  checks  were  made  as  to  the
             authenticity of these documents and I refer  to  the  document
             verification report attached with this bundle.  As a result of
             these checks the ECO was satisfied that the crop receipts  are
             false.  I have noted the Appellant's comments  in  respect  of
             these documents.  Submission of false  documents  leads  to  a
             mandatory refusal under paragraph 320(7A) of  the  Immigration
             Rules.   Such  an  action  also  undermines  the   Appellant's
             credibility to the extent that I am not satisfied that  he  is
             being truthful about his intentions in the UK."

4.   It is a notable feature of this case that as recorded  inter  alia,  in
    the judge's determination at paragraph 14:

         "... The Appellant accepts that this was the case and therefore the
         allegations proved by the Appellant's own admission.  He says  that
         he is now providing accurate crop receipts and asks that the errant
         behaviour of his accountant  should  not  prevent  him  from  being
         granted a visa.  The fact remains that  the  Appellant  did  submit
         documents which could have been relied upon by the ECO in  granting
         an entry clearance, and  the  issue  is  that  he  got  found  out.
         Paragraph 320(7A) applies whether or not the false  representations
         were material to the application and whether or not  the  Appellant
         was aware of them."

5.   In consequence the judge concluded that  the  Respondent's  refusal  of
    entry clearance in this case was justified and in accordance  with  the
    law and he dismissed the appeal.

6.   The Appellant made a successful application for  permission  to  appeal
    the decision.  In his grounds he stated that he "came to know about the
    errant behaviour of the accountant  only  on  receipt  of  the  refusal
    letter" and that had he known "that the accountant  of the firm  issued
    crop receipts without verifying the books of  accounts,  the  Appellant
    would never [have] submitted said crop receipts.  Whilst the  Appellant
    admitted the falsity of the receipts, he  maintained  that  he  had  no
    intention to deceive. He had submitted crop receipts "under the  belief
    that the same were correct according to the produced sold".

7.   The Appellant contended that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  320(7A)
    therefore did not apply in this case and that in consequence, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law.

8.   In granting permission to appeal, Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    McDonald had this inter alia to say:

         "Given what is said in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD EWCA Civ 773 this was an
         arguable error of law as it is necessary in law that the  Appellant
         was aware of the fact that the representations were false."

9.   Prior to the hearing and by letter dated 21 May  2014   the  Respondent
    served her Rule 24 response in which she had this to say:


         "The grounds contend that making a false representation should  not
         have been taken against [the] Appellant given that this was done by
         his accountant without his knowledge.  The grant  of  PTA  suggests
         that in line with AA (Nigeria) it is arguable that the grounds  are
         correct and 320(7A) only applies when false documents are submitted
         when there was deliberate deception by the Appellant.


         Indeed the very clear terms of 320(7A) confirm  that  the  Rule  is
         engaged where "false documents or information have  been  submitted
         (whether or not material to the application and whether or  not  to
         the applicant's knowledge ...) in relation to the application".


         On the basis of the clear concessions from the Appellant  that  the
         crop receipts submitted were indeed forgeries, the First-tier Judge
          was bound to find that the  appeal  fell  to  be  dismissed  under
         320(7A)."

10.  Thus the appeal came before me on 16 July 2014 when my first  task  was
    to determine whether the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

11.  At the outset of the hearing the Appellant's  sponsor,  Miss  Harvinder
    Kaur, appeared before me and  given  that  neither  I  nor  Mr  Kandola
    objected,  I  granted  her  permission  to  act  as   the   Appellant's
    representatives.

12.  Mindful that she was unfamiliar with the legal process and  the  nature
    of the hearing; I made a point of carefully explaining  the  matter  to
    her and my task.  I explained to  her  the  requirements  of  the  Rule
    concerned.  I asked Miss Kaur if there was anything she wished  to  say
    on the Appellant's behalf and she told me as follows:

         "My brother did make a mistake that he did rectify and produced new
         papers that were true.   We are all human and make mistakes.  All I
         want is for him to visit us.  That's all I want. My son's  birthday
         is on 25 July and we have got a religious programme on 27 July  and
         it would be nice to have him here."

13.  Mr Kandola in  response  relied  on  what  was  said  in  the  Rule  24
    response.  He continued that there was a  difference  between  a  false
    document and a false representation and in that regard he  referred  to
    paragraphs 66 and 67 of  AA  (Nigeria)  and  further  in  reference  to
    paragraph 68 of AA, pointed out the court had thus drawn a  distinction
    between a false representation and a false document in  terms  of  this
    particular Rule.

14.  Mr Kandola continued that although the judge was  incorrect  in  saying
    that he did not have the Document Verification Report before him (as it
    been [produced] at  the  hearing  and  indeed  attached  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's response) it was the case that  in  any  event  the
    Appellant had accepted to his credit, that he had, albeit innocently as
    he claimed, submitted false crop receipts.

15.  It followed, submitted Mr Kandola, that the First-tier  Judge  was  not
    in error in dismissing the appeal.

16.  I invited Miss Kaur to respond if she wished and she  simply  responded
    that as before  her brother had made a mistake but it was not meant.

Assessment

17.  I have had no difficulty in concluding that the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge did not disclose an error on a point of law.

18.  My starting point is the decision in Adedoyin  (Formerly  AA  (Nigeria)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 373).  In that case and in terms of  the  circumstances
    of the present appeal before me, it was  clearly  held  that  the  term
    "false" in the relevant Rules was to be given the meaning  "dishonest".



19.  A false document was one that told a lie about itself.  In such a  case
    a mandatory refusal under 320(7A) or  paragraph  322(1A)  was  entirely
    understandable where a person had made use of a false document even  in
    ignorance of its falsity.

20.  A false representation stated  in  all  innocence  might  be  simply  a
    matter of mistake  or  an  error  short  of  dishonesty.   It  did  not
    necessarily tell a lie about itself.  In such a case there  was  little
    reason for a requirement of a mandatory refusal.

21.  However if on the other  hand,  a  dishonest  representation  had  been
    promoted by another party, then the Rule  should  require  a  mandatory
    refusal, irrespective of the personal innocence of the applicant.  Thus
    a false representation required dishonesty,  although  not  necessarily
    that of the applicant.

22.  Indeed Rix LJ in giving the leading judgment was clear at paragraph  76
    inter alia that:

         "Dishonesty or deception is needed, albeit not necessarily that  of
         the applicant himself, to render a 'false representation' a  ground
         for mandatory refusal'."

23.  In the present case the First-tier Judge was not dealing with  a  false
    representation such as, for example, an answer entered  into  an  entry
    clearance application form that was false in  some  material  way,  but
    with a false document.

24.  It follows that there is nothing about  the  judge's  decision  on  the
    facts of this case that could even arguably be said to be out of kilter
    with the decision in Adedoyin.

25.  Whilst I understand the heartfelt plea of the Appellant's  sponsor  and
    sister Miss Kaur, it is clear to me and so I find, that the  First-tier
    Judge's conclusion that the appeal could not succeed  was  thus  proper
    and appropriate.

Conclusion

26.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law and  I  order  that  it  shall
    stand.

Signed                                  Date 28 July 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
