
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/08864/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19th June 2014                             |On 23rd June 2014            |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                             AMOY KADIANA TAYLOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER KINGSTON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The UK Sponsor (Mrs Price) attended
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a female citizen of Jamaica  born  20  October  1994.
      She applied for entry clearance as a family visitor.   In  a  decision
      dated 16 April 2013 the respondent refused the application because  it
      was  not  considered  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the  applicable
      immigration rules.  In summary  the  respondent  considered  that  the
      appellant had not shown, on the balance of probabilities, that she was
      genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or that she intended to leave the
      United Kingdom at the end of the visit.

   2. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  came
      before Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Knowles on  4  February  2014.
      The appellant was represented by counsel and the respondent  was  also
      represented.  In a determination dated  14  February  2014  the  judge
      dismissed the appeal both under the rules and by reference to  Article
      8  ECHR.   In  doing  so  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
      established her relationship as grand-daughter and  grand-mother  with
      the UK Sponsor but at paragraph 28 of the Determination found that the
      appellant had not satisfied the necessary burden to show that she  was
      a genuine visitor and at paragraph 29 it was found that the  appellant
      had not shown that she intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end
      of her visit.

   3. In grounds submitted in support of an application for leave to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal it was alleged that the judge erred  in  finding
      that the lack of financial incentive was  good  reason  to  doubt  the
      appellant's intention to return to Jamaica.  It was also alleged  that
      the judge had erred in failing to make a finding on a  material  issue
      namely the sponsor's credibility and finally had erred in  failing  to
      give the appellant an opportunity to address concerns that  the  judge
      had with the evidence.

   4. In granting permission to appeal  another  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal gave his reasons in two lines:

         "There is an arguable  error  of  law.   The  judge  did  not  make
      findings as to the  credibility  of  the  sponsor  and  this  omission
      arguably vitiates the analysis of whether the rules are fulfilled".

   5. Hence the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   6. At the commencement of the hearing I raised with Mrs Price the absence
      of solicitors.  She indicated that she had withdrawn instructions  and
      was not expecting any representation.  I explained in some detail  the
      procedure to be adopted at the hearing and I explained the role of  Mr
      Mills.  I emphasised that my job initially was  to  determine  whether
      there had been a material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  Judge
      Knowles.  I explained what such an error could be.

   7. Mrs Price submitted a  written  statement  which,  in  effect,  is  in
      support of the appellant's original application and  appeal.   It  did
      not address the question of an error of law.

   8. Mrs Price said that she relied upon the grounds seeking leave and  she
      gave details of the work undertaken by the  appellant's  mother.   She
      emphasised that the appellant would be returning to Jamaica after  the
      visit.  She contended that the judge made a mistake in  that  she  was
      not sure whether or not he believed what she had said at the  hearing.
      She had indicated that the appellant would go back.   Mrs  Price  says
      that she wanted just one of her relatives to come over to see her life
      in the United Kingdom.

   9. Mr Mills in his submission  referred  to  a  Rule  24  response  which
      directed my attention to paragraph 28 of  the  judge's  determination.
      Mr Mills submitted that finances are relevant although not with regard
      to the question of maintenance.  It was a question  of  incentive  for
      the appellant to return and the judge had made findings with regard to
      that.

  10. Mrs Price finally indicated that banking in Jamaica was not  easy  and
      it was costly to get bank statements.

  11. At the end of the hearing I gave my decision that I found no error  of
      law  that  was  material  to  the  decision  and  that  therefore  the
      appellant's appeal must be dismissed.  I indicated  that  the  reasons
      would be contained in this written determination.

  12. In summary the issues before the judge were in connection with whether
      or not the appellant was a genuine family visitor and whether  or  not
      she intended to return to Jamaica at the end of the visit.  The  judge
      clearly set out the burden and standard of proof.

  13. The second ground seeking leave  and  indeed  the  reasons  given  for
      granting leave relate to the  absence  of  a  credibility  finding  in
      respect of the Sponsor, Mrs  Price.    It  is  correct  that  no  such
      finding was made but I do not consider that  Mrs  Price's  credibility
      was at issue or indeed relevant.  It was  the  job  of  the  judge  to
      assess the intentions of the appellant and whilst notice must be taken
      of the sponsor's evidence  the  judge  had  to  assess  the  ties  the
      appellant had to her home country in an attempt to assess whether  she
      had discharged the burden with regard to the relevant issues.

  14. I do not consider that Mrs Price's credibility was at issue  and  even
      if the judge had made a finding on that I do  not  consider  that  the
      overall outcome of the  decision  would  have  differed  in  any  way.
      Paragraphs 28 and 29 of the  Determination  deal  with  findings  with
      regard to the relevant issues and paragraph 30 relates to the question
      of Article 8 ECHR.  The decision in respect of Article 8 has not  been
      challenged.

  15. The judge was entitled to reach findings as he did with regard to  the
      financial situation of  the  appellant  in  her  home  country.   This
      necessitated  taking  into  account  the  financial  position  of  the
      appellant's mother in Jamaica.  The judge made findings with regard to
      her mother's financial position and also with  regard  to  the  letter
      produced by way of reference from "Malcolm's Pre-school".

  16. Equally (Ground 3) that document had been produced  by  the  appellant
      and the judge was entitled to comment upon it.  As  indicated  in  the
      Rule 24 letter no precise findings were made by the judge with  regard
      to the appellant's intention to work and I do not consider that aspect
      had any weight with regard to  the  judge's  ultimate  decision.   The
      judge had already decided that the appellant was not a genuine visitor
      and any appeal would have failed on that basis alone.

  17. For these reasons I do not consider that there was a material error of
      law in Judge Knowles Determination.  His decisions must stand and  the
      appellant's appeal against that decision is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


