
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA 09726 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2014                              |On 23 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Zanib Bibi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Ahmed, counsel instructed by Gramdan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, a woman in  her  80th  year,
    against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant her an entry  clearance  as  a
    family visitor.  There was some uncertainty about whether  in  fact  the
    application was as a family visitor but that has been  resolved  in  her
    favour and that finding has not been challenged.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant
    intended to return to Pakistan at the end of her  visit.   This  is  the
    sort of case which was going to be tricky to decide properly.  It is not
    a case where the appellant has been shown to be dishonest in any way and
    in many places the evidence appears to be extremely honest. For  example
    her sponsor in the United Kingdom was found in many  respects  to  be  a
    very satisfactory witness and some of the things  that  have  been  used
    against the appellant such as her ill-health in Pakistan  and  need  for
    support in Pakistan were disclosed openly in correspondence  before  the
    application was made.

 3. At paragraph 28 of  the  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    listed five points that were of particular  concern.   The  judge  noted
    that the appellant had substantial family in the United Kingdom  and  in
    Pakistan but also that she had primary carers in the United Kingdom,  no
    obvious economic reason to return to Pakistan, no history of  travel  to
    the United Kingdom which would be an indicator of future  behaviour  and
    was of an age when she could be expected to be needing more help.

 4. There was an element to the evidence that was unsatisfactory because the
    application referred to the appellant not being  well.   Her  niece  had
    said that she wanted to return to the United Kingdom and could not leave
    the appellant on her own.   The  appellant's  supporter  in  the  United
    Kingdom, Mr Rashid, her niece's husband,  referred  to  the  appellant's
    good health. This was a tension  of  the  evidence  that  could  not  be
    resolved.  There are many possible explanations.  One is that Mr  Rashid
    was talking about the present situation and the niece was talking  about
    the situation at the time of the application.  Another is that Mr Rashid
    is out of touch. Elderly people are not always keen for  people  who  do
    not need to know to realise that they are failing.  Certainly Mr  Rashid
    has not been found to have been a liar but it was  an  inconsistency  in
    the evidence that made the First-tier Tribunal Judge cautious.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has identified the areas  of  tension  and
    has reached the conclusion that the appellant has not proved her case.

 6. Before me Mr Ahmed had a difficult task because, as he  appreciated,  he
    had to show not how the appeal could have been allowed but that  it  was
    wrong for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  refused  it.  Although  he
    presented the case fairly and  determinedly  he  really  could  make  no
    progress on that point.

 7. There is reference in the grounds  to  the  failure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  to  make  a  specific  finding  about  the  appellant's
    intention without making enquiries on her general credibility.  That  is
    a technical point but  does  not  stand  up  to  proper  analysis.   The
    findings were set in the context of the evidence as  a  whole  and  were
    open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is quite clear that the First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  proved  her
    intentions and the judge gave proper reasons for not being satisfied.

 8. This does not mean that a further application would lead  to  a  similar
    decision but I cannot find any error of law in  the  decision  that  has
    been made and therefore I dismiss the appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 April 2014                  |

