
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/09907/2013

                                                       VA/09906/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2014                               |On 17th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              mr lakhbur singh
                              miss simran kaur
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jarnel Grewal (Sponsor in person)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellants with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Brenells) promulgated on 16th April 2014.

 2. The Appellants had initially sought entry clearance as family  visitors
    to visit the  Sponsor,  the  first  Appellant's  brother-in-law.  Those
    applications were refused but subsequently allowed  on  appeal  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. However, when attempting to travel to the UK the  first  Appellant  was
    denied boarding  because  his  passport  was  damaged.  He  obtained  a
    replacement passport and then attended the British High  Commission  to
    have his visa transferred to his replacement passport. He also produced
    the previous passport. Examination  of  that  passport  led  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to conclude that it  had  been  tampered  with  as  a
    result of which the visa was cancelled. The second  Appellant  being  a
    child and dependent upon the first Appellant being able to travel,  her
    Visa was also cancelled.

 4. The appeals came before the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House on 4th
    April 2014 when the Appellants were represented by the Sponsor, as they
    were before me.

 5. In his determination the Judge  set out the reasons for the visa  being
    cancelled and the first paragraph of that refusal states as follows:-

         "In  your  original  application  you  submitted  passport   number
         A3433205.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  document  has  been  forged
         following  a  document  examination   detailed   in   report   held
         separately. As false documents have been submitted in  relation  to
         your application, it is refused under paragraph  320  (7a)  of  the
         Immigration Rules".

 6. The Judge then set out the text of  the  letter  issued  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to the first Appellant dated 29th April 2013 and then
    the text of the document verification report that  was  before  him.  I
    will not repeat the contents of the verification report but it is clear
    that it indicates on its face that it is a  sanitised  version  of  the
    original document which is held on the local restricted  drive  because
    it contained details and  images  of  restricted  ultraviolet  security
    features. However it is plain that there  were  difficulties  with  the
    stitching on the passport which indicated that the  document  had  been
    taken apart and poorly re-stitched manually.  It  also  indicated  that
    certain security features were not as they ought to have  been  leading
    the author to conclude the document had been tampered  with  and  pages
    removed and/or inserted.

 7. The Judge then indicated that  he  heard  from  the  Sponsor  who  made
    representations on behalf of the Appellants, in particular  that  there
    was no evidential foundation to revoke the visa and  indeed  the  first
    Appellant indicated in his grounds  of  appeal  that  as  the  original
    passport, the subject of the DVR, had not been returned to him  he  had
    been denied the opportunity to rebut the "'spurious allegation".

 8. The Judge however indicated that before him the Sponsor  did  have  the
    passport in question and invited the Judge to examine it  himself.  The
    judge refused to do so indicating that he is not an expert.  The  Judge
    then noted that given the passport was in the Sponsor's  possession  it
    would have been possible for him to  have  obtained  an  expert  report
    which he had failed to do.  The  Judge  considered  that  the  document
    verification report, sanitised though it may been,  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof and was satisfied that the  document  was
    not what it purported to be or at least not in its  original  form  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 9. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted make a number  of
    complaints. The grounds upon which permission was granted  however  was
    that  the  Judge  had  arguably  given  inadequate  reasoning  for  his
    conclusion that the document was false and that the Judge did not  deal
    with the submissions put forward by the  Sponsor  and  first  Appellant
    about  the fact that the passport could not been forged because  if  it
    was it would not have been replaced and the Judge  granting  permission
    felt it arguable that if the First-tier Tribunal   had  considered  the
    written submissions on this point he might have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

10. The  grant  of  permission  also  suggests  that  the  Judge  may  have
    considered the wrong  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  although
    having  reads  the  determination  I  can  find  no  evidence  of  that
    whatsoever.

11. Large parts of the grounds are taken up with a criticism of  the  Judge
    refusing to examine the passport himself. That  is  unmerited.  As  the
    Judge quite properly pointed out, he is not an expert and  it  was  not
    for him to come to a conclusion about  the  veracity  of  the  passport
    particularly when faced with a report by an expert.

12. The grounds reiterate that  if  the  Indian  authorities  believed  the
    passport to have been forged they would not have issued a new one.

13. The grounds also complain that the document verification  report  being
    incomplete, the Judge ought not to have relied upon it.

14. The Sponsor referred to  s.108  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  However, there was no s.108 application.   There  was
    no evidence seen by the Judge that was not available to  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor. It is true that the document  verification  report  was  a
    sanitised version of the whole. However, the Judge did not have  access
    to the entirety of the report any more than the Appellant and  Sponsor.
    However, the report that the judge did have and which the Appellant and
    Sponsor also had was sufficient, in my view for the judge  to  conclude
    that the Entry Clearance Officer was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    document had been tampered with. Whilst forgery  is  referred  to  more
    than once it is quite clear  that  the  difficulty  was  not  that  the
    original passport was a forgery but that the original passport had been
    tampered with, taken apart and re-stitched. There is adequate  evidence
    even in the sanitised version to support that conclusion and the  Judge
    was entitled to place reliance  upon  it.  The  fact  that  the  Indian
    authorities replaced a "damaged" passport  is  not  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had not tampered with it.

15. Furthermore, despite the Appellant's complaint that as he did not  have
    his passport and thus could not obtain his own evidence  to  rebut  the
    allegation, it had been  returned  because  it  was  in  the  Sponsor's
    possession by the hearing. As the Judge pointed out therefore, they did
    have the ability to obtain their own expert evidence and they chose not
    to avail themselves of that opportunity.

16. Before me the Sponsor argued that they had not done so because they did
    not consider the Entry Clearance Officer's argument to merit it; it was
    so flimsy and thus  not  worth  rebutting.  It  may  or  may  not  have
    transpired to be flimsy but  it  is  nevertheless  the  case  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were aware of the reason for the decision and had
    the  means to obtain their own evidence to rebut the assumption of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had they chosen to.  Having decided not to take
    this action they must take the consequences.

17. The Sponsor indicated to me that he did now have an expert  report  but
    as I explained that evidence was not before the original  Judge  and  I
    would only consider looking at it if I decided that the original First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  made a material error of law such  that  the  case
    has to be re-decided. That evidence could and should have been produced
    to the First-tier Tribunal and was not.  I do not find that the  First-
    tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision is upheld.

18. The appeal of the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 17th July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
