
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/09456/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 18 July 2014                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 30 July 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               MARIAM ALSHAIB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant was not represented but the sponsor
attended
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N M K Lawrence promulgated on 7 May 2014 in  which  he  dismissed
    the appeal of the appellant, Mrs Mariam Alshaib, against  the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer in Amman  in  the  State  of  Jordan  to
    refuse her entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
    to visit her daughter and her family in the United Kingdom.

 2. The remarkable thing about this case is that the appellant who is  said
    to be a national of Palestine but has been living  in  Syria  for  many
    years has got an immigration history which cannot be faulted.  She  has
    been to the United Kingdom on a number of  occasions  and  on  each  of
    those occasions she has sought entry clearance as  a  genuine  visitor.
    She has been granted entry clearance as  a  genuine  visitor.  She  has
    attended the United Kingdom as a genuine visitor and  most  importantly
    at the conclusion of each of those visits she has returned to her  home
    in Syria.  Not only has she returned to her home in Syria but  she  has
    also returned to her husband who has not applied to join  her  on  this
    visit and will be remaining at all times in Syria.

 3. The judge reached his decision on the basis  of  paragraph  10  of  his
    determination.  He said

         "It is difficult to ignore  the  civil  war  in  Syria  and  it  is
         difficult to ignore the fact that the appellant is not  a  national
         of Syria but is said to be a Palestinian.  These were  the  factors
         when she previously entered the UK four times since  the  start  of
         the  civil  war  and  left  without  being  in  breach  of  the  UK
         immigration laws. However, the increase in  the  intensity  of  the
         civil war, the use  of  chemical  weapons  and  the  indiscriminate
         killings undermines the claim that this is just a family visit."

 4. Pausing there, the inevitable consequences  of  the  finding  that  the
    escalation in the civil  war  means  that  this  appellant  fails  must
    inevitably be that there can be  no  Syrians  coming  into  the  United
    Kingdom who can satisfy the requirements of a  family  visitor  because
    each of them would be subject to the same reasoning that  the  increase
    in the intensity of the civil war and the use of chemical  weapons  and
    the indiscriminate killings undermines each one of those claims to be a
    genuine family visitor.  That must be wrong and it must be an error  of
    law and I so find.

 5. The matters referred to by the judge appear to be based upon what is an
    increase in the intensity of the civil war between the  last  time  she
    visited, which the judge does not record, and  the  present.   I  would
    caution against such a finding because first of all we do not know what
    increase in intensity he was referring to.  He does not set it  out  in
    his  determination.   In  any  event  it  becomes  quite  difficult  to
    ascertain where a cut off point is reached in any escalation of warfare
    where all visa visits are unlikely to be  genuine.   There  can  be  no
    discernible or rational line to be drawn as the judge did.

 6. Secondly, he appears to have used his own anecdotal evidence about  the
    intensity of the fighting which may not be altogether appropriate.

 7. There is  another  reason  as  well.   The  intensity  of  fighting  is
    something which is very local. There may well be, and I am  sure  there
    are, parts of Syria where, although the country as a whole is  involved
    in a civil war, there are people who are relatively  protected  against
    the effect of civil war.  It may be that there are  numbers  of  people
    living in relatively affluent areas of the capital who are not affected
    in the same way.  Consequently the general level of violence  does  not
    necessarily apply in their case.

 8. The judge also referred to the fact that the appellant is a Palestinian
    as if, somehow, this rendered it less likely that she should return  to
    Syria but I am bound to say I do not understand the reasoning  of  this
    remark and none is provided by the judge.  It may be that a  Syrian  is
    just as much likely to be subjected to this situation as a  person  who
    has lived in Syria but happens to be Palestinian.

 9. The judge goes on to say:

          "The appellant's two [sons], at least are  living  outside  Syria.
         They provide financial support, according  to  the  sponsor's  oral
         evidence, to the appellant and  her  husband.  If  the  appellant's
         economic position is secure there is no need to be supported by her
         sons living in Europe."

10. There is in my judgement an error in that reasoning.  First,  there  is
    no reason why an  expatriate  providing  funds  to  parents  should  be
    treated as an indication that there is a need for that support so  that
    the judge can properly regard  the  appellant's  economic  position  as
    insecure.  There will be many  people  who  in  the  diaspora  will  be
    providing assistance and help to relatively elderly parents and will be
    doing so because their own economic position is stronger.  It does  not
    seem to me that this affords the Entry Clearance Officer with a  reason
    for refusing the application because of  the  assistance  that  can  be
    provided.

11. For these reasons I am not satisfied that the judge acted rationally in
    reaching his decision.  Furthermore, whilst he  acknowledges  the  fact
    that there has been a quadruple demonstration of the  appellant's  good
    faith in the visits she has previously made to the United Kingdom  that
    does not appear to me to have factored into the determination in a  way
    whereby appropriate weight was attached to it.  There are  cases  where
    an application for entry  clearance  can  properly  be  questioned  and
    undermined by the fact that there is a poor immigration history, either
    on the part of the appellant or on the sponsor but  where  there  is  a
    good immigration history, some weight must be given to  the  fact  that
    there was a perfectly good reason for her wishing to come to the United
    Kingdom.

12. Finally, I do not consider that the  judge paid  sufficient  weight  to
    the fact that the appellant's husband remains in Syria and will  remain
    in Syria during the course of the visit.  This is a highly  significant
    factor to be taken into account when considering a visit visa.  If  the
    appellant's motive is to leave her husband permanently, there should at
    least be some evidence that the marriage  is  in  difficulties  or  was
    broken down or that relations between the couple are at such a low  ebb
    that it is likely that there is to be a separation.  There  was  simply
    no information at all available to suggest that  likelihood  and  that,
    too, factors into whether this is a genuine relationship.  The  sponsor
    attended before me accompanied by her husband who is a solicitor but is
    not permitted to appear in immigration cases.  I did not call upon  him
    to make submissions to me but I am satisfied that their presence in the
    hearing room provides at least some limited support to the reasons that
    I have provided. It is clear that they are  wishing  to  support  their
    mother or mother-in-law in this application for entry clearance.

13. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the judge  made  a  material
    error of law and his determination shall be set aside.  I substitute  a
    determination granting entry clearance and I will give a direction that
    entry clearance should be granted in that capacity.

DECISION

       1. The Judge made an error on a point  of  law  and  I  substitute  a
          decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


       2. I direct entry clearance in the capacity sought.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge      |Mr A Jordan                       |
|issuing approval:                 |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Mariam Alshaib                    |
|Case Number:                      |VA/09456/2013                     |

Oral determination (please indicate)   Yes


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:    ANDREW JORDAN, UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

Date:    27 July 2014


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



