
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/09169/2013
                                                               VA/09173/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th November 2014                |On 14th November 2014                |


                                   Before

                      Deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              1) MR ANEEQ AHMAD
                              2) MR MOEED AHMAD

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
  Introduction

    1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan who were born on the (i)  4th
       May 2001, and (ii) 3rd June 1994. They appeal against the decision of
       Judge Robson who, in a decision promulgated on the  24th  June  2014,
       dismissed their appeals against refusal  of  their  applications  for
       entry clearance as family visitors.

    2. The appellants were  represented  by  Mr  Garni  (solicitor)  at  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds of appeal to  the
       Upper Tribunal were, however, settled Mr Farooq Azam (see below).  Mr
       Farooq Azam subsequently indicated, by letter, that he was unable  to
       attend the hearing due to work  commitments  and  requested  that  it
       proceed in his absence. I was satisfied  that  the  appeal  could  be
       justly decided without his presence and I therefore  acceded  to  his
       request.

  Background

    3. The appellants had applied - along with their mother (Mrs Izmat Ijaz)
       and brother (Mr Roshaan Ahmad) - for  entry  clearance  in  order  in
       order to visit their uncle (their mother's brother-in-law), Mr Farooq
       Azam (hereafter, "the sponsor"). The respondent initially refused all
       four applications; that is to say, those of the each appellant and of
       their  mother  and  their  brother.  The  decision  to   refuse   the
       applications of Mrs Izmat Ijaz and Roshaan  Ahmad  were  subsequently
       withdrawn, and their  applications  were  granted.  Hence,  only  the
       appeals of the present appellants fell to be determined by the First-
       tier Tribunal.

  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    4. Judge Robson set out his findings (conclusions) at paragraphs  42  to
       46 of his determination -

       42.     I  considered  the  Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor
           Regulations 2012 and the category of persons referred to therein
           which does not include uncles or indeed Aunts. Further since the
           mother has no longer proceeded with her appeal it is  inevitable
           that she will not accompany her younger minor child and for that
           reason alone the appeal must fail  as  being  noncompliant  with
           paragraph 46A(iv)(a) [of the Immigration Rules].

       43.    It has been put to me that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
           would interfere with the Appellant's right to  Family  Life  and
           Private Life [under Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention
           for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms]  it
           being submitted in particular that the current decision had been
           in fact been  particularly  emotionally  harmful  to  the  older
           child. There is no evidence of that.

       44.    The family life such as it is of the Appellant is  undoubtedly
           being conducted in Pakistan and there is nothing before me  that
           suggests that that relationship can in anyway be disrupted.

       45.     In  terms  of  the  relationship  with  the  UK  family  that
           relationship can be continued either  by  UK  family  visits  to
           Pakistan on the one hand or other modern means of  communication
           such as telephone and alike or  indeed  some  other  application
           which would be compliant with Immigration  Rules  and  could  be
           successful.

       46.    In relations to the Private Life of these two Appellants again
           given the terms of 276ADE there is nothing to suggest that those
           requirements will in anyway  be  breached  by  the  Respondent's
           decision.

  The grant of permission to appeal

    5. Judge Gillespie granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
       the following terms -

        2. Grounds of appeal aver that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred
           in law in  that  he  the  (sic)  based  his  decisions  upon  an
           erroneous  understanding  of   the   factual   situation.   More
           particularly, the documented facts showed  that  the  Appellants
           had originally applied for entry clearance with their mother and
           one other sibling, and  that  the  Respondent,  after  initially
           refusing all applications had, after the noting of the  appeals,
           withdrawn the refusals  in  respect  of  the  mother  and  other
           siblings, conceding that they were entitled to visas.  This  was
           misunderstood by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  formed  the
           mistaken view that the mother and other  sibling  had  withdrawn
           their appeals against the refusal.

        3. That the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  under  the  mistaken
           impression averred is clear from the terms of the determination.
           In dismissing the outstanding appeals, the  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge relying upon the supposed abandonment of the appeal by the
           mother, stated as  a  main  ground  of  the  decision  that  the
           Appellants could no longer enter  as  family  members  and  with
           their mother but would be seeking entry clearance  in  order  to
           visit a person who, would be seeking entry clearance in order to
           visit a person who, although a  close  family  member  of  their
           mother, would not be their  own  close  family  member  for  the
           purpose of the purposes of  the  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations.
           This is arguably an error of law.

  Analysis

    6. Both Judge Robson and Judge Gillespie appear  to  have  confused  and
       conflated two discrete legal principles.

    7. Firstly, the Tribunal was required to decide the appeals by reference
       to the circumstances appertaining at  the  date  of  the  immigration
       decision [Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002]. The subsequent decision by  the  respondent  to  withdraw  the
       immigration decision and to grant the applications of the appellant's
       mother and brother was therefore irrelevant to the issues before  the
       Tribunal concerning the remaining appellants. For the same reason, it
       would have been irrelevant to the issues before the Tribunal had  the
       position been (as Judge Robson erroneously believed) that Imtiaz Ijaz
       had abandoned her appeal. At the date of the decision,  the  position
       was simply that all  four  applications  had  been  refused.  It  was
       against that factual background that  the  Tribunal  was  obliged  to
       assess the merits of the appeals.

    8. Secondly, both appellants  were  limited  to  appealing  against  the
       immigration decision on the ground  that  it  was  incompatible  with
       their rights under the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of
       Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.  This  is  because,  as  Judge
       Robson  observed,  the  appellants  relationship  with  the   sponsor
       (nephews and uncle) was not such as to attract a full right of appeal
       under the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012. That
       position was not dependent, as Judge Gillepie supposed, upon the fact
       that  the  first  appellant  was  a  minor  and  would  therefore  be
       travelling with his mother, who, by contrast with her minor son,  had
       the benefit of  a  full  right  of  appeal  against  the  immigration
       decision.

    9. This leads me to  consider  the  errors  of  law  that  are  in  fact
       contained within Judge Robson's determination.

   10. Firstly, it is clear, from the second sentence of paragraph 42,  that
       Judge Robson dismissed the first appellant's appeal on the basis of a
       post-decision event, and also because he  believed  that  this  event
       meant that the first appellant was unable to meet the requirements of
       the Immigration Rules. He was wrong on both counts. It was  not  open
       to him to  take  account  of  a  post-decision  event,  even  if  his
       assumption as to its character had been correct. Nor was it  open  to
       him to dismiss the first appellant's appeal on  the  basis  that  the
       immigration decision was in accordance  with  immigration  rules.  As
       with the second appellant, the only issue that  he  was  required  to
       decide was whether the immigration decision was compatible  with  the
       appellant's right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life.  That
       decision could  only  be  made  by  reference  to  the  circumstances
       appertaining at the date when it was made.

   11. Secondly, having dismissed the appeal of the first appellant  on  the
       ground that the immigration decision was in accordance with paragraph
       46A of the Immigration Rules, the  judge  does  not  appear  to  have
       considered his appeal under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention
       for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms.  I  say
       that he 'appears' not to have  done  so,  because  whilst  the  judge
       refers to a single appellant throughout the course of  his  reasoning
       in paragraphs 43 and 44, it is by no means clear to  which  appellant
       he is referring. This means that one  cannot  say,  with  confidence,
       that  he  has  considered  the  individual  circumstances  of  either
       appellant  in  deciding  whether  the  immigration   decisions   were
       compatible with their respective rights under Article 8 of  the  1950
       European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of   Human   Rights   and
       Fundamental Freedoms.

   12. The above errors of law are so fundamental that I have  decided  that
       the entire determination should be set aside and the appeals remitted
       to the First-tier Tribunal for them to be decided afresh.







  Notice of Decision

   13. The appeals are allowed.

   14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeals is set
       aside.

   15. The appeals are remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
       afresh (not before Judge Robson) and none of  the  original  findings
       are preserved.

  Anonymity not directed.




Signed                                  Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal           13th November 2014


