

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/09818/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 3 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             NAJWA S M KHALAILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a person described  as  a  national  of  Palestine
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  Paul,  dismissing
    her appeal against the respondent's refusal of entry  clearance  for  a
    family visit to the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  is  married  to  a
    British citizen and has a son who is a British citizen; he was born  in
    February 2013 in the United Kingdom.

 2. The principal grounds for refusal were  that  the  appellant's  history
    demonstrated a previous visit very shortly before that proposed and the
    Entry Clearance Officer and indeed the judge took the view that it  was
    the intention of the appellant not  genuinely  to  make  another  short
    visit to the United Kingdom but to make a settlement  application  from
    within the United Kingdom, or in some other way  to  act  as  a  person
    other than one intending only a  short  visit  and  to  return  to  her
    country at the end of it.

 3. The grounds of appeal  submitted  by  the  appellant  and  her  husband
    without,  so  far  as  we  know,  legal  assistance,  assert  that  the
    suggestions made by the Entry Clearance Officer  and  accepted  by  the
    judge were purely speculative that  the  only  previous  visit  to  the
    United Kingdom had been that during which the son  was  born  and  that
    there was no basis for thinking other than that the appellant  intended
    the visit of three months which she specified.

 4. Today, there is no appearance by,  or  on  behalf  of,  the  appellant.
    Notice of the hearing was sent to the sponsor at the address which  she
    gave for correspondence, which is the address, so far as we  understand
    it, of her husband.  No other address has been given to  the  Tribunal.
    In the circumstances we proceed in their absence.

 5. In the absence of any substantive submissions other than those to which
    we have already made reference, it is difficult to see that we could do
    other than conclude that there was no error of law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge; but there is another factor which we regard as of  some
    importance in this case.  The application was made on 6 May  2013.   It
    was said to be an application which needed to be granted because  there
    had been a letter from the son's GP indicating the  importance  of  his
    having certain injections at about two months after his birth, that  is
    to say in April 2013.  The position now, eighteen months later, is that
    there is no evidence demonstrating that the son has had the injections.
     The purpose of the visit was to enable him to have them, but we do not
    know whether other arrangements were made  or  not:  that  is  of  some
    importance because of the matters raised so specifically by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  If the real reason for  the  visit  was  the  son's
    injections it is surprising that  they  have  played  no  part  in  the
    subsequent assertions made by the appellant and her husband.   Be  that
    as it may, the position is that the appellant has  entirely  failed  to
    show that the judge was not entitled to reach  the  decision  which  he
    reached.

 6. There has been some discussion in this case of  whether  the  appellant
    would be making an application for settlement from Palestine and it may
    be that an application has already been made.  We would emphasise  that
    there is no inhibition on such an application  being  made  during  the
    course of an appeal such as this and we suppose that owing to the  very
    protracted course which for some reason  this  appeal  has  taken,  the
    appellant and the sponsor have now reached a view of what  action  they
    wish to take.

 7. In our judgment, the statement of 29 September 2013 which the judge  is
    said not to have taken into  account,  adds  nothing  material  to  the
    factors already before him.  For the reasons we  have  given,  however,
    this appeal falls to be dismissed and we dismiss it.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 12 November 2014
