
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/10703/2013
                                                               VA/10695/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 6th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     mr Muhammad riaz (FIRST appellant)
                      MR Khalid RIAZ (SECOND appellant)
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Nazakit Bahadur, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Heath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  They are respectively  father
    and son.  The son being the first named Appellant.  They had  submitted
    simultaneous applications for permission to enter  the  United  Kingdom
    with a view to spending a holiday with the first Appellant's sister who
    is also the second Appellant's daughter.  Their  brother-in-law/son-in-
    law Mr Nazakit Bahadur is the Sponsor.  Their appeals were  refused  by
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  6th  May  2013.   Mr  Khalid  Riaz's
    application was refused pursuant to paragraph 41 and was refused  under
    paragraph 320(7B).  Mr Muhammad Riaz was refused  on  the  grounds  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not consider that he met  the  requirements
    of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Osborne to be heard  on  the  papers  in  December  2013.   In  a
    determination  promulgated  on  8th  January  2014  the  appeals   were
    dismissed but so far as the decision against Khalid Riaz was  concerned
    it was dismissed under paragraph 320(7A) and not 320(7B).  It  is  also
    appropriate to note that there is an error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in that in the decision he appears to refer to  the
    dismissal against Muhammad Riaz rather  than  Khalid  Riaz  so  far  as
    paragraph 320(7A) is concerned.

 3. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal on 22nd April 2014  and
    on 21st May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Tiffan granted permission to
    appeal.  Grounds of Appeal were  handwritten  by  the  Sponsor.   Judge
    Tiffan noted that they correctly refer to the  judge  having  misstated
    the names and relationships of the Appellants to  the  Sponsor  and  he
    concluded that this was an arguable error of law.  He further  extended
    the time permitted to  appeal  under  Rule  24(4)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended).

 4. On 5th June 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Secretary of State in that letter  indicated
    that she did not entirely understand the point raised with  respect  to
    the relationship of the parties as it refers to the Grounds  of  Appeal
    saying  that  the  judge  has  mistaken  the  relationships  when   the
    documentation attached to the IA66 does not appear to cover this point.
     In any event the Secretary of State contends  that  even  if  this  is
    correct the issues raised in the refusal and addressed by the judge are
    entirely freestanding of the point and  that  it  was  clear  that  the
    individual adverse findings were sustainable.

 5. It is on this basis that the appeal comes before  me.   The  Appellants
    are represented by their Sponsor Mr Bahadur.  As stated above he is  Mr
    Muhammad Riaz's father-in-law and Mr Khalid Riaz's brother-in-law being
    married to Mr Khalid Riaz's sister.  The Secretary of State appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Miss Heath.  I explained fully to Mr
    Bahadur, as he was acting in person, the purpose of appeal and that  it
    was necessary to show as a starting point that  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  He  indicated
    his acknowledgment and understanding of that position.

Submissions

 6. Miss Heath submitted that it is clear that the judge had made  findings
    on each of the applicants and the findings that the judge had made were
    not challenged in the Grounds of Appeal.  Yet  the knowledge that  even
    if there was a confusion as to which Appellant was which as set out  in
    the decision (this being something I have referred to above) the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made distinct findings which were open to  him  and
    submits that the findings are to stand and that there  is  no  material
    error of law and that I should dismiss the appeal.

 7. I invited Mr Bahadur to make submissions to me  and  indicated  that  I
    would not interrupt him during the course  of  those  submissions.   He
    indicated that he accepts that the responses of the Secretary of  State
    are still valid.  However so far as his father-in-law is  concerned  he
    points out that he is over 60 and that he  just  wanted  a  three  week
    holiday and that his wife i.e. the Sponsor's  mother-in-law  previously
    visited the UK to see her daughter and had properly abided by the terms
    of her visa and returned.  He acknowledges that some  of  the  evidence
    produced is not as clear as it should be but he asked me to look at  Mr
    Muhammad Riaz's application independently and  merely  because  he  was
    travelling together with his son it was not appropriate to  refuse  his
    application.  He asked me to reconsider the refusals.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. Albeit that these appeals were dealt with on the papers they have  been
    very thoroughly looked at by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   He  has
    examined both the basis for refusals  pursuant  to  paragraph  320  and
    paragraph 41, has considered the  inconsistencies  with  regard  to  Mr
    Khalid Riaz's circumstances and as  to  the  failings  in  Mr  Muhammad
    Riaz's application confirm and provide supportive evidence  as  to  his
    business as a property dealer.

11. The grounds are handwritten by the Sponsor and I acknowledge that it is
    appropriate in such circumstances to look at these grounds with perhaps
    a little more flexibility than I would if they were  drafted  by  legal
    representatives but they amount to little more than a request for me to
    ensure that  the  applications  are  individually  looked  at  and  not
    confused and whilst there has been some confusion in the set up of  the
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal Judge his findings of fact are
    sound.

12. Mr Bahadur acknowledges the position with regards to  Khalid  Riaz  and
    emphasises the main thrust of his  appeal  is  based  very  largely  in
    support of his father-in-law's application relying on the fact that his
    mother-in-law has previously abided by the terms of her visa.  That  is
    addressed  in  paragraph  24  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination and it is appropriate for Mr Muhammad  Riaz  to  take  on
    board exactly what the First-tier Tribunal Judge said there:

         "I cannot be satisfied that his circumstances are as claimed as the
         factors claimed are so disparate and there is a virtual total  lack
         of corroborative evidence of any description."

13. In all the circumstances the determination discloses no material  error
    of law and I dismiss the appeals.  Certainly so far as Mr Muhammad Riaz
    is concerned this may well come as a considerable  disappointment.   It
    is not the purpose of the immigration system to prevent genuine  visits
    to the UK.  It may well be that Mr Muhammad Riaz would wish to  reapply
    and if that is the case then he should be encouraged to do  so  but  he
    should also be aware that it is necessary to comply with the  terms  of
    the Immigration Rules.  If he does seek to reapply  he  would  be  most
    strongly advised to ensure that his application is  properly  completed
    along with the appropriate accompanying documentation.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material errors of
    law and the appeals  of  both  the  first  and  second  Appellants  are
    dismissed.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make an order  pursuant  to  Rule
    45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
     No application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           31st July 2014


