
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/10657/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 July 2014                               |On 1 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                             Miss Gifty Koomson

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (Accra)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Oke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is a citizen of Ghana born on 23 January  1987,  has
    been granted permission to appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Perry who by a determination promulgated on 1 March 2014
    dismissed her appeal against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    to refuse an application for entry clearance as a family visitor.

2.   Although a number of concerns were expressed  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in refusing the application the  issue  at  the  heart  of  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  a  narrow  one.   The
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application  under   paragraph
    320(7B)(d) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the applicant had
    used deception in a previous application for entry  clearance  made  in
    2007.

3.   The applicant asserts that this is simply incorrect  and  in  fact  the
    application in 2007 was refused under paragraph 320(3)  simply  on  the
    basis that she had failed to produce to the Entry Clearance  Officer  a
    valid passport.

4.   The deception alleged in the  2007  application  was  said  to  be  the
    submission of  a  passport  containing  a  different  name  or  a  name
    expressed differently and a different date of  birth  from  that  which
    appeared in the passport presented by the appellant in  support  of  an
    earlier application in 2005.

5.   The respondent's position is that the  appellant  changed  the  way  in
    which her name appeared in the 2007 passport so that she would not have
    to disclose the refusal in 2005 and that she  dishonestly  changed  the
    date of birth to enable an application  of  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom to succeed, which it could not have done  if  she  presented  a
    passport disclosing the date of birth declared in the earlier passport.

6.   The appellant accepts that it was unlawful for her to be in  possession
    of two Ghanaian  passports  and  there  is  no  dispute  that  she  was
    prosecuted in 2007 in Ghana and was fined.

7.   Much turns on which of those positions is bound to be the correct  one.
     A refusal under  paragraph  320(7B)  carries  with  it  a  finding  of
    deception and dishonesty on the part of the applicant  and  means  that
    future applications fall to be refused on that basis alone.   There  is
    no such continued consequence for a person whose application is refused
    under 320(3) although the facts and the circumstances  of  the  refusal
    would of course be taken into account when any  future  application  is
    considered.

8.   The judge dismissed the appeal because he found  as  a  fact  that  the
    2007 application had been refused  on  the  basis  of  deception  under
    paragraph 320(A) on account of the fact that deception had been used in
    the earlier application.  In making that finding he placed reliance  on
    what was said by the Entry Clearance Officer in the notice  of  refusal
    of the earlier application:

         "You were refused entry clearance for using deception on 07/08/2007
         for presenting passport H1969214 which showed a change in your name
         and date of birth from the previous application on 12/09/2005.   On
         that occasion you used passport number H1587641...  You also failed
         to declare that you made the previous application and that  it  had
         been refused.  The ECO was satisfied that  you  had  changed  these
         details  in  order  to  conceal  this  refusal  and   qualify   for
         settlement."

9.   The grounds for seeking permission to appeal in  respect  of  this  key
    issue may be summarised as follows.  It was said that the judge  failed
    to give adequate reasons for his findings; wrongly reversed the  burden
    of proof, failing to recognise that it was for the respondent to  prove
    the alleged deception and not for the appellant to refute it; failed to
    recognise that a bare assertion by the respondent did not and  was  not
    capable of discharging the burden  of  proof  of  proving  the  alleged
    deception and finally that the judge  failed  to  appreciate  that  the
    respondent acted unfairly in not producing the 2007 decision.

10.  A First-tier Tribunal Judge granted permission to  appeal  saying  that
    the  burden  of  proof  for  establishing  the  deception  was  on  the
    respondent but  he  could  not  find  in  the  papers  before  him  any
    documentary evidence of that earlier refusal from 2007.

11.  In our judgment there is an air  of  unreality  about  the  appellant's
    position.  She complains that the respondent has not produced the  2007
    decision but, as pointed out during  discussion  at  this  hearing,  of
    course she would have had a copy of that also but she has not  produced
    it.  She does  not  dispute  that  she  unlawfully  obtained  a  second
    passport in 2007 stating a different date of birth, a  fact  which  she
    must have known to be incorrect, and that that was for the  purpose  of
    making the unsuccessful settlement application.   She  did  not  appeal
    against that refusal and, as we  have  seen,  she  was  prosecuted  and
    convicted for having two passports.

12.  At the time  of  the  2007  application  the  facts  before  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer would have  included  the  failure  to  disclose  the
    earlier refusal to grant  entry  clearance  and  the  production  of  a
    different passport from that which was  presented  in  support  of  the
    earlier application in which the date of birth was  incorrectly  stated
    so as to make her appear to be younger  and  therefore  qualifying  for
    settlement.

13.  Mr Oke submits that a bare assertion of the Entry Clearance Officer  as
    to these facts was not sufficient but, as explained,  this  was  not  a
    bare assertion but a statement of facts gleaned from  official  records
    kept on file.  In those circumstances refusal  under  320(7A)  was  the
    obvious disposal of the application and it  was  plainly  open  to  the
    judge to reach the conclusions he did.

14.  We do not accept that  the  judge  reversed  the  burden  of  proof  in
    respect of the alleged deception.  On the contrary,  he  accepted  that
    the  respondent  had  established  that  and  nothing  offered  by  the
    appellant raised any doubt at all about that.  The material facts  were
    not in dispute nor in any way challenged.  Even if the  situation  were
    as the appellant asserts it to be and the  2007  application  had  been
    refused under 320(3) without a specific allegation  of  deception,  the
    outcome would inevitably have been the same.

15.  Mr Wilding points out that it is not a precondition of a refusal  under
    paragraph 320(7A) that an earlier application has  been  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7A).  It was enough if there was  evidence  of  deception
    before the decision-maker in respect of the  earlier  application,  and
    that quite plainly was the case here.

16.  It seems to us inconceivable  that  entry  clearance  would  have  been
    granted to a person with a history  of  failing  to  disclose  relevant
    facts in previous applications and who had been convicted of an offence
    relating to passports and who had  submitted  one  of  those  passports
    containing a false date of birth to enable her to make  an  application
    that otherwise would not have been open to her  if  the  true  date  of
    birth had been stated.

17.  For those reasons we are satisfied that the judge made no error of  law
    and that the decision reached was open to him.

18.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal will be dismissed and the decision  of
    the First-tier will stand.



Signed                                  Date 25 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

