
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/10640/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 June 2014                                 |On 30 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             mohammad mukit miah
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal before the Upper Tribunal by Mr Mohammad  Mukit  Miah
    who is  an  individual  from  Bangladesh  who  has  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor to the  United  Kingdom.   His  application  was
    refused on 29 April 2013 and his appeal then came before Judge Napthine
    sitting at Hatton Cross in February 2014.  Judge Napthine  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigrations Rules.

 2. The grounds of appeal brought  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  were
    granted  permission  by  Judge  Levin  on  11  April.   In  short,  the
    permission should never have been granted or the appeal pursued.  I say
    that for this reason.  The appeal raised questions of  jurisdiction  of
    the Tribunal in relation to the appeal of Mr Miah.   The  assertion  in
    the grounds is that Mr  Miah  was  coming  to  visit  a  non-qualifying
    relative, namely his uncle, in the United Kingdom and therefore  unless
    he was able to show that the decision was unlawful by reference to  the
    race relations or under the Human Rights Act, he could not  succeed  in
    that appeal.

 3. The background is that Mr Miah's application form showed, at  8.4,  two
    qualifying family members whom he was intending to  visit,  namely  his
    uncle and also Sunar  Bibi,  his  grandmother.   She  is  described  as
    British and as his grandmother; she would qualify under the 2012 Family
    Visitor Regulations as a relative, a visit to whom would give  rise  to
    an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The question of whom the appellant was intending to visit was raised by
    an Entry Clearance Officer as part of the refusal of  entry  clearance.
    The assertion was made that only the  uncle  was  the  sponsor  of  the
    visit; no mention was made of the grandmother and the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer said "I am not satisfied that such evidence such as evidence of
    a UK passport was sufficient evidence to demonstrate  your  grandmother
    is aware of the proposed visit and has agreed to sponsor  any  part  of
    your proposed visit".  Now that  was  a  matter  which  was  not  aired
    whatsoever before the judge sitting in the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    reason for that is perhaps obvious from  another  document  before  us,
    that is the review of the refusal carried out by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager in Bangladesh.  Under the heading 'the appeal' it is written as
    follows:

         It is conceded that as Appellant 2, (and here they are referring to
         Mr Miah) indicated that he intended to visit his  grandmother,  the
         sister of Appellant 1 and as a copy of  her  British  passport  was
         provided that his application should have been assessed as a family
         visitor

    It is perhaps obvious, in the light of that document that the judge did
    not engage with that part of the refusal at all in  his  determination.
    It also means that in the light of that  clear  concession,  that  this
    ground of appeal to this Tribunal cannot succeed.

 5. There was no other challenge to what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    said  and  there  is  nothing  obvious  about  the  remainder  of   his
    determination which would indicate that he found error of  law  of  any
    kind.  In those circumstances we dismiss the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    appeal.


Signed                              Date 11 June 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

