
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/10509/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 19th June 2013                             |on 21st June 2013            |

                                   Before

                                 LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                  MUHAMMAD AKMAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: In person.
For the Respondent: Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Pacey promulgated on the 9th October 2012 in which she  found
        there was no valid appeal before her as the primary purpose of  the
        visit was not to visit family members.


     2. We find the Judge erred in law for although referring  to  evidence
        from the sponsor it is clear from the application form,  paragraphs
        8.4, 8.11 and 9, that the primary purpose was for a  family  visit.
        Indeed in 8.4 the appellant specifically states  that  he  and  the
        family will stay with his nephew and  real  sister.    In  Ajakaiye
        [2011] UKUT 00375 the Tribunal found that ascertaining the  purpose
        of the visit is primarily achieved by examining what the  applicant
        said in the application form.


     3. Judge Pacey noted the evidence from  three  sources  mentioned  the
        family element but found that as it was said he was  coming  for  a
        holiday first, this must be the primary purpose.  We  find  this  a
        perverse finding.  The weight  of  evidence  establishes  that  the
        appellant intended to visit the United Kingdom for a holiday during
        which he will visit family members with  whom  he  will  stay.  The
        statement he and  his  family  are  coming  for  a  holiday  is  to
        distinguish it from his coming for business purposes. The  evidence
        shows a substantial number of previous visits of  this  nature  for
        which entry clearance was granted.


     4. We also note that the refusal dated 19th March 2012 confers a  full
        right of appeal as it was accepted by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
        (ECO) that this is an application that fell to be considered  under
        the provisions of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  If  Judge
        Pacey took a point not set out in  the  refusal  and  therefore  of
        which the appellant had no notice i.e.  jurisdiction,  and  without
        giving him the opportunity to make representations on  this  point,
        it is also  arguable  there  has  been  a  procedural  irregularity
        sufficient to amount to a material error of law.


     5. We set the determination aside as the finding of 'no  jurisdiction'
        is wrong in law. This is clearly a family visit.  The Tribunal  had
        jurisdiction to determine the appeal and should have done so.


     6. We proceed to remake the decision by allowing the appeal.  The  ECO
        was  concerned  that  the  evidence  did  not   substantiates   the
        appellant's claimed income and financial situation in Pakistan.  We
        have seen a considerable  bundle  of  documents  corroborating  his
        claim as at the date of decision.  We  also  had  the  pleasure  of
        meeting Mr Akmal who appeared before us having been granted a multi
        entry business visa by Islamabad valid from 7th March 2013  to  7th
        March 2018 (VAF Number: 1713496). An ECO must have  been  satisfied
        his business credentials were genuine to grant such a visa.


     7. Having considered all the evidence we are  satisfied  that  at  the
        date of  decision  the  appellant  was  able  to  satisfy  all  the
        requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules and so  allow
        the appeal. There are related family members who  were  refused  in
        line in 2012 whose applications should also be allowed if the visit
        visa is sought, although an ECO may wish to clarify  the  situation
        with Mr Akmal in light of  the  grant  of  the  business  visa  and
        passage of time.


Decision

     8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original  Judge.  We  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


     9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th June 2013












