
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/10770/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 June 2013                                |On 19 June 2013              |
|Prepared 5 June 2013                          |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                MATILDA ESHUN
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mrs N Richards, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert promulgated on 19  November  2012  in
    which he allowed the appeal of the claimant against the  decision  made
    on 20 February 2012 to refuse entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as
    a child visitor.

 2. The claimant was born on 17 July 1996 and is a citizen of  Ghana.   She
    wishes to come to the United Kingdom to visit her mother, Mary Cobbinah
    who has leave to  remain  here  as  a  domestic  worker  in  a  private
    household.  The visit is supported by the mother's employer, Mrs  Nandy
    Richards ("the sponsor") who  assisted  with  the  application  as  Mrs
    Cobbinah is not literate and does not speak English.  As at the date of
    decision the claimant had finished her basic secondary  education  and,
    there being a gap of several  months  before  the  next  stage  of  her
    secondary education was to commence, she wished to  spend  an  extended
    time with her mother.  The appellant has had no contact with her father
    and he has not been involved in her upbringing.  She is looked after by
    an aunt when she is not at boarding school.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the basis  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor,
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her visit  and  that
    also the appellant did not submit satisfactory evidence to  demonstrate
    that her father had given written consent for her to travel.

 4. The  matter  came  before  Judge  Herbert  on  8  November  2012.   The
    respondent was not represented at that point.  The judge found that the
    appellant's mother had complied with immigration control since entering
    the United Kingdom some three years previously  as  a  domestic  worker
    that there was sufficient accommodation available for the appellant for
    a limited three  month  visit  so,  there  was  realistic  prospect  of
    locating the father and that that was  not  a  condition  for  her  not
    entering.  He also found that there was no  reason  why  the  appellant
    could not return to Ghana to complete her education.   The  judge  also
    made a full fee award,

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal against that  on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to make a finding as to who  the  appellant's
    guardian is in her home country and  that  if  she  has  no  parent  or
    guardian there, she did not meet the requirements of paragraph  46A(v).
    It is submitted also that the judge failed to make a recent finding  on
    the appellant's intention to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her
    visit.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan on 27 December
    2012.  The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lewis on
    14 March 2013 and he found that there had been an  error  of  law,  set
    aside the decision of Judge Herbert and directed that the appeal be re-
    heard on all issues [8].   The matter then came before me to remake the
    decision.

 6. The appellant's mother did not appear before me, but Mrs  Richards  did
    attend, explaining that she had been asked to speak on  behalf  of  the
    mother who, not speaking English, and not being literate, did not  wish
    to attend.  I did not however, consider that it would be appropriate to
    adjourn this matter for the  appellant's  mother  to  attend  and  give
    evidence.  It has been made clear to the appellant and  her  mother  in
    the decision of Judge Lewis that they were to decide  whether  she  can
    attend and give evidence and that Mrs Richards  should  do  so  if  she
    wished to give evidence also.

 7. I heard evidence from Mrs Richards. She explained that  she  had  known
    the appellant's mother her whole life as her grandmother had taken Mary
    in when she was a small child.  She had worked first for Mrs  Richards'
    mother then her older sister and then finally came to join her  in  the
    United Kingdom as a domestic worker.  She said that the  appellant  had
    completed her basic and junior secondary and would have had up to  nine
    months between taking he exams and starting school the following  June.
    She said that she is now in senior secondary school and that her mother
    talks to her daily.  She said she had seen her in Ghana in February but
    that her mother had been unable to travel with her as at that point the
    Home Office still had her passport  having  taken  thirteen  months  to
    extend her visa.  She said that there had  been  no  permission  sought
    from the aunt as this had not been asked for.  She said that  had  they
    known this further clarification from the aunt could have been provided
    but it was not clear that this was required either from the application
    form or otherwise.

 8. In cross-examination Mrs Richards confirmed that she  had  written  the
    letter which had been signed by the mother, inviting the  appellant  to
    stay.  She said that they had no intention of making an application for
    the appellant to settle and that it was unlikely that the mother  would
    be able to apply for settlement either given that, she does  not  speak
    English and is illiterate, she is unlikely to pass the Life in  the  UK
    test.  She said that the plans were for  the  appellant  to  remain  in
    secondary school until she is aged 19 and then to go to  university  in
    Ghana.  She said that the mother's intentions are to  return  to  Ghana
    and to start a shop or a restaurant as she gets lonely  in  the  United
    Kingdom it being difficult for her to communicate.  She said that there
    was no way that she would permit the appellant to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and that this was not a  means  of  getting  Matilda  into  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. In immigration appeals the burden of proof lies on  an  appellant;  the
    standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. In this case  it  is
    for the claimant to  show  that  she  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.

10. I found Mrs Richards to be a compelling and credible witness.  I accept
    that she has known the appellant through her mother all of her life and
    that whilst the letter inviting her might have been  better  expressed,
    when she has said that she wanted the appellant to "stay" that all that
    was intended was a visit.  I am satisfied from what she said that there
    was no intention either on  her  part  or  the  mother's  part  or  the
    appellant's part that she should remain in the United Kingdom beyond  a
    holiday to visit her mother.  I find no basis for the  submission  that
    what is intended is a means of circumventing  the  Rules  so  that  the
    appellant should  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  Mrs  Richards
    submitted, that there  would  be  little  advantage  to  the  appellant
    remaining here illegally as opposed to getting a good  education  in  a
    boarding school in Ghana.

11. I am satisfied also by the evidence  before  me  that  there  would  be
    adequate accommodation  for  the  appellant  and  that  this  would  be
    provided by Mrs Richards and the appellant's mother.

12. I accept that the appellant's father has had no involvement in her life
    and  that  therefore  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  obtain   any
    confirmation from him.  However, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    aunt does act as her guardian in that she is the person who  cares  for
    her whilst she is not at boarding school.  There was not, included with
    the application, a confirmation that she was happy for the appellant to
    travel to the United Kingdom.  I accept that that confirmation has been
    provided subsequently, but it was not in place at the date of  decision
    and therefore is not a matter which could be taken into account.

13. I accept that the appellant and Mrs Richards did not  fully  understand
    what the Immigration Rules required. In fairness to them, the Rules  do
    not at first glance make it  clear  that  even  though  one  parent  is
    present in the United Kingdom there must still be a confirmation from a
    guardian  or  other  parent.   This  was  not  provided  and   so   the
    requirements of the rules were not met.

14. On that sole basis, I  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I therefore dismiss the  appeal
    on that basis.  No other ground of appeal  has  been  advanced,  and  I
    therefore dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

15. This does not, however, prevent  the  appellant  from  making  a  fresh
    application for entry clearance as a visitor and any  such  application
    should include this determination.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and it is set aside.

 2. I remake the determination by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

 3. The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

 4. As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


