
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: VA/11112/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MOSHIN YUSUF DUDHARA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     sponsor in person
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the home Department and the
    respondent is a citizen of India born on 30 January 1986. However,  for
    convenience, I refer below to Mr Dudhara as "the appellant" and to  the
    Secretary of State as "the respondent" which are the designations  they
    had before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse his application for entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor pursuant to paragraph 41 of the Immigration  Rules.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R Callender Smith allowed the appellant's appeal. On  12
    May 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal saying that it is arguable that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in allowing the appellant's appeal in  the  absence
    of a finding with specific reasons as to the relationship  between  the
    sponsor and the appellant. A further arguable error of  law  arises  in
    the context of the consideration but the Judge of paragraph  320  (7A).
    It is arguable that insufficient analysis has been set out  as  to  the
    findings of fact in respect of this.

    The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  found  as  follows.  The
    sponsor confirmed that the appellant was his nephew and was  a  genuine
    visitor. The money placed in the appellant's  bank  account  came  from
    deposits by his father in respect of work already done  on  the  family
    farm, to which he would return,  the  money  had  not  been  previously
    deposited because there had been no reasons to do so until the proposed
    travel and visit. There are other documents such as his finance details
    and a letter from the appellant's employers confirming the  appellant's
    leave from his employers for a  period  of  two  months  after  he  has
    worked, full-time, as an electrician since July 2011  at  a  salary  of
    Rs.7000 per month. The  appellant's  application  is  genuine  and  his
    appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

    The respondent's appeal

 4. The respondent appealed against this decision.  Her grounds  of  appeal
    are in summary the following.

      i. The respondent refused the appellant's application as a visitor  to
         the  United  Kingdom  because  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer   was
         satisfied that a full stock and had been submitted  in  support  of
         the application.

     ii. At paragraph 15, the Judge refers to a letter from the  appellant's
         employer. However he has failed to make a finding on the outcome of
         the checks made by the Entry Clearance Officer which found that the
         employer could not  be  contacted  using  on  the  contact  details
         provided. The Judge does not  adequately  explain  how  the  letter
         addresses the concerns of the Entry Clearance Officer  in  relation
         to the appellant's claimed employment.

    iii. At paragraph 10 the sponsor confirms  that  the  appellant  is  his
         nephew. However on the application form the appellant  stated  that
         he is visiting his brother. The Judge has failed to  make  findings
         on this discrepancy. If the appellant is  visiting  his  uncle  the
         appellant's appeal is restricted to residual grounds  contained  in
         section 84 (1) (b) and (c) of the 2002 Nationality Immigration  and
         Asylum Act by the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)  Regulations
         2012. The Judge has therefore erred and the decision should be  set
         aside.



    The appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing, someone who calls himself Mr Zahid Akhtar said  he  was
    the appellant's Legal Representative. Mr Akhtar did not have  a  letter
    of authority from Ebrahim and  Co,  the  solicitors,  representing  the
    appellant as stated in correspondence  between  the  Tribunal  and  the
    solicitors. The Usher informed me that a letter had  been  received  by
    the Tribunal from Ebrahim and Co stating that they would not be able to
    attend the hearing today because of the Muslim religious festival  Eid.
    There was no letter from Ebrahim and Co to say that Mr Akhtar would  be
    representing the appellant. I  also  took  into  account  that  in  his
    Section 84 form, Mr Akhtar said that his address  is  Wembley  HA0  2AL
    while the Ebrahim and Co's address is in Hazel Hare building. Mr Akhtar
    had no knowledge of this building. I excused Mr Akhtar and said that  I
    do not recognise him as the appellant's  legal  representative  and  he
    left without saying anything more.

    Finding whether there is an error of law in the determination

 6. There is no dispute that the appellant made an  application  for  entry
    clearance pursuant to  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appellant in his application form said that he is coming to  visit  his
    nephew. At the  hearing  his  sponsor,  Mr  Yusuf  Ali  said  that  the
    appellant is his brother.

 7. I find  that  given  the  inconsistency  in  the  evidence  as  to  the
    appellant's relationship with the sponsor, the appellant's  claim  that
    he is visiting a family member within the category of relationships set
    out in the Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012.  A
    nephew is not amongst the relationships that is  not  captured  in  the
    Regulations.

 8. Section 88A(1) of the 2002 Act, as in force from 25 June 2013, sets out
    the limitations on an appellant's rights of appeal.  It states that  "A
    person may not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  refusal  of  an
    application for entry clearance unless the  application  was  made  for
    purposes of ... entering as the dependant of a person in  circumstances
    prescribed  by  regulations  for  the  purpose  of  this   subsection".
    Subsection (1) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on either  or
    both of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Act,
    that is to say, on grounds under section 19B of the Race Relations  Act
    1976  and  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  (see  section
    88(3).Therefore the appellant right  of  appeal  is  limited  to  human
    rights and race discrimination grounds, as set out in section  84(1)(b)
    and (c) of the 2002 Act. No such ground has been raised in this appeal.



 9. There is no evidence before me that the decision is  discriminatory  on
    grounds of race, and that the appellant had not identified  any  breach
    of his human rights but simply challenges, in essence the basis of  the
    refusal. There is no evidence that  the  refusal  interferes  with  the
    appellant's private or family life and therefore the  appellant  cannot
    succeed. My jurisdiction is limited to these two grounds.

10. I also find that there is an error of law in the determination  because
    the Judge did not resolve the conflict  in  what  is  set  out  in  the
    respondent's refusal letter that checks carried out on the  appellant's
    employer, on the telephone number provided by  the  appellant  did  not
    yield any results and his application  was  also  refused  pursuant  to
    paragraph 320 (7A) of the Immigration Rules. There is no  reasoning  by
    the Judge, in his findings for why he has accepted that  the  appellant
    is employed as claimed given the concerns of the respondent.

11. The burden is now on the respondent to show that the appellant has used
    deception in his application. The document verification report dated 28
    May 2013 stated the following in  respect  of  the  "contact  history".
    "Tried searching contact details of Royal Electricals through  (address
    given-information satisfied under DPA  Act  1998)  however  no  details
    found. Tried searching details through the  address  mentioned  on  the
    letterhead but no details found. Also tried searching  details  through
    the company's name, Royal Electricals and found  that  it  is  situated
    (address given-information  satisfied  under  DPA  Act  1998)  and  was
    informed that they do not have a branch in Palej. Called  (the  number)
    (number mentioned on letterhead) and asked for the  appellant  but  was
    informed it is a wrong number and he disconnected the call".

12. The respondent has demonstrated by  the  Document  Verification  Report
    that the appellant has given false information  about  his  employment.
    The burden of proof now shifts onto the  appellant  to  show  that  his
    employment is genuine. There is no evidence other than the  appellant's
    own evidence and a letter from his employer  that  he  is  employed  in
    India. I place no reliance on the  letter  of  employment  and  instead
    placed reliance on the document verification report that the  appellant
    has not been truthful about his employment.

13. I therefore find that the appellant's application  stands  also  to  be
    refused in line with paragraph 320 (7A) of the Immigration Rules.

14. I find that there is an error of law in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal. I dismiss the appellant's appeal for the  reasons  given
    above. I remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

DECISION

    In the circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appellant's appeal is dismissed




    Signed by


    Mrs S Chana  Dated this 25th day of October 2015
    A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
