
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
VA/11388/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 October 2014                         |On 30 October 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                          ELVIRA SALGADOS MANGARON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: not represented
For the Respondent: Mr Nath Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou, promulgated on 4  July
   2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Rules.

3. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was  he  represented  at  the
   appeal. The sponsor Steven Hooton did not attend the hearing although  he
   was sent a notice of hearing. He emailed the court on 22  September  2014
   and told of his anger and frustration at the decision that  was  made  by
   the ECO , how long the appeal had taken to list, and  indicated  that  he
   wished to withdraw his wife's visit visa application as they  were  going
   to apply for a spouse visa. He was sent a notice by the court telling him
   that the case was listed for appeal as  the  Respondent  had  been  given
   permission to challenge the decision of the Judge  who  had  allowed  the
   appeal. He was told he could not withdraw the Respondent's appeal and  it
   would remain listed for hearing. He was advised  that  it  would  proceed
   taking into account what he had said.

4.  I am satisfied that due  notice  of  the  appeal  was  served  upon  the
   Appellant at the address that was given and upon  the  Sponsor.  Although
   the notice served on the Appellant herself was returned as undelivered  I
   am satisfied it was served at the last address given  to  the  court  and
   that the Sponsor was also served and was aware of the hearing date. I  am
   therefore satisfied that having been served notice of the hearing and not
   attended it is in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in
   the Appellant's absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph  38
   of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Background


5. The Appellant was born on  17  August  1971  and  is  a  citizen  of  the
   Philippines.
6. On 15 April 2013 the Appellant applied for entry clearance  as  a  family
   visitor in order to see her husband the sponsor Steven  Hooton  a  United
   Kingdom citizen she married  on  5  January  2013.  Her  application  was
   considered by reference to paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.
7. On 9 May the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  by
   reference to paragraph 41 9i) and (ii) of the Rules. The ECO  noted  that
   the Appellant was unemployed and totally reliant on her  husband  in  the
   United  Kingdom  for  financial  support  and  that  she   had   supplied
   insufficient evidence of her financial or social  standing  in  her  home
   country or that she had social ties by way of family members.


The Judge's Decision


8. The Appellant submitted grounds of appeal that  were  apparently  drafted
   by her  sponsor.  No  further  documentary  evidence  was  submitted.  He
   asserted that he and the Appellant intended to apply for a  spousal  visa
   and wished to see other again to build up evidence of their relationship;
   he advised the Appellant not to get a job as he would support  her;  they
   would not endanger the spousal visa by overstaying.
9.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Onofriou (hereinafter called "the Judge") decided the case
   on the papers and allowed the appeal against the  Respondent's  decision.
   The Judge accepted the assertions made in the grounds that they would not
   endanger the spousal  via  and  that  while  her  "circumstances  in  the
   Philippines may well not be particularly attractive  but  that  does  not
   necessarily mean that she is not a genuine visitor."
10. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  1  September  2014  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hollingworth gave permission to appeal.

11. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Nath  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

The Law

12.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law such that the decision should be set
   aside and remade.

15. The Respondent in the refusal letter asserted  that  the  Appellant  had
   failed to provide evidence of the social ties to her  home  country  that
   would encourage her to return in accordance with the terms of  any  visa.
   It was specifically stated that she had failed to establish the existence
   of a brother she claimed to have.  This  issue  would  have  been  easily
   addressed by documentary evidence. No such evidence was provided with the
   application or the grounds of appeal.  The  Judge  in  his  determination
   stated 'She has given evidence of her family in the  Philippines.'   This
   is  factually  incorrect:  the  Appellant  made  an  assertion  that  was
   challenged that she had a brother but no evidence was produced in  either
   documentary form nor did the sponsor attend court  to  give  evidence  of
   having met the brother.

16. The sponsor also asserted that he would not endanger  the  spousal  visa
   by allowing the Appellant to overstay. Again the  Judge  merely  accepted
   this assertion. There was no evidence in any form  before  the  Judge  to
   suggest that an application for a spousal visa would  inevitably  succeed
   and therefore no adequate reasons given why the  Judge  was  prepared  to
   accept this assertion.

17.  Given  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  her  circumstances   'were   not
   particularly attractive' in her home country I am not satisfied  that  he
   gave adequate reasons why  he  reached  the  conclusion  that  she  would
   return.

18. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  and  determine  the
   facts put in  issue  by  the  Respondent  ,  whether  the  Appellant  had
   sufficient social and economic ties to encourage her  to  return  to  the
   Philippines at the end of her proposed  trip constitutes a clear error of
   law. This error  I  consider  to  be  material  since  had  the  Tribunal
   conducted this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my
   view is the correct test to apply.

19. I am therefore found that errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination cannot stand and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
   entirety to be remade.

The Law
20. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance  of  probability.  I  have  determined  this
   matter based upon facts that were appertaining at the time  the  decision
   of the Entry Clearance Officer being constrained by Section 85(5) of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) I am entitled
   to take into account evidence of matters occurring after the date of  the
   decision providing that they relate to and  inform  an  understanding  of
   facts in existence at the time of the decision pursuant to DR    (Morocco
   ) [2005] UKIAT 00038.

21. The Appellant's appeal is pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

22. The appeal must be allowed if I find that  the  decision  against  which
   the appeal is brought was not in accordance with  the  law  or  with  the
   Immigration Rules. Otherwise I must dismiss the appeal.

Evidence
23. On the file I had the Respondent's  bundle.  The  Appellant  put  in  an
   appeal attaching the refusal notice, setting out the  Grounds  of  Appeal
   but no further documents provided. There  was  an  Explanatory  Statement
   from the Entry Clearance Officer which maintains the  refusal  and  sends
   the documents on to me.
Findings
24.  I  have  looked  at  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round  whether  I
   specifically refer to it or not.
25. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who applied  on  16  April
   2013 for entry clearance to visit the sponsor Stephen Hooton who  is  her
   husband who she married on 5 January 2013.
26. I accept that the Appellant was frank in her visa  application  in  that
   she accepted that she was entirely dependent on the sponsor who  provided
   financial support for her which was  evidenced  in  bank  statement.  She
   asserted that she had family in her  home  country  in  that  she  had  a
   brother, Renato Mangaron.
27. Given that the Appellant was entirely dependent  upon  her  husband  the
   sponsor and had not provided any documentary evidence of her  brother  or
   any other social or economic ties to  her  home  country  the  Respondent
   challenged that she had not met the evidential burden of showing that she
   would return at the end of her trip.
28. In the grounds the Appellant did not address the  issue  of  her  social
   ties to the Philippines and did not provide any evidence  in  documentary
   form that she had a brother as claimed.
29. The Appellant also suggested through the  sponsor  that  they  would  be
   applying for a spousal visa and would not endanger that application.  The
   Appellant bears the burden of proving her case. Had she provided evidence
   that they would inevitably succeed in a spouse application this  argument
   may have had some force but the Appellant and the sponsor elected to have
   the case dealt with on the papers without providing any further evidence.
   I am not persuaded that this may not have simply been a device to  secure
   entry to the United Kingdom when the spousal requirements cannot be met.
30. I am satisfied that Article 8 is not engaged by the  decision  as  there
   is a route by which the Appellant can join her husband and indeed he  can
   visit her in the Philippines.
 Conclusion
31. Taking all my findings into account I find that the  Appellant  has  not
   discharged the burden of proof on her to show that the terms of paragraph
   41 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules are met.
32. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.



Decision

33. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal such that the decision is set aside

34. I remake the appeal.

35. I dismiss the appeal under the Rules

  36. This appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8)



Signed                                                              Date
21.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell




