



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
VA/11798/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 July 2014                            |On 20 August 2014          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                            MRS BEGUM Mst SHAHNAJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Representation:
   For the appellant:      Mr A Kalam of Kalam Solicitors
   For the Respondent: Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer



   1.    The appellant is a 35 year  old  female  from  Bangladesh.  She  is
      married to Mr Abdus Sobhan, a  Bangladeshi  national  and  from  their
      marriage they have two children aged 17 and 14. She is a housewife but
      claims that receives an average monthly  income  of  28000  taka  from
      crops grown on land and rental income of CNG Vehicle. She applied  for
      an entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom with  her  son  Jubel
      Ahmed as a family visitor to visit  her  sister  for  one  month.  Her
      application was refused by the respondent and the case  papers  before
      me make no mention of the fate of Jubel Ahmed's  application.  He  too
      was presumably refused and as a dependant of his mother.  However  the
      decision to refuse does not state his name and in the notice of appeal
      either there is no  mention  of  Jubel  Ahmed  as  an  appellant.  The
      respondent refused the application because he was not  satisfied  that
      "it has been adequately established that the Appellant's circumstances
      in Bangladesh  are  as  claimed  and  that  their  intentions  are  as
      stated.."

   2.   The appellant's appeal against the decision was heard  on  15  April
      2014 at Birmingham by Judge Nixon, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal.
      Judge  Nixon  dismissed  the  appeal  for   reasons   given   in   his
      determination promulgated on 15 April 2004. The  determination  states
      that the sponsor gave evidence before him and was cross-examined.  The
      determination makes no satisfactory finding on that evidence.  However
      Judge Nixon concluded that "as there are unanswered  questions  as  to
      the appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh" she has "failed  to  show
      that she is a genuine visitor who intends to return at the end of  her
      trip." The unanswered questions relate solely to her financial means.

   3.   The appellant sought and was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal by Judge Mailer, a Judge of the First Tier  on  3  June
      2014. The grounds assert that the appellant's bundle contained a clear
      explanation at page 15 about the origin of the funds deposited in  her
      bank account. Crop receipts too had been produced as  had  many  other
      documents relevant to her financial circumstances but  the  Judge  had
      ignored these and had focussed on absence of documents  which  he  had
      assumed should have been available to  the  appellant  and  which  she
      should have produced (income tax returns).

   4.   For the appeal before me, Mr Kalam, the  appellant's  representative
      had filed written skeleton argument and copies of  Tribunal  decisions
      in Ogunkola [2002] UKIAT 02238 and AA and Others (Sector  Based  Work:
      General principles) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00026.

   5.    Mr Kalam relied upon his written skeleton argument  and  showed  by
      reference to the papers before Judge Nixon that material  evidence  on
      the appellant's financial circumstances had  been  overlooked  by  the
      Judge and that the Judge  had  erred  in  approving  the  respondent's
      decision which was based purely on suspicion and speculation.

   6.   For the respondent, Ms Pal did not challenge any of the  submissions
      made by     Mr Kalam. However she said that she would leave it  to  me
      to determine the validity of Mr Kalam's submissions.

   7.   I have reviewed  all  the  relevant  papers  and  I  find  that  the
      assertions made in the grounds of appeal are valid and these establish
      without a doubt that the decision of Judge Nixon was in material error
      of law for the reasons asserted. The Judge has made no real effort  in
      scrutinising the evidence that had been placed before the  respondent.
      He has gone along with the approach of the respondent that only strong
      proof of good financial circumstances of the appellant  can  discharge
      the burden of proof on the issue of intention to  return  following  a
      visit. That surely has no basis in  law.  The  fact  that  there  were
      "unanswered questions" as to the appellant's  finances  in  Bangladesh
      was  grossly  insufficient  for  the  Judge  to  conclude   that   the
      requirement on proving intention to return was not  established  given
      that the standard of proof required is on a balance of  probabilities.
      I find that the "unanswered questions" were matters of  detail  rather
      than substance.  In  the  circumstances  therefore  I  set  aside  the
      decision of Judge Nixon ad remake the decision. I  am  satisfied  that
      the appellant has discharged the burden of proof on the sole  disputed
      issue and that in respect of all other requirements the  evidence  has
      shown that these are met. The respondent also has not raised any issue
      on any of the other requirements under Rule 41. There is no reason  to
      doubt that the appellant is leaving behind her husband and children  -
      at the very least one child behind to visit her sister in the UK.  The
      reasons for the visit are credible and I am satisfied that she intends
      no more than a genuine visit of finite duration namely one month.

8.   The appeal is allowed.


FEE AWARD
Appeal having been allowed, I have considered whether there should be a  fee
award. I have concluded that the decision of  the  respondent  was  of  poor
quality and in the circumstances I make an award of full fees.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION
None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.






Judge Drabu
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal.
17 August 2014











