
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/11496/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 May 2014                             |On 5 June 2014             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                                  MRS MINDO
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                              INDIA (NEW DELHI)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

     For the Appellant:    Mr Omjeet Sidhu, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Immigration History

   1. The Appellant in this appeal was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing, decided on the papers on 26 February 2014.  However,
      for ease of reference, the  Appellant  and  Respondent  are  hereafter
      referred to as they were before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Therefore
      Mrs Mindo is referred to as the  Appellant  and  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer is referred to as the Respondent.

   2. The Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to
      refuse to grant her leave to enter the UK as a visitor under paragraph
      41 of HC395, as amended (the Immigration Rules) to visit her  brother,
      the Sponsor, was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lingham  (the
      Judge).

   3. In the grounds of application, the Respondent submitted that the Judge
      erred in failing to give adequate reasons for findings on  a  material
      matter because refusal of the Appellant's application was on the basis
      that she had been to the UK on two previous occasions and  had  stayed
      beyond the period of time that she said that she would stay in the UK.
      This therefore established that she did not intend to leave the UK  at
      the end of the period of the visit as stated by her  pursuant  to  the
      provisions of paragraph 41 (ii). It was also submitted that the  Judge
      referred to Sawmyden (family visitors -  considerations)  [2012]  UKUT
      161 (IAC) but it was unclear how this case related to  the  appeal  by
      the Appellant; in Sawmyden  at  [8]  there  is  reference  to  'family
      emergencies which are likely to result in longer visits should not  be
      regarded as taking up residence' but the  Respondent  had  not  argued
      that the Appellant was seeking to take up residence; the basis of  the
      refusal was that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph  41  (ii)  because  she  had  overstayed  on  two   previous
      occasions. The Appellant did not provide an explanation as to why  she
      overstayed on the two previous occasions.

   4. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that:

         a. The Judge failed to explain the  evidential  basis  for  finding
         that the Appellant was genuinely seeking to leave to enter for  the
         limited period stated by her (as stated  in  the  visa  application
         form) as required by paragraph 41 (i) and

         b. This finding was arguably  important  because  she  admitted  to
         having remained in the United Kingdom, on two  previous  occasions,
         for periods longer than those that she had declared when  she  made
         the relevant applications and she failed to provide an explanation.




 The Hearing

   5. Mr Smart handed up a copy of paragraph 41  and  provided  the  Sponsor
      with a copy of the relevant parts of paragraph 41 highlighted. He also
      handed up a copy of Sawmyden.

   6. The decision by the Judge to allow the appeal was made on  the  papers
      before him. The Sponsor attended the hearing  before  me  and  it  was
      clear that he had difficulty with expressing himself in English and it
      was not clear how much he could understand of what was being said.  Mr
      Smart, who had the advantage of seeing the Sponsor before  me,  stated
      that he had explained the reason why the  Respondent  was  challenging
      the decision of the Judge in simple terms and if  one  speaks  slowly,
      the Sponsor was able to understand.

   7. The Sponsor confirmed that Mr Smart had helped him to  understand  and
      it was apparent that he understood that the Respondent's objection was
      that the Judge had  not  considered  why  the  Appellant  had  on  two
      previous occasions stayed in the UK beyond the period of time she  had
      stated in the relevant visa applications because he said that  on  one
      occasion his sister had stayed for the opening of his  restaurant  and
      on the second occasion it was his mistake because the  visa  had  been
      granted for six months and he had thought that provided  she  returned
      within the six month period, she would be complying with the terms  of
      the visa.

   8. In  submissions,  Mr  Smart  essentially  relied  on  the  grounds  of
      application. He submitted that the Judge had stated, "The real concern
      of the respondent seems to relate to the appellant having extended her
      time of stay beyond that indicated  in  her  first  and  second  visit
      applications for visa to the UK.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  had
      stayed further than the  period  indicated  by  her  in  her  previous
      applications but on both applications the  appellant  did  not  remain
      beyond her grant of leave" [16].

   9. When asked whether the omission by the Judge was  material,  Mr  Smart
      stated that the ECO was entitled to know the reasons for the decision.

  10. In response, the Sponsor reiterated that it was his mistake  that  his
      sister had overstayed, that he had been in the UK  for  23  years  and
      sponsored many people who had returned within time.  His  brother  had
      come in October for a month and had stayed 27 days. He  did  not  want
      his sister's visa to be withheld because he had made a mistake.


Decision and Reasons

  11. Paragraph 41 (ii) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules provides:

      "41. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter the
      United Kingdom as a general visitor are that he:


         (i) is genuinely seeking entry as a general visitor for  a  limited
         period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months or not exceeding 12
         months in the case of  a  person  seeking  entry  to  accompany  an
         academic  visitor,  provided  in  the  latter  case   the   visitor
         accompanying the academic visitor has entry clearance; and


         (ii) intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  the  period
         of the visit as stated by him; and does  not  intend  to  live  for
         extended  periods  in  the  United  Kingdom  through  frequent   or
         successive visits;..."

  12. These provisions require the Appellant to establish that  she  intends
      to leave the UK "...at the end of the period of the  visit..."  stated
      by her. Whilst the main purpose of paragraph  41  is  to  ensure  that
      those who come to the UK as visitors do not  overstay  or  breach  the
      conditions of grant, one of the ways in which the assessment  is  made
      is by considering whether an applicant has previously been  in  breach
      of the provisions of the Immigration Rules. In the  Appellant's  case,
      she has been to the UK on two previous occasions, in  2007,  when  she
      stayed in the UK for a period of six months when  she  stated  on  her
      application that she would leave the UK at the end of  the  period  of
      two months. On the second occasion, in 2009, she was  refused  a  visa
      because she had stayed in the UK beyond the period of the visit stated
      by her in 2007, during which the ECO stated that she was  working  for
      her son. She appealed against that decision in 2009 and her appeal was
      allowed.

  13. The Appellant gave reasons, in her grounds of appeal  for  overstaying
      on "a previous visit" although which visit  was  not  identified.  She
      stated that this was because her son was to open a restaurant and  she
      extended her visit from two to four months. It is likely that this was
      the second occasion as the failure to leave the UK within  the  period
      stated by her during the first visit in 2007 is likely  to  have  been
      dealt with during  the  course  of  the  appeal  in  relation  to  the
      application in 2009.

  14. The Appellant has a history of failing to leave the UK at the  end  of
      the period of the visit stated by her in her visa  application  forms.
      As this issue had been previously raised to refuse a visa application,
      the Appellant should have been aware that if she failed  to  meet  the
      terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  next  visit,  any  future
      applications were likely to be refused. The ECO took issue with it  on
      the present application; he decided that the failure to abide  by  the
      terms of the  Immigration  Rules  taken  together  with  his  lack  of
      satisfaction as to her finances meant that she would not leave the  UK
      at the end of the period of the visit for which she is seeking  leave.
      She did not address it and the Judge did not do so either.  He  merely
      stated that this was one  of  the  reasons  why  her  application  was
      refused but made no findings on it. In the  context  of  her  previous
      failure to abide  by  the  Immigration  Rules,  I  accept  Mr  Smart's
      submission that an ECO is entitled to  know  the  reason  why  a  past
      breach of the Immigration Rules did not result in  a  finding  against
      the Appellant.

  15. There was no challenge to the findings of fact on other issues  raised
      in the notice of refusal and these are therefore preserved.

  16. As to the remaking of the decision, the Sponsor, who  is  not  legally
      qualified,  had  explained  in  submissions  why  the  Appellant   had
      overstayed on the second  occasion;  Mr  Smart  accepted  that  I  had
      sufficient evidence before me on which  to  remake  the  decision.  Mr
      Smart, very fairly to the Appellant, explained again  to  the  Sponsor
      the importance of ensuring that she returns within the period  of  the
      visit stated by her; if she required a longer period (up  to  the  six
      months permitted by paragraph 41) she should  stipulate  that  in  her
      visa application form. The Sponsor stated that he was now  aware  that
      she must adhere to the  provision  within  the  Immigration  Rules  to
      return to India within the period of the visit stated by  her  in  her
      visa application form and that they would ensure that she did.

  17.  There was nothing before me to indicate that the Sponsor  was  not  a
      credible witness and I accept his evidence that  the  reason  why  the
      Appellant overstayed  on  the  second  occasion  was  because  he  had
      persuaded her to. In view of the fact that he now knows what adherence
      to the Immigration Rules means, there is no excuse for staying  beyond
      the period stipulated by her on any future occasion.  He  stated  that
      other relatives had been to the UK and returned within the  period  of
      time stated by them. I find that  an  adequate  explanation  has  been
      provided.

  18. As all the findings of the Judge on other issues are preserved, on the
      evidence in the round I remake the decision to allow the appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules.


Decision

  19. It follows from the above that there is a material error of law in the
      decision of Judge Lingham. I set aside  his  decision.  I  remake  the
      decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


Anonymity

  20. The First-tier Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
      45(4)(i) of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
      and I see no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule 14 of
      the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision to there is no reason for me to change the fee
award made by Judge Lingham.




Signed                     Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
