
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/12457/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2014                                 |On 8 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                 FARHAM ALI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 17  February  2009.   He  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor together with  his  mother
    (Naveed Sajida).  Both he and his mother were refused  entry  clearance
    by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) Abu Dhabi  in  decisions  dated  9
    June 2013.  Both appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Hindson) which, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  16  April  2014,
    allowed the appeal of the mother  (Naveed  Sajida)  but  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  The appellant now appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The  grant  of  permission  by   Judge   Pirotta   is   based   on   a
    misapprehension.  Judge Lawrence (presumably sitting as a duty judge at
    Leicester) had found that there was no valid appeal  as  the  appellant
    proposed to visit a person not classified by  the  Immigration  Appeals
    (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Renton
    (exercising his powers as a member  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    oversight of the registry at Leicester) on 23 October  2013  set  aside
    the decision of Judge Lawrence and directed a hearing (on 9 April 2014)
    of the appellant's appeal together with that of his  mother.   However,
    following the decision of Judge Lawrence, the appellant (or rather, his
    litigation friend) had applied for judicial review of the decision.  No
    decision was taken on the application for  a  permission  for  judicial
    review.  Instead, the respondent had, in the light  of  Judge  Renton's
    decision,  invited  the  appellant  to  withdraw  the  application  for
    judicial review.  I have a draft consent order (which does not bear the
    signature  of  the  appellant's  solicitors)  which  provides  for  the
    claimant (the appellant) to have leave to withdraw the application  for
    judicial review with no order as to costs.  The sponsor (the  uncle  of
    the appellant and brother of Naveed Sajida told me at the hearing  that
    the judicial review proceedings had been compromised in accordance with
    the terms of the draft consent order.

3.   In the light of those matters, Judge Pirotta was not correct [3]  where
    she recorded that "the refusal letter did not give the appellant a full
    right of appeal whereas the decision of the  administrative  court  [on
    judicial review] restored his rights to a full appeal."  There  was  no
    such restoration of "rights to a full  appeal"  as  the  terms  of  the
    consent order made clear.  Rather, Judge Lawrence's decision that there
    was no valid appeal at all was replaced by an appeal on limited grounds
    (human rights)  under  the  provisions  of  Section  88A(3)(a)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   I find that Judge Hindson, who  heard  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  at  Bradford,  properly  understood  the  position   of   the
    appellant.  At [19-20], he wrote as follows:

     19. I now consider the position of the second  appellant.   His  appeal
             is limited to Article 8 grounds.  The effect of  the  decision
             in the case of Gulshan is that the Immigration Rules  are  the
             starting point in the decision making process.  Only if  there
             are arguably good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules
             will it be necessary to go on to consider the  position  under
             Article 8.

     20. In the instant case  I  can  find  no  such  grounds.   This  is  a
             straightforward case in which the appellant is precluded  from
             the right of appeal by virtue of the Regulations.   He  is  at
             liberty to make a further application and it seems to me  that
             is the correct approach.  I would, however  invite  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer to deal sympathetically with the position of
             the second appellant given that I have allowed the  appeal  of
             his mother.

5.   That assessment was clearly open to the judge on  the  evidence  before
    him.  The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal make  no  direct
    reference to human rights although at [10] the grounds do refer to  the
    "importance of family visits ...  the  appellants  and  their  sponsors
    being family members emotionally dependent upon each other and  wanting
    to see each other on a frequent basis."  There was nothing  at  all  in
    the evidence or the grounds of appeal before Judge Hindson which  might
    have justified allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     I agree with Judge Hindson  that  the  result  is  rather  harsh,  the
    appellant's mother acquiring entry clearance but (as the  sponsor  told
    me at the hearing) not being able or willing to take up  her  visa  she
    could not also travel with her child.  Whilst, in the circumstances and
    in the light of this determination, one might expect an Entry Clearance
    Officer to look favourably on any future application by  the  appellant
    for a visit visa, this appeal must, for the reasons I outline above, be
    dismissed.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 8 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

