
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/12579/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th June 2014                              |On 12th Aug 2014             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                              MD HABIBUL ISLAM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - (DHAKA)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hasan of Kalam Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Herbert promulgated on the 14th  January  2014,  following  a
        hearing at Taylor House on 23rd December 2013, in which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal against the  refusal  of  an  Entry  Clearance
        Officer (ECO) to grant to the Appellant leave to enter  the  United
        Kingdom for the purposes of a family visit.


     2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on the 31st  December
        1989. The ECO reviewed the documents provided  in  support  of  the
        application and noted a number of trade licences had been  produced
        at least one of which, based upon information set out in a document
        verification report, was found not to be genuine and  not  to  have
        been issued by  the  appropriate  authorities  in  Bangladesh.  The
        application was therefore referred to an  Entry  Clearance  Manager
        and refused under the provisions  of  paragraph  320  (7A)  of  the
        Immigration Rules.


     3. The evidence before the Judge from the UK-based  sponsor  was  that
        other trade licences had been prepared and that  in  the  sponsor's
        view none of those were false and  that  they  wanted  the  ECO  to
        contact the trade license organisation who  would  then  provide  a
        written reply [4]. The Judge found the document verification report
        provided clear evidence that the licensing authority had no records
        of any trade licences being issued over a stated reference  number.
        The clothing licence relied upon by the Appellant  in  relation  to
        Islam Cloth Store was outside the issued serial  number  and  there
        was no information before the Judge that since this was brought  to
        the Appellant's intention that any mistake had been remedied by the
        licensing authority. The Judge concluded that on the basis  of  the
        available information the appeal should be dismissed.


     4. The application for permission to appeal  alleges  legal  error  in
        relation to the burden and standard of proof which is said  to  lie
        upon the ECO, an  assertion  that  the  Respondent's  own  guidance
        states  that  independent  evidence  needs  to   be   obtained   to
        corroborate the allegation and that the failure to follow their own
        published guidance amounts to legal error, that the Judge erred  as
        the document verification report indicates verification following a
        telephone conversation rather than the documents  physically  being
        submitted for verification, failure by the Judge  to  consider  the
        evidence "in the round", the failure to make  credibility  findings
        in respect of the Appellants evidence, inadequate reasoning, and  a
        perverse conclusion.


     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis the Judge had made an arguable legal error by
        failing to indicate expressly or otherwise that the onus of proving
        falsity or deception falls upon the Respondent.



Error of law


     6. It is not necessary for permission to appeal to be granted  to  the
        Upper Tribunal on the basis of an alleged failure to refer  to  the
        appropriate burden and standard  of  proof  if  a  reading  of  the
        determination clearly shows that that correct burden standard  were
        applied by the Judge in reaching his or her decision.


     7. In the determination under challenge the Judge states in  paragraph
        5 that "The burden of proof rests on the appellant and the standard
        of proof is on a balance of  probabilities".  Whilst  that  may  be
        correct in relation  to  the  question  of  whether  an  individual
        applicant is able to satisfy the requirements  of  the  immigration
        rule they seek to rely upon, where it  is  the  Respondent  who  is
        asserting that the documents are forged the burden passes to  them.
        It is  arguable  therefore  that  the  Judge  may  appear  to  have
        misdirected himself in law. Even if this is the case, I do not find
        it has  been  established  before  this  Tribunal  that  the  Judge
        proceeded to apply the wrong test. What the  Judge  states  in  the
        determination is that the assertion the documents are  forged/false
        is corroborated by the document verification report provided by the
        ECO. That report, a copy of which has been made available,  clearly
        states that an official of the relevant union body  confirmed  that
        the trade license is not genuine, that it does not exist, and  that
        the trade license number 1190 does not  appear  in  their  registry
        book. The Judge was satisfied, based upon the information provided,
        that the Respondent had discharged  the  burden  of  proof  to  the
        required standard. No legal error is proved.


     8. Before the Tribunal Mr Hasan also submitted legal error by the  ECO
        failing to follow policy  guidance  by  reference  to  a  flowchart
        providing guidance to decision makers when considering a  paragraph
        320 (7A) deception case. It is accepted that when an allegation  of
        forged or false documents is made the nature of the evidence to  be
        provided needs to be  good  evidence  upon  which  the  appropriate
        weight can be placed. The  flowchart  indicates  that  where  false
        documents are suspected the decision  maker  can  either  call  the
        applicant in for interview or send the  document  for  verification
        and prepare a verification report. The  next  stage,  if  there  is
        positive evidence of deception, is that the decision maker  has  to
        consider whether it is demonstrated to a high standard and possibly
        discuss this with an Entry Clearance Manager and  consider  whether
        there could be non-disclosure by "innocent mistake".


     9. The document relied upon in support of this  submission  is  not  a
        policy document which creates a legally binding obligation upon the
        decision  maker  to  follow  but  merely   guidance   provided   to
        caseworkers as to the practical steps they need to follow to ensure
        that the decision made is correct. I find no arguable merit in  the
        submission that as the procedural guidance to caseworkers  suggests
        that a suspected document should be sent for verification, there is
        arguable  legal  error  in  the  decision  maker  telephoning   the
        appropriate authority to whom the document  would  be  sent  rather
        than actually sending it, and obtaining confirmation by such means.
         The question is whether the alleged error/issue is one capable  of
        being clarified in this way.  In this case the  trade  license  was
        found not to be genuine as a result of  its  reference  number  not
        being  recorded  as  having  been  issued  and  it  has  not   been
        established before this Tribunal that this is a matter  that  could
        not have been verified by way  of  direct  telephone  contact.   No
        legal error in the Judge's decision in accepting  the  verification
        report provided to the First-tier Tribunal has been established  on
        this basis.


    10. The submission that the quality of the evidence was  poor  such  as
        not to  corroborate  the  assertion  has  no  arguable  merit.  The
        evidence is clearly  set  out  in  the  decision  notice  which  is
        corroborated by the document  verification  report.  That  evidence
        clearly supports the finding that one of  the  trade  licences  was
        never issued by the relevant authorities and is therefore  a  false
        document. The Judge considered that evidence  with  the  degree  of
        care required, that of anxious scrutiny, and gave adequate  reasons
        for the findings reached. In such circumstances the  weight  to  be
        given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge and no legal error
        is proved. The submission that the document verification report  is
        not evidence has no arguable merit. The fact other  trade  licences
        may have been genuine is not material as the engagement of  320(7A)
        is not dependant upon a proportionate assessment of the  number  of
        genuine verses false licences.


    11. The statement by the Judge that  there  was  no  rebuttal  evidence
        provided is factually correct and it is clear that  no  application
        for an adjournment was made to enable a direction to be sought  for
        such material to be produced. Mr Hasan submitted that the  Chairman
        of the Trade License Board would only give such information if  the
        court directs but if no application is made for  such  a  direction
        the Judge cannot be criticised and no  legal  procedural  error  is
        established.


    12. What is clear is that the Appellant submitted a number of documents
        at least one of which was found to  be  forged.  The  finding  upon
        which such conclusion is based is adequately supported by  evidence
        in a document verification report. As the Appellant  submitted  the
        application and signed the application form  confirming  everything
        contained therein in relation  to  the  application  is  true,  the
        necessary mens rea is established. Any such intent to  deceive  can
        be that of the applicant or a third party.


    13. Having considered the decision, evidence available  to  the  Judge,
        and submissions made, I am not satisfied that  any  arguable  legal
        error  material  to  the  decision   under   challenge   has   been
        established.

Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 12th August 2014



