
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
                                             VA/12258/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 1 July and 9 September 2014                 On 10 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                    Beirut
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Rim Walid Azzi
                         (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     1/7/14 - Mr G Jack;
      9/9/14 - Mr S Whitwell.
For the Respondent:            No appearance on either day.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I initially heard this appeal on 1 July 2014 when I found  that  there
      was an error of law and gave consequent directions.  The  text  of  my
      written Determination prepared on the same date and promulgated  on  7
      July 2014 is set out below as an Appendix for ease of  reference.  The
      case was re-listed before me  pursuant  to  my  earlier  decision  and
      Directions.


   2. I continue herein to refer to the ECO as the Respondent, and  Ms  Azzi
      as the Appellant.


No appearance

   3. There was again today no appearance by or on behalf of the  Appellant.
      I  am  satisfied  that  due  notice  of  the  hearing  was  given.  No
      explanation for non-attendance on behalf of  the  Appellant  has  been
      received by the Tribunal. Indeed the Appellant has  not  engaged  with
      the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal at all, and  in  particular  has
      not made any response to the Directions given in July. For essentially
      the same reasons as  given  previously  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
      appropriate to proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.


Consideration

   4. In my error of law  determination  I  concluded  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had been in error in limiting the scope of  the  appeal
      to human  rights  grounds,  based  on  the  date  of  the  Appellant's
      application being 20 June 2013 (i.e. prior to the  changes  that  came
      into effect on 25 June 2013). However, my attention has now been drawn
      to the case of Kaur (Entry Clearance -  date  of  application)  [2013]
      UKUT 00381 (IAC) in which it was clarified that the effective date  of
      an application for entry clearance is the date on which payment of the
      relevant fee is made. In this particular  case  the  Appellant  whilst
      making her application online on 20 June 2013 did  not  in  fact  make
      payment of the fee until 25 June 2013. It follows that the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was not in error in identifying that the scope  of  the
      appeal was limited to human rights grounds. This is  a  jurisdictional
      issue, and accordingly effect must be given to it notwithstanding  the
      earlier promulgation of my decision identifying error of law  in  this
      regard.


   5. It follows that the outstanding issue  before  me  is  in  respect  of
      Article 8 of the ECHR. Necessarily the  'error  of  law'  decision  in
      respect of the deficiency of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings
      and reasoning stands.


   6. Neither party has complied with the 'Consequent  Directions'.  In  the
      circumstances this means there is no material  before  me  that  might
      justify the substance of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion in
      respect of Article 8. It follows that I find  the  deficiency  of  the
      Judge's reasoning to be a  material  error:  looking  at  all  of  the
      available material it is not possible to discern  on  what  basis  the
      Judge reached his conclusion, or  otherwise  to  conclude  it  was  an
      obvious conclusion open to the Judge.


   7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal requires to be set  aside  and
      remade accordingly.


   8. I proceed to remake the  decision  without  a  further  hearing:  both
      parties have had ample opportunity to file any  relevant  evidence  in
      support of their respective cases.


   9. The Appellant has  not  provided  any  representations  or  evidential
      material upon which it would be possible to undertake an evaluation of
      the quality of any family life that might be shared  between  her  and
      her husband's UK based family members. Nor  is  anything  provided  to
      suggest that the Appellant's son (whether in the company of his father
      or otherwise) would be unable to visit his relatives in the UK in  the
      event that his mother was denied entry clearance, in  such  a  way  as
      would amount to an interference  with  his  or  anybody  else's  human
      rights grave enough to engage Article 8.


  10. In the circumstances the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Decision

  11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  12. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     9 September 2014



(Appendix attached)










                                  APPENDIX

   Text of 'error of law' Determination herein promulgated on 7 July 2014



                         DETERMINATION: ERROR OF LAW

                            CONSEQUENT DIRECTIONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Trevaskis promulgated on 14 April  2014,  allowing  Ms  Azzi's  appeal
      against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision dated 9  July  2013  to
      refuse entry clearance as a visitor.


   2. Although the ECO is the appellant  before  me,  and  Ms  Azzi  is  the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to  the  ECO  as  the
      Respondent, and Ms Azzi as the Appellant.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of the Lebanon born on 4 January 1971. She
      applied for entry clearance to make a six-day holiday visit to the  UK
      between 10 - 15  July  2013,  travelling  with  her  husband  Mr  Mark
      Dickinson (to whom she was married on 3 April  2004),  and  their  son
      Alexander (date  of  birth  13  April  2010),  who  are  both  British
      citizens.


   4. The application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision dated 9 July 2013.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   6. The Appellant's appeal was allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 14 April  2014  on
      human rights grounds.


   7. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
      which was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bartlett  on  21  May
      2014.




No appearance

   8. There was no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.  The
      Appellant herself has been denied entry to the UK; however her husband
      is a British citizen and may enter freely;  further  her  husband  has
      family members present in the UK; moreover it is always  open  to  the
      Appellant to instruct a representative. I am satisfied that due notice
      of the hearing was given. No explanation for non-attendance on  behalf
      of the Appellant has been received by the Tribunal. In this context  I
      note that the Appellant elected to have her appeal before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal considered without a hearing: it seems likely  that  she
      similarly preferred to  have  the  appeal  dealt  with  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal in her  absence.  In  any  event  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant has been afforded an opportunity to be  represented  at  the
      hearing, and has also been afforded an opportunity to forward  to  the
      Tribunal any representations or documents that she might wish to  rely
      upon in the appeal. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that it is
      appropriate to proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.

Error of Law

   9. I find that the Judge erred in law in the following respects:

(i) He cited the wrong regulations at  paragraph  3  in  respect  of  family
      members, the relevant regulations being the 2012 Regulations, not  the
      2003 Regulations. (This is unlikely to have been a material error.)

(ii) Although the Judge identified, at paragraph 5, that for a family  visit
      visa application made on or after 25 June 2013 a right of appeal would
      be limited to grounds of racial  discrimination  or  breach  of  human
      rights, he failed to identify that  the  Appellant's  application  was
      made on-line on 20 June 2013. Accordingly the Judge should have  given
      consideration to the appeal within the scope of the Immigration  Rules
      before proceeding to an analysis under Article 8.

(iii) The Judge's reasoning in respect of Article 8 was devoid  of  adequate
      findings and thereby reasoning. There were no findings in  respect  of
      the quality of family life supposedly shared between the Appellant and
      her husband's UK based family members. The Judge did not  explain  why
      the Appellant's son would be otherwise unable to visit  his  relatives
      in the UK in the event that his mother was denied entry clearance  for
      a 6-day holiday.


Future Conduct of the Appeal

  10. The materials before the Upper Tribunal appear to  be  incomplete.  In
      particular:

(i) The Entry Clearance Manager Review of 14  November  2013  indicates  the
      documents  that  were  submitted  with  the  application.   Of   these
      documents, the letter of sponsorship is missing from the materials  on
      file.

(ii) The ECM Review also indicates that all of the  documents  specified  on
      the Notice of Appeal were submitted with the appeal.  These  documents
      include bank statements for six months, which are not on file.


  11. I consider it inappropriate to determine the materiality of the errors
      of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  and  further  and  in  any  event,
      inappropriate to proceed to remake the decision in the appeal, in  the
      absence of the materials identified above.

  12. In the circumstances I adjourn the appeal reserved to myself with  the
      Directions as set out below.


Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law.


  14. The decision as to whether or not to set aside  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, and  if  so  the  remaking  of  the  decision  is
      reserved to be  determined  at  a  further  hearing  pursuant  to  the
      following Direction.


      Consequent Directions

      1. The appeal is adjourned part-heard, reserved to me,  to  be  listed
      for hearing at Field House on the first available  date  in  September
      2014.

      2. The Respondent is to file and serve within 21 days of  the  sending
      of this Determination a bundle comprising all such documents  as  were
      submitted with the Appellant's application and all such  documents  as
      were submitted with her Notice of Appeal. If any such documents as are
      listed in the ECM review are not  available  to  the  Respondent,  the
      Respondent is to file and serve a statement to this effect within  the
      same timeframe.

      3. The Appellant should not assume that the  Respondent  will  provide
      the  documents  /  information  identified  above.  Accordingly,   the
      Appellant is also to file and serve within 21 days of the  sending  of
      this Determination a bundle comprising  all  such  documents  as  were
      submitted with the Appellant's application and all such  documents  as
      were submitted with her Notice of Appeal.

      4. The Appellant is reminded that it is open  to  her  to  attend  the
      hearing by way of a representative. If she does not intend to instruct
      anybody to appear at the  next  hearing  on  her  behalf,  she  should
      communicate as much to the Tribunal when replying to the Directions at
      paragraph 3 above.

