

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: VA 12138-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.03.2014|
|on    31.03.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |03.04.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                  MMR HAFEZ
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Amir Fouladvand (working under the supervision of
MAAS)
For the respondent: Mr D Mills

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Shahzad Aziz), sitting at Hatton Cross on 3 January, to
     a family visit appeal by a citizen of Egypt, born 1 August 1992. Since
    the appellant's mother and sister had only limited leave to  remain  in
    this country, he had a right of appeal only on human rights grounds.

 2. The judge allowed his appeal on article  8  grounds,  without  dealing,
    even in passing, with any of the recent authorities  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, the Administrative Court, or this Tribunal about cases of  this
    kind: of course there would have been nothing wrong with that, so  long
    as he had made it clear that he was following the principles laid  down
    in them.



 3. Those authorities start, in order  of  importance,  with  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, where the Court of Appeal considered the  meaning
    of 'exceptional circumstances' in paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  'new
    Rules' (in force from 9 July 2012) made it necessary  for  cases  which
    did not satisfy them to be 'exceptional', applying  expressly  only  to
    deportation cases.  There  had  already  been  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), and Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) was to come. However, the parties before
    me did not find it necessary to refer in detail to any decision,  apart
    from MF (Nigeria) itself,  and  to  Shahzad  (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
    Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC).

 4. The relevant part of the judicial head-note in Shahzad  is this:

         (iv)       MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  held  that  the  new
             immigration rules regarding deportation of a  foreign  criminal
             are  a  complete  code.  This  was  because  of   the   express
             requirement  in  them  at  paragraph  398  to  have  regard  to
             exceptional circumstances and other factors.

         (v) It follows from this that any other rule which has a  similar
             provision will also constitute a complete code;

         (vi)       Where an area of the  rules  does  not  have  such  an
             express mechanism, the approach in R  (Nagre)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-
             [31] in particular) and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
             correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)  should  be  followed:
             i.e. after applying the requirements  of  the  rules,  only  if
             there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to
             consider  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances   not
             sufficiently recognised under them.

 5. In plain language, the process to be followed by judges in cases of the
    present kind is this:

          a) first decide whether the application satisfies the requirements
             of the Rules; if so, allow the appeal on  that  basis,  but  if
             not, then

          b) consider whether  "there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
             granting leave to remain outside them";  if  not,  dismiss  the
             appeal, but if so, then

          c) "go on to consider whether there are  compelling  circumstances
             not sufficiently recognised under them"; if  not,  dismiss  the
             appeal, but if so, then

          d) decide it on the result of the conventional article 8 balancing
             exercise.

 6. The judge did not answer the question posed  at  (c),  because  he  had
    neglected to inform himself of the present state of the law, relying as
    he did on MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC),
    since overruled by the Court of  Appeal.  In  those  circumstances,  Mr
    Fouladvand agreed that the decision on  the  appellant's  human  rights
    grounds needed to be re-made.

 7. There was another issue before the  judge,  as  to  the  Home  Office's
    contention that the application had to be refused on the basis  of  320
    (7B) of the Immigration Rules, in force at the  date  of  the  decision
    under appeal in this  case,  which  made  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    mandatory for

      (d) using Deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to
      enter or remain (whether successful or not);

      unless the applicant:

           (i) Overstayed for 28 days or less and left the UK voluntarily,
           not at the expense (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary of
           State;

           (ii) used Deception in an application for entry clearance more
           than 10 years ago;

           (iii) left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense (directly or
           indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 12 months ago;

           (iv) left the UK voluntarily, at the expense (directly or
           indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 5 years ago, or

           (v) was removed or deported from the UK more than 10 years ago.

 8. This contention was based on the appellant's  having  made  a  previous
    visit application in 2012, saying he only had an uncle in this country;
    but he had come here in 2011 with his mother and daughter,  who  stayed
    on to claim asylum. Unlike the rest of the case,  here  the  burden  of
    proof was on the entry clearance officer, and the judge dealt with  the
    issue  at  paragraphs  43  -  44.  He  noted   that   the   appellant's
    representative had required strict proof of  the  deception  used;  but
    counsel for the Home Office had no copy of the  appellant's  2012  visa
    application form with him; so the judge was "not  persuaded"  that  the
    application fell to be refused under paragraph 320 (7B).

 9. Mr Mills nevertheless argued that this was not a final decision on  the
    paragraph 320 (7B) point, which remained open for one to be made on the
    re-hearing which would be required, as discussed at 3 - 7. As I pointed
    out, there was no challenge to the judge's findings on  this  point  in
    the Home Office grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  nor  had
    permission been given on it. In those circumstances, this part  of  the
    judge's decision is not before me, and anything I might say on it would
    be obiter.

10. However, in my view the judge was fully entitled  to  expect  that  the
    Home Office should disclose the visa application  form  on  which  they
    relied, and which would have been  in  their  custody  ever  since  the
    appellant sent it in. They ought to have put all the evidence on  which
    they relied before the judge in the first place, and, if they wished to
    challenge his decision on it, to have  done  so  in  their  grounds  of
    appeal to this Tribunal.


11. It will be for the judge who sits on the fresh hearing I  am  about  to
    direct to consider whether this  ground  is  still  open  to  the  Home
    Office; but the least they can do is to file and  serve  that  evidence
    now.

Home Office appeal  by consent
Decision to be re-made following fresh hearing in First-tier  Tribunal  (not
before Judge Aziz)
Fresh judge to decide whether paragraph 320 (7B) point  still  available  to
Home Office, and, if so, to deal with it on its merits
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



