

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/12313/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 06 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MANLIKA ALLEN

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Allen, Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against a decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Kempton) allowing Manlika Allen's appeal  against
      the ECO's decision taken on 20 May 2013 to refuse her entry  clearance
      as a visitor under para  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended).

   2. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Thailand who was born on  7  June  1991.
      In 2008 the appellant met David  Allen,  a  British  citizen  who  was
      visiting  Thailand.   A  relationship  was  established  between   the
      appellant and Mr Allen.   On 24 May 2011, their daughter,  Sophie  was
      born in Thailand.   She  is  a  British  citizen.  In  May  2013  they
      underwent a traditional Thai marriage.

   4. The appellant and Mr Allen have a house in Thailand which was paid for
      by Mr Allen.  Mr Allen financially  supports  the  appellant  and  his
      daughter in Thailand.  He has made over 20 trips to Thailand to  visit
      his wife and (since her birth) their daughter.

   5. On 28 December 2011, the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
      clearance to visit Mr Allen in the UK.  That application  was  refused
      because, as I understand it,  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant  met  the  requirements  of  para  41.    In   making   that
      application, the appellant stated that she had no criminal convictions
      when in fact, she had a conviction in Thailand in 2009 for  driving  a
      motor scooter whilst under the influence of alcohol.  But, as  I  say,
      that application was not refused on the basis of a failure to disclose
      that conviction.

   6. The appellant's current application for entry clearance  to  visit  Mr
      Allen was made on 2 May 2013.   It  was  completed  online.   In  that
      application, at question  96  the  appellant  discloses  her  criminal
      conviction in the following terms:

           "2009 alcohol whilst driving motorbike.  2500 BHT fine and clean
           temple 3 hour".

   7. On 20 May 2013, the ECO refused the appellant's application for  entry
      clearance.  First, he did so under the mandatory refusal provision  in
      para 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules on the basis of the  appellant's
      failure  to  disclose  her  criminal  conviction  in  her  2011  entry
      clearance application.  Secondly, the ECO was  not  satisfied  on  the
      evidence presented of the relationship between the  appellant  and  Mr
      Allen and further  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  visitor  who
      intended to leave at the end of her visit.  Consequently, the ECO  was
      not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements  in  para  40(i)
      and (ii) of the Rules.   On  22  October  2013,  the  Entry  Clearance
      Manager confirmed the ECO's decision.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

   8. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She  did  not
      request an oral hearing and so the appeal was determined on the papers
      by Judge Kempton in a determination promulgated on 3 February 2014.

   9. In his determination,  Judge  Kempton  concluded  that  the  mandatory
      refusal provision in para 320(7B) did not apply on the basis that  the
      appellant's failure to disclose her 2009 conviction had not  succeeded
      in her obtaining entry clearance. Judge Kempton went on to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules but, in  doing  so,  he
      made no findings in relation to the  substantive  requirement  of  the
      Rules in para 41.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  10. The ECO sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  two
      grounds.  First, the Judge had misapplied para 320(7B): the fact  that
      the 2011 application had been unsuccessful was not  relevant  and  the
      appellant had not  made  an  "honest  mistake"  as  she  knew  of  her
      conviction and had failed to disclose it.   Secondly,  the  Judge  had
      erred in law by allowing the appellant's  appeal  without  considering
      whether the appellant met the substantive requirements of para 41,  in
      particular whether she was a genuine visitor.

  11. On 9 April 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro)  granted  the
      ECO permission to appeal on  both  grounds.   Thus,  the  appeal  came
      before me.

  12. The appellant was unrepresented but Mr Allen, the sponsor attended the
      hearing and spoke on the appellant's behalf.  The ECO was  represented
      by Mr McVeety.

  13. Mr McVeety submitted that the Judge had  misconstrued,  and  therefore
      misapplied, para 320(7B) in  paragraph  11  of  his  determination  by
      concluding that it did not apply because the appellant's deception  in
      the earlier application had not been successful.   In  any  event,  Mr
      McVeety  submitted  that  the  Judge  could  not  properly  allow  the
      appellant's appeal under para 41 without first  deciding  whether  the
      requirements of para 41 were, in fact, met.  The Judge  had  not  done
      so.

  14. Mr Allen explained that in 2009 the appellant had made an  application
      through a Thai representative/consultant.  She and the  appellant  had
      told the representative  about  the  appellant's  2009  drink  driving
      offence but the consultant, who had completed  the  application  form,
      said that it was not enough to stop the appellant  obtaining  a  visa.
      Consequently, it was not included on the form.

  15. Mr Allen told me that in her most recent application, he had completed
      this online and he had included the conviction.

  16. In reply, Mr McVeety indicated that,  given  Mr  Allen's  explanation,
      there was no reason why, if I concluded that the Judge had  misapplied
      para 320(7B), I could not conclude that there had been  no  dishonesty
      by the appellant or her representatives with the consequence that para
      320(7B) did not apply.  Mr McVeety indicated  that,  if  that  was  my
      conclusion, he was content for me to decide whether the appellant  met
      the requirements of para 41 on the basis of the evidence.

Paragraph 320(7B)

  17. Paragraph 320(7B) of the  Rules  provides,  so  far  as  relevant,  as
      follows:

           "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter  the  United
           Kingdom is to be refused

           ...(7B)     where the applicant has previously breached the UK's
                 immigration laws and was over 18 at the time  of  his  most
                 recent breach by:

                 ...(d)      using Deception in  an  application  for  entry
                       clearance, leave to enter or remain, or in  order  to
                       obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a
                       third party required in support  of  the  application
                       (whether successful or not)..."

  18. The effect  of  the  application  of  that  provision  is  that  entry
      clearance must be refused unless the  deception  was  used  for  entry
      clearance "more than 10 years' ago" (see para 320 (7B)(i)).

  19. The word "Deception" is defined in para 6 of the Rules as follows:

           "'Deception' means making false  representations  or  submitting
           false documents (whether or not material to the application), or
           failing to disclose material facts".

  20. In the context of the  mandatory  refusal  provisions,  the  Court  of
      Appeal considered the meaning of "Deception" in A v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA
      Civ 773.  At [51] Rix LJ (with whom Longmore  and  Jacob  LJJ  agreed)
      concluded that "Deception" required proof of "dishonesty".  The  Court
      of Appeal acknowledged that this required an individual  to  knowingly
      make a false representation (the Deception).

Error of Law

  21. It is clear that para 320(7B)(d) applies in a case where Deception  is
      used in a previous  application  for  entry  clearance  even  if  that
      application was ultimately unsuccessful. That might arise because  the
      Deception was detected and so the  refusal  was  on  that  basis,  for
      example under para 320(7A) or because the application was  refused  on
      other grounds as in  this  appeal.   That  plainly  follows  from  the
      wording of para 320(7B)(d) which applies where deception is  used  "in
      an application for entry clearance ....(whether successful  or  not)".
      It follows that Judge Kempton fell into error in paragraphs 11 and  12
      of his determination where he said this:

           "11.   ....The  Rule  goes  on  to  make  reference  to  various
                 exceptions to the Rule and most  of  these  relate  to  the
                 assumption  that  the  applicant  was  successful   in   an
                 application by way of deception and travelled  to  the  UK,
                 but did in fact leave within the requisite  timescale  etc.
                 In this case the appellant was  not  granted  her  previous
                 application in any event, on other grounds.   She  did  not
                 appeal the application but instead decided to wait and make
                 another application.  In the circumstances,  the  appellant
                 has not benefitted in any way from  the  non-disclosure  of
                 the conviction on the  previous  application.   Technically
                 she ought to have insisted to her legal  advisor  that  she
                 needed to mention that conviction as that is what the  form
                 asks for.

           12.   It appears somewhat draconian to say  that  the  appellant
                 has in fact used deception when in fact she did not benefit
                 and has never been to the UK. ..."

  22.  In  principle,  in  my  judgement  para  320(7B)(d)  applied  to  the
      appellant's circumstances even though her 2011 application  (in  which
      it is said a deception was used) was unsuccessful.

  23. For that reason the Judge's decision to allow the  appellant's  appeal
      cannot stand.

  24. In any event, even if he had been correct  on  his  interpretation  of
      para 320(7B)(d), the Judge could not properly allow the  appeal  under
      para 41 without considering, and finding  in  the  appellant's  favour
      that she met, the substantive requirements of para 41  which  the  ECO
      did not accept were met.

  25. Consequently, I now turn to remake the  decision  under  para  320(7B)
      and, if relevant, under para 41 also.

Remaking the Decision

  26. In relation to para 320(7B)(d) as I have already indicated Mr  McVeety
      saw no reason why I could not decide that "dishonesty"  had  not  been
      established even though Mr McVeety  did  not  concede  this  issue  on
      behalf of the ECO.

  27. It  is,  of  course,  for  the  ECO  to  establish  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that para 320(7B)(d) applied to the appellant.

  28. Both the appellant and Mr Allen have, throughout, given  a  consistent
      account of  how  the  appellant's  2009  conviction  came  not  to  be
      disclosed in her 2011 application.  They had consulted representatives
      in Thailand (whom Mr Allen told me included a British representative);
      they told the representative about the appellant's 2009 conviction for
      drink driving and were told that it was not sufficient to prevent  the
      appellant obtaining her visa and, when the consultants  completed  the
      application, that conviction was not disclosed.

  29. The requirement of "dishonesty" accepted by the Court of Appeal in the
      A case requires, in my judgement both knowledge of the facts which are
      said to amount to the deception and also an intent to deceive.

  30. For present purposes, I am content to assume that dishonesty either by
      the appellant or her representatives would suffice even though that is
      not explicitly stated in para 320(7B) but is,  by  contrast,  in  para
      320(7A) when considering false representations etc made in  a  current
      application.

  31. In this case, the Secretary of State has  failed  to  establish  on  a
      balance of probabilities dishonesty by either  the  appellant  or  her
      legal representatives.  What was done here  was  a  mistake  born,  at
      worst,  from   incompetence   by   those   advising   the   appellant.
      Incompetence alone is not the equivalent  of  dishonesty.   I  am  not
      satisfied that either the  appellant  or  representative  intended  to
      deceive the  ECO  by  failing  to  disclose  the  2009  drink  driving
      conviction of the appellant in Thailand.  The appellant and  Mr  Allen
      relied upon the advice they received  from  their  representatives  in
      applying   for   entry   clearance.    Those   representatives   were,
      undoubtedly, mistaken that the appellant was not required to  disclose
      her 2009 conviction.  There  is,  however,  nothing  in  the  evidence
      sufficient to discharge the burden of proof  upon  the  ECO  that  the
      advice was other than mistaken such that it can be inferred that there
      was dishonesty, though not personally by the appellant, on her behalf.



  32. For these reasons, therefore, I am not satisfied that para 320(7B)  of
      the Rules applies to the appellant.

  33. I now turn, therefore, to consider  the  substantive  requirements  of
      para 41 of the Rules which, so far as relevant, state as follows:

           "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave  to  enter
           the United Kingdom as a general visitor are that he:

              i) is genuinely seeking entry  as  a  general  visitor  for  a
                 limited  period  as  stated  by  him,  not  exceeding   six
                 months;...and

             ii) intends to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the
                 period of the visit as stated by him;..."

  34. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish on a balance of
      probabilities that she met the requirements of the Rules at  the  date
      of decision.

  35. In his decision, the ECO refused  the  appellant's  application  under
      para 41(i) and (ii) for the following reasons:

           "Within your visa application form  you  described  yourself  as
           unemployed and have  stated  that  you  are  wholly  financially
           dependent upon your husband, Mr David Allen.   You  also  stated
           that your sponsor visits Thailand approximately 5 times a  year.
           It would therefore not be unreasonable to expect to see evidence
           of this  support  and  cohabitation  in  order  to  assess  your
           circumstances in Thailand and therefore your intentions  in  the
           UK.  Apart from a  handful  of  photographs  of  your  and  your
           sponsor no other evidence has been presented  in  connection  to
           your relationship.  In light of this I am  not  satisfied  on  a
           balance of probabilities that you are genuinely seeking entry to
           the United Kingdom as a visitor, that you intend  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom at the end of the period of the  visit  and  that
           you do not intend to live for extended  periods  in  the  United
           Kingdom through frequent or successive visits.  Paragraph 41 (i)
           and (ii)."

  36. In confirming the ECO's decision,  the  ECM  in  his  decision  of  22
      October 2013 stated:

           "The Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  adequate
           evidence of the appellant's relationship to the sponsor had been
           provided.  The appellant has now submitted  a  letter  from  the
           sponsor, together with copies of money transfers.  However,  the
           most recent of these is dated 29 December 2012.   The  documents
           are therefore too old to provide evidence of any current ongoing
           relationship.  Whilst some photographs have been provided, these
           are not in themselves evidence of an ongoing  relationship.   No
           other relevant new information has been provided."

  37. It  would  appear  that  the  ECO  and  ECM  refused  the  appellant's
      application not only on the ground that they were not  satisfied  that
      she was a "genuine visitor" but also on the ground that they were  not
      satisfied that her relationship with Mr Allen was genuine.

  38. Before me, as I have already indicated, Mr McVeety was content for  me
      to determine the appeal on the evidence before me.

  39. There are a number of documents submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
      including photographs, statements from Mr Allen and from a  number  of
      others who know  him,  Richard  Morphett,  Michael  Ayrton  and  Nigel
      Hellyer.  There are also documents relating to the house in  Thailand,
      paid for by Mr Allen in which the appellant and their  daughter  live.
      There is also evidence  of  financial  support  by  Mr  Allen  of  the
      appellant and his daughter.  There is also a supporting statement from
      a village elder.

  40. In addition, Mr Allen briefly answered a number of  questions  at  the
      hearing.  He emphasised that his relationship with the appellant was a
      genuine one.  The appellant only intended to visit for a short  period
      of time, some 4-5 weeks at the most and would return on  a  pre-booked
      flight to Thailand.  He told me that the appellant lived in a  village
      where her family lived including her mother who sometimes  lived  with
      the appellant when Mr Allen was in the UK.  He told  me  that  he  had
      bought and built the house some 3 or 4 years  ago  for  his  wife  and
      daughter.  He told me that his daughter, Sophie is 3 years old and she
      is a British citizen and  would  be  visiting  with  her  mother.   He
      explained that his relationship with the appellant had begun but  that
      he had commitments in the UK and that he  did  not  want  to,  in  his
      words, shut up shop and go  to  Thailand  until  his  commitments  (he
      mentioned two elderly dogs) were resolved and their  relationship  was
      such that he should move to Thailand.  He told  me  that  it  was  his
      intention to move to Thailand rather than the appellant move  to  live
      with him in the UK.   He told me that he  had  visited  the  appellant
      over 25 times since 2008; the last time being in June for 2 months.

  41. In response to a question from Mr McVeety, Mr Allen explained that  he
      worked as an aircraft mechanic and that he had  a  security  pass  for
      working in the RAF Brize Norton airbase.

  42. Mr Allen was a most impressive witness.   None  of  his  evidence  was
      challenged by way of cross-examination. I have no doubt that he  is  a
      witness of truth and I accept his evidence.

  43. To the  extent  that  it  is  still  challenged,  I  accept  that  the
      relationship between the appellant and Mr  Allen  is  a  genuine  one.
      They have been in a relationship since 2008.  They have a daughter who
      was born in May 2011.  The commitment between  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Allen is reflected in, not only their having  a  child  together,  but
      also in the frequency of his visits to Thailand to be  with  his  wife
      (whom he married in Thailand in 2013) and also in the purchase of land
      and the construction of a home for the appellant  and  their  daughter
      and their continued financial support.

  44. As regards whether the appellant is a genuine visitor who  will  leave
      at the end of her visit, whilst the 'long distance'  relationship  may
      appear unusual, I accept Mr  Allen's  explanation  that  it  is  their
      intention to live in Thailand when circumstances are right.  There  is
      no intention that the appellant should live  in  the  UK.   Whilst  Mr
      Allen has, in the past, visited the appellant in  Thailand,  I  accept
      his evidence that the intention was for the appellant to visit  for  a
      holiday and now meet Mr Allen's family in the UK.  The sincerity of Mr
      Allen's evidence both in relation to his own and his wife's intentions
      was evident in his oral evidence.  The appellant and he have set up  a
      home in Thailand which, I accept, is intended to be  the  family  home
      not just of the appellant and their daughter but also  to  include  Mr
      Allen in the fullness of time.

  45. For these reasons, I am satisfied on a balance of  probabilities  that
      the appellant is a genuine visitor who intends to leave the UK at  the
      end of her visit and consequently the requirements in para 41 (i)  and
      (ii) were met at the date of decision.

  46. As the  ECO  has  raised  no  issues  in  relation  to  the  remaining
      requirements of para 41, I am satisfied on a balance of  probabilities
      that the appellant met the requirements of para 41.

Decision

  47. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an error  of
      law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

  48. I remake the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules on the basis that : (a) para 320(7B) does not apply;
      and (b) the requirements of para 41 are met.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have considered whether to make a fee award
and in all the circumstances I consider it appropriate to make a fee award
in the full amount paid.


                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
