

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/12497/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 May 2014                                |On 14 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                             MRS OBERE MARY OKOH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms B Rest, David Gray Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs H Rackstraw, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Traynor dismissed this appeal against
      refusal of entry clearance as a family visitor.  The refusal  decision
      was dated 27 June 2013.  The Appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  who
      applied for entry clearance  to  visit  her  sister,  Joyce,  and  her
      sister's husband, Joseph Brown, who are both settled in the UK.

   2) The judge found that the Appellant had failed to adduce evidence of an
      ongoing relationship with  her  husband,  including  evidence  of  his
      support for her visit by way of underwriting the cost  of  her  return
      and onward journey.  Because the Appellant had failed to  adduce  such
      evidence, the judge found that this cast considerable doubt  upon  her
      credibility and the judge found she had not discharged the  burden  of
      proof to show that she  was  a  genuine  visitor  who  had  compelling
      reasons to return to Nigeria after a short visit.  The judge  was  not
      satisfied that there was evidence that the Appellant's  husband  would
      be capable of paying the  cost  of  her  return  and  onward  journey.
      Accordingly there were doubts about the Appellant's relationship  with
      her husband and whether there were compelling ties which  would  cause
      the Appellant to return to Nigeria.  The Appellant  had  not  produced
      any explanation as to who would care for her children in her  absence.
      The Appellant claimed that she was in business as  a  trader  but  the
      judge found the evidence as to her  earnings  was  unreliable  in  the
      absence of any formal accounts  or  any  other  document  which  would
      suggest that the sums she received into her bank  account  represented
      earnings from a business.

   3) The first ground of the application for permission to appeal was  that
      the judge had placed unreasonable weight on the  absence  of  evidence
      relating to the Appellant's husband.  This was only one factor  to  be
      taken into account when assessing the  Appellant's  circumstances,  in
      accordance with Sawmynaden (Family visitors -  considerations)  [2012]
      UK UT 00161.  The judge heard evidence from Joyce  and  Joseph  Brown.
      Joseph  Brown  confirmed  the  Appellant's  marital  status  and   her
      relationship with her children, who would remain in Nigeria  with  her
      husband.  His evidence was that the Appellant intended to visit the UK
      for only two weeks because she was responsible for her husband and her
      children as well as her business.  The judge was wrong to  find  there
      was no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  currently  remained  with  her
      husband.  This was never put to  Joseph  Brown  in  cross-examination.
      Although the judge concluded that there was a lack of evidence to show
      the Appellant's ability to pay return airfares for the visit  her  own
      bank statements showed that she had  a  more  than  adequate  sum  and
      evidence was  provided  by  Joseph  Brown  about  the  source  of  the
      transactions recorded in the bank statement.

   4) The second ground contended that the judge  had  applied  requirements
      which were not in the Immigration  Rules.   At  paragraph  33  of  the
      determination the judge recorded that there was  no  evidence  of  the
      Appellant's husband either consenting to her visit or  supporting  her
      application.  It was pointed out that  there  was  no  requirement  in
      paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules for such evidence.

   5) The third ground contended that there was a failure by  the  judge  to
      engage with the evidence and to make clear findings.   The  judge  did
      not given proper consideration to  the  Appellant's  bank  statements,
      which showed her earnings from  her  business.   These  earnings  were
      explained by Joseph Brown in a supplementary witness  statement.   The
      judge nevertheless found at paragraph 38  of  the  determination  that
      there was "...literally no evidence that the Appellant is trading with
      anyone in Nigeria" and that the "...bank statements represent a series
      of transactions which have never been explained by  her."   The  judge
      did not make a finding as to whether he regarded  Joseph  Brown  as  a
      credible witness.

   6) The fourth ground of the application  contended  that  the  judge  had
      unreasonable expectations of the evidence  from  the  Appellant.   The
      judge appeared to have required  that  the  Appellant  should  produce
      direct evidence about a number of issues while failing to  acknowledge
      that there was no mechanism by which an overseas Appellant could  give
      oral evidence to the Tribunal.  Reference was made to  paragraphs  38,
      39 and 43 of the determination.  It was not explained what  the  judge
      expected the Appellant to do by way of providing direct evidence.

   7) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  arguably
      erred in law in finding that there was "an absence of any information"
      concerning the Appellant's relationship with her husband.   By  making
      this finding the judge had arguably failed to refer to the evidence of
      the Sponsor, Joseph Brown, and to  state  whether  this  evidence  was
      accepted or not.  In relation to the Appellant's finances,  the  Judge
      of the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeared  arguably  to  have  applied  a
      standard of proof more appropriate to an application for settlement or
      at least something more than a family visit.

   8) A Rule 24 notice dated 3 April 2014 was received from  the  Respondent
      stating that the appeal was opposed.  It was submitted that the  Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.  The  judge
      was entitled to place weight on the  absence  of  evidence  confirming
      that the Appellant's husband was in a position to pay for her  journey
      to and from the UK, on the basis that it was claimed that he would  be
      doing so.  The judge was also entitled to draw an adverse inference on
      the lack of evidence regarding  the  Appellant's  husband  within  her
      application form.  The alleged errors were no more  than  disagreement
      with conclusions the judge was entitled to reach.

   9) It was further contended in the notice that the judge was entitled  to
      be concerned about the lack of  direct  evidence  from  the  Appellant
      confirming payments into her bank account.  The judge was not bound to
      accept  the  Sponsor's  evidence  on  this  matter.    The   Sponsor's
      credibility  was  not  necessarily   relevant   to   the   Appellant's
      credibility and the judge was entitled to conclude as he did regarding
      the evidence of the Appellant's finances.

  10) At the hearing before  me  Ms  Rest  relied  on  the  application  for
      permission to appeal.  She referred  me  to  two  pieces  of  evidence
      relating to the Appellant's trading activities  which  she  maintained
      had been disregarded by the judge.  These were, at  page  116  of  the
      Appellant's bundle, a receipt dated May 2012 for a trading licence and
      a receipt dated 22 January 2013 for rent for the  Appellant's  trading
      premises.  The judge did not refer to  the  receipt  for  the  trading
      licence.  I was referred to the supplementary witness statement, dated
      28 January 2014, by Joseph Brown, considered at paragraph  21  of  the
      determination, in which the judge  recorded  the  evidence  of  Joseph
      Brown that the Appellant had told him that she did not hold a  tenancy
      agreement for her boutique although she paid rent.  Landlords  in  the
      area did not generally provide tenancy agreements because they  tended
      to evict tenants without going to court.  Subsequent to  the  decision
      to refuse the application the Appellant had moved to new  premises  in
      October 2013 and the  new  premises  were  owned  by  her  father  and
      occupied on a rent free basis.

  11) For the Respondent, Mrs Rackstraw relied on the rule 24  notice.   She
      submitted that the judge had directed himself properly.  There was  an
      absence of evidence from the Appellant's husband as to  the  financing
      of the journey, although the Appellant had stated that  he  would  pay
      for this.  The judge was entitled to be concerned about the source  of
      payments into the Appellant's bank account and was not bound to accept
      the evidence of the Sponsor.

  12) Reference was made to paragraph 38 of the determination where although
      the judge recorded that the bank statements  "represent  a  series  of
      transactions which have never been explained" by  the  Appellant,  the
      judge also recorded that the Sponsor gave oral evidence to the  effect
      that he had recently spoken to the Appellant concerning the entries in
      the bank statements and that she had given him an explanation  as  set
      out in his supplementary witness statement of 28  January  2014.   The
      judge went on to record that while he did not doubt that  the  Sponsor
      had provided these explanations in good faith, the fact remained  that
      the Appellant had not directly provided  such  evidence  herself.   In
      relation to this Mrs Rackstraw submitted that  the  lack  of  evidence
      from the Appellant was not remedied by evidence from the Sponsor.  She
      referred to paragraph 34 of the determination, in which it was pointed
      out that the application was premised upon the basis that the cost  of
      travel would be paid for by the Appellant's husband.  The judge stated
      that it would be only reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  have
      produced tangible evidence not only of her husband's  ability  to  pay
      for this but of her continuing relationship with him.  The judge noted
      that there was no submission from the  Appellant's  representative  at
      the hearing to the effect that it would be the Appellant's husband who
      would be paying the cost of her travel.

  13) In respect of these issues relating to the evidence, Ms Rest explained
      that pages 7-93 of the Appellant's bundle contained documents prepared
      in the UK but pages 94-117  were  documents  added  by  the  Appellant
      before the application was submitted to the High Commission.  Ms  Rest
      submitted that this was the bundle that was  handed  in  to  the  High
      Commission.

Reasons for decision

  14) I am satisfied that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      properly assess the evidence before him and by failing to  do  so  did
      not give adequate reasons for his decision and so erred  in  law.   In
      particular, at paragraph 38 of the determination the judge referred to
      there being "...literally no evidence that the  Appellant  is  trading
      with anyone in Nigeria."  This statement  cannot  be  sustained.   The
      judge had before him not only the written statements of the  Appellant
      herself but also the evidence of  Joseph  Brown  and  the  documentary
      evidence referred to above at pages 116-117 of the Appellant's bundle.



  15) Then again, at paragraph 33,  the  judge  referred  to  the  Appellant
      having stated in her application that it  would  be  her  husband  who
      would discharge the costs of her return travel to  the  UK.   He  then
      referred to the "complete absence of evidence from her husband  either
      consenting to her visit or supporting her application" and states that
      this "casts considerable doubt as to whether or not she is  a  genuine
      visitor who has strong reasons to leave the United Kingdom at the  end
      of her visit."   Then  at  paragraph  34  the  judge  found  it  "only
      reasonable to expect that she adduces tangible evidence  not  only  of
      his ability to do so but also of a continuing  relationship  with  the
      Appellant."  At paragraph 35 the judge referred to photographs in  the
      Appellant's bundle and stated "there is no evidence that she currently
      remains with her husband."

  16) The judge's statement at paragraph 35 that there was "no evidence that
      she currently remains with her husband" is a  further  error  of  law.
      There was the evidence of the Appellant herself and  the  evidence  of
      the Sponsor, Joseph Brown.  Mrs Rackstraw submitted that  the  judge's
      words should be read  as  meaning  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
      Appellant's husband himself but, with respect to Mrs Rackstraw, I have
      to say that that is not what the judge  wrote  in  the  determination.
      The judge clearly inferred  that  because  the  photographs  submitted
      showed the Appellant with her children but not her husband this was an
      indication that the Appellant was estranged from her  husband.   Under
      the circumstances such an inference was not supported by the evidence.



  17) I accept that the judge further erred  in  law  when  he  appeared  to
      require evidence that the Appellant's husband either consented to  the
      visit or supported  the  application.   As  was  pointed  out  in  the
      application for permission to appeal, this was not  a  requirement  of
      the rules.

  18) In view of the errors of law made  by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal I set aside his decision.  This requires to be  re-made  and,
      on the basis of the documentary evidence and the evidence recorded  by
      the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I consider that the  remaking  of
      the decision can be accomplished without any further evidence.

  19) The refusal decision of 27 June 2013  is  mainly  concerned  with  the
      Appellant's stated earnings and her bank statements.  It is noted that
      the Appellant recorded in her visa application form (VAF) that she was
      self employed and earned N85,000 (�340) per month.  According  to  the
      Respondent the Appellant failed  to  submit  satisfactory  documentary
      evidence  of  her  stated  business  or  earnings.   Accordingly   the
      Respondent was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the
      Appellant's economic circumstances  were  as  stated.   This  led  the
      Respondent to doubt her intentions in respect of her proposed visit to
      the UK.  The Respondent was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  a
      genuine visitor who would leave the UK at the end of the visit.

  20) According to the refusal decision the Appellant had  stated  that  she
      would fund her trip to the UK.   Because  of  the  concerns  over  the
      Appellant's earnings,  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant would be able to do this and that the requisite  funds  were
      available.   The  Respondent  was  not  satisfied   that   there   was
      satisfactory evidence as to the source of the funds in the Appellant's
      bank account and the Respondent was not  satisfied  that  these  funds
      were available for the Appellant's exclusive use for her trip  to  the
      UK.  Accordingly the Respondent was not satisfied that  the  Appellant
      would be maintained and accommodated in  the  UK  without  working  or
      having recourse to public funds and would be able to meet the cost  of
      her return journey.

  21) I am satisfied on the  basis  of  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
      evidence given at the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
      these concerns have been met.  I accept, of course, that the  evidence
      of Mr Joseph Brown, although accepted as given in good  faith  by  the
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, is not the evidence of the Appellant
      herself.  Nevertheless, I was  not  referred  to  any  inconsistencies
      between the evidence of Mr Joseph Brown, the documentary evidence  and
      the Appellant's own statements.   In  other  words,  the  explanations
      provided by Mr Joseph Brown were  in  accord  with  the  rest  of  the
      evidence, including the evidence emanating from the Appellant.

  22) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recorded at paragraph 21  of  the
      determination  that  in  Mr  Joseph  Brown's   supplementary   witness
      statement he recorded  discussions  he  had  had  with  the  Appellant
      regarding her bank accounts in  Nigeria.   She  has  two  Zenith  bank
      accounts - a current account and a savings account.  The  account  she
      used depended on which would attract the lowest bank charges.

  23) At paragraph 19 the  judge  recorded  Mr  Brown's  evidence  that  the
      Appellant operates a clothing business.  She buys clothes to  sell  in
      her boutique.  In her VAF she estimated her monthly income as  N85,000
      each month but from the bank statements the sum actually received from
      the business by way of earnings was significantly in excess  of  this.
      The Appellant had under-estimated her earnings.  Moreover, due to  the
      success of her business she was able only to spend a short  period  of
      time in the UK and would have to return to  manage  her  business  and
      look after her husband and children.

  24) Mrs Rackstraw pointed out that according to the  VAF  the  Appellant's
      husband would pay for the Appellant's travel to and from the UK.   The
      refusal decision, on the other hand, refers to  the  Appellant  having
      said she would pay for her travel.  I infer from this that it  is  not
      material whether the Appellant or her  husband  was  to  pay  provided
      there was evidence that the  Appellant  had  the  financial  resources
      available to her to do this.

  25) I consider  there  is  some  force  in  the  contention  made  in  the
      application for permission to appeal that the Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal approached this appeal as if it concerned an application  for
      settlement rather than an application for a visa for a two week visit.
       There is, contrary to  the  view  of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, nothing in the evidence  before  me  to  indicate  that  the
      Appellant's family circumstances are other than she has stated.  There
      is nothing to suggest that she is not able to  pay  the  cost  of  her
      return journey to the UK.  It is clear  from  the  evidence  that  the
      Appellant's sister and her husband will be able to pay  the  costs  of
      accommodation and maintenance in the UK.  There is good evidence as to
      the existence of the Appellant's family and  business  commitments  in
      Nigeria, giving her a strong incentive to return there.

  26) It is, of course, axiomatic that evidence which is on the face  of  it
      reliable should not be disregarded on the  basis  of  mere  suspicion.
      This seems to me, regrettably, the way  in  which  this  evidence  was
      treated by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant  has
      provided sufficient reliable  evidence  to  show  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that she meets all the requirements of rule  41  of  the
      Immigration Rules.  It would be wrong to impute an  intention  to  her
      not to abide by the terms of her visa when such an  intention  is  not
      supported by the evidence.  I see nothing in the evidence before me to
      indicate that the Appellant is anything other than a  genuine  visitor
      who intends to leave the UK at the end of the period of her visit.

Conclusions

  27) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  28) I set aside the decision.

  29) I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  see
    no reason for such an order.

Fee Award

    Although the appeal has been re-made and allowed I make  no  fee  award
    because the successful outcome of the appeal depended to a  significant
    extent upon the witness statements and oral evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal




Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


