
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/12802/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th July 2014                               |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                MR ALI HAMEED
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department
                      (on behalf of the ECO Abu Dhabi)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnson , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Ali Hameed date of birth 28th of November 1998, is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection  of  an  anonymity  direction.   I  have  taken
    account all of the circumstances including the fact that the  appellant
    is a minor. I do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. This appellant was making an application for entry clearance or a visit
    visa to come to the United Kingdom with his parents,  Mr  Abdul  Hameed
    and Mrs Khair Un Nisa. The parents' appeal  numbers  are  VA/12799/2013
    and VA/12801/2013. The FCO number for the appeals is 1001114. There  is
    a further reference number for the Home Office of N1997385/2.

 4. The appeals were determined on the papers by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    A J Parker by determination promulgated on 28 April 2014. Judge  Parker
    allowed the appeal of all three "appellants".

 5. This is an appeal by  the  respondent  against  that  determination  in
    respect of the named appellant only.  Whilst  it  is  the  respondent's
    appeal I have kept the designation of the parties as they appear in the
    original determination.

 6. This appeal encompasses only the appeal of the  appellant  named  above
    and not of the parents of  the  appellant.   The  appeals  by  the  two
    remaining appellants having been allowed by the judge  and  not  having
    been challenged by the respondent, as yet,   stand  at  this  point  in
    time.

 7. In respect of the appellant his application was to come to  the  United
    Kingdom as a family visitor. The Immigration Decision dated 27 May 2013
    pointed out that he did not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 and as such he had  no  right
    of appeal to the Tribunal under Section 88 A of the 2002 Act.

 8. The Regulations stipulates the family relationship that  has  to  exist
    between a sponsor and an appellant in order for an individual to have a
    right of appeal to the Tribunal. According to the papers submitted  the
    appellant was at best coming to visit an uncle. As that relationship is
    not one that is provided for in the Regulations, it is  the  contention
    of the respondent that the appellant does not have a right of appeal to
    the Tribunal.

 9. The respondent contends that the judge has erred in allowing the appeal
    in respect of the appellant because he did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    hear the appeal.

10.  Having  considered  the  evidence  presented  it  is  clear  that  the
    relationship of the sponsor to the appellant is at best that  of  uncle
    to nephew. That relationship does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations. Accordingly the judge did not have jurisdiction and  could
    not allow the appeal.  By allowing the appeal the  judge  has  made  an
    error of law. The decision in respect of the appellant has  to  be  set
    aside and a fresh decision made.

11. In listing this matter for hearing before the Upper Tribunal notice  of
    hearing was sent out to the sponsor. A letter has  been  received  from
    the sponsor. In that letter the sponsor states that he  does  not  know
    any of the appellants and he has not sponsored  them  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom. He requires his name be taken off the application as  a
    sponsor.

12. The appeals of the two adult appellants, the  parents  of  the  present
    appellant, are not before me. However it is now a matter for the ECO in
    light of the information received as to whether or not  he  issues  the
    parents with any visa or whether he cancels any visas that have already
    been granted.

13. With regard to this appellant even on his case he was  not  visiting  a
    family member within the terms of the 2012 Regulations. He  accordingly
    has no right to appeal to the Tribunal. This matter has to be dismissed
    for want of jurisdiction.

Decision

14. The original tribunal made a material error of law and I substitute the
    following decision in respect of the named appellant;-

         The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

         I make no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


