
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/12074/2013,
                        VA/12078/2013 & VA/12076/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st October 2014                          |On 5th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS ZAIN UL HUDA (1)
                              MRS ASMA GUL (2)
                           MASTER HAMDAN ANWAR (3)
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr J Anwar, Sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellants applied for entry clearance to  come  to  the  UK  as
       family visitors to see Mr Javed Anwar, who  is  a  British  citizen.
       They are citizens of Pakistan. The first appellant is the  sponsor's
       mother; the second appellant is his wife and the third appellant  is
       the sponsor's son. These applications were  refused  on  29th  April
       2013 and they appealed. Their appeals against the refusal  decisions
       were  allowed  by  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Stanford   in   a
       determination written on the 11th August 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Lambert on 25th September 2014 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as it  may  have  been
       that Judge Stanford gave weight to evidence that had only come  into
       being  in  May  and  June  2014,  regarding  the  sponsor  acquiring
       qualifications to practise law in Pakistan, which were therefore not
       relevant to the circumstances at the time of the  refusal  decisions
       in April 2013.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Mr Armstrong relied upon the grounds of appeal. These contended that
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate reasons as
       to why he found the appellants would return to Pakistan after  their
       visit given the fact that there had  been  a  plan  for  the  second
       appellant to live permanently with the sponsor in the  UK,  and  she
       had taken the English test and got a tuberculosis certificate. Judge
       Stanford erred in placing weight on the certificates showing  a  law
       graduate assessment and from the  Khyber  Pakhtunkhawa  Bar  Council
       from May and June 2014  as  indicating  that  the  appellants  would
       return to Pakistan.

    6. Mr Armstrong contended that Judge Stanford  had  relied  upon  post-
       decision evidence at paragraph 18 of his  determination  which  were
       not relevant to the decision of the entry clearance officer as  this
       had only come into being over a year after this decision.

    7. Mr Anwar said that he and his family had always intended  ultimately
       to return to Pakistan where he would practice law. He  had  acquired
       his law  degree  in  2001.  Initially  they  had  prepared  to  make
       settlement applications but then they realised that  the  appellants
       would never get settlement  as  they  were  planning  to  return  to
       Pakistan in June 2015, and that it would be cheaper and  quicker  to
       apply for visit visas. As a result they applied for visit  visas  in
       April 2013.

    8. I told the parties that I did not find that Judge Stanford had erred
       in law for the reasons set out below.

Conclusions

    9. I find that Judge  Stanford  clearly  understood  the  date  of  the
       decisions to refuse entry clearance in this case (see paragraph 2 of
       his determination) and that only evidence appertaining to  the  time
       of  decision  should  be  considered  (see  paragraph   6   of   his
       determination).

   10. He found that the sponsor had made a plan to return to  Pakistan  to
       establish a legal practice there at the  time  of  the  decision  to
       refuse entry clearance to the appellants: see paragraph  18  of  his
       determination. He sets out at paragraph 18 of his determination that
       the appellant had  provided  evidence  of  a  law  degree  from  the
       University of Peshawar in 2001 and also a diploma in  law  taken  in
       Malaysia in 2007 in support of this intention.  I  find  that  Judge
       Stanford's consideration of the Law Graduate Assessment  Test  taken
       in Pakistan in May 2014 and registration with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
       Bar Council in June 2014 was therefore legitimate in accordance with
       DR (ECO: post-decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038  as  it
       was evidence that had arisen after the date of  decision  but  which
       related to circumstances appertaining at the date of  refusal,  i.e.
       the plan of the sponsor to return to Pakistan to  establish  himself
       as a lawyer.

   11. Judge Stanford clearly gave consideration to  the  possibility  that
       the appellants were coming for settlement.  He  found  that  if  the
       second  appellant  had  made  such  an  application  it  might  have
       succeeded (see  paragraph  17  of  the  determination).  However  he
       accepted the evidence of the sponsor that he intended to  return  to
       live in Pakistan and in the light of this intention found  that  the
       appellants were genuine visitors who could satisfy  the  Immigration
       Rules at  paragraph  41  and  46A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (see
       paragraphs 23, 24 and 25 of the  determination).  I  therefore  find
       that Judge Stanford has provided adequate reasons for his  decisions
       that the appellants were genuine visitors who would leave the UK  at
       the end of their visit.

Decision

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  family  visit
       appeal is upheld.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
3rd November 2014

