
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/13811/2013
                                                               VA/13845/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15th August 2014                  |On 1st October 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                       SARVAR IRAJI (FIRST APPELLANT)
                      MAHROOZ IRAJI (Second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a father and his daughter.  The First Appellant  was
    born on 23rd March 1957 and the Second Appellant on 1st May 1987.  They
    are both citizens of Iran.  They  applied  on  14th  May  2013  to  the
    British High Commission Istanbul for entry clearance in order to  visit
    respectively their son and brother Behrooz Iraji.  That application was
    refused for the reasons given in a Notice of Decision dated  11th  June
    2013.  The Appellants appealed that decision, and  their  appeals  were
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant (the Judge) sitting  at
    Taylor House on 7th May 2014.  He decided to dismiss  the  appeals  for
    the reasons given in his Determination of 9th May 2014.  The Appellants
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and such permission  was  granted
    on 18th June 2014.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  applications  under  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules HC 395 because he was satisfied  that  deception  had
    been used by both Appellants  when  making  previous  applications  for
    leave to enter.  In the case of the First  Appellant,  it  was  alleged
    that when applying for entry clearance in October 2009  he  had  stated
    that his son Behrooz lived with him in Iran whereas at that time he was
    resident in the UK.  In the  case  of  the  Second  Appellant,  it  was
    alleged that when applying for entry clearance in  September  2007  she
    had stated that she had no relatives in  the  UK  apart  from  her  two
    uncles whom she proposed to visit whereas her brother had been resident
    in the UK since 2003.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeals because he found that he was  satisfied
    that there had been such deceptions.  At the hearing, Mr Hodson  argued
    that the Judge had erred in law in coming to this  conclusion  in  that
    the Judge had applied the wrong standard of proof.  In paragraph 12  of
    the Determination he had erroneously described this as  being  no  more
    than the balance of probabilities whereas in a case such  as  this  the
    burden was upon the Respondent to establish deception to the higher end
    of the balance of probabilities.  His application of the  wrong  burden
    of proof manifested itself in the Judge finding the allegations  proved
    against the Appellants although the Judge did not  have  before  him  a
    complete version of the original Visa Application  Form  of  the  First
    Appellant, and no copy of the original Visa  Application  Form  of  the
    Second Appellant.  The Judge had relied upon inference and speculation.



 5. I indicated to Mr Duffy that I did not need to hear a  submission  from
    him as I had decided that there was no error of law  contained  in  the
    Judge's decision.  My reasons for that conclusion are as follows.

 6. In my judgment, the Judge came  to  a  decision  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him and which he fully explained.

 7. As regards the standard of proof, the Judge wrote at  paragraph  12  of
    his Determination as follows:

         "12. Mr Hodson submitted quite correctly that the Respondent  bears
             the burden of showing on a balance of probabilities  that  the
             Appellants acted dishonestly.  If, for example,  I  find  that
             they merely slipped up and  ticked  the  wrong  box  then  the
             Respondent would not have made  out  her  case,  but  it  goes
             further  than  that.   I  have  to  find   that   they   acted
             dishonestly."

    It is apparent from what the Judge wrote that  the  standard  of  proof
    which he applied in deciding the issue of prior deception was something
    more or higher than just the balance of probabilities.  He required  it
    to be  shown  that  the  Appellants  had  acted  dishonestly.   In  the
    subsequent paragraphs the Judge then thoroughly analysed  the  evidence
    available to him and explained in detail  why  he  was  satisfied  that
    there had been deliberate dishonesty in the completion of  the  earlier
    Visa Application Forms.  The Judge described how he was able  to  glean
    as  much  from  that  part  of  the  First  Appellant's  original  Visa
    Application Form available to him.  The Respondent's bundle before  the
    Judge had contained copies of only the odd numbered pages of that  Visa
    Application Form, but from those pages the Judge was able  to  identify
    without any speculation or assumption that the First Appellant had been
    dishonest in completing that form.  Likewise, at paragraph  17  of  the
    Determination the Judge explained how he was able to make a finding  of
    dishonesty  against  the  Second  Appellant  even  though  the   Second
    Appellant's original Visa Application Form was not before him.   It  is
    to be noted that it is not  disputed  that  both  Appellants  completed
    their original Visa Application Forms in the way alleged.   Their  case
    was that when they completed those Visa  Application  Forms  they  were
    unaware that the Sponsor was present in  the  UK.   The  Judge  in  his
    reasons for dismissing the appeals demonstrated how he found that could
    not be the case.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
