
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13846/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 03 September 2014                          |On 03 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                                ECO (MANILA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MIN JUNG CHO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:        Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Dr Colin Venters, The Sponsor, was in attendance and
                  addressed the Tribunal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

              Introduction

   1.     This appeal to the Upper Tribunal has its origins  in  a  decision
      made by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Manila,  The  Philippines  -
      hereinafter the "ECO") whereby the  Respondent's  application  for  an
      entry clearance visa was  refused.   The  Respondent  challenged  this
      decision, successfully, by appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  ("the
      FtT"). The ECO appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.

      The Impugned decision

   2.     This is dated 10 July 2013.  I preface my summary thereof with the
      factually uncontentious observation that the Respondent is a  national
      of South Korea, aged 40 years, who is the  unmarried  partner  of  the
      sponsor (identified above), a British national resident and working in
      the United Kingdom.   On  27th  June  2013,  the  Respondent,  in  her
      application for  a  "(General)  Long  Term  Visitor  Visa  (2  year)",
      represented that the main purpose of her proposed visit to the  United
      Kingdom was to visit the Sponsor and that she intended to stay  for  a
      period of six months.

   3.     In refusing her  application,  the  ECO,  having  noted  that  the
      Respondent's daughter was intending to accompany her mother and was in
      the process of applying for a British Passport, stated:

         "It is not unreasonable to expect that you would wish  to  be  with
         your partner permanently and the fact that your child will  have  a
         British Passport means that she too can  stay  there  indefinitely.
         You have no job or assets in Korea to leave the UK for.   The  fact
         that you have applied for a two year visa indicates  you  plan  yet
         further stay [sic] in the UK even after the initial period  of  six
         months.  I am not satisfied that you will not use this  visit  visa
         as a means of de facto residence, which is not permitted. I am  not
         satisfied that you are genuinely seeking  entry  to  the  UK  as  a
         general visitor but more that you might visit  Korea  from  the  UK
         where you will reside with your family."

         [Emphasis added.]

      The decision maker  added  that  the  Respondent  should  consider  an
      application under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  This decision
      was reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager.  Regrettably, a  complete
      copy of this document has not been provided. However, I  shall  assume
      that it adds nothing material and, clearly, it affirmed  the  original
      decision.

     The Decision of the FtT

   4.     In its decision, the FtT noted, accurately, in [7]:

         "The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  because  the
         Appellant had applied for a two year visa rather than a  six  month
         visa and he suspected that she would use the visa  as  a  means  of
         obtaining residence."

      The Judge then rehearsed the evidence of the sponsor, which  was  that
      the Respondent intended to continue to live in South Korea with  their
      daughter but wished to visit the sponsor in the  United  Kingdom  with
      regularity: hence the application for a  two  year  visa.   The  Judge
      continued:


         "He [the sponsor] said that with hindsight they had complicated the
         position by applying for a two year visa when the  Appellant  could
         simply have travelled to the United Kingdom with their daughter  in
         the same way as she had in 2012 [evidently for a six month  period]
         without the necessity of applying for a visa."

      Next, the Judge  noted  that  the  ECO's  representative  declined  to
      question the  sponsor  and,  further,  had  no  submissions  to  make,
      continuing:


         "It was clear that he acknowledged that the  Appellant  would  have
         been able to enter into the United Kingdom  for  a  period  of  six
         months without any visa requirements  as  she  is  a  South  Korean
         national."

      Here, it would appear,  the  Judge  was  referring  obliquely  to  the
      relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules.   Having noted that  the
      ECO's representative did not seek to uphold the refusal decision,  the
      Judge pronounced himself satisfied (in terms) that the refusal reasons
      were unsustainable and allowed the appeal.

   5.     I draw attention to the terms in which permission  to  appeal  was
      granted:

         "The grounds of appeal maintain that the appeal was  decided  under
         the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 and  that
         the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  family  visitor   relationship
         requirements.  Moreover that the appeal should have been limited to
         grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 .....


         It is clear that the Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  an
         unmarried  partner  and  as  such  she  did  not  fall  within  the
         proscribed [sic] relationships as defined in the Regulations .....


         There is an arguable error of law."


      It is at once apparent that both the grounds of appeal and  the  grant
      of permission are based on certain statutory provisions which  do  not
      feature anywhere in either the impugned decision of the ECO or that of
      the FtT.

Statutory Framework

   6.     By virtue of section 82(2) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), immigration decisions which  may  be
      challenged by appeal to the FtT include a refusal of entry  clearance.
       The permitted grounds of appeal are listed in section 84  which,  for
      present purposes, provides in material part:


         "(1) An appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration  decision
             must be brought on one or more of the following grounds .....


             (b)  That the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B of
                  the Race Relations Act 1975 .....


             (c)  That the decision is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998 ....."

      The subject matter of section 88A is "Ineligibility: entry clearance".
       In its original incarnation,  introduced  by  section  29(1)  of  the
      Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004,  It
      provided:

              "88A Ineligibility: entry clearance

     (1)  A person may not appeal under section  82(1)  against  refusal  of
                  entry clearance if the decision  to  refuse  is  taken  on
                  grounds which -

                  (a)  relate to a provision of immigration rules, and

                  (b)  are specified for the  purpose  of  this  section  by
    order of the Secretary of               State.

              (2) Subsection (1) -

     (a) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  either  or  both  of
                      the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and  (c),
                      and

                  (b)  is without prejudice to the effect of section  88  in
       relation to an appeal        under section 82(1) against refusal  of
       entry clearance."

   7.     A substituted section 88A was  introduced,  with  effect  from  01
      April 2008, by section 4 of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality
      Act 2006. It provided:


             "88A Entry clearance

             (1)  A person may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against
             refusal of an          application for entry clearance  unless
             the application was made for the    purpose of-

              (a) visiting a person of a class or description prescribed  by
                                 regulations  for  the   purpose   of   this
         subsection, or

         (b)  entering  as  the  dependant  of  a  person  in  circumstances
                      prescribed by regulations for  the  purpose  of  this
             subsection.

              (2) Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular-
                  (a)  make provision by reference to whether the  applicant
                      is a member of the family (within such meaning as the
                      regulations may assign) of the  person  he  seeks  to
                      visit;

                  (b)  provide for the determination of whether  one  person
                      is dependent on another;

                  (c)  make provision by reference to the  circumstances  of
                      the  applicant, of  the  person  whom  the  applicant
                      seeks to visit or on whom he depends, or of both (and
                      the regulations may, in particular, include provision
                      by reference to-

                         i) whether or not a person is lawfully settled  in
                            the United Kingdom within such meaning  as  the
                            regulations may assign;


                        ii) the  duration  of  two  individuals'  residence
                            together);

              (d) make provision by reference to an applicant's  purpose  in
         entering as a              dependant;

     (e) make provision by reference to immigration rules;

     (f) confer a discretion.

              (3) Subsection (1)-

     (a) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  either  or  both  of
                      the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and  (c),
                      and

              (b) is without prejudice  to  the  effect  of  section  88  in
                  relation to an appeal       under  section  82(1)  against
                  refusal of entry clearance."


      Next, by section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, section 88A  was
      substituted for a second time, with effect from 25 June 2013, in these
      terms:


             "88A Entry clearance


              (1)  A person may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against
             refusal of an     application for entry clearance  unless  the
             application was made for   the  purpose of-


         [...]

     (b) entering as the dependant of a person in  circumstances  prescribed
                      by regulations for the purpose of this subsection.

              2) Regulations under subsection (1) may, in particular-


     [...]

     (b) provide for the determination of whether one  person  is  dependent
                       on another;

     (c) make provision by reference to the [circumstances of the  applicant
                       or of the person] on whom he depends, or of both (and
                       the regulations may, in particular, include provision
                       by reference to-

                         i)    whether or not a person is lawfully  settled
                            in the United Kingdom within  such  meaning  as
                            the regulations may assign;


                       (ii)  the  duration  of  two  individuals'  residence
                            together);

                 (d)   make provision by reference to an applicant's purpose
                       in entering as  a dependant;


                 (e)   make provision by reference to immigration rules;


                 (f)   confer a discretion.


             (3)   Subsection (1)-


     (a) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on  either  or  both  of
                       the rounds referred to in section 84(1)(b)  and  (c),
                 and

     (b) is without prejudice to the effect of section 88 in relation to  an
                           appeal under section  82(1)  against  refusal  of
                 entry clearance."

      Finally, it may be noted that when section 37 of the  Immigration  Act
      2014 is commenced, Section 88A will be repealed.

8.   The exercise of the Secretary of State's power under section 88A(1)  of
      the 2002 `Act, as substituted by the 2006 Act,  is  contained  in  the
      Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012  ("the  2012
      Regulations"), which came into operation on 09 July 2012.  These apply
      to all entry clearance applications made after that date. They  devise
      a regime whereby certain persons are "prescribed for the  purposes  of
      section 88(1)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
      (entry clearance)".  The model which follows identifies two  different
      persons.  The first, "P", is identified by reference to circumstances,
      being a person settled in the United Kingdom who has not been  granted
      asylum or humanitarian protection.  The second person in the equation,
      "A" (the putative visa visitor),  is  identified  by  reference  to  a
      series of possible relationships with "P".  There is a lengthy menu of
      such relationships.  They include a relationship involving "P" and "A"
      ".... that is akin to a marriage or civil partnership for at least the
      two years before the day on which A's application for entry  clearance
      was made; and (b) such relationship is genuine  and  subsisting":  per
      regulation  2(4)(a)  and  (b).  In  passing,  previously  there   were
      comparable regulations under earlier legislation.

   9.     The Respondent's application for entry clearance  was  considered,
      and refused, under paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    This
      provision of the Rules specifies the requirements to be satisfied by a
      person seeking leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  "general
      visitor".  The requirements germane in  the  context  of  the  present
      appeal are that the applicant -

         "(i) is genuinely seeking entry as a general visitor for a  limited
             period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months ......  and

         (ii) intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  the  period
             of the visit as stated by him; and does not intend to live for
             extended periods in the United  Kingdom  through  frequent  or
             successive visits ....."

     The main elements of the other  specified  requirements  are  that  the
      applicant does not intend to work in the United Kingdom,  can  finance
      the return journey, is aged 18 years or over and,  if  admitted,  will
      not require recourse to public funds for the purposes  of  maintenance
      and accommodation.


  10.     The evolution of section 88A of the 2002 Act yields the  following
      analysis:


        a) In its original incarnation, section 88A was designed  to  limit
           the grounds upon which an appeal  could  be  pursued  against  a
           refusal of entry clearance decision.  This was  to  be  achieved
           through the medium of an order of the Secretary of  State  which
           would exclude from appeal  decisions  made  on  certain  grounds
           under the Immigration Rules,  while  preserving  an  appellant's
           right to appeal against decisions  allegedly  vitiated  by  race
           discrimination or infringement of Convention  rights.   However,
           this model was never established, since the Secretary of State's
           power to make an order to this effect was not exercised.   As  a
           result, section 88A was redundant throughout the entirety of its
           existence.


        b) The second version of section 88A,  operational  from  01  April
           2008, established a different model. It empowered the  Secretary
           of State to make regulations restricting the statutory right  of
           appeal  against  refusal  of  entry   clearance   decisions   to
           applications made for the purpose of  visiting  a  person  of  a
           prescribed class or description or entering as the dependent  of
           a person in prescribed circumstances.  The Secretary of  State's
           power was exercised by making the 2012 Regulations,  which  came
           into force on 09 July 2012 and applied to  all  entry  clearance
           applications made on or after that date.


        c)  The  power  conferred  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to   make
           regulations under section 88A, as substituted with  effect  from
           25 June 2013, has not been  exercised.   As  a  result,  appeals
           against refusal of entry  clearance  decisions  continue  to  be
           governed by the 2012 Regulations.


        d) Section 88A will be repealed when section 37 of the  Immigration
           Act 2014 comes into effect.

  11.     The appeal before this Tribunal proceeded on the  basis  that  the
      Respondent is a "family member" of the sponsor, within the compass  of
      regulation 2(3) and (4).  This was not disputed on behalf of the  ECO.
      One of the  cornerstones  of  the  ECO's  grounds  of  appeal  is  the
      following statement:

         "These regulations (viz the 2012 Regulations) do not include  those
         visiting unmarried partners."

      This, as demonstrated above, is a misstatement of the law.   Based  on
      this misstatement, the next  paragraph  of  the  grounds  enshrines  a
      contention that the Respondent's  right  of  appeal  to  the  FtT  was
      restricted to race discrimination and human rights grounds.  This  too
      is misconceived.

12.  In summary, the 2012 Regulations establish a limited class  of  persons
      who enjoy the full range of statutory rights of appeal against refusal
      of entry  clearance  decisions.   The  application  of  the  statutory
      framework to the present case is uncomplicated.  The sponsor ("P")  is
      a person settled in the United Kingdom, while the Respondent ("A") is,
      by common consent, in a relationship with the sponsor that is akin  to
      marriage and has  existed  for  at  least  the  period  of  two  years
      preceding the date of her entry clearance application, 27  June  2013.
      Thus  the  Respondent,  by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  the  2012
      Regulations highlighted above, is a member of the qualifying class.  I
      repeat: this key fact is not in dispute.  It follows that there  is  a
      fundamental misconception in both the grounds of appeal and the  grant
      of permission to appeal.  This should  have  been  apparent  from  the
      mismatch between the grounds of appeal and the terms of  the  impugned
      decision: see [3] supra. Furthermore, there is a clear misstatement of
      the law in the grant of permission to appeal: see [5] supra . Being an
      unmarried partner as defined by the 2012 Regulations,  the  Respondent
      did qualify as a person enjoying an unlimited right of appeal  against
      the  impugned  decision.   Thus  there  was  no  basis  for   granting
      permission to appeal. It follows that  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is
      unimpeachable.

DECISION

13.  Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.


                                    [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 19 September 2014
