
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13680/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 31 July 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN



                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          AHMED SADEQ RAHEEM RAHEEM



                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Ahluwalia, Counsel, instructed by Fragomen
LLP

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Blackford promulgated on 1 April 2014 in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of the applicant, Mr Ahmed Sadeq Raheem Raheem,  for
    entry clearance as a visitor.  The Entry Clearance Officer has appealed
    against that determination but for the sake of continuity I shall refer
    to Mr Ahmed Sadeq Raheem Raheem as the  appellant  as  he  was  in  the
    Tribunal below.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 July 1951  and  he
    applied on 23 April 2013 for entry clearance as a family  visitor.   It
    was refused by a decision made by the Entry Clearance Officer on 7 July
    2013, subsequently confirmed by the Entry Clearance Manager.

 3. I do not need to set out the  reasons  that  were  used  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer because those are set out in the determination of the
    judge in paragraph 15 of his determination.  Suffice it to say that the
    first two issues are now no longer a viable challenge.

 4. The first related to whether or not the sponsor, who is the appellant's
    daughter, is and  was  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  has  a
    doctorate and is currently working as a research assistant at  Imperial
    College London. It may well be that the appellant did not  produce  her
    passport.  That, however, has been produced.  It predates the  decision
    and it demonstrates that she is and was at the material time a  British
    citizen and it can be readily inferred from  that  that  the  challenge
    made by the Entry Clearance Officer cannot now be made out.

 5. The second challenge related to the  appellant's  name.   He  has  been
    variously described as Ahmed Sadeq Raheem Raheem and Ahmed Sadeq Raheem
    Al Raheem It had been explained to the judge that the prefix  'Al',  if
    that is what I  can  call  it,  is  a  reference  to  the  familiar  or
    patronymic name.  Its omission does not signify the use of a  different
    name - an allegation that was made by the Entry Clearance Officer  that
    he was using two different names.

 6. There was also an issue as to whether the appellant  failed  to  reveal
    the fact that he had applied for and been refused  entry  clearance  by
    the American  authorities  but  an  explanation  was  provided  by  the
    appellant and his daughter and that was accepted by the judge.   It  is
    clear that there was no evidence that  he  had  been  refused,  thereby
    rendering the refusal on the basis of paragraph 320(7A)  a  ground  for
    refusal which is not now made out.

 7. The substantial ground of challenge is that  set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter which relates to the appellant's assets, his involvement with  a
    company called the Al-Yamman General Trading Company  Limited  and  his
    relationship with the Al-Bilad Islamic Bank where it is said he was and
    is a vice chairman.  The Entry Clearance Officer apparently looked at a
    website of the bank, or at any rate he conducted an internet search  of
    the bank, which provided a list of all the directors,  members  of  the
    top executive management and the main shareholders, and  the  appellant
    was not listed in any of those headings.

 8. We do not have a printout of what the Entry  Clearance  Officer  looked
    at.  We do not know what his internet search involved  but  all  we  do
    know is that a subsequent printout has been provided  of  the  bank  in
    which the appellant is shown both as  a  director  and  I  think  as  a
    shareholder.

 9. We then come to the evidence of the appellant's means.  It is  slightly
    tangentially dealt with in that the accounts which  were  produced  for
    the judge and which had been produced before me deal with two principal
    accounts of the appellant and one company account.  They  deal  with  a
    period beginning on 1 November 2013. Bearing in mind that the  decision
    complained of is a decision that was made on 7 July 2013  it  therefore
    predates these accounts and that would normally be  a  perfectly  valid
    head of challenge to them.  However, one has to look at these cases  in
    the round.  In the circumstances of this case the  account  number  507
    with the Al-Bilad Islamic Bank is a statement produced on  11  February
    2014.  It covers a period from 3 November 2013 and it  shows  what  was
    clearly a running account. The transactions by the stage of 1  November
    2013 had already apparently  involved  transactions  of  at  least  US$
    372,000, rather indicating that there had been  previous  transactions.
    It is apparent that it carried forward a balance of the account.

10. I am not going to refer to the figures because there are no  commas  in
    the accounts which are provided.  The first account, 507, is  a  dollar
    account. It shows substantial sums of money and, importantly, it  shows
    substantial credits being put into the account as well  as  substantial
    debits taken from the account.  Those  transactions  go  from  page  13
    through to page 43 and cover a period showing very large sums of  money
    being paid into an account and large sums of money being withdrawn from
    the  account.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  these   accounts   are
    fabricated.

11. There then follows at page 44 a letter from the  managing  director  of
    the bank dated 10 February 2014 which indicates that the appellant is a
    member of the board of directors and vice  chairman  of  the  board  of
    directors  as  well,  and  no  apparent  challenge  is  made  to   that
    documentation.

12. The bundle also includes accounts for the Al-Yamman Company for General
    Trade Limited in Baghdad.  It is an  account  for  the  year  ended  31
    December 2012 and shows substantial sums of money on the balance  sheet
    with fixed asserts running into many millions of dinars.   Those assets
    include fixed assets as well as cash in hand. They all  run  into  many
    millions of dinars and they appear to  tally  with  the  other  set  of
    accounts which we have again at page 51, that is, the accounts for  the
    previous year.

13. There are a number of documents provided by the company that have  been
    translated which  indicate  the  state  of  the  company  when  it  was
    incorporated.  There is an indication as to who  are  the  shareholders
    and that it has complied  with  its  requirements  under  the  relevant
    Companies  Act.    There  are  supporting  documents  in  relation   to
    contracts which have been entered into by the company with car  dealers
    in China and contracts in relation to this.  It is not necessary to  go
    into that in any great detail.  Suffice it to say that there is also  a
    bank account of the company  in  Iraqi  dinars,  account  number  5751,
    dealing with a period which begins on 1 December 2013 and once again it
    shows many millions of Iraqi dinars being placed into the account.

14. That satisfies me, because these documents have not been challenged  by
    the respondent in terms of their authenticity, that the appellant is  a
    man of some substance and that he  has  both  personal  bank  accounts,
    (there are two bank accounts in his name), and that he is also involved
    in the Al-Bilad Bank and that he is involved in a  substantial  trading
    company.  All of the material which I have seen, whilst some of it post-
    dating the decision, is capable of shedding light on what the  position
    was at the date the decision was made on 7 July 2013, absent  a  viable
    suggestion that the situation is newly minted.

15. The Judge did not deal with those documents in his findings of fact  in
    paragraphs 18 and 19 in any great detail but it is clear  that  he  had
    them before him. He merely globalised their contents by saying that  he
    was entirely satisfied with the appellant's means and the  availability
    of ample accommodation at his daughter's home.

16. I do not regard it necessary to go into the question  of  accommodation
    in this appeal.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  applicant  would  be
    permitted a recourse to public housing for the week of his stay in  the
    United Kingdom and accordingly the  importance  about  availability  of
    accommodation without recourse to public funds does not enter into  any
    rational consideration of this appeal.

17. The appellant has a perfectly clear immigration history.  There  is  no
    suggestion that he has ever overstayed or that he  has  not  travelled.
    The sponsor, his daughter, has provided and did provide evidence as  to
    her sponsorship and there is no suggestion that she is not  capable  of
    properly sponsoring the appellant for his short visit.  The issue as to
    the requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii) cannot be assessed by  any
    direct evidence.  It will  be  inferred  from  the  material  which  is
    provided in relation to the other matters but  it  is  clear  that  the
    challenges that are made by the Entry Clearance Officer have  not  been
    made out and it was on that basis that he questioned the genuineness of
    the appellant as a visitor and his intention to return, given the  fact
    that it is clear the appellant is involved in a significant business in
    Iraq and has dealings with a bank, both as an account holder and  as  a
    shareholder and as its chairman.  I have no reason to doubt that he has
    a proper intention to return at the conclusion of his visit.

18. On this basis I am satisfied that the Judge reached the correct overall
    decision.  It would have been helpful, I think, had he set out some  of
    the documentary evidence which he  had  relied  upon  in  reaching  his
    findings, but nevertheless  I  am  satisfied  that  he  did  take  that
    documentary  evidence  into  account  and  he  reached  a   sustainable
    decision.

19. In those circumstances I dismiss the  appeal  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer against the decision of the Judge  and  I  uphold  the  judge's
    determination allowing the appeal.  A request was made by Mr  Ahluwalia
    that I should endorse my judgment with a direction that entry clearance
    be provided.  I feel content to do that in the  circumstances  of  this
    case. There is nothing to  suggest  that  there  is  going  to  be  any
    substantial change  in  the  situation  between  March  2014  when  the
    determination was made and today and for these  reasons  I  am  content
    that a direction that entry clearance be granted is made.

DECISION

   1. The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original
      determination of the appeal shall stand.
   2. I direct entry clearance in the capacity sought.


                                                                       [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

