
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13034/2013
                                                               VA/13308/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th January 2015                   |On 12th February 2015               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                               1) ZHENRONG HAN
                               2) ZHIMING HAN

                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    the entry clearance officer - beijing
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Maggie Wong & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are nationals of the Peoples Republic  of  China  and  are
   father and son. The first appellant was born on the  18th  December  1958
   and the second appellant on the 2nd June 1989. They appeal,  having  been
   granted permission upon renewed application, against the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Kelsey)  to  dismiss  their  appeals  against
   refusal of their applications for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
   as family visitors.

2. The respondent refused the  applications,  amongst  other  things,  under
   paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules (making a false  statement  or
   submitting a false document in support of an application). This  decision
   was based upon the respondent being satisfied that the  second  appellant
   had submitted a letter, signed by  the  first  appellant,  which  falsely
   stated that he was employed by his father's company  whereas  he  was  in
   fact unemployed. The second appellant had admitted that he was unemployed
   in a telephone interview with the respondent and had blamed  his  parents
   for the submitting the letter with his  application.  In  the  Notice  of
   Appeal, which was drafted by the second appellant's sister,  Ms  Hui  Hui
   Han, it was claimed that the second appellant had "totally misunderstood"
   the question that he was being asked in the telephone interview, and that
   he had in fact been working continuously for his father's  company  since
   he left school in 2008.

3. The judge set out his findings and reasons at paragraphs 15 to 20 of  his
   decision. I have given added emphasis to the arguable error of  law  that
   gave rise to the granting of permission to appeal in paragraph 17:

    15. These  two  applications  were  refused  for  similar  reasons.  Mr
        Zhenrong Han is said to  have  been  the  general  manager  of  the
        company since August 1997. His son, Mr Ziming Han  was  interviewed
        over the telephone  and  as  a  result  of  that  conversation  the
        respondent concluded that Mr Zhiming Han could not give the name of
        his supposed employer. He then said he was unemployed. In  addition
        he had  not  submitted  any  payslips,  bank  statements  or  other
        evidence of having an income. Mr Zhenrong Han claimed that  he  had
        worked for his company as general manager since 1997. However,  the
        respondent noted that het telephone number given  for  the  company
        was a residential number, and  no  information  about  the  company
        could be found. It did not appear to have  any  website,  and  that
        fact alone is extraordinary in 2013. The sponsor Ms Huihui Han  has
        not explained satisfactorily why the  company  does  not  advertise
        itself. It appeared that Mr Zhenrong Han was complicit in providing
        a false employment letter in support of his  son's  application  to
        obtain entry to the UK, since the company could not be  reached  on
        the telephone number, and there is very little documentary evidence
        to confirm the company's operations.  Both  the  applications  were
        refused under paragraph 320 (7A) of the Immigration Rules.  I  find
        that the appellants have not satisfied me that they run  a  genuine
        business as transporters and hauliers.

    16. Those conclusions have not  been  addressed  or  explained  in  the
        grounds of appeal or in the  documents  submitted  to  support  the
        appeals. The appellants have not submitted  any  evidence  to  show
        that they have telephone  numbers  belonging  to  or  sued  by  the
        business, or that Mr Zhiming Han  actually  receives  a  salary  or
        income from the company. In his interview he said he was unemployed
        and that his parents had arranged  an  employment  letter  for  the
        purpose of the application. He did not appear to have any knowledge
        any knowledge of the business. It  was  later  suggested  that  the
        appellant did not speak Mandarin fluently and  did  not  understand
        the interviewer. There is no satisfactory evidence that Mr  Zhiming
        Han has a role in working in the business.

    17. Mr Zhiming Han had also failed to provide any evidence of  his  own
        financial circumstances  or  any  evidence  of  income  from  other
        sources. That remains the situation. His sister has made  a  number
        of  assertions  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and   other   written
        submissions that she has made to the  tribunal,  but  there  is  no
        evidence to support the  assertion  that  he  is  employed  by  the
        company. No payslips have been submitted and there are no  relevant
        bank statements. The sponsor has made a number  of  assertions  and
        claims with regard to the family business but there is very  little
        independent evidence of any kind to  prove  the  business  actually
        trades, and no cogent evidence to show that Mr  Zhiming  Han  works
        for the  business.  New  evidence,  submitted  after  the  appeals,
        includes documents which came into being after the decision,  so  I
        cannot take them account. The sponsor has also submitted  documents
        claiming that they refer to the business and the vehicles that  are
        used in the business, but there are only a few pages translated  by
        an independent translator. Such documents do not have any weight or
        evidential importance.

    18. Many of the documents have been translated by the sponsor  herself;
        she may be an accurate translator, but she  has  not  provided  any
        evidence that she is qualified as a translator. Nor  did  she  take
        the opportunity to come to the tribunal in order to  give  evidence
        at the hearing to explain the various papers. In any event there is
        still no cogent  evidence  which  addresses  the  main  reason  for
        refusing the applications, namely that her brother  was  unemployed
        and did not work for the family business. The documents supplied do
        not explain any of the reasons why the applications  were  refused.
        The fact that some lorries may belong to the firm  is  no  evidence
        that her brother works on behalf of  the  company  and  receives  a
        salary from the company.

    19. I also note that Mr Zhanerong Han has submitted a letter in support
        of the appeal confirming that his  son  Mr  Zhiming  Han  has  been
        working for the  company.  There  is  no  independent  evidence  to
        support that and I can place little or no weight on a  letter  from
        the father. I have not seen evidence to show that  Mr  Zhiming  Han
        performs work for, or receives any remuneration from, the company.

    20. In all the circumstances I can find little evidence of  any  weight
        to show that Mr Zhiming Han has any roles or status in the company.
        There is no evidence which really addresses the conclusions of  the
        entry clearance officer following  the  interview.  For  all  those
        reasons I find the appellants have filed  to  meet  the  burden  of
        proof to show that they are genuinely applying to come  to  the  UK
        for a family visit of no longer than six months and that they would
        return.  The  appellants  have  failed  to  supply  evidence  which
        satisfies me that the appellants are  genuinely  seeking  a  family
        visit. For all those reasons the appeals are dismissed.

4. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds noted  that,



         "... it is arguable that the judge erred in law  by  rejecting  all
    consideration of the evidence provided for the purposes of the  appeal.
    The fact that it was provided after the decision  did  not  necessarily
    make the evidence inadmissible as "post decision evidence".

5. The judge's concern was in fact not merely that the  documents  had  been
   provided after the date of decision, but that they had been created after
   that date. This was a fact that was undoubtedly capable of  reducing  the
   weight that he might otherwise have attached to them. It nevertheless did
   not render them inadmissible  under  the  terms  of  Section  85  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration Act 2002. To that  extent,  the  judge  made  an
   error of law. However, in spite of Mr Vokes best efforts to  persuade  me
   to the contrary, I have concluded that the error was  immaterial  to  the
   outcome of the appeal. This is for the following reasons.

6. Firstly, as I have already observed, the judge would have  been  entitled
   to attach less weight than otherwise to the documents in question  (those
   attached to the Notices of Appeal) on account of them having been created
   after the date of the decision. Secondly, the documents were not relevant
   to the issue of the falsity or otherwise of the letter that the appellant
   had submitted in support of his application and which ultimately  led  to
   the dismissal of both appeals. It is true, as Mr Vokes pointed out,  that
   these documents were relevant to the existence of the  first  appellant's
   company; a matter that had also been put  in  issue  by  the  respondent.
   Nevertheless, they were not relevant to the ultimately decisive  question
   of whether the second appellant was working for that company, as  claimed
   in the letter signed  by  his  father.  Thirdly,  the  legally  erroneous
   statement that is contained within the sentence that  I  have  underlined
   was but one of many reasons  that  the  judge  gave  for  dismissing  the
   appeal. The judge's other reasons were all perfectly sustainable upon the
   evidence that was before  him.  He  might  have  added  that  the  second
   appellant had not in fact retracted the admission that he was unemployed,
   or explained how he had come to make it in the first place.

Notice of Decision

7. The appeal is dismissed, and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   therefore stands.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed                              Date


Judge D Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

