
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13399/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24th July 2015                    |On 11th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               muhammad ikhlaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saini (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey, promulgated on 8th  July  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Sheldon Court on 24th June  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Muhammad Icklaq.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born  on   10th
    September 1986.  He appealed against the refusal of entry clearance  as
    a family visitor by the Respondent in a decision dated 17th June  2013.
    The Appellant's claim is that  he  wishes  to  visit  his  brother,  Mr
    Mohammed Altaf, who is the Sponsor and his  sisters.   He  had  made  a
    previous application for entry clearance which had  been  refused  less
    than two months previously.

The Respondent's Decision Dated 17th June 2013

 3. The Respondent's decision states that the Appellant had  not  addressed
    the Entry Clearance Officer's concerns the last time  in  the  previous
    refusal notice two months earlier.  He claimed to be employed as a head
    electrician with Mughal Construction.  As evidence of his employment he
    provided a letter or reference from his employers.   However,  the  ECO
    could not  be  satisfied  that  this  document  supported  the  claimed
    employment  circumstances.   The  Appellant  had  provided   the   same
    documentation in his previous application for entry clearance.  He  had
    not addressed the concerns which were raised then.  It was not credible
    that the employer would authorise three months' continuous  leave  from
    the Appellant's employment for the purpose of  a  family  visit  alone.
    The Appellant resided in a joint family system.  He  had  no  dependent
    family of his own.  He had no assets of his own.  The ECO was concerned
    about the Appellant's personal and employment circumstances and was not
    satisfied that he had demonstrated a significant social or economic tie
    enabling him to return to Pakistan in the  event  of  the  grant  of  a
    visitors visa to the UK.

The Judge's Finding

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that there was a  letter  from  Mughal
    Construction dated 28th May 2013 confirming that the Appellant had been
    employed full-time for five years earning 20,000 rupees and that he had
    been granted three months' leave.  There was also a bank  statement  in
    the Appellant's name (see paragraph 8).  The judge  did  not  draw  any
    adverse inferences at all from the fact that the  Appellant's  employer
    had granted him three months' leave to go to the UK (see paragraph 12).



 5. However, if the Appellant's job could be filled during the time that he
    was away for three months, then, "It should equally be possible to fill
    his job on a  permanent  basis  so  that  the  employer  would  not  be
    disadvantaged should the Appellant chose not to return and hence  would
    not be concerned to ascertain his intention" (see paragraph 13).

 6. The fact was that this was a case where the Appellant  lived  with  his
    parents and he owned no property of his own and had no  family  of  his
    own (see paragraph 14).  The judge concluded that,

         "Given that there has been  no  new  evidence  provided  with  this
         application in the form of a new letter from the  employer  or  any
         other evidence of the Appellant's ties to Pakistan,  and  given  my
         concerns set out in paragraph 13 above, I  am  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant  has  not  ...  discharged  the  burden  of  proof"  (see
         paragraph 15).

    The appeal was dismissed.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge provided little  reasons  as
    to why the appeal was rejected.  There were only three short paragraphs
    which provided inadequate assessment of the evidence.  But the  refusal
    was speculative.

 8. On 12th August 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 28th August 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 24th July 2015, Mr Saini, appearing as  the
    Appellant's representative, argued that the primary issue was  that  of
    "intention" on the part of the Appellant.  There had been an employer's
    letter confirming that the employer would give him three months'  leave
    to go to the UK to visit his brother and sisters.  However,  there  was
    no proper reference by the judge to the documents that she had referred
    to.

11. Secondly,  the  credibility  of  the  application,   in  terms  of  the
    "intention" of the Appellant, can properly be assessed  by  looking  at
    the wider circumstances, which in this case were to do  with  the  fact
    that the Appellant's parents and his brothers had also come to  the  UK
    previously and had all returned back to Pakistan.  This evidence was in
    the bundle before the judge.  The judge made no reference to it.   This
    amounted  to  a  fundamental  failure  to  have  regard   to   material
    considerations.

12. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed
    because the judge directly addressed the issue that, "there has been no
    new evidence provided with this application in the form of a new letter
    from the employer or any of the evidence of  the  Appellant's  ties  to
    Pakistan ..." (paragraph 15).  In this respect, the judge was  entirely
    correct in stating what she did state.  This is because the  employer's
    letter was simply the same letter as the one provided last  time.   All
    that had happened was that the date  had  been  changed  and  the  same
    letter re-signed again.  The refusal was dated  17th  June  2013.   The
    letter is dated 24th June 2013.  It  is  the  same  letter.   There  is
    nothing new advanced.  The judge was concerned to  have  new  evidence,
    especially in the light of what she had said at paragraph  13,  namely,
    that it would be easy to fill the Appellant's job even on  a  permanent
    basis, were he to go for as long as three months to the UK.

13. Second, whereas it was now being argued that the  Appellant's  brothers
    had come to the UK and had returned back to Pakistan, this was entirely
    irrelevant.  This was because the brothers were married  and  they  did
    leave their families behind before they came to the UK.  In this  case,
    the Appellant was single, unattached, without children, and without any
    assets of his own.  Such earnings that he had from a low paid job  were
    hardly of much significance.

14. In reply, Mr Saini submitted that the evidence that family members  had
    been coming over a number of years and returning back to  Pakistan  was
    material evidence.  The judge should have taken it into account.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCA 2007) such that I should set aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  This is a supervising Tribunal.  It can  only  intervene  in
    the decision of a lower Tribunal if the decision of the lower  Tribunal
    amounts to perversity or leads to a decision that is irrational and  it
    is important to remember the stricture by Brooke LJ in R (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982, that "these epithets  are  completely  inappropriate"  in
    many cases when applied by practitioners.  It would have been otherwise
    if there has been a new employer's letter and the judge had  overlooked
    this.  What transpired from the employer was not new  evidence  because
    all it was, was the same letter with the date changed.

16. Second, as far as evidence of other  family  members  is  concerned  as
    having visited the UK and then returned back to Pakistan,  whilst  this
    was relevant evidence, it is not such as to tilt the balance decisively
    in a case such as the present in favour of  the  Appellant,  where  the
    crucial "intention" is that of the  Appellant  himself.   This  is  the
    Appellant who is at the date of the decision, single,  unattached,  and
    living in an extended family system, with no assets of  his  own.   The
    judge was entitled to give such an application  the  scrutiny  that  it
    deserved, and in the absence of evidence specific to the Appellant, she
    was entitled to conclude as she did.   It  is  obviously  open  to  the
    Appellant to make another application with proper new  evidence.   This
    would then have to be assessed anew.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    3rd August 2015

