
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13522/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2014                                 |On 23 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 KHALIL AZAR

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Myers made following a hearing at Bradford on 28th March 2014.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Syria.  He  appealed  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision made on 5th July 2013 to  refuse  him  and
    his wife entry clearance as visitors under paragraph 41 of HC 395.

 3. The judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor and was  satisfied  that
    the  concerns  expressed  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  been
    satisfactorily addressed,  and  that  the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    relating to visitors were met  She allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the claimant did not have a full right of appeal, which  was  abolished
    by Section 52 of the Crimes and Courts Act 2013 in family visitor  visa
    cases and which affected applications submitted on  or  after  25  June
    2013.  This application was made on 4th July 2013. It was therefore not
    open to the judge to allow the appeal.

 5. The Sponsor complains that the notice of decision informed him that  he
    had a right for appeal against the decision.  He said that he had  been
    put to  a  considerable  amount  of  expense  and  inconvenience  as  a
    consequence of the mistake of the Entry Clearance Officer.

 6. Mrs Petterson acknowledged the errors but miantained that there was  no
    right of appeal.  She did however agree with him  that  he  should  not
    have to pay a fee because the expenses to which the  Sponsor  has  been
    put were as a consequence of errors by the Entry Clearance Officer.

 7. It is most unfortunate that the sponsor has wasted time and money on an
    appeal which should never have been brought.   I would  hope  that  the
    fees which he has paid can be refunded, although I have no jurisdiction
    to overturn a fee order.

 8. The correct course for him is to advise  his  parents  to  make  a  re-
    application enclosing the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge who made strong findings in their favour.

 9.  However  this  decision  cannot  stand  because  the  judge   had   no
    jurisdiction to consider the appeal.

Decision

10. The judge erred in law and her decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




Signed
                                Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

