
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/13154/2013
                                                               va/13155/2013
                                                               va/13156/2013
                                                               va/13157/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 September 2015                            |On 30 September 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            1) mr muhammed nadeem
                             2) mrs anwari bibi
                                  3) miss m
                                 4) miss f n
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bajwa, A. Bajwa and Co, Solicitors
For the Respondents:   Mr L. Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Verity sitting at Hatton Cross on 6  February  2015)  dismissing
    their  appeals  against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  family
    visitors.  Permission to appeal to the  UT  was  granted  on  the  sole
    ground that it  was  arguable  that  the  appellants  and  their  legal
    representatives had not received notice of the hearing. The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the appellants require anonymity for these proceedings in the  UT.



Relevant Legal Principles

 2. The requirements to be met by an applicant for a visit visa are set out
    in paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The requirements set out in paragraph 41 include the  following,  which
    is that the applicant:

    "(i) is genuinely seeking entry as a  general  visitor  for  a  limited
         period as stated by him, not exceeding 6 months; and

     (ii)     intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  the  period
         of visit as stated by him; and

     (iii)    does not intend to take  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom;
         and...

     (vi)     will maintain  and  accommodate  himself  and  any  dependants
         adequately out of resources available to him  without  recourse  to
         public funds or taking employment; or will, with any dependants, be
         maintained and accommodated adequately by relatives or friends; and

     (vii)    can meet the cost of the return or onward journey; and

     (viii) is not a child under the age of 18."

 4. The burden is on the applicant to show that he meets all  the  relevant
    requirements for entry clearance as a visitor contained in paragraph 41
    or, if a child, the requirements of paragraph 46A. On appeal against  a
    refusal decision he must show, if he is  a  family  visitor,  that  the
    decision of the respondent refusing to grant him leave to enter in this
    capacity is not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration  rules,  or  is
    otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  law:  see  Section  84   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  sub-
    sections (a) and (e), The standard  of  proof  is  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The  Tribunal  may  consider  only  the   circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse: see  Section  85(5)
    of the 2002 Act.

 5. But if the applicant is not a family visitor,  his  appeal  rights  are
    much more restricted. Pursuant to Section 88A of the 2002 Act  and  the
    Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)  Regulations  2003,  he  can  only
    appeal on the ground that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section
    19B of the Race Relations Act 1976 or unlawful under section 6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.







The Application and Grounds of Refusal

 6. The first and second appellants are husband and wife, and the third  to
    fourth appellants are their children. They applied to visit the UK  for
    one  month  in  order  to  attend  a  family  wedding.   The   parents'
    applications were refused on 21 May 2013 under sub-paragraphs (i), (ii)
    and (vii) of paragraph 41 of the rules. The reasoning of  the  ECO  was
    that Mr Nadeem had not provided adequate evidence of his claimed  self-
    employment as "Nadeem Motors" or of his claimed income from such  self-
    employment; and that their UK sponsor (Mr Nadeem's niece) had  provided
    bank statements which were over four months old. So  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that either the main appellant or the sponsor  had  given  an
    accurate picture of their respective financial circumstances.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appeal against this decision came before Judge Verity for  an  oral
    hearing at which the ECO was represented. There was  no  appearance  by
    the appellant's nominated legal representatives, Bajwa &  Co,  although
    the notice of hearing had apparently been sent to their  address.   The
    judge noted that no additional information had been provided by way  of
    appeal in answer to the concerns raised by the ECO, and  she  dismissed
    the appeal inter alia on the ground that the appellants had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. At the hearing before me, I reviewed the convoluted procedural  history
    of these appeals and the  evidence  relied  on  by  way  of  appeal  as
    establishing that the notice of hearing had not been received. Mr Bajwa
    produced a witness statement from the sponsor in which  she  sought  to
    explain why she was not attending the hearing and why  the  hearing  of
    the appeal should be adjourned for a fourth time  (the  hearing  before
    Judge Verity being  the  third  adjourned  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal). Mr Tarlow submitted that even  if  the  appellants  did  not
    receive notice of the hearing there  was  no  unfairness  as  they  had
    failed to put in evidence to discharge the burden of  proof.  Mr  Bajwa
    submitted that the appellants ought to be given one more  bite  of  the
    cherry. Alternatively, he invited me to remake the  decision  in  their
    favour, having regard to  the  evidence  that  was  enclosed  with  the
    application (which he handed up) and which, he said, the  ECO  had  not
    taken into account.

Discussion

 9. The appeal was first due to be heard on 25 April 2014. But on 16  April
    2014 Bajwa & Co sought an adjournment because the appellant had  posted
    documentary evidence from Pakistan which had not reached them.  He  was
    now re-gathering the evidence, and it was expected by 28 April 2014  at
    the earliest.  The request was granted, and this  was  communicated  to
    Bajwa & Co by the service of a NOTICE OF ADJOURNED HEARING on 22  April
    2014. The same notice informed them that the  new  hearing  would  take
    place on 13 August 2014.

10. In August 2014 there was a repeat of  what  happened  in  April.  On  7
    August 2014 Bajwa & Co sought an adjournment because the documents that
    the appellants wished  to  rely  on  had  not  yet  reached  them  from
    Pakistan. Also, the respondent's bundle was incomplete as  it  did  not
    contain the documents submitted in  support  of  the  application.  The
    request was granted, and this was communicated to Bajwa  &  Co  by  the
    service of a NOTICE OF ADJOURNED HEARING on 7  August  2014.  The  same
    notice informed them that  the  new  hearing  would  take  place  on  6
    February 2015.

11. In a letter dated 31 March 2015 Mrs Selina Ashfaq of Bajwa 7 Co says as
    follows:

         We did receive a Notice of Hearing for the  appellants  for  August
         2014 for which an adjournment had been requested and granted. I can
         confirm that the Tribunal never sent us a notice for the hearing on
         5 February 2015. We have a computerised postal record  for  over  5
         years.

12. I find that Mrs Ashfaq is mistaken, and that there was a  breakdown  in
    the firm's internal administration. Mr Bajwa was unable to  explain  to
    me how the firm would have become aware that  the  adjournment  request
    made on 7 August 2014 had been successful without also  becoming  aware
    of the new hearing  date  -  as  the  information  on  both  topics  is
    contained in the  same  document.  Absent  receipt  of  the  Notice  of
    Adjourned Hearing, the firm would have had to proceed  on  the  premise
    that the appeal hearing on 13 August was going ahead.  But  it  is  not
    suggested that this is what happened. On the balance  of  probabilities
    the firm received the Notice of Adjourned Hearing.

13. I do not consider that the lack of representation  at  the  hearing  in
    February 2015 has led to procedural unfairness, or that the  appellants
    have thereby been deprived of a fair hearing.

14. There has been an egregious failure by the main appellant  and  his  UK
    sponsor to comply with the duty to help the  Tribunal  to  further  the
    overriding objective. The  conduct  of  the  appeal  by  the  appellant
    borders upon an abuse of the process. The grounds of appeal were purely
    formulaic, and did not respond to the concerns raised by the  ECO.  The
    appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  had  plenty  of  time  to  assemble
    additional evidence to  address  the  ECO's  concerns;  and,  with  the
    benefit of hindsight, the grounds for seeking  an  adjournment  of  the
    hearings scheduled for April and August 2014 are wholly  unsatisfactory
    and lacking in credibility. The bundle of documents  handed  up  to  me
    includes documents  that  were  clearly  generated  after  the  refusal
    decision, such as a witness statement from the appellant made in  early
    2014. So he was able to send  documents  to  his  lawyers  in  the  UK.
    Remarkably, one of the excuses advanced by the sponsor in her letter of
    23 September 2014 for adjourning the appeal yet again is that her uncle
    has not yet been able to post all the relevant documents necessary  for
    his appeal.

15. It appears to have been overlooked that the ECO  also  raised  concerns
    about  the  sponsor's  financial   circumstances.   She   is   in   the
    jurisdiction, and easily accessible to the appellant's lawyers. Yet she
    has never apparently been asked  to  provide  a  witness  statement  or
    additional documentary evidence which  addresses  the  concerns  raised
    about her financial circumstances.

16. The judge was wrong to find that  the  parents  had  restricted  appeal
    rights. They had full appeal rights, as the ECM conceded. But her error
    on this issue was not material, as she addressed  all  the  appeals  on
    their merits. She gave adequate reasons for finding that the appellants
    had not discharged the burden of proof.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands. These appeals are dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Immigration Judge Monson
(Immigration Judge sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

