
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/13806/2013
                                                               VA/13748/2013
                                                               VA/13754/2013
                                                               VA/13751/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 29 April 2015                         |           On 22 May 2015           |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Muhammad Shafique
                               Roohi Shafique
                               Nimra Shafique
                                Iman Shafique
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Falak Sheraz Rama (Sponsor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We shall refer to the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent and  to
    the respondents as the appellants, as they appeared respectively before
    the First-tier Tribunal. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.   The
    second appellant is the wife of the first appellant and the  third  and
    fourth appellants are their  children.   They  had  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as visitors.   Their applications  were
    refused by decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi,  on  17
    July 2013 and the appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Hussain) which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  13  August  2014,
    allowed the appeals under the Immigration Rules.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. These appeals turn on the  application  of  paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules:

         (7A) where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application.

 3. As Judge Hussain noted, the  appellants  had  claimed  that  the  first
    appellant was;

         a business executive with Prince Auto Store where he had a  monthly
         income of 350,000 rupees.  To support his  claimed  employment,  he
         has provided various documents including membership of  the  Lahore
         Chambers of Commerce and Industry...  However, verification  checks
         conducted by the respondent showed this document not to be genuine.

    The parties do  not  dispute  that  the  Lahore  Chambers  of  Commerce
    document was false insofar as it contained information about the  first
    appellant which was not true.

 4. The judge recorded that the first appellant had,

         applied for membership of  the  Lahore  Chambers  of  Commerce  and
         Industry through an agent called Rizwan who was  working  for  that
         institution.  He provided him with all the documentation and a  fee
         and in return received a certificate.

    The appellant had attempted to bring a prosecution against  Rizwan  but
    the police had refused to act.  The judge noted that Prince Auto  Store
    bearing  the  reference  number  shown  on  the  Chamber  of   Commerce
    certificate was owned by one Mohammad Nadeem.  The  judge  went  on  to
    observe that;

         There is voluminous documentation suggesting that the appellant  is
         connected to a business called Prince Auto Store.   I  am  inclined
         therefore to the view that there may be two businesses of that name
         with different proprietors.

    The judge commented that "it appears that  the  'agent'  simply  issued
    [the first appellant] a false certificate with a number  that  belonged
    to the other Prince Auto Store owned by Mohammad Nadeem" [14].




 5. At [15] the judge wrote:

         I direct myself that the law requires the Entry  Clearance  Officer
         to demonstrate that any  false  statement/document  was  submitted,
         whether by himself or through a third party, with dishonest intent.
          In this case the question of a third party submitting the impugned
         document does not arise because the third party simply procured the
         certificate on the instructions of the  appellant  and  that  third
         party was no way connected with its submission  to  the  ECO.   The
         main question therefore is whether the appellant attached  it  with
         his application with a dishonest intent.

 6. In the grounds of appeal, the respondent asserts  that  there  was  "no
    dispute  that  a  false  document  was  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application" [6].  The respondent relies on AA  (Nigeria)  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 773, in particular at [67]:
    First, "false representation"  is  aligned  in  the  rule  with  "false
    document". It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a  lie
    about itself. Of course it is possible for a person to make  use  of  a
    false document (for instance a  counterfeit  currency  note,  but  that
    example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the  context  of
    this discussion) in total ignorance  of  its  falsity  and  in  perfect
    honesty. But the document itself is  dishonest.  It  is  highly  likely
    therefore that where  an  applicant  uses  in  all  innocence  a  false
    document for the purpose of obtaining  entry  clearance,  or  leave  to
    enter or to remain, it is because some  other  party,  it  might  be  a
    parent, or sponsor, or agent, has dishonestly promoted the use of  that
    document. The  response  of  a  requirement  of  mandatory  refusal  is
    entirely understandable in such a  situation.  The  mere  fact  that  a
    dishonest document has been used for such an important  application  is
    understandably a sufficient reason for a mandatory refusal. That is why
    the rule expressly emphasises that it applies "whether or  not  to  the
    applicant's knowledge".




 7. At [18], the judge wrote:

         Looked at in its totality, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant
         submitted the certificate  with  knowledge  and  if  there  was  no
         knowledge on his part, then any intention to use it could not  have
         been with dishonesty.

    Both in that paragraph and also at [15] (see above)  we  consider  that
    the judge has erred in law.  We say  that  for  the  following  reason.
    Central to the judge's reasoning at [15] appears to be his belief  that
    paragraph 320(7A) should not apply in  this  case  because  the  "third
    party [had] simply procured the certificate on the instructions of  the
    appellant and that third party was no way connected with its submission
    to the ECO."  The judge appears to have been  influenced  by  the  fact
    that the first appellant had taken "prompt  action"  in  reporting  the
    matter to the police and also  that  he  had  "no  obvious  reason  for
    procuring a false statement." [18]. However, the judge's reasoning  was
    based on error. Paragraph 320(7A) requires only  that  false  documents
    "have been submitted"; it is not disputed in this instance that a false
    certificate was submitted  to  the  ECO.   Further,  the  paragraph  is
    drafted widely enough to include  the  submission  of  false  documents
    which may not be "material to the application [for  entry  clearance]".
    We consider that, on its proper construction, the rule is  wide  enough
    to cover documents which may not affect the outcome of  an  application
    in any way but  which  are  (i)  false  and  (ii)  submitted  with  the
    application; whether  the  applicant  or  another  person  created  the
    document  or  whether  its  submission  to  the  ECO  was  or  was  not
    accompanied by dishonest intent on the part of  the  appellant  or  any
    third  party  will  make  no  difference  to  the  outcome.   Moreover,
    paragraph 320(7A) does not require that a false document  is  submitted
    with the intention of obtaining a visa;  the  expression  used  is  "in
    relation to the application";  that is a term, in our  view,  which  is
    wide enough to include the facts of the present appeal.  Judge  Hussain
    appears to have  believed  that,  to  fall  within  the  provisions  of
    320(7A), the agent who created the false document had to  be  connected
    to or, at the very least, have been aware that the  document  would  be
    submitted to the ECO in support of a visa application.  That belief  is
    based on a false construction of paragraph 320(7A) and, in consequence,
    we find that the judge erred in law such that his  determination  falls
    to be set aside.

 8. We have  proceeded  to  remake  the  decision.   Following  the  proper
    construction of paragraph 320(7A) which we  have  outlined  above,  the
    fact that the document was (i) false and (ii) submitted in relation  to
    the application for  entry  clearance  is  sufficient  to  justify  the
    refusal under that paragraph.  We acknowledge that the first  appellant
    may have had no dishonest intent in submitting the document and that he
    was not aware of the false nature  of  the  document  until  after  his
    application for entry clearance had been  refused.   However,  for  the
    reasons which we have given, we dismiss the appellants' appeals against
    the decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer.

 9. There is, of course, nothing to prevent these  appellants  from  making
    further applications for entry clearance.  We are  well  aware  that  a
    refusal under paragraph 320 may have a negative impact but  it  is  our
    hope that an Entry Clearance Officer will have regard to the particular
    facts of this appeal when considering any future applications.

DECISION

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  promulgated  on  13
    August 2014 is set aside.  We have remade the decision.  The appeals of
    the appellants against the decisions of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    dated 17 July 2013 are dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 5 May 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
