
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/13448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2014                               |On 15 July 2014              |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - mumbai

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A S J
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Entry Clearance Officer): Mr P Nath, Home Office
                                       Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation and no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley.  For ease of  reference,  throughout
    this determination I shall refer to the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who
    was the original respondent as "the Entry Clearance Officer" and to A S
    J, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of India, who was born on 31 May 2011.  On 3
    June 2011 (when she was 2 years old) an application  was  made  on  her
    behalf for entry clearance to allow her to  visit,  together  with  her
    mother, her mother's sister in the UK.

 3. This application, together with that of her mother, was refused by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and the claimant,  together  with  her  mother,
    appealed against this decision.  It should be noted that in the refusal
    letters sent both to the  claimant  and  her  mother,  they  were  each
    informed that they had a right of appeal.  The letter to  the  claimant
    stated as follows:

         "Your right of appeal

         You are entitled to appeal  against  this  decision  under  Section
         82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  If  you
         wish to appeal you must complete  the  attached  IAFT-2  notice  of
         appeal form.  An information sheet has also been provided ...

         If you decide to appeal against the refusal  of  this  application,
         the decision will be reviewed with your grounds of appeal  and  the
         supporting documents you provide ..."

 4. It is not necessary for the purposes of this determination to  set  out
    any of the reasons given by the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  refusing
    the application, for the reasons which appear below.  It is  sufficient
    to say that following consideration of the  appeal  on  the  papers  at
    North Shields on 18 February 2014, in a determination promulgated on 12
    March 2014 Judge Handley allowed the appeals of both the  claimant  and
    her mother.  He considered that on the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    claimant and her mother had both established that the  requirements  of
    the Rules were satisfied and that entry clearance  should  be  granted.
    Again, it should be noted that no objection was taken before him as  to
    this claimant's right of appeal.

 5. Following this decision, however, the Entry Clearance Officer  realised
    that in fact the claimant should not have been  told  that  she  had  a
    right of appeal, because, it is now said, the Rules  no  longer  permit
    this.  Prior to 9 July 2012,  a  visit  to  an  aunt  came  within  the
    category of a "family visit" such as to give rise to a right of appeal,
    but on that date the Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
    2012 took effect, and by virtue of those Regulations a "member  of  the
    family" of the person to be visited is limited to:

         "Spouse, civil partner, father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather,
         grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, brother or sister ... father-
         in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or sister-in-law ...  son-in-
         law or daughter-in-law; or  ...  stepfather,  stepmother,  stepson,
         stepdaughter, stepbrother or stepsister".

    In other words, this no longer includes aunt or niece.  Accordingly, it
    is argued that the judge made a material error of law  by  entertaining
    the appeal, because he lacked jurisdiction to hear it, and the decision
    should be set aside for this reason.

The Hearing

 6. On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Nath relied on the grounds
    and submitted that the decision did not attract a full right of  appeal
    because the Regulations had been changed.  This was a challenge only to
    the decision in respect of the claimant; no challenge was made  to  the
    decision allowing the claimant's mother's appeal, because she had had a
    right of appeal.

Discussion

 7. The right of an applicant to appeal against an immigration decision  is
    provided under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 of which the relevant parts provide as follows:

         "82. Right of Appeal: General

                (1)    Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a
                    person he may appeal to the Tribunal.

                (2)    In this part "immigration decision" means -

                    ...

                    (b)    refusal of entry clearance ..."

 8. By Section 84, it is provided as follows:

         "84. Grounds of Appeal

                (1)    An appeal under Section 82(1) against an  immigration
                    decision must be brought on one or more of the following
                    grounds -

                    (a)    that the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with
                        Immigration Rules;

                    (b)    that the decision is unlawful by  virtue  of  ...
                        [the applicable section of the Race Relations  Act]
                        ...;

                    (c)    that the decision is unlawful under Section 6  of
                        the Human Rights Act ... (public authority  not  to
                        act contrary to Human Rights Convention)  as  being
                        incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights
                        ..."

 9. It cannot be argued that the decision is unlawful by virtue of the Race
    Relations Act or that the decision is unlawful as being contrary to any
    Convention right of this claimant, and so accordingly the  only  ground
    on which an appeal against the decision could be brought  is  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules (which is the
    basis upon which the appeal was brought, and allowed).   However,  such
    an appeal is subject to the provisions of Section 88A of the Act  which
    provides as follows:

         "88A.    Entry Clearance

                (1)    A person may not appeal under Section  82(1)  against
                    refusal of an application for entry clearance unless the
                    application was made for the purposes of -

                    (a)    visiting a  person  of  a  class  or  description
                        prescribed by Regulations for the purposes of  this
                        subsection, or

                    (b)     entering  as  the  dependant  of  a  person   in
                        circumstances prescribed  by  Regulations  for  the
                        purposes of this subsection."

10. Section 88A(1)(b) does not apply in this case, and, although prior to 9
    July 2012 the claimant  would  have  been  permitted  to  appeal  under
    Section 88A(1)(a) (because a visit to  an  aunt  was  until  that  date
    prescribed by the Regulations) following that date,  the  visit  to  an
    aunt is no longer prescribed by the Regulations and so technically  the
    Entry Clearance Officer is correct when he argues  that  this  claimant
    did not in fact have a right of appeal.

11. Accordingly we are in a situation where this claimant brought an appeal
    because she was told by the Entry Clearance  Officer  that  she  had  a
    right to bring such an appeal, where no objection was taken before  her
    appeal was heard to the effect that she did not have a right  to  bring
    such an appeal and where, having considered all the evidence put before
    him, the judge considered that her appeal  should  be  allowed  on  the
    merits.

12. In these circumstances, it is in my judgment clear  that  in  light  of
    these factors the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  should  now  grant  entry
    clearance to this claimant because there is no  legitimate  basis  upon
    which it can now properly be argued  that  she  does  not  satisfy  the
    requirements under the Rules (a hearing having so decided which hearing
    only took place after the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  informed  the
    claimant that she had the right to appeal,  and  for  the  purposes  of
    which the entry  clearance   had  submitted  all  documents  and  other
    material considered relevant to the appeal).

13. However, notwithstanding that on the  merits  there  is  no  basis  for
    setting aside the decision, I am nonetheless bound by the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Pavandeep Virk and others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ
    652 in the course of which  at  paragraph  23  Patten  LJ,  with  whose
    judgment the other members of the court agreed, stated as follows:

         "... The FtT is a creation of statute whose  jurisdiction  in  this
         case is limited by the terms of s.82 of the  2002  Act.   The  same
         goes for the UT.  Statutory jurisdiction  cannot  be  conferred  by
         waiver or agreement; or by  the  failure  of  the  parties  or  the
         Tribunal to be alive  to  the  point.   Although,  as  Longmore  LJ
         pointed out, decisions taken without jurisdiction may in due course
         become irreversible, that point has not been reached in this  case.
         It was, in my judgment, open to either the FtT or the  UT  to  take
         the point about jurisdiction notwithstanding  the  failure  of  the
         Secretary of State to raise it herself ..."

14.  It  cannot  be  said  in  this  case  that  the  decision  had  become
    irreversible, because the Entry Clearance Officer  brought  his  appeal
    within the time  prescribed  within  the  Rules.   Accordingly,  in  my
    judgment, the jurisdiction point now having been taken,  this  Tribunal
    has no alternative but to find that as a matter of fact, the First-tier
    Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to entertain this claimant's appeal.
     It follows that I am bound, however reluctantly, to allow this appeal,
    although, as I have already indicated, I consider in the  circumstances
    of this case that having now succeeded in establishing  this  point  of
    principle, it would be improper for the Entry Clearance Officer not now
    to grant the claimant entry clearance in any event.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal with regard to  the
claimant (but not her mother, who was the first appellant  in  that  appeal)
and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's (but not her mother's) appeal  is  dismissed,  on  the  basis
that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to entertain her appeal.




Signed:                                 Date: 9 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

