
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13083/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 8th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Ghalib Yasir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saini (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page promulgated on 1st May 2014, following a hearing at  Newport
    on 23rd April 2014, in which the judge allowed the appeal of Mr  Ghalib
    Yasir.  The Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, applied  for,  and  was
    subsequently granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  14th
    December 1991.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 9th June 2013 refusing his application for entry clearance  as  a
    family visitor in order to visit his brother with his mother,  who  had
    already been granted  entry  clearance.   The  Appellant's  mother  did
    travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  visit  the  Appellant's   brother
    subsequently and did return to Pakistan.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge had regard to  the  fact  that  evidence  was  given  by  the
    Appellant's sponsoring brother, Nazakat Hussain, "who has  sponsored  a
    number of members of his family to visit the  United  Kingdom,  all  of
    whom returned to Pakistan" (paragraph 3).  The judge held that

         "The evidence of the Appellant's  brother  satisfied  me  that  the
         Appellant's  family  are  law  abiding  people  who   respect   the
         immigration laws of the United Kingdom.   This  Sponsor  would  not
         countenance the Appellant or any member of his family remaining  in
         the United Kingdom unlawfully" (paragraph 4).

 4. In particular, consideration was given to the fact that the Appellant's
    brother had  sponsored  his  father  who  had  also  returned  back  to
    Pakistan.  There was evidence before the judge that,  "Mr  Hussain  was
    adamant that his brother would have returned with his mother if he  had
    been allowed to visit.  He guaranteed  that  the  Appellant  would  not
    overstay..." (paragraph 4).

 5. The judge also heard how the Appellant's  father  had  visited  the  UK
    regularly since 1992 every year and  had  returned  back  to  Pakistan.
    Finally, consideration was given to the fact that the Appellant himself
    was a student at Jinnah Model Science College where  he  had  completed
    the first year (paragraph 5).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge had wrongly allowed the
    appeal on the basis there had been past compliance with the Immigration
    Rules by other family members  of  the  Sponsor,  rather  than  by  the
    Appellant himself, because this  had  the  effect  of  overlooking  the
    Appellant's true intentions, which the judge had to judge independently
    himself.

 8. On 6th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted.





Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 15th August 2014, Mr  Smart,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, stated that he would  rely  upon
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The  crucial  question  here  for  the  judge's
    determination  was  the  intention  of  the  Appellant  himself.   This
    question could not be answered by looking at the  intentions  of  other
    family members.  The fact that other family members  had  returned  was
    relevant to their circumstances.  The circumstances  of  the  Appellant
    himself may well be different.  The judge had erred in not focusing  on
    the Appellant's own circumstances and his own true intention.

10. For his part, Mr Saini submitted that this had been a late  application
    for appeal by the Respondent, and that the late application should  not
    have been overlooked or condoned in any way.  He  also  submitted  that
    the fact that the  Appellant  was  studying  at  Jinnah  Model  Science
    College was relevant.

11. In reply, Mr Smart submitted  that  the  fact  that  this  was  a  late
    application was not a matter for this Tribunal.  This question had been
    considered by the judge granting permission, he had applied Rule 21  of
    the Procedure Rules and concluded that the reason why this  application
    should be heard was because the determination  had  been  sent  to  the
    wrong address.  Any delay was not a matter for this Tribunal.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.   The  judge  in  this  case  had
    regard to the circumstances of this family and to the history of visits
    made at the sponsorship of Mr Nazakat  Hussain,  to  the  UK.   He  was
    entitled to assess a matter such as "intention" which is  a  subjective
    assessment, rather than an objective one, on  the  basis  of  evidence,
    that came directly not from the Appellant himself, but from Mr  Nazakat
    Hussain.

13. Just as it would be relevant if a family member  had  overstayed,  upon
    the sponsorship of Mr Nazakat  Hussain,  it  was  equally  relevant  if
    nobody had overstayed.  The judge was  impressed  by  what  Mr  Nazakat
    Hussain stated.  Moreover, the Appellant himself was to  accompany  his
    mother.  She was granted a visit visa.  She came and she returned  back
    to Pakistan.  The Appellant's father had been coming  since  1992.   He
    has come and he has returned back to Pakistan.  The standard  of  proof
    is on a balance of probabilities.  It  is  not  beyond  all  reasonable
    doubt.

14. The judge applying that standard,  was  entitled  to  conclude  on  the
    evidence as he did.  He is entitled to say as he did (at  paragraph  7)
    that "if the Appellant had overstayed in the United  Kingdom  it  would
    have damaged his brother's  credibility  as  a  Sponsor,  damaging  the
    prospect of future applications for entry clearance  to  visit  by  his
    parents" (paragraph 7).

15. In these circumstances, given  that  the  prospects  of  the  Sponsor's
    parents of re-entering the UK again as visitors at  some  time  in  the
    future are at stake, and given that the Sponsor,  Mr  Nazakat  Hussain,
    had given a firm assurance to the  judge  that  his  relatives  do  not
    overstay and would return, the  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusions that he did.

16. Another judge may well have made findings of fact that  were  different
    to this.  However, this judge was entitled to decide  as  he  did.   It
    would be wrong for this Tribunal to intervene in that decision.   There
    is no error of law.

Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014


