
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/13328/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On   19th September 2014                        |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DEHLI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          MRS SANTOSH KUMARI GUPTA
                           (anonymity not directed
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T S Choda, Counsel.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The respondent to this appeal is a female citizen of India who  was  born
   on the 16th July 1948. The Entry Clearance Office [ECO]  appeals  against
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cohen) to allow her appeal
   against the decision to refuse her application for entry clearance  as  a
   family visitor.

2. The ECO refused the application under paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
   Rules. This was because he concluded that the  appellant  had  failed  to
   prove that she met the requirement under that Rule that she  intended  to
   return to India within the period that she had stated in her  application
   (2 months) and, in any event, within a period of 6 months of her  arrival
   in the United Kingdom.

3. The First-tier Tribunal found as a fact that the appellant did intend  to
   return to India in accordance with her stated intentions, and allowed the
   appeal on the ground that the ECO's refusal of entry clearance was not in
   accordance with immigration rules.

4.  Mr  Choda  acknowledged  that  the  Tribunal  did  not  in   fact   have
   jurisdiction to allow the appeal on that ground, but argued that it ought
   instead to be allowed on the basis that  the  decision  was  incompatible
   with the appellant's right to respect for family life under Article 8  of
   the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
   Fundamental Freedoms. He emphasised  that  the  appellant  had  a  strong
   emotional attachment to her cousin in the United Kingdom, Ms Parveen Lata
   Doll. Ms Doll was in fact more like a  daughter  to  her.  Moreover,  the
   appellant had a specific  reason  for  wishing  to  come  to  the  United
   Kingdom; namely, to attend a religious ceremony (known  as  'Mundan')  in
   celebration of the recent birth of Ms Doll's son.

5. Mr Whitwell reminded me that Article 8  does  not  provide  the  Tribunal
   with a general power to dispense with the requirements of the Immigration
   Rules, and submitted that there would need to be particularly  compelling
   circumstances to engage its potential operation in A case of  refusal  to
   grant entry clearance for the purpose of visiting a family member in  the
   United Kingdom. No such circumstances had been  shown  to  exist  in  the
   instant appeal.

6. I prefer the arguments of Mr Whitwell. Although Article 8 may readily  be
   engaged in a case where it is proposed to remove a person from the United
   Kingdom, I am not satisfied that it is engaged simply  because  a  person
   has been refused entry clearance for the purpose  of  visiting  a  family
   member in the UK. A state is entitled to control immigration, and Article
   8 cannot therefore be taken as imposing a general  obligation  to  permit
   entry to its territory for the purpose of  making  a  family  visit.  The
   decision did not prevent the appellant and  Ms  Doll  from  visiting  one
   another, whether in the United Kingdom or in India. It  merely  prevented
   them from meeting in the United  Kingdom  on  this  particular  occasion.
   There was nothing in the  decision  that  prevented  the  appellant  from
   making a fresh application and submitting further evidence to support her
   claim that she meets the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.  In  the
   circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to consider whether the  decision
   was proportionate in furtherance of a  legitimate  aim.  However,  had  I
   been called upon to do so, I would  have  found  that  the  decision  was
   lawful  and  proportionate  in  furtherance  of  the  legitimate  aim  of
   protecting the economic well being of the country through the  consistent
   application of immigration controls.

Decision

7. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  against
   refusal of entry clearance is set aside, and is substituted by a decision
   to dismiss that appeal.

Anonymity not directed.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

