
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/13047/2013
                                                               VA/13053/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2014                          |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, bangkok
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS CHIT SNOW TUN
                               MR NAY WIN TUN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis
For the Respondents:   Ms Nasim


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Nay Win Tun and Miss Chit Snow Tun are citizens  of  Burma  born  in
    1984 and 2010  respectively.   They  are  father  and  daughter.   They
    applied for entry clearance
    as visitors.  Their applications were refused on 14  May  2013  because
    the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that   they   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 and 46A of the Immigration Rules.

 2. They appealed.

 3. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 21 August 2014 before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Turquet she dismissed the appeals under the  Immigration
    Rules, but allowed them under Article 8 (ECHR).

 4. The ECO sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge on  15
    October 2014.

 5. Although in proceedings before me the ECO is  the  Appellant  and  Miss
    Chin Snow Tun and Mr Nay Win Tun the  Respondents,  for  convenience  I
    will maintain the designations  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    namely Miss Chin Snow Tun and Mr Nay Win Tun are the Appellants and the
    ECO is the Respondent.

 6. The basis of the refusal by the  Respondent  was  as  follows:  neither
    Appellant qualified as family members  under  the  Immigration  Appeals
    (Family  Visitor)  Regulations;  they  had  applied  to   visit   their
    mother/wife who held limited leave to enter the  UK.   Miss  Chit  Snow
    Tun, the first Appellant stated that she was to visit  her  grandmother
    and she had been listed as Sponsor by the second  Appellant.   However,
    in an interview he said that the primary focus of the visit was  to  be
    with his wife and (another) daughter and to stay with them in  the  UK.
    As the Appellants' mother/wife being not settled did not qualify  as  a
    family member under the Regulations they had not been  granted  a  full
    right of appeal.

 7. In addition, the second Appellant had stated that he had been  employed
    as a sales manager since June  2007  earning  3,000  dollars  a  month.
    Although he had submitted  a  personal  bank  statement  there  was  no
    independent  or  substantiating  evidence  of  a  regular   income   or
    employment as claimed.  The bank account was opened in  December  2011,
    four years after he claimed to have begun his employment and there were
    no regular deposits in the nature of salary evidence  in  the  account.
    It was noted that funds increased at the time of the first  application
    and then the funds were removed following the  refusal,  and  then  the
    funds increased prior to the current application.  Such indicated  that
    the account was artificially inflated to bolster the application.   The
    ECO was not satisfied that it represented  a  true  reflection  of  his
    financial circumstances.

 8. Further, he had provided evidence of a business  licence  for  a  firm.
    Whilst this indicated that he had paid licence fees he had not provided
    evidence of an operational business from which he derived  any  income.
    The ECO was not satisfied that  the  second  Appellant's  circumstances
    were as described which led him to question why he was coming to the UK
    and that he intended to leave at the end of his stay  (paragraph  41(i)
    and (ii)).

 9. The first Appellant's father with whom she intended to travel  did  not
    hold a valid entry clearance and therefore could  not   accompany  her.
    She did  not  have  permission  from  her  legal  guardians  to  travel
    unaccompanied.  Thus she did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    46A(a) or (b).  The concerns over her father's circumstances were  also
    relevant to her application.  The ECO was not satisfied that the  first
    Appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a child visitor for a  limited
    period.  She did not satisfy paragraph 46A (1)(i) as well as 41(ii)  as
    encompassed by 46A (1)(ii).

10. Having heard evidence from the second Appellant's wife and his  sister-
    in-law the judge made her findings at paragraph [19] ff.  She did  'not
    find that the Appellant has satisfactorily addressed the issues  raised
    in the refusal letter'.   She  noted  that  at  date  of  decision  the
    Appellants' mother/wife was not settled in the UK.  She had applied for
    ILR which was not granted until after the decision.

11. Although the Sponsor, the mother-in-law, was settled in the UK at  date
    of application she had stated that the Appellants would live  with  her
    daughter.  Also, in his interview the second Appellant stated  that  he
    wished to travel to the UK to see his wife.  The judge  concluded  that
    the purpose of  the  visit  was  for  the  Appellants  to  visit  their
    mother/wife and not someone who is settled in the UK.

12. In addition the judge was not satisfied that they would be visiting the
    Sponsor, the grandmother.  Although it was stated  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal that the grandmother was desperate to see them and in particular
    the first Appellant for the first time and could not go to Burma,  this
    was not consistent with the Sponsor having been in  Burma  in  2011  as
    indicated in the second Appellant's interview.  Nor was  it  consistent
    with the oral evidence of a witness that the grandmother lived in Burma
    but visits the UK.  At date of hearing she had been in Burma for  eight
    months.

13. The judge went on to consider the second Appellant's finances and found
    (at [22]) that he had not satisfactorily addressed the issues raised by
    the ECO about these.  In particular, he had not addressed the issue  of
    the  increase  in  funds  before  a  previous  application  and   their
    withdrawal after refusal.  Nor had the issue of a lack  of  independent
    or substantiating evidence of  a  regular  income  or  employment  been
    satisfactorily addressed.

14. The judge dismissed the case under the Rules.

15. She went on at [24] to state as follows:

         'Although there was no submission in respect of Article  8  it  had
         been raised in the Grounds of Appeal.  Although  it  is  rather  an
         academic exercise at this time as the Appellants' mother  and  wife
         has now been granted ILR and  the  parties  have  all  been  living
         together in Burma from January to August this year, I find that the
         decision was not proportionate.  The first Appellant at the date of
         decision was aged three years old and had not seen her  mother  for
         about eighteen months.  Her sister was born in the UK in  2012  and
         neither Appellant had seen her.  The mother  was  in  the  UK  with
         leave and had applied for ILR.  In the event that  the  visit  visa
         applications were refused, I am satisfied that, had the mother  had
         access to her passport she would have returned to Burma  which  was
         what she did when she was granted ILR.  There is no suggestion that
         the family has breached Immigration Rules in the past.  To separate
         a father from his wife and new born child and a  young  child  from
         her mother for a lengthy period due  to  administrative  delays  in
         considering the mother's ILR application is  not  proportionate  to
         the interests of maintaining effective immigration control. I  find
         that the balancing exercise falls in favour of the Appellants.'

16. The judge concluded by dismissing the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowing them on human rights grounds.

17. At the error of law hearing before me  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in law in her approach to  the  Article  8  assessment.
    She had taken account of factors which postdated  the  ECO's  decision.
    Also, the judge had not made  reference  to  exceptional  circumstances
    which applied.  Further, she had failed  to  take  into  account  as  a
    factor against the Appellants that they could not satisfy the Rules.

18. In  reply  Ms  Nasim  submitted  that  the  judge  had  considered  the
    circumstances as at date of decision in particular that the mother/wife
    was not settled.  It was clear that there was family life  between  the
    parties.  She had considered compelling circumstances,  in  particular,
    that they had been separated for a long time especially the child  from
    her mother and that the mother could not travel.  This was thus  not  a
    normal family visit.  The judge was entitled to conclude as she had.

19. In considering this matter the judge's reason in allowing the appeal on
    human rights grounds is that it  was  disproportionate  to  separate  a
    father from his wife and a new born child, and a young child  from  her
    mother for a lengthy period due to administrative delays in considering
    the mother's ILR application.  The judge also noted there had  been  no
    breaches of the Immigration Rules in the past.

20. In this case the judge considered the application under the  Rules  and
    concluded that they could not succeed under them not least because this
    was not a family visit as the wife/mother was not settled in the UK  as
    she was required to be.  The use by the second Appellant of the mother-
    in-law/grandparent was, in the judge's view, effectively  a  device  to
    circumvent the requirements of the Rules,  the  clear  intention  being
    that the Appellants would live with the wife/mother.  It was also noted
    that the second Appellant's claimed financial  circumstances  had  been
    disbelieved which went to intention.

21. The problem in my judgment with the judge's  approach  is  that  having
    clearly found, albeit without specifically saying so, that there was  a
    family life between the Appellants and the  wife/mother  and  that  the
    decision amounted to interference with the right to respect  with  that
    family life, her consideration of proportionality  is  inadequate.   In
    particular she failed to consider as an adverse factor in the balancing
    exercise that the Appellants could not satisfy the Immigration Rules in
    that they were not seeking to visit the family member claimed and  that
    the second Appellant's financial circumstances  gave  cause  for  doubt
    that there was incentive to leave at the end of the stay.   Further,  I
    see no basis for the judge's conclusion as a factor in  favour  of  the
    Appellants  that  the  period  of   separation   had   been   'due   to
    administrative delays' in considering the wife/mother's application for
    ILR. The fact that she has not breached immigration laws adds nothing.

22. The judge showed material error of law  in  failing  to  give  relevant
    reasons in support of her decision to allow the appeal on human  rights
    grounds.  The decision is set aside. The findings stand.

23. I proceed to remake the decision.  As the appropriate date is  date  of
    decision there is no further evidence  to  consider.  The  parties  had
    nothing to add.

24. Article 8 is not to be used to circumvent the Rules. Therefore a person
    who could not satisfy the Rules  should  not  benefit  from  a  liberal
    interpretation of Article 8. In this case, as indicated the  Appellants
    could not meet the requirements.

25. On the evidence the  Appellants  clearly  have  family  life  with  the
    mother/wife.  In the circumstances of this case, however, I do not  see
    that refusing a visit interferes with the right  to  respect  for  that
    family life which can, as it has been for years, be  carried  by  other
    means, such as phone calls and  online.  In  that  regard  at  date  of
    decision separation was  likely  to  be  temporary.  The  mother/wife's
    application for ILR was pending. With the decision she  would  get  her
    passport back.

26. Even if I am wrong in that regard and the interference is severe enough
    to engage Article 8, the issue of proportionality has to be considered.

27. In this case the wife/mother chose, as  she  was  entitled  to  do,  to
    reside in the UK from May 2012 separate from her husband and child.  It
    was her choice. She was able if she wished to return to see her family.
    She chose to seek ILR for which she  submitted  her  passport.  If  the
    application was successful such would allow her to travel to her family
    when she wished and if she chose to remain in the UK, for them to  make
    application under the Rules to join her which if  they  met  the  Rules
    would be successful. In the meantime as indicated there is  nothing  to
    stop family life continuing by modern means of communication.

28. Under Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    as introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 I  am  required  to  consider
    public  interest  considerations.    The   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest (117B(1)).  Also, it  is
    in the public interest, and in particular the interests of the economic
    wellbeing of the UK, that persons who seek to enter the UK are able  to
    speak English, because persons who speak English are less of  a  burden
    on taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society (117B(2)).

29. There is no information before me as to whether the two Appellants  can
    speak English.

30. Further, it is in the public interest, and  in  the  interests  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the UK that persons who seek to enter the UK  are
    financially independent, because such  persons  are  not  a  burden  on
    taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.

31. The claimed  financial  circumstances  of  the  second  Appellant  were
    doubted by the ECO.  The First-tier Judge found  such  concerns  to  be
    merited.  There is nothing before me to show that  the  Appellants  are
    financially independent.

32. For the reasons stated I find there to be no compelling or  exceptional
    circumstances in this case.  Any interference with the right to respect
    for family life is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to
    be achieved.

33. The appeals fail on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  shows  a  material  error  of  law.
That decision is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 19 November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

