



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14446/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd June 2013                                |On 12th June 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                               NAZMEEN SAJAWal
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Al-Hassan from Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Grant made
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 5th November 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17th  April  1990.   She
    applied to come to the UK to visit her two brothers here, Mohammed Amin
    and Mohammed Saleem, but was refused entry clearance on  13th  February
    2012.  Judge Grant dismissed her  appeal  stating  that  there  was  no
    evidence from the Appellant save for a brief declaration  of  completed
    when she applied for entry clearance. However it is apparent  from  the
    file that her representatives, Aman Solicitors sent to the  Tribunal  a
    bundle of papers which was received at Hatton  Cross  on  2nd  November
    2012, three days before the hearing.  It clearly was not linked to  the
    file

 3. The judge therefore erred in law, albeit through no fault of  her  own,
    in not taking into account reference evidence when making her decision.
    Her decision is set aside.

The Hearing

 4. I heard oral evidence  from  one  of  the  Sponsors,  Mohammed  Saleem.
    Mohammed Amin is presently in Pakistan having gone there a month ago to
    see his mother who is unwell.

 5. Mohammed Saleem said that he has been in the UK  for  22  years  having
    come here on a spouse visa.  He only sponsored one visitor in the past,
    his father, who came on a six month visa in 2005 and stayed fore  three
    months.  He said that his sister just wants to come to the UK to  visit
    him and his brother and their families.  She  would  return  since  she
    lives with her other brother and mother in Pakistan.  She is a  teacher
    there and has been given leave from work.

 6. Mr Diwnycz made no submissions save to rely  on  the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and said that he would leave the decision in my
    hands.

Findings and Conclusions

 7. There is no indication that this is a family who intends to  flout  the
    Immigration Rules and no evidence that they have done so in  the  past.
    In the original refusal decision the Entry Clearance Officer  commented
    that six of the Appellant's siblings were in the UK but has produced no
    evidence at all that any of them has acted unlawfully in the  past  and
    the mere fact that her siblings reside  here  is  not  evidence  of  an
    intention not to abide with the requirements of immigration control.

 8. The Appellant has close family in Pakistan and a job to return to.  The
    Sponsor gave credible oral  evidence  unchallenged  by  the  Presenting
    Officer to the effect that the Appellant intended to return to Pakistan
    at the end of her stay.  I accept his word.

Decision

 9. The original judge erred in law  and her decision is  set  aside.   The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


