
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14395/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2014 and 1st September 2014         |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - dhaka
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               shahdia parvin
                         (anonymity order not made)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    On 4th July 2014 Mr H Mahmud of Immigration and Work
Permit
     On 1st September 2014 Mr B Thomas, acting as agent for    Immigration
and Work Permit


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Metzer  promulgated  on  2nd  February
    2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a national of Bangladesh born 31st  December  1975  who
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  visitor.   She
    wished to visit Fakir Islam (the Sponsor)  who  she  described  as  her
    uncle.

 4. The application  was  refused  on  9th  June  2013  with  reference  to
    paragraph 41(i), (ii), (vi), and (vii).  The ECO was not satisfied that
    the Claimant was genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor  for  a  limited
    period nor that she intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end  of
    the visit.  In addition the ECO was not  satisfied  that  the  Claimant
    would maintain and accommodate  herself  adequately  out  of  resources
    available to her, without  taking  employment  or  having  recourse  to
    public funds, or be maintained and accommodated adequately by relatives
    or friends.  The ECO was not satisfied that the Claimant would be  able
    to meet the cost of an onward or return  journey.   The  ECO  contended
    that the right of appeal was limited to  the  grounds  referred  to  in
    section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act).  Those grounds relate to the  decision  being  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998,  as  being  incompatible
    with the Claimant's Convention rights.

 5.  The  Claimant  appealed  contending  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the  law,  a  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently, and that the decision was contrary to  Article  8  of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The appeal was heard by Judge Metzer on 27th January 2014, who did  not
    consider Article 8 of the 1950 Convention, but after  hearing  evidence
    from the Sponsor, allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 7. The ECO  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending that Judge  Metzer  had  materially  erred  in  law  in  not
    appreciating that the refusal of entry clearance did not attract a full
    right of appeal because the application for entry  clearance  had  been
    made after 9th July 2012 when The Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)
    Regulations 2012 came into force.  This meant that because an uncle was
    not included in these regulations, the Claimant did  not  have  a  full
    right of appeal against refusal of entry clearance.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davis on 2nd May 2014 and directions were issued that there  should  be
    an oral hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such the decision  should  be  set
    aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing 4th July 2014

 9. Mr Mahmud, on behalf of the Claimant accepted  that  Judge  Metzer  had
    materially erred in law and that the decision must be set aside.

10. This concession was rightly made, and I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as Judge Metzer had erred as contended by the  ECO.
    The Claimant would only have been entitled to a full  right  of  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance if she was seeking to visit a person
    referred to in The Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
    2012, and the Sponsor did not fall into any of the categories  referred
    in those regulations.  Judge Metzer should  only  have  considered  the
    appeal with reference to Article 8.

11. Having  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  both
    representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed so  that  the
    decision could be re-made.  I decided that it was  appropriate  to  re-
    make  the  decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  that  it  was  not
    appropriate to remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having
    considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements.



12. I was told that the Sponsor wished to give evidence and did not need an
    interpreter.  The Sponsor gave his evidence-in-chief  by  adopting  the
    contents of his undated  witness  statement.   That  statement  may  be
    briefly summarised as follows.

13. The Sponsor described the Claimant as his niece and noted that the  ECO
    had expressed doubts  about  the  length  of  her  stay.   The  Sponsor
    confirmed the Claimant would not stay  more  than  four  weeks  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In relation to  concerns  about  finance  the  Sponsor
    explained that the Claimant has a share in  her  family  business.   He
    stated that he had raised the Claimant and regarded her as being like a
    daughter and they have strong  ties.   The  Sponsor  has  been  granted
    refugee status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore  cannot  visit
    Bangladesh and he and the Claimant have not seen each other in the last
    five years.  The Sponsor confirmed  the  Claimant  intended  a  genuine
    family visit to the United Kingdom.

14. The Sponsor was not asked any questions by Mr  Mahmud  but  upon  being
    cross-examined by Mr Whitwell, it very soon became apparent the Sponsor
    did in fact need the assistance of an interpreter.  As  an  interpreter
    was not available, it was not possible  to  proceed  with  the  hearing
    which had to be adjourned part-heard.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing 1st September 2014

15. At the commencement of the hearing I  ascertained  that  there  was  no
    difficulty in communication between the Sponsor and interpreter and the
    language was Bengali.   The  Sponsor  was  then  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Whitwell.  I have recorded all questions and answers in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings and will not repeat them in full here.

16. In brief summary the Sponsor said that he keeps  in  contact  with  the
    Claimant by telephone and Skype once a week and sometimes  more  often.
    The Sponsor had lived at his current address since 12th  May  2013  and
    could not satisfactorily explain why the Claimant  in  her  application
    for entry clearance dated 20th May 2013 had listed his address  as  his
    previous address which he had left in May 2012.

17. The Sponsor confirmed his relationship to the  Claimant  as  being  her
    father's cousin, and therefore accepted that he and  the  Claimant  are
    second cousins.

18. The Sponsor came to the United Kingdom on  8th  October  2009  and  was
    granted refugee status in December  2010.   He  accepted  that  if  the
    appeal was not successful the Claimant could make a further application
    for entry clearance.

19. The Sponsor was not re-examined  by  Mr  Thomas.   In  answer  to  some
    questions I put by way of clarification the  Sponsor  stated  that  the
    Claimant's parents are still alive although  her  father  is  seriously
    ill.  The Claimant lives with her brother and  her  parents  and  other
    family members.  The Sponsor said that the Claimant had started  living
    with him when she was 9 or 10 years old and lived with him for eight or
    nine years.  He then said that she had in fact lived with him until  he
    left Bangladesh in 2009 although they lived close to  her  parents  and
    she used to go and see her parents.

The Submissions of the ECO

20. Mr Whitwell  made  succinct  submissions  contending  the  Sponsor  and
    Claimant had not established family life and therefore  Article  8  was
    not engaged.  In the alternative, if family life was  engaged,  refusal
    of entry clearance was proportionate.  There was nothing preventing the
    Claimant from making a further application for entry clearance.

The Submissions of the Claimant

21. Mr Thomas was equally succinct in  making  submissions.   He  contended
    that the evidence proved that the Claimant intended a genuine visit  to
    the United Kingdom for a period of four weeks and that the Claimant and
    Sponsor had lived together for a very substantial period  of  time  and
    because the Sponsor could not visit the Claimant in Bangladesh  because
    of his refugee status, the appeal should be allowed with  reference  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. As this is an appeal against refusal of entry clearance I must consider
    the circumstances appertaining at the date of refusal, that  being  9th
    June 2013.

24. It is accepted on behalf of the Claimant, that she cannot  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  in  relation
    to private life, nor the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules in relation to family life.

25. The starting point for my consideration must however be the  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules that deal with family and private  life.   The
    Claimant does not in any event rely upon private life as  a  ground  of
    appeal.  She could not succeed  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE,
    which sets out the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life.  The  Claimant  is  not  in  the
    United Kingdom and has not  made  a  valid  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  Her application is for entry clearance.  It is therefore clear
    that the Claimant cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph  276ADE.



26. It is also clear that the Claimant cannot satisfy the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in relation to family life.  This is because  the  Claimant
    is not applying for entry clearance as a partner,  as  a  child,  as  a
    parent, nor as an adult dependent  relative.   There  is  no  provision
    within Appendix FM for entry clearance to be granted to  an  individual
    wishing to visit her second cousin in the United Kingdom.

27. Having concluded that the  appeal  cannot  succeed  with  reference  to
    either paragraph 276ADE or  Appendix  FM,  I  have  to  decide  whether
    Article 8 should be considered outside the Immigration Rules.  On  this
    issue the Court of Appeal stated in paragraph 135  of  MM  (Lebanon)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985;

    Where the relevant group of IRs [Immigration Rules], upon their  proper
    construction provide a "complete code"  for  dealing  with  a  person's
    Convention rights in the context of a  particular  IR  or  a  statutory
    provision, such  as  in  the  case  of  "foreign  criminals",  and  the
    balancing exercise and the way the various factors are to be taken into
    account in an individual case must be  done  in  accordance  with  that
    code, although reference to "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the  code
    will  nonetheless  entail  a  proportionality  exercise.   But  if  the
    relevant  group  of  IRs  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"  then  the
    proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by the  Huang
    tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

    I have also considered the Upper Tribunal decisions Gulshan [2013] UKUT
    00640 (IAC) and Shahzad  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).   Those  decisions
    indicate that after applying the requirements of the Immigration Rules,
    only if there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside them is it necessary  for  Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the rules.

28. In my view there are no such compelling  circumstances  which  are  not
    recognised by the Immigration Rules,  as  this  is  an  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance as a visitor, and  the  Claimant  wishes  to
    visit a second cousin, and her application is  not  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She is entitled to  make  a  further  application  for
    entry clearance.  However, if I am wrong in considering that there  are
    no compelling circumstances not recognised by the rules, I now go on to
    consider  Article  8  outside  the  rules.    This   involves   firstly
    considering whether  family  life  has  been  established  between  the
    Sponsor and Claimant so as to  engage  Article  8  which  for  ease  of
    reference I set out below;


    1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.
    2.   There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

    The Claimant and Sponsor are both adults.  The Claimant was 37 years of
    age at the date of refusal of  entry  clearance.   I  accept  that  the
    Claimant and Sponsor are related, in that the Sponsor is the Claimant's
    father's cousin.  I also  accept  that  the  Claimant  lived  with  the
    Sponsor in Bangladesh and regarded him as being like a father, although
    her own father is still alive and she lives with her parents and  other
    family members at present.  The Claimant  is  not  dependent  upon  the
    Sponsor.  She stated in her Visa  Application  Form  that  her  brother
    would be paying for her travel to the United Kingdom.  She also  stated
    that she has her own income in Bangladesh.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 considered family life between  adults  and
    stated in paragraph 25;

    Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment a family
    life is not established between an adult child and his surviving parent
    or other siblings unless something more exists  than  normal  emotional
    ties.

29. In Ghising (Family life - adults - Ghurkha policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that there  is  no  general  proposition
    that Article 8 can never be engaged when the family life it  is  sought
    to establish is between adult siblings living together.   There  should
    be no blanket rule with regard to adult children, and each case  should
    be analysed on its own facts to  decide  whether  or  not  family  life
    exists, within  the  meaning  of  Article  8(1).   Each  case  is  fact
    sensitive.

30. In this appeal, the Sponsor and Claimant are not  a  parent  and  adult
    child nor are they siblings.  I accept that they  wish  to  visit  each
    other, but this does not  amount  to  family  life  that  would  engage
    Article 8(1).

31. However if I am wrong in reaching the conclusion that Article 8 is  not
    engaged, I go on to consider Article 8 in the light of the  five  stage
    approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  which  involves  answering
    the following questions;


    (i)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?
    (ii) If so, would such interference have consequences of  such  gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
    (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
    (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?
    (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

32. If Article 8 is engaged, I find that the interference with family  life
    is in accordance with the law as the Claimant  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules, and has no right
    of appeal against that decision, except  on  Article  8  grounds.   Any
    interference is necessary in the  interests  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration control, which is necessary to maintain the economic  well-
    being of the country.

33. The issue then, is whether the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  is
    proportionate.  In considering proportionality I have to have regard to
    the  considerations  listed  in  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  which  in  summary  state  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest,
    and it is in the public interest that persons  who  seek  to  enter  or
    remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  and  are
    financially independent.  In this appeal no evidence has been given  of
    the Claimant's ability to speak English, and the burden of proof is  on
    the  Claimant.   The  reason  for   attaching   weight   to   financial
    independence is so that the individual is not a burden on the  taxpayer
    and is better able to integrate into society  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That however is not the Claimant's case, as she contends that she  only
    intends a four week visit.

34.  In  my  view,  the  ECO's  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance   is
    proportionate.  It is not appropriate to disregard  the  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules and to allow the  visit  to  the  United  Kingdom
    based upon Article 8.  As was stated by the Supreme Court in  paragraph
    57 of Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72;

    57.  It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power.

35. The Claimant is entitled  to  make  a  further  application  for  entry
    clearance and if the appropriate documentary evidence is  submitted  to
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 41, then  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor may be granted.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 2nd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.




Signed                              Date 2nd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
