
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14044/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 21 November 2014                       |On 21 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARNACE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GURDEEP KAUR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.   The appellant in this case  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who
      appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Griffith  to  allow  the
      appeal of Ms Gurdeep Kaur, an Indian national born on 8 December 1993,
      against a decision dated 2 July 2013 refusing Ms Kaur entry  clearance
      in order to attend her cousin's wedding in the UK. She applied jointly
      with her mother, Ms Inderjit Kaur Saini. She would  have  stayed  with
      her mother's sister, Ms Ravinder  Kaur  Gahunia  ("the  sponsor"),  in
      Hounslow for three weeks before returning to India to resume  her  BSc
      in nursing  course.  The  appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  by  Judge
      Griffith who found the requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration
      Rules, HC395 were met. Her mother's appeal was also allowed.


   2.    It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. From now on I shall refer to Ms Kaur as  "the
      appellant" and to the Entry Clearance Officer as "the respondent".


   3.   I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The sponsor did not attend the hearing to give evidence.  I  checked
      the notice of hearing was sent to the correct address and that she had
      had sufficient notice of the hearing. There has been no  contact  from
      her or the appellant. I therefore proceeded in her absence. Mr  Jarvis
      made brief submissions, which I have recorded and taken into account.


   Error of law
   5.   The respondent sought and was granted permission to  appeal  against
      Judge Griffith's decision in respect of the appellant  on  the  ground
      that  she  failed  to  recognise  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were
      restricted to human rights and race  discrimination.  It  is  fair  to
      point out that there is no reference in either decision or  the  entry
      clearance manager's review to the restricted scope  of  the  right  of
      appeal and therefore neither the appellant  nor  Judge  Griffith  were
      alerted to this.


   6.   Reference was  made  in  the  grounds  to  the  limitations  on  the
      definition of "family visitor"  imposed  by  the  Immigration  Appeals
      (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012, which came into  force  on  9  July
      2012. Under those Regulations, a niece visiting her aunt  and  cousins
      would not have fallen within the class of persons who would  have  had
      an unrestricted right of appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002. On the other hand, Ms Inderjit Kaur  Saini,  who  was
      visiting her sister in the UK, would have had an unrestricted right of
      appeal, which is presumably why the respondent did not appeal  against
      Judge Griffith's decision allowing her appeal under the rules.


   7.   It is plain that Judge Griffith did not direct herself correctly and
      she failed to recognise that she had  no  jurisdiction  to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal under the rules. She made no reference  at  all  to
      human rights or, for that matter, race discrimination. I therefore set
      aside her decision.


   8.   I re-make the decision as follows.

   Decision substituted
   9. The grounds of appeal were prepared by the sponsor in person  and  are
      headed "URGENT REVIEW". They speak of the upset caused by the  refusal
      and emphasise the importance of  the  appellant's  attendance  at  her
      daughter's wedding. By granting the visa the  "cultural  family  ties"
      would be preserved. The grounds stress that the appellant is a genuine
      visitor who would return to India after  three  weeks  to  resume  her
      nursing degree course. There is no issue of race discrimination raised
      in  this  case.  In  view  of  the  family  relationships,  there   is
      potentially an issue arising under  article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, which protects the right to family life.


  10. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard of  proof  is
      the ordinary civil standard of a  balance  of  probabilities.  Section
      85(5)  of  the  2002  Act  provides  that  I  may  consider  only  the
      circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision to  refuse.  In
      AS (Somalia) UKHL 32, the House  of  Lords  held  that  section  85(5)
      applied to human rights grounds of appeal.

  11. Article 8 states as follows,


         "1.    Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
         life, his home his and correspondence.
         2.     There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with
         the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
         law and is necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

  12. There is no provision within  Appendix  FM  of  the  rules,  which  is
      expressly concerned with the application of article 8  to  immigration
      decisions, to visitors. Appendix FM is  concerned  with  family  unity
      where the respective family members wish to live together permanently.
      It is sometimes said that it is only necessary  to  look  outside  the
      rules and to refer to domestic and European  case  law  if  there  are
      arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the  rules
      because the outcome would have unjustifiably harsh consequences.  That
      does not appear to be the case here but I shall nevertheless do on  to
      do so in case that is an incorrect analysis.


  13. It is for the appellant to show there would be  an  interference  with
      her right to family  life,  although  in  entry  clearance  cases  the
      correct approach to this issue may be to assess whether  the  decision
      amounts to an unjustified lack of respect for family life, focusing on
      the UK's positive obligations to facilitate family reunion (Shamim Box
      [2002] UKIAT 02212). Article 8 is a qualified right expressed in  such
      a way as to allow for exceptions and it is for the respondent to  show
      that the lack of respect is lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.
      I then have to assess whether the decision is disproportionate to that
      aim.

  14. I reminded myself of the five questions to be answered in  determining
      an article 8 ground of appeal, as set out in paragraph  17  of  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27, an approach confirmed in paragraph 7  of  EB  (Kosovo)
      [2008] UKHL 41. I also reminded myself that I am not solely  concerned
      with the rights of the appellant but I must also consider  the  direct
      impact of the refusal on her family members (Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL
      39).


  15. There is scant evidence regarding the factual  background  but  it  is
      possible to glean the following from the papers. The  appellant  is  a
      young woman, aged 20, who is unmarried and lives with her parents, who
      support her, in Hoshiarpur. She is in the second year of  her  studies
      at the Shri Guru Ram Das Institute of Nursing in Amritsar. She has not
      travelled to the UK or outside  India  in  the  last  ten  years.  The
      sponsor appears to have travelled  to  India  and  met  the  appellant
      there, as is to be expected.


  16. The first question is whether there is family life for the purposes of
      article 8 between the appellant  and  the  sponsor.  The  question  of
      whether family life exists between adult family members was considered
      in detail in paragraphs 50 to 62 of Ghising (family life  -  adults  -
      Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).  The  guidance  given  by  the
      Upper Tribunal in that case was subsequently approved by the Court  of
      Appeal in paragraph 46 of Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  Most  of
      the case law has been concerned with adult children living with  their
      parents. The thrust of the guidance is that each case depends  on  its
      own facts.

  17. The available evidence falls considerably short of  showing  there  is
      family life between the parties in this case. There is no evidence  of
      dependency between the parties, emotional or  financial.  In  essence,
      the appellant lives with her parents in India and her family life,  as
      properly understood, is centred on them. The sponsor lives in  the  UK
      and has her own family life here. An aunt and her niece will naturally
      be fond of each other but, in the circumstances that they  have  never
      live together apart from during short visits, it  would  be  wrong  to
      regard family life as having arisen. The appeal must be  dismissed  on
      this simple basis as article 8 is not engaged by the decision.


  18. If I were wrong about that, moving to the issue of proportionality,  I
      would have found the  decision  justified  by  the  need  to  maintain
      immigration controls. Section 117C(1) of the 2002 Act now  informs  us
      that the maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
      public interest, although I suspect that was widely understood in  any
      case. The point here is that the family life which might exist in this
      case is of a kind which can be  adequately  safeguarded  by  means  of
      visits and contact by telephone and other electronic media.  There  is
      no evidence the appellant and her aunt have ever  lived  in  the  same
      household as part of a single family  unit.  The  appellant  has  been
      denied the opportunity to attend her cousin's wedding and  to  make  a
      three-week visit to the UK. That will have been  hugely  disappointing
      for her. However, it does not amount to  a  breach  of  a  fundamental
      right. In light of the reversal of the decision taken  in  respect  of
      her mother, she can also re-apply for entry clearance and, if she does
      so reasonably soon, she can apply in the expectation that the concerns
      of the Entry Clearance Officer which led to the refusal  in  her  case
      will be regarded as having been satisfactorily answered.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  I  re-
    make the decision in the following terms:

     The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

    No anonymity direction.


                               Signed                 Date 21 November 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                               Signed                 Date 21 November 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal


