
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
VA/14763/2013

                                  VA/14765/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  13th June 2014                            |On 17th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - GUANGZHOU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR CHANGFA YU (1)
                             MRS LANGFANG YU (2)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Wilding , Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Kothala & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The first appellant is a citizen of China born on  28th  July  1951.
       The second appellant is his wife, and is a citizen of China born  on
       21st May 1955. They applied for family visits to come to the  UK  to
       visit their son, Mr Zhaoyan Yu who has indefinite leave to remain in
       the UK. They were refused on  26th  April  2012  because  the  entry
       clearance officer found that they could not satisfy paragraph 41  of
       the Immigration Rules and also because they fell to be refused under
       paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules. They did not appeal this
       decision but reapplied and were again refused on 20th June  2013  as
       family visitors on the basis that they could not  satisfy  paragraph
       41 of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration
       Rules because of false documents it was said were submitted with the
       previous application. The appeals against the decisions of 20th June
       2013  were  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  in   a
       determination promulgated on the 24th March 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on 28th April 2014  on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in  law  in
       failing to give sufficient reasons in his consideration  of  whether
       false documents had  been  used  and  also  because  the  respondent
       contended that a refusal under paragraph 320(7B) of the  Immigration
       Rules was mandatory when one had been made under  paragraph  320(7A)
       of the Immigration Rules, and had not been appealed.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge Coutts had no power to go behind
       the unappealed 320 (7A) decisions of the entry clearance officer and
       once satisfied that such decisions had  been  made  in  relation  to
       these appellants must therefore find that the appellants were to  be
       refused under paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules and dismiss
       the appeal. He accepted that the only authority on a  similar  point
       was the case of SD (paragraph  320(11):Forgery)  India  [2010]  UKUT
       276, but said that this was not conclusive as it concerned paragraph
       320(11) which was not a mandatory ground of  refusal.   I  indicated
       that I was not with him on this argument.

    6. Mr Wilding therefore submitted that Judge Coutts erred in law as  he
       had failed to show that he had considered the Document  Verification
       Reports at paragraph 9 of his  determination.  The  first  of  these
       reports showed differences in opinion as to  the  first  appellant's
       place of work and where he was on that day. Mr Wilding accepted that
       the First-tier Tribunal had not  been  provided  with  the  document
       which was said therefore to be false,  so  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       could not be criticised for failing to engage with the  argument  as
       to why the document itself was false however the Tribunal  did  need
       to look at the internal discrepancies  presented  in  that  Document
       Verification Report, and it was a material error for the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have failed to do this.

    7. Mr Richardson submitted that it was being  argued  that  paucity  of
       findings in the determination of Judge Coutts could have  led  to  a
       different outcome, and was therefore  material,  but  this  was  not
       possible  on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
       document said to be false was not before the First-tier Tribunal, or
       indeed before the Upper Tribunal, so it could not be  compared  with
       what was  said  in  the  Document  Verification  Report.  The  first
       appellant  does  claim  that  he  worked  at  the  Fujian   Huaxiang
       Supermarket Co Ltd at the time of the first and second applications,
       and indeed to date. The Document  Verification  Report  consists  of
       various telephone conversations with a number of people who say that
       he worked at that supermarket. There are some internal consistencies
       about where he was on that day and a mobile  telephone  number,  but
       these are dealt with in the first appellant's statement and evidence
       from the sponsor, and they are not capable of showing that the first
       appellant submitted a false document. It is also of  note  that  the
       entry clearance officer conducted further telephone  enquiries  into
       the  first  appellant's  employment   with   the   Fujian   Huaxiang
       Supermarket Co Ltd when the second application was  made,  and  this
       time they were said to be "inconclusive". The information given when
       the enquiries were made in 2013 was said to be consistent  with  the
       first appellant being employed as claimed but the  landline  numbers
       could not be verified from an  "open  source".  If  considered  this
       evidence could not satisfy the burden of proof on the respondent  to
       show the first appellant had made false representations or submitted
       a false document.

    8. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I  found  that
       there was no evidence that Judge Coutts had made a material error of
       law in his determination of the  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out
       below, but that I would put my reasons in writing.

Conclusions

    9. I find that the guidance in SD (paragraph 320(11): Forgery) India is
       that in cases where the entry  clearance  officer  says  the  forged
       documents were submitted with a previous application and  there  has
       been no judicial determination of the issue  or  relevant  admission
       that the burden of proof remains on the entry clearance  officer  to
       show that documents in the previous application were forged.  I  can
       see no reason why this does not apply to paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  This provision requires the  applicant  to  have
       previously breached the UK's immigration laws, which can be by using
       deception in an application for entry clearance.  It  does  not  say
       that the applicant is to  be  mandatorily  refused  under  paragraph
       320(7B) because he has previously be refused under paragraph 320(7A)
       of the Immigration Rules. The burden of proof to  show  the  use  of
       forged  documents  or  made  false  representations  in   the   2012
       application by the appellants was therefore on the respondent. Judge
       Coutts therefore proceeded correctly in this regard at  paragraph  9
       of the determination.

   10. Judge Coutts should have set out the evidence on the  issue  of  the
       allegation of use of false documents in a more fulsome  fashion.  He
       did not set out the respondent's reasons for refusal or outline  the
       evidence from the respondent on the issue.

   11. However I agree with the submission of Mr Richardson  that  even  if
       this had been done the outcome of the appeal  would  not  have  been
       different. There was no admission by the appellants  that  they  had
       submitted a false employment letter for the first appellant or  made
       false representations on this  issue.  The  letter  itself  was  not
       provided by the respondent, and there is no evidence in the Document
       Verification Report conversations that it was a false document.  The
       conversations of 19th April 2012 with Ms Wei and  Ms  Yu  of  Fujian
       Huaxiang  Supermarket  Co  Ltd  confirmed  that  the  appellant  was
       employed by them as he had claimed. The first  appellant's  daughter
       also said that he was at work. There was confusion as to  where  the
       appellant was  precisely  on  that  day,  and  the  entry  clearance
       assistant was not happy that some of the  numbers  called  were  not
       listed or were private numbers. In response the first appellant  has
       provided an explanation as to why he attended work for a period that
       day when actually he was listed to be on holiday, and as to why  the
       various telephone numbers appeared as they did.  A further  document
       verification report of 14th  June  2013  also  has  the  appellant's
       employer confirming he was employed as claimed, but is  said  to  be
       inconclusive because the entry clearance assistant  could  not  find
       the telephone number "in open source".  This  evidence  was  rightly
       found by Judge Coutts to be insufficient to show that the respondent
       had shown on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellants  had
       previously breached the UK's immigration laws by using deception  in
       their application for entry clearance in 2012.

Decision

   12. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
       of a material error on a point of law.

   13.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeals  are
       upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
13th June 2014
