
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14549/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2 December 2014                       |On 8 December 2014                |
|Extempore                                |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                              MRS NASEEM AKHTAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wellesley-Cole  promulgated
    on 9 September 2014 whereby she allowed the appeal of Mrs Naseem Akhtar
    against the decision of the respondent made on 4 July 2013.  Mrs Akhtar
    did not appear before me nor  did  any  representative  attend  on  her
    behalf.  I am satisfied that  she  had  instructed  solicitors  in  the
    United Kingdom in the past.  I am satisfied also, having regard to  the
    court file, that due notice of the time, date and venue of the  hearing
    had been served and  in  the  absence  of  any  explanation  I  am  not
    satisfied there is  any  good  reason  why  I  should  not  proceed  to
    determine this matter so I am satisfied  it  is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to do so, having had due regard to the overriding objective.

 2. Mrs Akhtar whom I shall refer to as the claimant sought  permission  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a visitor to stay with  a  cousin  and  the
    application was made on the basis that  she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The respondent refused to grant entry clearance for reasons set out  in
    a notice which was served on the claimant.  The reasons  for  that  are
    summarised by Judge Wellesley-Cole in her determination and are not  in
    dispute.  Judge Wellesley-Cole considered the  application  and  having
    heard evidence from the sponsor concluded that the  applicant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole had erred in law as the claimant's right  of  appeal  is
    limited given that the application was made after 9 July 2012 the  date
    on which the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 came
    into force. As she was seeking to visit a cousin, a relationship  which
    falls out with the classes of persons entitled to  a  right  of  appeal
    under the immigration rules, the only  grounds  of  appeal  permissible
    were that the decision is unlawful pursuant to the Race  Relations  Act
    or unlawful pursuant to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 5.  On  21  October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted
    permission stating that the grounds are clearly arguable. There  is  no
    response pursuant to Rule 24 from the respondent in this case.

 6. When the matter came before me as noted above there was  no  appearance
    from the claimant.  Mr Melvin submitted that Judge  Wellesley-Cole  had
    made a clear error of law in proceeding pursuant  to  consideration  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  failing  to  have  regard  to  the   only
    permissible grounds of appeal that is race relations and human rights.

 7. I am satisfied that Judge Wellesley-Cole did err materially in  failing
    to consider first whether, given  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations  2012,  she  had  jurisdiction  to
    consider the appeal on the ground that the decision was contrary to the
    Immigration Rules.  It is clear that, on the facts of this  case  given
    that the claimant was seeking only to visit a cousin that she  did  not
    have the right of appeal except on limited  grounds.  That  is  because
    "cousin" does not fall within the list of persons set out in regulation
    2, and it  is  only  those  people  who  have  a  right  of  appeal  on
    immigration  rules  grounds.  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  therefore  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider that issue. Further, she failed  to  make  any
    findings with respect to the limited grounds permissible, in this  case
    with respect to Human Rights, and accordingly I am satisfied this error
    is material. I therefore I set Judge Wellesley-Cole's  decision  aside.
    I therefore proceed to re-make the decision.

 8. As Mr Melvin submitted it is difficult to discern from the  grounds  of
    appeal that human rights is raised except obliquely.  The only  mention
    of family life is that which the appellant has  in  her  home  country.
    Further, I am not satisfied in this case that there is on the  evidence
    before me even arguably a family life between the claimant  and  either
    her cousin in the issue of whether the Upper Tribunal has  jurisdiction
    pursuant to the Human Rights  Act  to  consider  the  appeal.  That  is
    because the scope  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is
    essentially territorial and it is only exceptionally that rights can be
    asserted outside the jurisdiction or territory of the member state.

 9. As was stated  in  Sun  Myung  Moon  (Human  rights,  entry  clearance,
    proportionality) USA [2005] UKIAT 00112 at [68]:

         "The essence of family life, which makes it possible that the  ECHR
         extends  to  some  non-nationals   outside   of   the   territorial
         jurisdiction who seek respect for their family  life  with  someone
         settled here, is the need  for  physical  proximity  between  those
         persons.  This would cover the normal relationships between husband
         and wife, parent and child and closely  allied  relationships.   We
         did not conclude that Article 8 in this extended form  covered  all
         aspects of personal and private  life,  or  necessarily  all  those
         relationships which could come within the  notion  of  family  life
         within the Convention.  It covers the basic  components  of  family
         life, personal relationships which require  physical  proximity  in
         order for them to be enjoyed in any real sense.  We emphasise  that
         in this extended  form,  we  were  examining  the  issue  from  the
         standpoint of the non-national out of country, rather than from the
         standpoint of the family member settled here.  Our comments do  not
         bear upon the position of the latter were they to assert rights  as
         in Abdulaziz."

10. Whilst the issue of the extra-territoriality of the European Convention
    has been considered more recently in Al-Skeini [2006] UKHL  26  and  by
    the Court of Appeal in R v Naik [2011] EWCA Civ 1546, I do not consider
    this alters the position that the Human Rights Convention is simply not
    engaged when what is asserted is a family life which exists outwith the
    United Kingdom and none of those between whom  it  exists  are  present
    here, and where, unlike in Naik other  articles  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention might be engaged.

11. This is not a case where  she  was  held  in  the  custody  of  British
    authorities nor can it properly be argued that the actions in the facts
    of this case of the consular authorities could  be  construed  as  such
    that the claimant was within their "jurisdiction"; they had no  control
    over her.  Further, having had regard to the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Naik I consider that this is not a case to which  Article  10
    applies or that that could by analogy be applied to the facts  of  this
    case  and  accordingly  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  has
    jurisdiction to entertain the case.

12. Further, even if I am wrong on the issue  of  jurisdiction,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant has established a family life with anybody
    in the United Kingdom and accordingly  the  appeal  would  fall  to  be
    dismissed in any event there being in reality little or no evidence  of
    how any family life or private life within  the  jurisdiction  was  the
    subject of interference or a failure to promote.

13. For these reasons, I remake the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on
    all grounds. I would, however, ask the respondent to take careful  note
    of the findings of fact made by Judge Wellesley-Cole in considering any
    further application by the claimant.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

   1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an
      error of law and I set it aside.
   2. I remake the decision by dismissing  the  appeal  on  all  permissible
      grounds.



Signed                                  Date:  3 December 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


