








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14537/2013
                                                               VA/14539/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 30 July 2014                              |On: 12 August 2014           |
|Prepared: 11 August  2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Mrs Razia Begum (1)
                            Mr Kawsar Rashid (2)
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer: dhaka
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr M K Noor, legal representative (Noor Law
Associates)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh. The  second  appellant  is
      the son of the first.


   2. Their applications dated 11th June 2013  for  an  entry  clearance  as
      family visitors were refused on 2nd July 2013 as  the  respondent  was
      not satisfied that they would leave the UK at the end of the period of
      their visit.


   3. In a decision promulgated on 1st May 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Walters dismissed their appeals under the rules.


   4. On 17th June 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  granted  the
      appellants permission to appeal on the basis that it may  be  arguable
      that the Judge gave insufficient reasons for  rejecting  the  evidence
      that might have been taken as supporting the case for the appellants.


   5. At the hearing before me, Mr Noor relied on  two  grounds.  The  first
      ground was to the effect that  even  though  the  appellants  received
      remittances from their UK relatives,  they  had  regular  earnings  in
      Bangladesh from family owned agricultural land. That was evident  from
      the evidence of the sponsor who stated that his  parents  and  brother
      have some agricultural land. He gets enough from it. Sometimes  it  is
      not enough. His brother's study expenses are financed by the family in
      the UK.


   6. The Judge however had misdirected himself in finding that  the  family
      in Bangladesh were "almost entirely dependent on remittances from  the
      UK [19]".


   7. Mr Noor relied on the decision of Ogunkola v SSHD [2002]  UKIAT  0238,
      where the Tribunal held that the comments made in an earlier  case  of
      Blair (1997) were still valid.


   8. Accordingly, if lack of economic incentive to return to the country of
      origin was sufficient to found a refusal of a visit  application  then
      no person living overseas whose standard of  living  there  was  lower
      than that prevailing in the UK could ever come  on  holiday  here,  or
      visit relations settled here. That is not the  law.  The  Tribunal  in
      Ogunkola adopted that comment.


   9. The second ground was that the  Judge's  determination,  reflected  at
      paragraph 20 and concerning the appellant's intention to  depart  from
      the UK was arguably based upon mere suspicion.  That  is  contrary  to
      other quoted authority. Cases should not be decided on  the  basis  of
      suspicion as to intentions.


  10. He submitted that no  findings  of  credibility  were  made.  Further,
      although the appellant did not produce a bank statement,  her  husband
      had such a statement.


  11. There had also been failure by the Judge to consider the fact that the
      appellants had their own family in Bangladesh. There was a husband and
      son remaining there. She has two daughters in the UK  whom  she  would
      wish to see.


  12. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Everett accepted that it was wrong  to
      find that just because a person may be financially not well off, there
      was no incentive to return. She referred to paragraph 2 of the witness
      statement of Mrs Dipa Begum before the First-tier Tribunal.


  13. Ms Begum is the sponsor. She stated that her aunt has no bank account,
      but her uncle does. They have transferred money on several  occasions.
      It was therefore not clear why the majority of the  income  came  from
      the UK.


  14. At paragraph 19, the Judge also stated that he  could  not  understand
      why the first appellant would seek to undertake the journey to the UK.
      He would have thought that it  would  have  been  preferable  for  her
      family in the UK to visit her in Bangladesh.


  15. There was no record of this ever having  been  put  by  way  of  cross
      examination to the sponsor. It had not been raised by the respondent.


  16. Accordingly, although the  Judge's  reasoning  relating  to  financial
      circumstances could  be  sustained,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  'the
      balance is tipped' when regard is had to the  Judge's  'finding'  that
      her "very weak health condition" made it preferable for her family  to
      visit her in Bangladesh.


  17. Accordingly, Ms Everett accepted that  that  finding,  which  was  not
      supported by any evidence, constituted a material error. She  accepted
      that the decision would have to be re-made.


  18. I accordingly set aside the determination and re-make the decision.


  19. I have  had  regard  to  the  bundle  of  documents  produced  by  the
      appellants in anticipation of this hearing.  There  was  also  further
      documentation which the appellants sought to produce pursuant to  Rule
      15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  This
      consisted of the death certificate and copy of the British passport of
      Somokjan Bibi, (the appellant's late mother) and an affidavit from  Mr
      Hafizur Rahman with supporting documents.


  20. Ms Everett did not oppose the production of such evidence.


  21. Mr Rahman stated in his affidavit that he is a  Bangladeshi  national.
      He has been self-employed as a farmer for the last 30 years  and  owns
      six acres of farming land. His house has five bedrooms and two sitting
      rooms. He lives there together with the appellants. The appellant is a
      housewife and his son is in full time education.


  22. His six acres of land is cultivated with a substantial market value of
      60 lakh.


  23. He has regular earnings from his family owned land where  he  produces
      rice, vegetables and seasonal crops. He is a self employed farmer  and
      is financially solvent.


  24. In addition to his earnings, he and his wife receive remittances  from
      their son and other relatives settled in the UK on an occasional basis
      as a gift. He is not dependent on remittances from them. He has a bank
      account at the Sonail Bank. He regularly maintains  and  deposits  his
      earnings through the account after meeting family expenses.


  25. His wife and son have been sponsored to visit the UK for three  months
      by his son, Mr Rashid and niece. Both are settled in the UK.


  26. The particulars of his Islami Bank account have been produced as  well
      as documents proving his ownership of land.


  27. The appellant's sponsor,  Ms  Dipa  Begum,  gave  oral  evidence.  She
      adopted her witness statement at pages 19-21, dated  17th  July  2014.
      She is a British citizen. She is employed. She is a joint  sponsor  of
      the appellants who are her aunt and cousin.


  28. Her aunt is a housewife and is dependent on her husband, Mr Rahman,  a
      self- employed farmer. He has regular earnings from his  family  owned
      farm. They occasionally send money to his account. The family  is  not
      in any way fully dependent upon such remittances.


  29. The purpose of the visit is "purely emotional and to  maintain  family
      contact." Her aunt wishes to  visit  and  say  prayers  for  her  late
      mother, Mrs Somokjan Bibi. She passed away in  2008.  A  copy  of  the
      death certificate has been provided. She is looking forward to  seeing
      her  grandchildren  and  other  close  family  members.  It  would  be
      difficult and expensive for them to travel to Bangladesh.


  30. Her aunt is in her old age and is unable to travel to the  UK  on  her
      own. Accordingly, her son is accompanying her to provide  support  and
      assistance.


  31. She had also made a witness statement before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dated 22nd March 2014. In that statement, as noted by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, she stated that her aunt is "very week (sic) in health
      condition, that is she cannot travel to UK alone and as a  woman  does
      not travel alone."


  32. In cross examination, Ms Everett asked about her aunt's  illness.  She
      stated that she is losing weight. She has not seen them in ten  years.
      She does not have a health condition. She loses  weight.  She  is  not
      diabetic. She needs someone to travel with her.


  33. She was asked whether, if she alone were granted entry clearance,  she
      would travel here. She could not come by herself. She needs someone to
      travel with her. She would not be confident to come alone.


  34. Her son, who wished to travel with her,  is  studying  in  Bangladesh.
      Evidence of that has been provided at the end of the bundle A  showing
      that he is registered at a Madrasa. A "testimonial" signed  and  dated
      on 12th June 2014 shows that he  successfully  passed  an  examination
      held under the Bangladesh Madrasa Education Board.


  35. He will return to Bangladesh. They are coming  to  see  relatives.  If
      they refuse to return, she would call the UKBA. Her  record  and  good
      name would be involved.


  36. This is the first time they have applied. The appellant wants  to  see
      her granddaughter. Ms Begum said that she was last  in  Bangladesh  in
      2005. She is a single mother.


  37. She is quite confident that they will return. They have  to.  If  not,
      she will call the UKBA. Her aunt cannot read or write.


  38. Her co-sponsor is the  second  appellant's  brother.  He  married  her
      sister. He has been here for seven to eight years.


     Submissions


  39. Ms Everett relied on the reasons for refusal. There are concerns about
      the aunt's ill health. It is not clear why it is "weak." It  jars  and
      does not quite fit in with the evidence. There are  accordingly  still
      credibility problems raised by the unexplained reference to the aunt's
      condition.


  40. On behalf of the appellants, it was submitted that regard must be  had
      to the evidence and documents as a whole. The health condition is  not
      a serious one. She has lost weight.


  41. The basis for the refusal still amounts to suspicion that  the  second
      appellant might stay. However,  he  is  studying.  This  is  a  purely
      'emotional visit'.


     Findings and Determination


  42. Since the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellants  have
      produced  a  substantial  bundle  of  documentation  relating  to  the
      financial circumstances of the appellants, including documents  and  a
      statement on affidavit from her husband and family in  Bangladesh.  In
      addition, a certificate relating to the second appellant's  continuing
      education has been produced.


  43. As noted by Ms Everett there is something odd about the  reference  to
      her aunt being "very week in health condition." However,  paragraph  4
      of her earlier statement contains the explanation that she is weak  in
      health condition, that is, she cannot travel to the UK alone.


  44. I found the evidence of the sponsor to be credible. She explained that
      the appellant wishes to visit the grave of her deceased  mother.   The
      appellant would not be able to travel to the UK alone. She cannot read
      or write. She also wants to see her grandchildren and stay for  a  few
      days with them.


  45. I also accept her evidence that she would report the appellants to the
      UKBA in the event that they sought to remain longer than permitted.


  46. In  these  circumstances,  I  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the
      intentions of the appellants are anything other than that  which  they
      have given. I have no reason to suppose, having regard to the evidence
      as a whole, that there is any ulterior motive to this trip. They  have
      strong social and economic circumstances in  Bangladesh.  Accordingly,
      they have shown that they have the incentive to return.


  47. Having regard to the evidence as a whole, I find that the decision  of
      the respondent was not in accordance with the law and the  immigration
      rules.


     Decision


        Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I re-make
it allowing the          appellants' appeals.


     No anonymity orders made.







                               Signed                     Date  11/8/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


