
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/14962/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated              |
|On 26 January 2015                     |On 27 January 2015                     |
|                                       |                                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Mr MAHMOUD SALAH MOHAMED ELSAADANY
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Chohan, Counsel (instructed by Greenfields
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge S. Chohan on 12 December  2014
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Colvin  who
         had allowed the Respondent's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
         against refusal of  his  entry  clearance  application  made  under
         paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules to visit his wife  and  young
         son in the United Kingdom.  The determination was promulgated on 16
         September 2014.


    2.     The Respondent is a national of Egypt, born on 13 January  1985.
         It is not necessary to repeat his adverse immigration history which
         is set out at [3] and [4]  of  Judge  Colvin's  determination.   In
         essence the Respondent had been removed from the United Kingdom  at
         public expense on 24 October 2010, after his leave  to  remain  had
         been curtailed following the breakdown of his previous marriage  to
         a British Citizen.  The Appellant had formed  a  relationship  with
         another British Citizen, who had joined him in Egypt.   A  son  was
         born in 2012, who is a British Citizen.  The Appellant had  married
         his new wife in Egypt in 2013.  She and the  son  had  subsequently
         returned to the United Kingdom but remained in close  contact  with
         the Appellant.  The couple were currently  unable  to  satisfy  the
         requirements of Appendix  FM  for  financial  reasons.   The  entry
         clearance application had been refused under paragraph  320(7B)  of
         the Immigration Rules which applied to visitors but not to  spouses
         seeking settlement.  The judge found that the Appellant would abide
         by the visit visa conditions and that there were compassionate  and
         compelling circumstances which made  refusal  of  a  visit  visa  a
         disproportionate lack of respect for the family life  of  the  wife
         and son, settled British Citizens.   The decision was also contrary
         to the best interests of the Appellant's son.


    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had erred in  law  in  her  proportionality
         analysis by failing to take into account the public interest and in
         giving inadequate reasons for her finding that the Appellant was  a
         genuine visitor who would leave the United Kingdom at  the  end  of
         his visit.


    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error of  law
         were found.


    Submissions - error of law


    5.     Ms Everett for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards of
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.  She  submitted  that
         the judge's approach had been wrong and had  failed  to  follow  MM
         (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  There was no "threshold" test.  The
         judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for her findings.  The
         fact that the Appellant was currently unable to settle as a  spouse
         was ultimately a matter of choice in that his  sponsor  could  seek
         qualifying employment enabling the financial requirements  for  his
         settlement to be met.  They had other choices.  The judge had  also
         failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  her  finding  that  the
         Appellant would abide by the terms of his visit visa.  This  was  a
         mandatory refusal which the Appellant had brought on himself.


    6.     In response to the tribunal's enquiry Ms Everett confirmed  that
         the Secretary of State did not contend that  the  judge's  decision
         had been irrational.


    7.     The tribunal did not need to call on Mr Chohan.


    8.     The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
         and reserved its determination which now follows.


    No material error of law finding


    9.     The judge's treatment of the evidence was thorough and  she  set
         out her essential  findings  with  care.   The  judge  weighed  the
         evidence given by the Appellant's sponsor and by his parents in law
         as to why they believed that he would comply with the  restrictions
         applicable to his visit visa and how they would ensure that he did.
           Her  positive  findings  on  that  issue  are  at  [20]  of   her
         determination and were open to her.


    10.    The judge was right to call attention to the circumstances where
         paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules do  not  apply  and  the
         parallel she drew between visits and settlement was  relevant.   It
         would not have been logical to reach that stage  unless  the  judge
         had satisfied herself that compliance with the restricted  visa  by
         the Appellant was more likely than not to occur.


    11.    Although it is right to say that the judge followed the  Gulshan
         (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC)
         approach rather than the MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985  approach
         on the "threshold" question, that  debate  probably  remains  live.
         It cannot be said to amount to a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         context of the present appeal  because  a  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
         analysis had to be conducted by the judge in  any  event  and  was.
         The Appellant's son's best interests were plainly a relevant factor
         in the proportionality exercise.  There can be no  doubt  that  the
         judge was entitled to find what amounted to  special  circumstances
         which made refusal of a temporary visa disproportionate:  see  [21]
         and [22] of the determination.  There is  no  sense  in  which  the
         judge was following the impermissible approach identified in  Patel
         v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 741 of seeking to use Article 8  ECHR  as  a
         general remedial power.


    12.    The public interest was adequately considered by the judge.  The
         British child's best interests have  an  impact  on  society  as  a
         whole, affecting as they must the future wellbeing of  that  child.
         The judge considered the immigration control aspect in  detail  and
         found that the restrictions on the visa would be observed.  It  was
         not a settlement situation when other matters  would  have  arisen.
         There was here no suggestion of any resulting expense to the public
         purse.


    13.    There was no irrationality in the  judge's  decision  and  quite
         properly  none  was  suggested.   This  was  ultimately  merely   a
         disagreement with the judge's decision.  There would have  been  no
         point in parliament's provision for allowing Article 8 ECHR appeals
         in visit visas despite ending appeals under  paragraph  41  of  the
         Immigration Rules unless it was accepted that not  every  situation
         can be covered by the Immigration Rules.  Successful  appeals  will
         be rare but the present appeal provides an example.


    14.    The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
         of law in the determination and there is no basis  for  interfering
         with the judge's decision.


         DECISION


         The making of the previous decision did not involve the making of a
         material error on a point of law and stands unchanged






         Signed   Dated 26 January 2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
