
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14736/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 13th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                        (ON BEHALF OF ECO ABU DHABI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ABDUL MANAN KAYANI
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey to allow the appeal of  the  Respondent
    (previously the Second Appellant) against refusal of entry clearance as
    a family visitor.  On the same occasion (and in the same decision)  the
    judge allowed the appeal of his mother.  There  is  no  appeal  against
    that decision.

 2. The appeal currently before me is founded on the grounds that the judge
    purported to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  However the
    application leading to the refusal decision had been made on  3rd  June
    2013.  The application was  for  the  Respondent  to  visit  (with  his
    mother) his mother's brother, that is to say his uncle.  Following  the
    introduction of the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
    2012 that relationship does not come within those permitting a right of
    appeal save on race relations and human rights grounds.  It is said  in
    the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal that the judge  misdirected
    herself in purporting to allow the appeal of  the  Respondent  in  line
    with that of his mother.  Her decision is the  more  surprising  as  at
    paragraph 10 of her determination she in fact noted that the Respondent
    had only a limited right of appeal.

 3. At the hearing before me there was no attendance by or on behalf of the
    Respondent when the appeal was called on for  hearing  at  11.40am.   I
    noted from the file that notice of hearing had been sent  both  to  the
    Respondent and to the Sponsor (who had given evidence  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal) by letter dated 12th January  2015.   I
    considered the matter in the light of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and decided that it was in the interests of
    justice to proceed with the hearing.

 4. Mr Mills on behalf of  the  Appellant  Secretary  of  State  said  that
    neither of the limited Grounds of Appeal which had  been  available  to
    the Respondent had been pleaded in the Notice  of  Appeal.   There  had
    been a material error of law on the part of the judge  as  she  had  no
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal.

 5. I noted that in her decision although the judge had expressly  referred
    to the fact that the Respondent had only limited Grounds of Appeal  she
    gave no basis for allowing the appeal having regard  to  those  limited
    rights.  There is nothing in  the  documents  to  indicate  that  human
    rights or racial discrimination grounds had been relied upon.  In those
    circumstances I  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and  substitute  a
    decision that the appeal by the Respondent stands dismissed.   The  fee
    award which was made by Judge Pacey in favour of  the  Respondent  also
    necessarily falls away.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error on a
    point of law.  I have set aside that  decision.    I  have  remade  the
    decision and for the reasons stated above the appeal of  the  Appellant
    Secretary of State is  successful  and  therefore  the  appeal  by  the
    Respondent against the refusal of entry clearance is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity order was requested and none is made.



Signed   Date 12 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
