
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14460/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th September 2014                          |On 10th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                            MR Jahangir Muhammad
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed of Equity Law Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Jahangir Muhammad, date of birth 7 April 1987,  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan. Having considered all the circumstances it is  not
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards promulgated on  6th  May  2014.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the decision of the
    respondent dated 23rd June 2013 to refuse the appellant entry clearance
    to the United Kingdom as a visitor.

 3. By decision of the 11th July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    granted permission to appeal. In  granting  permission  to  appeal  the
    Judge Holmes gave permission in the following terms:-

        2 The grounds, as drafted, amount in large part to little more than
        a series of disagreements with the  Judge's  decision,  however  it
        does appear that the Judge either overlooked relevant  evidence  as
        to  the  Appellant's  economic  circumstances  or  failed  to  give
        adequate reasons for any decision that it carried no weight.

 4. This is an application for a visit visa  to  enable  the  appellant  to
    enter the United Kingdom to visit his brother and his brother's family.

 5. In the letter of refusal dated 23 June 2013 the ECO accepted  that  the
    sponsor in the United Kingdom was related to the appellant  as  claimed
    and that the sponsor was capable of maintaining and  accommodating  the
    appellant. The ECO was not satisfied as to the  appellant's  intentions
    in coming to  the  United  Kingdom,  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant intended to leave the United Kingdom  on  completion  of  his
    visit. In coming to that conclusion the ECO  looked  carefully  at  the
    financial  affairs  of  the  appellant.  The  ECO  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not as financially secure as he claimed  and  accordingly
    that the appellant's intentions were not as stated.

 6. The appellant had stated that he was self-employed working as  Jahangir
    Vegetable & Fruit Commission Agent. His place of business is Shop No 24
    New Sabzi Mandi G T Road Dina. He claimed a total  income  of  PKR  30-
    35,000 per  month.  To  substantiate  that  income  the  appellant  had
    produced tax forms and bank statements. In his  tax  return  his  gross
    income was PKR 353,000 for 2011 and for PKR 375.00 for  2012  with  the
    net income as PKR 265,000 and PKR 280,000.

 7. In the determination it is suggested that the appellant was relying  on
    tax returns for the period 2009 and 2010.  In  fact  in  the  documents
    submitted to the ECO there are tax returns  for  the  period  2011  and
    2012. To be clear those documents are documents allegedly completed  by
    the appellant to be submitted or actually  submitted  to  the  Pakistan
    Federal Board of Revenue. One problem appears to be that the annual tax
    returns are stamped for 2009 and 2010 on the 4th June 2011 and for 2011
    and 2012 on the 28th May 2013.

 8. Whilst there are calculations on those forms, there are  no  supporting
    documents to show purchases and sales of items  to  support  the  claim
    that the appellant  is  running  a  commission  agent's  business.  The
    calculation of commission is consistent  with  his  claimed  commission
    rate but there are no supporting documents to show who he was acting as
    agent for who he was selling to or other details  to  substantiate  his
    business.

 9. There is a document that supports that the appellant is registered with
    FBR but no evidence of payment of any tax. Indeed  all  the  tax  forms
    refer to item 26 taxable income at a significant level but the tax rate
    applicable is, item 38, at 0%.

10. Whilst I appreciate that there are tax breaks for farmers and the  like
    the appellant had claimed in his VAF that he had additional income [see
    page 42 part 5-3rd answer].  Despite  that  additional  income  claimed
    there is no figure in the tax return for such and no liability for tax.



11. The judge in examining the documentation has noted that  in  completing
    the tax forms the appellant has completed the section stating that  his
    income is from " Other Revenues /Fee/Charges for Professional or  other
    Services/Commission". An examination of the tax documents  contains  no
    statement of net sales, cost of sales, gross or net profits [items  1-7
    on the tax form]. It was being claimed on behalf of the appellant  that
    he based his commission on the whole trade, with which he dealt and  he
    then took a percentage of that as profit.

12. The judge was clearly drawing  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  tax
    returns containing figures from the appellant  without  any  supporting
    documents. Whilst the judge appears to have limited himself to  looking
    at the documents for 2009 and 2010, the documents  for  2011  and  2012
    contain the same detail and problems. The figures on the 2011 and  2012
    tax documents are merely that which the appellant claims he is  earning
    but on which he pays no tax.

13. The judge also made the point  that  there  is  no  reference  to  bank
    accounts on the tax forms. Within the tax  forms  there  is  a  section
    referred to as Annex B. Part of that section refers  to  bank  accounts
    and other details which appear not to be completed. The 2011  and  2012
    tax documents [returns] do not appear to be complete in any event.  One
    of the documents jumps from Annex D to Annex G and the  other  document
    jumps from Annex B to Annex D.

14. The  same  applies  to  the  documents  submitted  by  the  appellant's
    representative for tax returns for 2009 /2010. Why in that bundle there
    was not more up-to-date tax documentation is not explained.  Why  those
    acting on behalf of the appellant should  be  submitting  historic  tax
    documents rather than up to date tax documents was not explained.

15. However whatever else can be said  there  is  no  confirmation  of  the
    actual amount of tax paid. According to the tax documents the appellant
    is not paying  any  tax.  There  is  a  document  indicating  that  the
    appellant is registered with the FBR of Pakistan but that does not show
    how much tax he paid. The tax returns refer to no  tax  being  payable[
    see items 33-36]. Again there is no explanation as to how the appellant
    receiving such income from trade does not pay any tax.

16. As the final matter I would also note that whilst  bank  accounts  have
    been submitted there is no evidence on the bank accounts of the payment
    of any tax at all. Admittedly  the  bank  accounts  run  from  February
    through to May. However there is no indication of any tax being paid in
    the period.

17. The bank account has regular payments into the  account  and  there  is
    confirmation from the bank of the balance at the end of the period. All
    of the transactions on the bank account are in cash. That to an  extent
    is consistent with the claim by the appellant that his  business  is  a
    cash business. There are payments into the bank account every four days
    or so. The payments cover the whole of the period from 1 February to 31
    May. That would be a period of four months.  In  that  period  of  time
    according to the appellant he was earning at  most  PKR  140,000.  Paid
    into the account over that period of time was over PKR 232,000.  Whilst
    bank accounts do show regular credits the credits are far in excess  of
    the appellant's claimed income and no explanation has  been  given  for
    the excess income.

18. Looking at the documentation the judge has looked at  the  bundle  that
    had been submitted by the  appellant's  representative.  However  there
    were more up-to-date tax returns and the bundle with the  ECO.  However
    the concerns of the judge as to why he was not  satisfied  on  the  tax
    documents that the appellant had the income that  he  claimed,  applies
    whether one looks at the 2009/ 2010  documents  or  one  looks  at  the
    2011/2012 documents.

19.  The judge has given valid reasons  for  not  accepting  that  the  tax
    returns properly reflect the income of the appellant. The  tax  returns
    are merely the appellant's submission as to what his income is.  Whilst
    he is clearly registered with a FBR, there was no liability to tax  and
    no confirmation of the income from the FBR. The judge was  clearly  not
    satisfied as  to  the  financial  circumstances  of  the  appellant  in
    Pakistan. On the documentation submitted those were  findings  of  fact
    that the judge was entitled to make.

20.  Even if the judge has failed to take account  of  the  2011  and  2012
    documents those documents raise the same issues identified by the judge
    in respect of the earlier documentation. If such constitutes  an  error
    it makes no material difference as the same issues arise  under  latter
    documents.

21. There is no material error of law in the determination.  I  uphold  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

