
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/14880/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th  August  2014                            |On 13th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              mrs fethia dahak
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - paris
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lamine Mekideche (the Sponsor in person)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Colvin) dated 11th May 2014 by which he allowed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to  refuse  her
    leave to enter as a family visitor.  The Judge allowed the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. For the sake of clarity and continuity I shall continue to refer to the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  as  the  Respondent  and  Mrs  Dahak  as  the
    Appellant.

 3. The Entry Clearance  Officer  submits  that  the  Judge  misquoted  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. As the Judge correctly identified, the refusal notice indicate that the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant was a  genuine  visitor
    who intended to leave the UK  at  the  end  of  the  visit.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer did so on the basis that the Appellant had previously
    been issued with a visit visa in November 2012 when she  had  indicated
    that it was her intention to stay for four weeks in  the  UK.  However,
    she in fact remained in the UK for  four  months  before  returning  to
    Algeria. She then returned to the UK only two weeks later returning  to
    Algeria only five days before the expiry of the six months  visa.  Thus
    having said that she intended to spend four weeks in  the  UK  she  was
    here for almost 6 months.

 5. The Judge at paragraph 11 indicates that he had  the  benefit  of  oral
    evidence from the Sponsor who told him that he had persuaded  his  wife
    to stay longer on the two previous visits so they could be together  as
    a married couple. He explained  to  the  Judge  that  they  were  in  a
    difficult position having married two years ago with  a  five-month-old
    child but could not meet the new Immigration Rules to live together  in
    the UK. They are therefore  reliant  upon  visits  to  each  other.  He
    confirmed that his wife would leave before the expiry of  the  visa  as
    she has done on both previous occasions.

 6. The Judge then at paragraph 12, accepting the evidence of the  Sponsor,
    accepted that the Appellant is a genuine visitor who intends  to  leave
    the UK at the end of the visit. The Judge  acknowledged  that  she  had
    stayed longer on the last two visits than  she  had  indicated  in  her
    application but was nevertheless satisfied that she returned  prior  to
    the expiry of the visa "which is one of the main  requirements  of  the
    Visa".

 7. The pertinent part of  what  the  Judge  says  is  his  statement  that
    returning prior  to  the  expiry  of  the  visa  is  one  of  the  main
    requirements.

 8. Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules in fact states that in  order  to
    be granted a visa an applicant must be "genuinely seeking  entry  as  a
    visitor for a limited period  as  stated  by  him,  not  exceeding  six
    months".

 9. What is  relevant  therefore  is  what  the  Appellant  stated  on  the
    application form as to the duration of the visit,  not  that  she  will
    return before six months expires. It is quite clear that  the  evidence
    in this case was that the Appellant was unlikely to remain  in  the  UK
    only for the period of four weeks. So much was confirmed by the Sponsor
    to me. On the basis that she is likely to stay for more than  the  four
    weeks applied for, she cannot show that she meets the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41(i) of the Immigration Rules and thus cannot succeed in her
    appeal.

10. In misquoting the requirements of paragraph 41 the First-tier  Tribunal
    has made an error and as that  was  determinative  of  the  appeal  the
    decision must be set aside. On the basis that  the  Appellant,  on  the
    evidence of the previous visits and the evidence of the Sponsor, cannot
    satisfy paragraph  41(i)  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision must be dismissed.

11. There is brief mention in the First-tier Tribunal's determination  that
    the Judge took into account the genuine difficulties  that  the  couple
    have in being able to conduct their relationship and family life.  That
    however arises due to their inability to meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and there is no evidence that it is not possible  for
    them to enjoy family life together in Algeria.

12. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
    allowed with the effect that the Appellant's  original  appeal  against
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12th August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
