

                                [pic]
 Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/14421/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard at Field House
       Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 12 February 2016
       On 22 February 2016


                                   Before



                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DHAKA)



         Appellant


                                     and


                             MISS RUHENA AKHTER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr M K Hasan, Kalam Solicitors


                        DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Majid, promulgated on 21 August 2015.

 Background

    2.   On 17 June 2013, the respondent sought leave to enter the United
       Kingdom in order to visit her sister and brother in law, who reside
       in this country. Two earlier applications had been refused in 2007
       and 2011.
    3. Her application was refused on  8  July  2013  as  the  ECO  was  not
       satisfied that she was genuinely seeking entry only as a  visitor  or
       that she intended to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  the
       visit. Furthermore, because  the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
       respondent, who  intended  to  bear  the  cost  of  her  travel,  was
       genuinely in receipt of the stated funds from self-employment,  there
       was concern whether she could meet the cost of the return  or  onward
       journey.

    4. In appealing the decision, the respondent provided an explanation for
       the large sum, which was  deposited  in  her  account  prior  to  the
       application for entry being made.

    5. The ECO reviewed the decision in the knowledge that the  respondent's
       appeal was listed for a hearing on 8 September 2014. A second refusal
       of entry clearance resulted from this review dated 20 July 2014.  One
       additional matter was raised; that the respondent  had  been  refused
       entry  for  using  deception  within  the  last  10  years  and   her
       application was therefore refused under paragraph 320(7B).

    6. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) reviewed the decision on  13  August
       2014 and maintained it. With regard to  the  previous  allegation  of
       deception, it was noted  that  the  respondent  withdrew  her  appeal
       against that particular decision and no evidence had been put forward
       to address the issue.

    7. When this matter came before the FTTJ, he found that  the  respondent
       was a "simple lady" who could not be  accused  of  fraud  and  was  a
       genuine family visitor.

    8. The grounds of appeal argued that the FTTJ was wrong to  assert  that
       the allegation of deception was not supported by  "admissible  cogent
       evidence" owing to the existence of a  Document  Verification  Report
       (DVR).  It was also said to be far from clear how the FTTJ  concluded
       that the respondent was how he described her owing  to  the  lack  of
       details relating to the previous application and refusal.

    9. FTTJ Frankish granted permission to appeal, commenting  thus;   "with
       no  mention  of  the  fraudulent  NHS  letter  referred  to  by   the
       respondent, it cannot be gainsaid that an arguable error has  arisen"
       in relation the FTTJ's finding that the respondent was a "simple lady
       who cannot be accused of fraud."


The hearing

   10. At the hearing before me, Ms Fijiwala  produced  the  letters,  which
       were the subject of the DVR. Mr Hasan stated that these  letters  had
       never been produced before despite two adjournments of the appeal for
       this to be done. While copies were made of these  letters,  they  did
       not form part of my consideration as to whether there was an error of
       law owing to the clear indication that they were not before the FTTJ.



   11. I proceeded to hear submissions from both representatives.

   12. Ms Fijiwala accepted that it was not clear if the letters, which were
       referred to in the DVR were before the FTTJ. However, she argued that
       the DVR itself was before  the  FTTJ  but  that  there  had  been  no
       reference to this item in his decision.  She  acknowledged  that  the
       FTTJ had shown some awareness of the deception issue in that  he  had
       concluded that the respondent was a "simple lady." He also found that
       the allegation was not supported by  cogent  evidence.   Ms  Fijiwala
       argued that it was not clear if the FTTJ had regard to  the  previous
       application  and   decision.   Furthermore,   there   had   been   no
       consideration of paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules and this amounted  to
       a fundamental error of law.

   13. Mr Hasan emphasised that permission was granted on the basis  of  the
       FTTJ's description of the appellant as a simple lady. There had  been
       no representation on behalf of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  at  the
       hearing. While Kalam Solicitors received the DVR, by post, it was not
       accompanied by the letters or the emails referred to in that  report.
       He argued that the FTTJ clearly recorded that no proof of forgery was
       submitted.  A crucial document that of the email conversation between
       the ECO and the alleged writer of the letters was missing at the time
       of the hearing. There had been no error of law.

   14. In response, Ms Fijiwala argued that the FTTJ had not considered  the
       evidence before him. If that evidence was to be discounted, he should
       have explained why.

Decision on Error of Law

   15. I decided that the FTTJ materially erred in his treatment of the  DVR
       and the associated issue of the  refusal  of  the  application  under
       paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules. My reasons are as follows.

   16. The second notice of immigration decision, dated 20 July 2014, states
       the following; "You were previously refused entry clearance for using
       deception  by  providing  a  non-genuine  NHS  letter   (Dhaka/565625
       refers). As you have previously employed deception in an  application
       for entry clearance within 10  years,  after  referral  to  an  Entry
       Clearance  Manager,  your  current  application  is   refused   under
       paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules." Elsewhere  in  the  same
       decision, it is noted that the respondent withdrew her appeal against
       that decision. The ECM's review also noted that  the  respondent  had
       yet to provide any evidence to address the  previous  refusal,  which
       occurred on 20 January 2011.

   17. While it can be inferred from [12] of the decision and  reasons  that
       the FTTJ decided that there was no deception in this  case,  he  does
       not mention paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules at any stage.


   18. At [21] the FTTJ states as follows;

      "It will be unfair to accept an allegation of heinous moral turpitude
      without "clear and   convincing evidence" of production of forgery or
      deception. Accordingly, it cannot be legal to accept a datum of  this
      kind against an Appellant,  which  is  not  supported  by  admissible
      cogent evidence. "

   19. In the previous commentary, there is no indication that the FTTJ  has
       considered the  contents  of  the  DVR,  which  both  representatives
       accepted was before him. That document states that  a  Dr  Sayers  of
       Newcastle upon Tyne Hospital, the purported writer of two NHS letters
       both dated 24 November 2010, was asked by an ECM to  confirm  whether
       he had written them. According to the DVR Dr Sayers  stated  that  he
       did not write the second of the two  letters.  Accordingly,  the  ECO
       concluded that  the  document  was  not  genuine.  The  communication
       between the ECM and DR Sayer was said to have been made by email.

   20. Mr Hasan rightly argued that the DVR was not  accompanied  by  either
       the email  communication  or  the  two  letters  referred  to  above.
       Nonetheless, FTTJ Majid ought to have explained why he found the  DVR
       to be unreliable evidence of deception, if this is what he found. The
       decision and reasons makes  no  reference  to  the  DVR  at  all  and
       consequently, it cannot be said with any certainty that it was  taken
       into consideration by the FTTJ in reaching his conclusions.

   21. The FTTJ failed to give any or any adequate consideration to the  DVR
       or to the relevant Immigration Rules.

   22. I accordingly, set aside the decision of the FTTJ in its entirety.

   23. The ECO's appeal is allowed.


 Decision


  1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
     making of an error on a point of law


  2) The decision of the FTTJ to allow the appeal under the Immigration
     Rules is set aside, with no findings preserved.

  3) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
     hearing before any judge except FTTJ Majid.

  4) The Entry Clearance Officer is directed to produce the email
     communications between the ECM and the said writer of the NHS letters
     referred to in the DVR no later than 10 days before the substantive
     hearing of this appeal.

 No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
 such a direction.

 Signed     Date: 14 February 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



-----------------------
                                                Appeal Number: VA/14421/2013







