
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/15298/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd October 2014                             |On 28th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               Mr harjit singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phull, promulgated on 23rd June  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 4th June 2014.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Harjit Singh.  The Respondent Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  India,  who  was  born  on  2nd
    October 1982.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer, under paragraph 46A and 41 of HC 395, which  refused
    his application for a visit visa in order to make  a  family  visit  to
    come to the UK, having been sponsored by Mr  Arminder  Singh,  a  close
    relative.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The circumstances of the Appellant's claim were set out at paragraph  4
    by the determination, which explained  his  family  situation  back  in
    India, and how he had come to the UK in 2010 in order to visit  and  to
    attend a wedding and a birthday party,  when  he  returned  within  the
    period of the visa granted.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  previous
    application, after his visit in 2010, had been  refused  in  2012,  and
    that Judge Pirotta, had heard an appeal in the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    29th November 2012, when she had upheld the refusal on the  basis  that
    there had been a ration card, which was issued in 2001, and which  gave
    the Appellant an age of 17 years, whereas he  was  born  in  1982,  and
    would  have  been  19  years  of  age  (see   paragraph   13   of   the
    determination).

 5. Judge Phull referred to the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  now  filed
    evidence with the appeal, which was not before Judge Pirotta, and which
    dealt with the issue of the ration card, and the  crop  receipts.   The
    HOPO raised paragraph 320(7A) and argued that the ration card  was  not
    genuine.  The judge referred  to  the  case  law  in  the  form  of  AA
    (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 (see paragraph 15 of  the  determination)
    and held that there had to be evidence of dishonesty on the part of the
    Appellant, which was absent here.  This is because  the  Appellant  was
    able to refer to the translation which refers to a date  on  the  card,
    which was not stated in the actual card itself, so that the translation
    could not be relied upon (see paragraph 16).  The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  finding  that
    paragraph 320(7A) had not been substantiated.

 7. On 9th July 2014, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the principles of Devasaleen should  have  been  followed  because  the
    previous judge had dismissed the appeal.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Samra referred to  his  Rule  24  response
    dated 29th July 2014, which states that the Presenting Officer was  not
    denied the opportunity of  presenting  a  document  to  deal  with  the
    question of dishonesty.  This is because  the  relevant  document,  the
    ration card, was contained in the Respondent's bundle, and  was  before
    the parties involved, and at no point did the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    or the Entry Clearance Manager raise the issue of  the  application  of
    paragraph 320(7A).

 9. Mr Mills, appearing on behalf of the Respondent, stated that  he  would
    have to concede that there was no error of law here.  This  is  because
    Mr Samra had only  been  show  him  the  ration  card  as  an  original
    document.  It was clear from this that there was no date on it at  all.
    It was a translation which had wrongly interposed a date on  the  card.
    This had led Judge Pirotta to previously  conclude  that  the  date  of
    birth of the children did not correspond with the date on the issue  of
    the ration card.  However, there was never a date on  the  ration  card
    itself.  Therefore, he, Mr Mills, would have to accept that the  ration
    card was a genuine document.  He would have to  accept  that  paragraph
    320(7A) had not been substantiated.  He would have to accept  that  the
    judge was correct in allowing the appeal on this occasion.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by Judge Phull  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  It is clear that
    the reliance on paragraph 320(7A) was misconceived.  It  had  not  been
    raised by the Entry Clearance Officer and it had not been raised by the
    Entry Clearance Manager.  The  ration  card  was  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The Respondent had not been denied the opportunity of  raising
    the issue.  In any event, it had now been  explained  away.   Mr  Mills
    wisely conceded that he could not place any reliance on the  allegation
    that there had been an element of fraud here.

Decision

11. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

12. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th October 2014
