


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number VA/15603/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
               Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th September 2015
            On 16th October 2015



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                               HARBHAJAN KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Sharma (Counsel, instructed by H & M Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant's application (the second application) for a visit visa
   was refused. She had previously applied to visit the UK (the first
   application) but that application had been refused on the basis that a
   false document had been submitted in the form of false KCB bank
   statement. That decision on the first application had not been appealed.
   The second application was refused under paragraph 320(7B) of the
   Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant had used deception in a
   previous application.

2. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross the Home
   Office applied for an adjournment to obtain a document verification
   report (DVR) which was refused and the appeal was heard. In paragraph 17
   of the decision the Judge recorded the Sponsor saying that the agent had
   used false documents in the first application and in paragraph 20 they
   had not put in any false documents.

3. The Judge's findings included that the Appellant had used an agent in
   the first application. The Judge found that a false bank statement from
   KCB probably had been submitted with the first application. Given the
   evidence that the Sponsor's brother did not have such an account it
   followed that the statement submitted was false. The Sponsor's evidence
   about subsequent events was consistent with a false statement having been
   submitted. She also found that his evidence was that a false document was
   probably submitted with the application.

4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, this
   was refused by the First-tier Tribunal. A renewed application to the
   Upper Tribunal was made. It was submitted that there was no evidence that
   a false statement from KCB had been submitted. It was also submitted that
   the oral evidence of the Sponsor had been mis-recorded which was to the
   effect that if such a statement had been submitted then it would have
   been false.

5. Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal citing the case of SD
   paragraph 320(11): forgery) India [2010] UKUT 276 there had been no
   judicial determination of the issue whether a document previously
   submitted had been forged and the difficulty as to whether there was such
   an admission in the evidence.

6. The issue in this appeal is narrow although the consequences for the
   Appellant will be lengthy and significant which means that is more
   important than might at first appear. It is accepted that if a document
   purportedly from KCB was submitted with the first application that
   document would have been false.

7. The evidence before the Judge was that the Sponsor's brother did not
   have such a bank account and at the very least the Sponsor accepted that
   such a document would have been false. That would have been enough to
   satisfy the requirement for cogent evidence to show that a document was
   false. The narrow is issue is whether such a document was submitted in
   support of the first application.

8. The evidence for that did not come from either a copy of the document
   itself or from a DVR. The Judge was clearly alert to the significance of
   the issue and had refused the Home Office application for an adjournment
   to obtain supporting documentation and that refusal remains unchallenged.
   There is no complaint from the Home Office about the fairness of that
   decision and it is not subject of a cross-appeal.

9. The evidence that the Judge relied on to find that the KCB bank
   statement had been submitted in the first application was from the ECO's
   statements in the Refusal Notice to that effect, she also relied on the
   evidence of events after the first application had been refused including
   the evasive behaviour of the agent and his subsequent disappearance and
   the first decision had not been appealed.

10. If the disputed evidence of the Sponsor is excluded, i.e. whether he
   accepted that the documents had been submitted, it is clear that he
   accepted that if such documents had been submitted they would have been
   false. The evidence relied on by the Judge to find that the KCB documents
   had been submitted was set out, the findings properly reasoned and
   supported.

11. Read properly I am satisfied that notwithstanding the absence of the
   KCB bank statements themselves or a supporting DVR the Judge was entitled
   to find that the KCB had been submitted with the first application, it
   followed that those statements were false. The Judge had in mind the
   burden and standard and approached the issue with due caution. It follows
   that the decision was open to the Judge on sustainable reasons that had
   been given.

12. I appreciate that this finding has consequences for the ability of the
   Appellant to renew an application for a visit visa. However, this
   decision is not a further bite at the cherry but a review of the
   lawfulness of the First-tier Tribunal decision which requires a
   dispassionate analysis of what took place and what was decided.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes (IAC)

Dated: 16th October 2015



