
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/15744/2013
     VA/15753/2013
     VA/15755/2013
     VA/15759/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2014                             |On 29 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             nadia shahbaz ahmed
                                  ahmed ali
                              abdullah shahbaz
                             mahad shahbaz DHABI
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Otchie, instructed by Malik Law Chambers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   I will refer to the four respondents as the  appellants  as  they  were
    the appellants before the First-tier Judge, and I  will  refer  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

2.   The appellants appealed to a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent of 7 July 2013 refusing  to  grant  them
    entry clearance as  family  visitors  to  have  a  holiday  with  their
    sponsor, Mr Tariq Mehmood, the first  appellant's  first  cousin.   The
    appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  because  since  9
    July 2012 the Immigration Appeal (Family Visitor) Regulations no longer
    provided for a right of appeal for a family visit  to  a  cousin.   The
    appellants therefore had only a limited right of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which was restricted to Human  Rights  and  Equality  Act
    2010 issues.  They did not raise any Equality Act issues.

3.   The judge found Mr Mehmood, who gave evidence  before  him,  to  be  an
    impressive witness.  He said that  he  and  the  first  appellant  were
    unusually close because their respective families had lived jointly  in
    Pakistan before he  migrated  to  the  United  Kingdom  some  26  years
    previously.  He said that the first appellant was like a baby sister to
    him and he had ample accommodation available and was happy  to  provide
    hospitality.  He was offering the trip of out  of  a  sense  of  family
    obligation.  He visited the appellants in Pakistan annually and  wanted
    them to visit the United Kingdom in return.  There was no question that
    they would overstay as the three children were at school and the  first
    appellant had to return to her husband.

4.   The judge found that paragraphs 41 and 46A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    were satisfied.  He remarked at paragraph 13 of the determination  that
    none of the appellants was in the United Kingdom and so they could  not
    invoke Article 8  in  their  own  right  and  even  if  that  were  too
    restrictive an approach, plainly there was no private life component to
    their appeals in that they had never done more than  visit  the  United
    Kingdom in the past.

5.   He went on to consider  whether  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellants and the sponsor, noting that the threshold for  interference
    was low and that family life could take many forms.  He  was  satisfied
    that the sponsor and the first appellant had a special bond which arose
    because of their family links.  He was fortified in that conclusion  by
    the fact that some of the appellants had previously visited the  United
    Kingdom and that the sponsor saw the appellants as being  part  of  his
    family circle and saw bringing them to the United Kingdom for  a  visit
    as a family obligation.  He considered that  preventing  the  sponsor's
    cousin and her sons from making another visit  to  the  United  Kingdom
    represented an interference with the sponsor's  family  life  and  that
    alternatively it was an interference with his private life if his  non-
    nuclear family circle was to be classified as mere friendship.  He went
    on to consider relevant authorities which led him to an  assessment  of
    the proportionality of the decision.  He found that there was no likely
    breach of immigration control and that the appellants were not  seeking
    to settle in the United Kingdom, would have no access to  the  NHS  nor
    would they have any right to public funds and their visit would  be  of
    short duration and would be privately sponsored.  He considered however
    that the sponsor  would  suffer  an  unwarranted  restriction  upon  or
    interference with his private and family life if  the  appellants  were
    not allowed to visit him and that it was not enough that he was able to
    visit them in Pakistan.  The fact that they could  simply  lodge  fresh
    entry clearance applications meeting  the  Immigration  Rules  was,  he
    thought, in effect redundant in light of  his  finding  that  they  had
    satisfied the requirements of the  Rules  and  that  this  would  be  a
    disproportionate and hence  unlawful  requirement.   The  appeals  were
    therefore allowed under Article 8.

6.   In her grounds of appeal the respondent argued that  it  had  not  been
    explained properly or at all what the family links  were  that  led  to
    Article 8 being engaged, referring to the decision in AAO  [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 840.  It was argued that no reason had been given  to  support  the
    judge's finding that there was family life engaged between cousins  who
    had lived in different countries for 26 years.  (The grounds state that
    it was the case that the sponsor had been found "neither  to  have  the
    time nor inclination to travel", but  that  was  a  mistake  since  the
    reference at paragraph 6 of the determination in that regard is to  the
    first appellant's husband rather than the sponsor).  It was argued that
    the refusal on the basis of an interference with the sponsor's  private
    life suffered from the same defects as the  findings  on  family  life.
    The grounds were on to argue that, the judge having failed to establish
    that either the family or private life were engaged  in  these  appeals
    for the purposes of Article 8, it followed that proportionality was not
    a matter for consideration.  Reference was made to the decision of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel & Others [2013] UKSC 72 which warns against  the
    use of Article 8 as a "general dispensing power".  The point  was  made
    that such guidance was  pertinent  to  the  instant  appeal  where  the
    circumstances of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  fundamentally
    normal and could continue in their respective countries of residence.

7.   In her submissions Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds  of  appeal.   It
    had not been shown why Article 8 was engaged.  The decisions in AAO and
    Patel were of particular relevance.  The judge's findings were  unclear
    and the appeal should be dismissed.

8.   Mr Otchie argued that the determination was  clear  and  well-reasoned.
    The judge had found that they could meet the Rules and  considered  the
    case law and found there was a special bond between the sponsor and the
    appellants.  He saw them as part of his family circle.  The conclusions
    were based on the facts.  The determination was properly reasoned.   It
    was clear from AAO  that  decisions  of  this  nature  were  very  fact
    specific.  The judge was fortified by  the  fact  of  previous  visits.
    There needed to  be  more  than  emotional  ties,  but  it  was  a  low
    threshold.  They were not going to take advantage of NHS  treatment  or
    public funds.  It was a question of weighing the factors.  There was no
    need for compelling circumstances.  The fact that visits could be  made
    was found not to be proportionate to the decision.

9.   By way of reply Ms Isherwood argued that it had  not  been  shown  that
    Article 8 was engaged with regard either to family or private life.

10.  If I were to find an error of law Mr Otchie argued that there would  be
    a need for a further hearing in light  of  the  judge's  findings.   Ms
    Isherwood argued that the matter could be determined without  the  need
    for a further hearing.

11.  I reserved my determination.

12.  I am conscious of the need not to interfere with a decision of a First-
    tier Judge unless there is shown to be an error of law in  the  judge's
    determination.  Matters of disagreement cannot of course amount to  the
    identification of errors of law.  That having  been  said,  I  consider
    with regard to the finding of family life that that was a finding  that
    was not open to the judge, even bearing in mind the  findings  he  made
    about the special bond as he described it which arose  because  of  the
    family links between the appellant and the sponsor.  He had  said  that
    they were unusually close because their respective families  had  lived
    jointly in Pakistan, but subsequently Mr Mehmood migrated to the United
    Kingdom some 26 years ago.  However  it  is  clear,  for  example  from
    paragraph 35 of AAO, that family life will not normally  exist  between
    parents and adult children within the  meaning  of  Article  8  in  the
    absence of further elements of dependency going beyond normal emotional
    ties, and  that  must  be  equally  applicable,  mutatis  mutandis,  to
    relationship between two adult cousins, who have not lived in the  same
    country for 26 years, albeit there have been regular visits.  No  doubt
    family life can take  many  forms,  but  the  protection  conferred  by
    Article 8 cannot rationally, in my judgment, be said to extend  to  the
    relationship between two adult first cousins who have  only  seen  each
    other infrequently over the last 26 years.  Accordingly I find that the
    judge materially erred in law in finding that  there  was  family  life
    between the sponsor and the appellants.

13.  Nor do I consider that the finding is saved by the alternative  finding
    that there is private life that would be disproportionately  interfered
    with by the refusal of entry clearance.  The decision in this regard is
    minimally reasoned.  Here although the context is  somewhat  different,
    the point at paragraph 57 in Patel concerning the need to remember that
    Article 8 is not a general dispensing power is required to be borne  in
    mind.  In light of my conclusions it cannot rationally  be  found  that
    the sponsor and the appellants enjoy family life together,  nor  in  my
    view can it be said to be the case that there is an  interference  with
    the private life of the sponsor which  requires  protection  under  the
    Convention.  Accordingly I conclude that the judge erred with regard to
    the findings as to both family and private life.

14.  I can see no benefit to  a  further  hearing  in  light  of  the  above
    findings.  The arguments were made before the judge and accepted and  I
    consider that he erred in law in concluding as he did.  If there is  an
    interference with the sponsor's private life in the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance   to   the   appellants,   that   interference   is   clearly
    proportionate.  He can continue to visit the appellants in Pakistan and
    keep in touch between visits.  The judge's decision is  reversed.   The
    appeal is dismissed on all grounds.




Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
