
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/15968/2013
     VA/15970/2013
     VA/15971/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court    |Decision & Reason  Promulgated       |
|On 5th December 2014                 |On 29th December 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                        (1) Master Bilal Ahmed Khalid
                        (2) Master Haris Ahmad Hassan
                             (3) Miss Amna Rida
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer, abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ferguson, promulgated on 9th April 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 24th March 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the  Appellants.   The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are the children of Mr  Nasir  Ahmed  and  Mrs  Mansoura
    Nasir, both husband and wife, from Pakistan, and they are  aged  13,  9
    and 4 respectively.  They applied for entry clearance to come to the UK
    as family visitors.  Their sponsoring relative was Dr Nafees Hamid, who
    was the brother of Mrs Nasir.  The  applications  of  the  parents,  Mr
    Nasir Ahmed, and Mrs Mansoura Nasir, were allowed.  The applications of
    the Appellant children were all dismissed.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence from the Sponsor, Dr Hamid, who explained that
    he had been living in  the  UK  for  fourteen  years,  coming  here  to
    complete his medical training, and that he  could  at  any  stage  have
    sponsored his sister's family, but that the reason for  their  visiting
    now  was  so  that  his  parents  could  spend  some  time  with  their
    grandchildren, who were growing up.  He also explained that they  would
    not claim asylum or engage in any other means to stay.  (See paragraphs
    3 to 4).

 4. The judge concluded that the Sponsor was a "wealthy man who has  always
    intended to finance the visit of his sister and her family (see VAF  at
    question 88)."  The judge recorded that,

         "He provided evidence of his income for the last  three  years  and
         his income from private work as a neurosurgeon when  added  to  his
         NHS salary means that he earns at a level which requires him to pay
         the highest rate of tax.  Mr Ahmed  has  sufficient  funds  in  his
         business account to finance  the  amount  he  claimed,  but  it  is
         apparent that he does not need to spend a  disproportionate  amount
         on the visit of his family because his Sponsor will fund the visit.
          The Appellants are travelling as a family unit ..." (paragraph 9).

    The judge went on to conclude that,

         "As a person of standing within his local Ahmadi community  he  was
         able to say with authority that he knew of people who followed  the
         Ahmadi religion who visited and returned to Pakistan.  He knew that
         his sister and her family had no problems in  Pakistan  because  of
         their beliefs and they were a relatively well-off family who had no
         reason to claim asylum ..." (paragraph 10).

    The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  misdirected  himself
    because the decisions by the Entry Clearance Officer did not attract  a
    full right of appeal after 9th July 2012.  These children were visiting
    their uncle.  Their applications were  refused  on  7th  January  2013.
    Under the Immigration (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012, they  did  not
    have a right of appeal.

 6. On 22nd April 2014, permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on the basis that no explanation had been  provided  why
    the Home Office Presenting Officer present at the hearing did not raise
    the issue now  forming  the  basis  of  the  Respondent's  application.
    Furthermore, it was stated that,

         "It flies in  the  face  of  common  sense  and  justice  that  the
         Appellants have no right of appeal on the basis put forward by  the
         Respondent.  The Appellants are dependent children of the principle
         Appellants, their mother and father who clearly did  have  a  valid
         right of appeal and whose appeals were allowed".

 7. It was  further  stated  that,  in  any  event,  "if  the  Respondent's
    contention is correct it would be  likely  that  the  Appellants  would
    succeed on Article 8 grounds".  (Paragraph 5).

 8. On 5th June 2014, however, the Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
    appeal, on the basis that there was arguable merit in the  Respondent's
    grounds "as a matter of law".

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 5th December 2014, Dr  Nafees  Ahmed  Hamid
    was not in attendance to represent the Appellants in the  way  that  he
    had done before the judge below.  Mr David Mills, appearing  on  behalf
    of the Respondent, submitted that whatever the  position  in  terms  of
    fairness and justice, the fact was that the law did not grant  a  right
    of appeal.  When each child was making a separate application, one  can
    look at the position of each child separately.

10. In this case they were applying to visit the uncle.  There was no right
    of appeal granted.  The fallback position for them  would  then  be  to
    have their case considered under Article 8.  However, the judge had not
    allowed the appeal under Article 8.  Therefore, the determination could
    not stand.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I come to this conclusion,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that
    what the Respondent Secretary of State was now arguing,  had  not  been
    argued by the Presenting Officer before the judge, when the  judge  was
    hearing the appeal.  It ill behoves a party to now say that  there  was
    no right of appeal, when the opportunity to so say had not  been  taken
    in a full appeal before a presiding judge.  The judge himself is not to
    be criticised for running an appeal on  a  point  which  has  not  been
    taken.  Nevertheless, the fact remains that as  of  mid-July  2012  the
    Rules changed, and "as a matter of law" there was no  right  of  appeal
    under the Rules.

Remaking the Decision

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today from Mr Mills.  I am allowing this appeal on the basis of Article
    8 alone.  As the judge observed below the Appellants are "travelling as
    a family unit" (paragraph 9) and indeed to live as a "family unit"  and
    this being so it would be incongruous to allow  the  parents  to  visit
    family members in the UK but to disallow  the  children  from  visiting
    their grandparents (see paragraph 4) in the way intended.

13. It is incongruous because it has  a  disproportionately  arbitrary  and
    unjustified impact on the right of the  parents  who  appeal  has  been
    allowed. This is because in circumstances where the parents are  living
    with their children, and they all comprise a  single  family  unit,  to
    allow the appeals of the parents but not of the children frustrates the
    exercise of the right to visit by the parents - a  right  conferred  by
    law on the parents.

14. In fact, if the parents are given the right it  strengthens  even  more
    the similar corresponding right of the children to do the same. It goes
    to the essence of family life.  In the circumstances,  this  appeal  is
    allowed on the basis of Article 8 because Article 8 is plainly engaged,
    and although the decision is in accordance with  the  law,  it  is  not
    necessary in  the  public  interest,  and  even  more  so,  it  is  not
    proportionate to the  legitimate  public  end  that  is  sought  to  be
    achieved.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.

16. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014

