
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham                                Determination
Promulgated
On: 7 July 2014                               On:  8 July 2014
                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                 Zarina Bibi


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Not represented
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Pakistan and she was born on 1 January  1967.


This is an appeal against the decision  promulgated  on  19  March  2014  of
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-Beale  which  dismissed  the  appellant's
appeal against the respondent's decision of 14 August  2013  refusing  entry
clearance as a visitor.

The sponsor, Mrs Rabila Akther, attended the hearing.

The background to this matter  is  that  the  appellant  applied  for  entry
clearance to visit close  family  members  in  the  UK,  in  particular  her
sister, the sponsor's mother, who  is  unwell  and  was  widowed  relatively
recently. The appellant also has sons and a number  of  other  relatives  in
the UK whom she intended to visit.

The application was refused by the respondent under the  Immigration  Rules.
It was not found that the appellant was a genuine  visitor  seeking  limited
leave who would return to Pakistan at the end of her visit.

The decision stated correctly that the appellant  had  a  limited  right  of
appeal under section 84 (1) (c) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002. That was a reference to the change in statute which meant that  as
of the date of the decision, the grounds of appeal that the appellant  could
raise in  a  visit  visa  appeal  were  limited  to  human  rights  or  race
relations.

It was common ground before me that at the hearing the  First-tier  Tribunal
and the respondent's representative proceeded on the  incorrect  basis  that
the limited right of appeal arose because the sponsor was not coming to  the
UK to visit a sufficiently close relative.  The  error  in  that  regard  is
conceded by the Judge at [15].

A further error arose from the first one, however,  as,  having  found  that
the sponsor was visiting sufficiently close relatives, the  Judge  proceeded
with the hearing as if a full right of appeal arose and  heard  evidence  as
to whether the substantive Immigration Rules were met. It is worth  pointing
out that she found that they were; see [16]. The  appellant  will  obviously
want to rely on those  positive  findings  in  any  future  entry  clearance
application.

The materiality of the error in addressing  whether  the  Immigration  Rules
are met is that the Judge did not afford  the  sponsor  the  opportunity  to
address the human rights  aspect  of  the  appeal  and  whether  there  were
exceptional  circumstances  such  that  the   decision   should   be   found
disproportionate.

Mr Mills conceded that the appellant did not have a fair hearing before  the
First-tier Tribunal where it had proceeded on an  incorrect  basis  and  the
appellant been unable to have proper  evidence  and  argument  made  on  her
human rights claim. He accepted, as in the grant of  permission  to  appeal,
that it would not be an easy task for the appellant to show that her  appeal
should be allowed on Article 8 grounds but given that there were  issues  of
the health of the  sponsor's  mother  (the  appellant's  sister)  and  other
family issues, he accepted that the failure to address  human  rights  could
be said to be material.

Mr Mills also conceded that where there was a  procedural  error  such  that
the decision should be set aside, it should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be re-made, following paragraph 7.2 of  Part  3  of  the  Senior
President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law.

It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made following a  hearing
on 9 August 2014.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 7 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
