

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16664/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 26th June 2013                           |On : 1st July 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                           purvi nilaykumar desai

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Bombay

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Zane Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss Emily Martin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mrs Purvi Desai is married with two  children,  and  lives  in  Valsad,
    Gujarat.  She must be very keen to come to the United Kingdom, for  she
    has made four applications for a visa in quick succession.   The  first
    was refused on 2nd November 2011, because the evidence of the sponsor's
    finances was unsatisfactory.  The second  application  was  refused  on
    17th February 2012, again  because  of  concerns  about  the  sponsor's
    finances, but this time also because the  photograph  provided  of  the
    sponsor's house was actually of a neighbour's house.   It  was  pointed
    out on this occasion that the sponsor was  not  related  to  Mrs  Desai
    closely enough to bring her  proposed  trip  into  the  category  of  a
    'family visit', generating a full right of appeal.   Any  appeal  would
    therefore be limited to the grounds set out at section 84(1)(c) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The  decision  was  not
    appealed, but a third application was made, this time accompanied by  a
    family tree purporting to show that Mrs Desai is the  sister-in-law  of
    the sponsor, Hetal Desai.  In fact, the sponsor is the daughter of  the
    brother of Mrs Desai's mother-in-law.  That relationship is not  within
    the degrees of  kinship  listed  in  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
    Visitor) Regulations 2003, which were (apparently ~ see below) in force
    at that time.  A sister-in-law there is defined as the "sister  of  the
    applicant's spouse".  So Mrs Desai fell to be  treated  as  a  'general
    visitor' rather than a  'family  visitor',  with  a  limited  right  of
    appeal.  On 3rd April 2012 this application too was refused because  of
    unsatisfactory evidence of maintenance and accommodation.

2.    With dogged persistence, Mrs Desai made a fourth application  on  16th
    April 2012, calling in person at the British Deputy High Commission  in
    Bombay.  This time she brought a letter from  her  husband,  Nilaykumar
    Desai, dated 5th April 2012, saying that he was "currently working  for
    Pacard Associates with salary of 20,000/-Rs."  This was accompanied  by
    a letter from Pacard Associates dated 1st  September  2010,  certifying
    that Mr Desai had been "working with  our  organization  since  January
    2008, as a Service Engineer - UPS & Batteries.  His last  drawn  salary
    is Rs 19,860 per month."  Payslips from  Pacard  Associates  were  also
    provided, for the months March through to August 2010.

3.   To back this up, Mr Desai added two invoices and a  'delivery  challan'
    concerning SMF batteries supplied by Pacard Power Products,  a  company
    with the same (very precise) address as Pacard  Associates,  namely  A-
    225/1 Popular  Plaza,  132  ft  Ring  Road,  nr  Shyamal  Cross  Roads,
    Satellite, Ahmedabad.  Finally, Mr Desai left his business card.   This
    has his name and mobile telephone number at the top  left-hand  corner,
    but the card is actually for the Jala-Sai Agency, with the  strap  line
    "All Types of Industrials and  SMF  Batteries."   This  agency  has  an
    address in Navsari, but its Head Office is given as Pacard  Associates,
    Popular Plaza, Satellite, Ahmedabad.

4.   On 1st May 2012 a Document Verification  Report  was  produced  at  the
    Deputy High Commission, in connexion with Pacard Power Products and the
    Jala-Sai Agency.  A member of the Risk Assessment  Unit  says  that  he
    called a number (which  he  does  not  give,  as  this  information  is
    'sanitised' under the Data Protection Act) but could not get connected.
      So  he  rang  another  number  ('sanitised')  and  spoke  to   a   Mr
    ('sanitised'), the director of Pacard Power Products, who told him that
    Mr Nilay Desai was working as  ('sanitised')  on  a  commission  basis,
    representing the Jala-Sai Agency.

5.   This was not quite the information that caused the visa application  to
    be refused on 7th May 2012, under paragraph 320(7A) of the  Immigration
    Rules.  "Our office has contacted Pacard Associates", writes the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, "who state that your husband left their  employ  two
    to three months previously."   This  information  seems  to  have  been
    derived from a report made on 27th  April  2012  by  a  member  of  the
    Document Verification Unit, who was investigating a letter from  Pacard
    Associates of Ahmedabad.  He says that he called the number  and  spoke
    to  ('sanitised'),  who  told  him  that   the   applicant's   husband,
    ('sanitised'), used to work for ('sanitised')  but  left  the  job  2-3
    months back.  The informant further stated that Mr (sanitised') was  in
    charge of Service  &  Marketing,  South  Gujarat.   Then  ('sanitised')
    reconfirmed that ('sanitised') used to work for them and left the job 2-
    3 months back.

6.    At  all  events,  Mrs  Desai  was  told  that  she  had   made   false
    representations, in submitting a letter from her husband claiming  that
    he was currently employed by Pacard Associates.  She was also  reminded
    that, not being a 'family  visitor',  she  could  only  appeal  on  the
    grounds given by section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.

7.   On 14th May 2012 Malik Law  Chambers  completed  an  IAFT-2  notice  of
    appeal, ticking the boxes marked 'family visit' and 'oral hearing', and
    appending Grounds of Appeal which are vague,  unfocused  and  rambling.
    They do not address the reason for refusal, i.e. the  making  of  false
    representations, nor do they address the respondent's  contention  that
    the application was not for a 'family visit' and so attracts  no  right
    of appeal save on the grounds of racial  discrimination  or  breach  of
    human rights.  There is no mention  of  racial  discrimination  in  the
    Grounds, and as for human rights, there is one sentence among  the  ten
    paragraphs of Grounds which baldly states that the  ECO's  decision  is
    "contrary to the provisions of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    Act (sic)."  No attempt is made to explain why this is so.  That  these
    Grounds have  been  appended  to  the  Notice  of  Appeal  without  any
    attention being paid to what the appeal is actually about, save that it
    is a visit appeal, is confirmed by their  referring  to  the  appellant
    throughout as 'he'.

8.   An oral hearing having been requested (and apparently  paid  for),  the
    appeal was listed before the First-tier Tribunal on 11th January  2013.
    Despite notice of the hearing having been sent to the  sponsor  and  to
    Malik Law Chambers, there was no appearance by either on the  day,  and
    no explanation for their absence.  The HOPO Unit informed Taylor  House
    that no one was available to represent the ECO  either,  and  so  Judge
    Beach proceeded to determine the appeal in the absence of the  parties.
    She agreed with the respondent that the appeal could  only  succeed  on
    race discrimination or human rights grounds.  No issue at all had  been
    raised by the appellant  on  race  discrimination,  and  as  for  human
    rights, the judge noted that no  reasons had been given in the  grounds
    of appeal as to why the refusal of a visit  visa  interfered  with  the
    appellant's human rights.

9.   Judge Beach might well have ended  her  determination  at  that  point.
    The refusal of the visa application under one of the general grounds in
    Part 9 of the Immigration Rules had not been challenged in the  Grounds
    of Appeal.  It was not suggested in the Grounds that Mrs Desai had  not
    made false representations, nor was any attempt  made  to  show  how  a
    'mandatory refusal' under rule 320(7A) was in  breach  of  Mrs  Desai's
    human rights.  Nevertheless,  Judge  Beach  did  consider  whether  the
    information obtained by the Deputy High Commission  in  respect  of  Mr
    Desai's employment showed that false  representations  had  been  made.
    Contrary to what Mr Desai had written in his letter of 5th April  2012,
    he was not "currently working for  Pacard  Associates  with  salary  of
    20,000 Rs."  Rather, he had ceased working for them prior to his wife's
    application, and was  now  working  for  Pacard  Power  Products  on  a
    commission  basis.   That,  thought   the   judge,   was   a   material
    misrepresentation - although one may note that rule  320(7A)  does  not
    actually require a false representation to be material.

10.  The appeal was of course dismissed, and that might have seemed the  end
    of the matter.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted,
    however, on the strength of  three  grounds  settled  by  Mr  Malik  of
    counsel, who withdrew the second of them when the appeal came before me
    today.  This  ground  asserted  that  the  ECO  took  no  point  as  to
    jurisdiction during the appeal proceedings, and so it was not  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to  take  it  of  its  own  motion.   Mr  Malik
    withdrew this ground because of the recent judgment in  Pavandeep  Virk
    [2013] EWCA Civ 652, holding that it is open to the Upper  Tribunal  to
    query whether there is jurisdiction to entertain an appeal, even if the
    appeal has proceeded through the  First-tier  Tribunal  without  anyone
    noticing that there might be no jurisdiction to hear it.  It  seems  to
    me that  this  ground  was  in  any  event  misconceived,  because  the
    jurisdiction point was taken by the ECO, who pointed out in the  notice
    of decision that the appeal was restricted to the grounds  set  out  at
    section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.  Judge Beach was also aware that that
    was the scope of the appeal, although for the sake of completeness  she
    also addressed the 'mandatory refusal' ground.

11.  Mr Malik's third ground is that it was an error of law for  the  First-
    tier judge not to make a finding on whether any misrepresentation  made
    by the appellant was dishonest.  Reliance was placed on Adedoyin [2010]
    EWCA Civ 773, in which it was held that  "dishonesty  or  deception  is
    needed  to  render  a  false  representation  a  ground  for  mandatory
    refusal."  The short answer to that, of course,  is  that  the  refusal
    under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules was not challenged  in
    the grounds of appeal, and so the judge  was  not  required  to  decide
    whether the refusal on that ground was rightly made.  If the  appellant
    had challenged the ECO's decision on that ground, it is hard to see how
    she could have succeeded on an appeal confined to the  issues  of  race
    discrimination and human rights.  It might have been possible, perhaps,
    to show that the ECO was wrong  to  suppose  that  deception  had  been
    employed, and to argue that the ten-year re-entry ban consequent upon a
    paragraph 320(7A) refusal would be a disproportionate breach of Article
    8 rights.  But there is no need to speculate further about that.

12.   Judge  Beach  did,  nevertheless,  consider  the   mandatory   refusal
    substantively, and I heard submissions on the point from Mr Malik,  who
    argued that Mr Desai's letter was not a 'false representation'  by  the
    appellant, and from Miss Martin, who argued  that  it  was,  since  Mrs
    Desai had taken it in person to the Deputy High  Commission.   I  agree
    with Miss Martin.  Even if  Mrs  Desai  had  not  intended  herself  to
    practise deception, Adedoyin does not come to her rescue.  The ratio of
    that case is that if an  applicant  makes  a  representation  which  is
    inaccurate but not dishonest, then it is not a  'false  representation'
    for the purposes of  rule  320(7A).   But  if  somebody  else  makes  a
    dishonest representation in support  of  the  applicant,  then  she  is
    caught by it, even if she is unaware of it.  Rule 320(7A) does  specify
    "whether or not to the applicant's knowledge."

13.  In days gone by, ECOs used to send  Document  Verification  Reports  to
    the appellate authority in plain brown envelopes,  with  a  request  to
    invoke section 108 of the 2002 Act and not disclose to the  other  side
    how the forgery had been detected.  The  Report  would  usually  relate
    that, for example, an administrative assistant had rung up  the  branch
    of  the  bank  which  had  purportedly  issued  the  applicant's   bank
    statements, to check whether the applicant really did have  an  account
    with the bank, and whether he really did have as much in his account as
    the statements said.  This method of gathering information  was  hardly
    the sort of thing that had to be kept out of the  public  domain,  lest
    forgers and traffickers use it to elude the vigilance  of  the  British
    posts abroad.  Nowadays it seems that, instead of trying  to  keep  the
    Document Verification Reports away from  the  gaze  of  appellants  and
    their  representatives,  our  overseas  posts  are  'sanitising'  these
    reports to a point of near-incomprehensibility.

14.  In the instant case, however, it has not been challenged that Mr  Desai
    was not, contrary to what he asserted  in  his  letter  supporting  Mrs
    Desai's application, currently  employed  by  Pacard  Associates  at  a
    salary of Rs 20,000/- per month.  He was working for them still, or  at
    least for an associated company, on a commission basis, but  no  longer
    on a regular salary.  Perhaps he thought it would look  better  to  the
    ECO if  he  was  in  regular  employment,  rather  than  working  on  a
    commission basis.  Whatever the reason, it was deliberate dishonesty.

15.  I turn now to Mr Malik's first, and principal, ground, namely that  the
    Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2003,  made  under
    section 90 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  ceased
    to have effect when section 90 was  repealed  on  1st  April  2008  and
    replaced  by  a  new  section  88A,  inserted  by  section  4  of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Mr Malik  prays  in  aid
    Craies  on  Legislation,  which  states  at  14.4.23   :   "Subordinate
    legislation lapses automatically when the enabling power ceases to have
    effect, unless saved expressly."  The 2003 Regulations were  not  saved
    expressly, and so they must, argues Mr Malik, have lapsed automatically
    when the enabling power of section 90 ceased to have effect.   The  new
    section 88A is not, he insists, a re-enactment in the sense required by
    section 17(2)(b) of the Interpretation Act 1978.   It  was  assumed  in
    Ajakaiye (visitor appeals - right of appeal) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  375
    (IAC) that the reference to section 90 in the 2003  Regulations  should
    now be read as a reference to section 88A, but the  Presidential  panel
    heard no argument on  the  matter,  and  their  assumption  should,  he
    contends, be considered as obiter.

16.  Mr Malik may well be on to something here,  and  it  may  be  that  his
    argument will in due course be ventilated before a tribunal  of  higher
    authority than the present.  It is  not  necessary  for  me  to  decide
    whether Mr Malik is right, because - as adumbrated by Mr  Parkinson  in
    his Rule 24 Response, and picked up today by Miss Martin  -  if  he  is
    right, then there was no provision at all for a 'family  visit'  appeal
    at the time when Mrs Desai's application was refused.  The  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012, made under the  new  section
    88A of the 2002 Act, did not come into force until 9th July 2012, while
    the previous Regulations had lapsed on 1st April 2008.

17.  Mr Malik has an ingenious answer to that.  Section 88A(1) of  the  2002
    Act, anticipating the roll-out of the  Points  Based  System,  severely
    limits the right of appeal against the refusal of  an  application  for
    entry clearance.  A person can only appeal against the decision if  the
    application was made for the purpose of -

    (a)  visiting  a  person  of  a  class  or  description  prescribed  by
         regulations for the purpose of this subsection, or
    (b)  entering as the dependant of a person in circumstances  prescribed
         by regulations for the purpose of this subsection.


18.  No regulations having  been  prescribed  for  the  purpose  of  section
    88A(1) until 9th July 2012, subsection (1)(a) must be  read,  according
    to Mr Malik, without any reference  to  the  regulations.   That  means
    ignoring the prepositional phrase 'of a class or description prescribed
    by regulations for the purpose of this subsection'.  What  is  left  is
    simply 'visiting a person'.   One  can  therefore  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance if the application was made for the  purpose
    of 'visiting a person' - any person, regardless of how closely related,
    or even if unrelated.  So in Mrs Desai's case, the fact  that  she  was
    proposing to visit quite a distant relative does not matter.  She has a
    full right of appeal on the merits.

19.  Miss Martin protests that subsection (1)(a) cannot  be  chopped  up  in
    this  manner,  and  she  is  right.   An  examination  of  the   syntax
    demonstrates this.  A sentence is not an unstructured, linear  sequence
    of words.  Syntactically, it is arranged in a  hierarchical  structure.
    Subsection (1)(a) is not a full sentence, but it still has a structure.
     The verb 'visiting' has as its object the entire noun phrase 'a person
    of a class or description prescribed by regulations for the purpose  of
    this subsection'.  One cannot excise part of that noun phrase,  leaving
    a rump behind to be governed by 'visiting', so as to accord  with  what
    one would like the subsection to mean.  One cannot do violence  to  the
    syntax in the way proposed by Mr Malik.  If he is correct to  say  that
    there were no Family Visitor Regulations in  force  between  1st  April
    2008 and 8th July 2012, then the  only  right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance during that period  was  the  one  given  by
    section 88A(3)(a), namely an appeal brought on the grounds referred  to
    in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act.  Incidentally,  the  logic
    of this argument means that after  the  end  of  March  2008  no  entry
    clearance appeals under Part 8 of the Immigration Rules would have been
    possible  either,  save   on   the   restricted   grounds   of   racial
    discrimination or breach of human rights, since no regulations had been
    prescribed under section 88A(1)(b).

20.  The upshot is that, whether the 2003 Regulations were in force  or  not
    when Mrs Desai's visa application was refused, her right of appeal  was
    restricted to the grounds given by section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002
    Act.  Her appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  mention  race
    discrimination at all, while the  assertion  that  the  ECO's  decision
    breached her human rights did not condescend to any  particulars.   The
    appeal  was  frankly  hopeless,  and  Judge  Beach  made  no  error  in
    dismissing it.


     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              29th June 2013



