
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/16375/2013
                                                               VA/16381/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd October 2014                         |On 10th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                     Mr Muhammad hamid (first appellant)
                    mrs tayyaba hamid (second appellant)
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representation
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  Appellants  born  on  1st  January  1972  and  21st  April   1978
    respectively are citizens of Pakistan and are husband  and  wife.   The
    Appellants were unrepresented and the  Respondent  was  represented  by
    Miss Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer.  The Sponsor in  this
    case, Mr Latif, brother of the Appellants was present.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellants had made  application  for  entry  clearance  as  family
    visitors to the United Kingdom to visit Mr Latif.  On 3rd July 2013 the
    Respondent  had  refused  those  applications.   The  matter  had  been
    appealed and heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  sitting  at
    Manchester on 29th April 2014.  She had dismissed the appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on 18th June 2014 and came  before  me
    on 15th August 2014 to decide whether or not an error of law had  been
    made in this case.   I  found  for  reasons  provided  in  the  earlier
    determination that an error of  law  had  been  made,  set  aside  that
    decision and issued directions for remaking that decision.

 4. The matter comes back before me to remake that decision  in  accordance
    with the directions set.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 5. As the Sponsor was present I firstly explained to him the nature of the
    proceedings and the way they would be conducted.

 6. I next checked the documents available to me in this case.

 7. The Respondent's bundle consist of:

      i)  Entry  Clearance  Manager  review  letter  -  14th  January   2014
         containing the Respondent's bundle of documents.

 8. The Appellant's documents consist of:

     ii) Witness statement of Sponsor - 20th October 2014.

    iii) Various sale receipts and sale breakdown letters.

The Proceedings - Evidence

 9. The Sponsor was  called  to  give  evidence.   He  confirmed  that  the
    Appellants were his brother and sister-in-law and they had no children.
     He confirmed the First Appellant rented cars and also bought and  sold
    the cars.  The First Appellant provided himself with a  monthly  salary
    of 50,000 rupees from his company.  He said that  additionally  in  the
    financial year to 30th June 2013 the company had made 894,000 rupees in
    profit.  He said as a general rule the First  Appellant  ploughed  back
    that money into his business.  The purpose of  the  Appellants  was  to
    visit the Sponsor for a two to three week period.

10. The Sponsor confirmed that he was married and had one daughter and  was
    a partner in an accountancy firm and owned his own property  where  the
    Appellants would stay.

11. In cross-examination he said  that  the  Appellants  lived  with  their
    mother.  He said other family members would be looking after the mother
    whilst they were in the UK.  The First Appellant's mother owned her own
    property and had a pension together with rental income  from  a  second
    home that she owned.  He said that he did not invest in  his  brother's
    business.  He had another brother  in  Pakistan  who  owned  a  factory
    making garments and  also  owned  a  shop  from  which  he  sold  those
    garments.

12. He said his brother had come to the UK for a  few  weeks  in  2007  and
    returned, a cousin had come twice in 2007 and 2012 and returned and his
    mother had also come in 2005 and returned.   I  briefly  heard  closing
    submissions on behalf of both the Respondent and the Sponsor.

13. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated I would allow  the  appeal
    but provide a decision with reasons in writing.   I  now  provide  that
    decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

14. In this case the burden  of  proof  lies  on  the  Appellants  and  the
    standard of proof required for both immigration and human rights issues
    is a balance of probabilities.  I may only take  into  account  matters
    arising as at the date of decision in respect of  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

15. I found the Sponsor to be a credible witness who provided  evidence  as
    to the  circumstances  of  the  Appellants  that  was  consistent  with
    documentary evidence that had been produced.  The original  refusal  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer appeared  to  overlook  or  not  take  into
    account certain documentation  in  respect  of  the  First  Appellant's
    claimed income and business.  There  are  also  concerns  as  to  large
    deposits placed within the First Appellant's bank account.   The  First
    Appellant had produced tax documentation to indicate  that  he  was  in
    business and the nature of that business.  He had further  produced  an
    accountant and tax advisor's letter of 31st July 2013  indicating  the
    nature of the First Appellant's business, his profit before tax and his
    monthly remuneration.  That letter was consistent with the  claims  put
    forward by the Appellants.  There had also been produced  a  number  of
    receipts demonstrating the nature of the business and covering a period
    of time.  There had further been cheques and deposit  receipts  in  the
    United Bank demonstrating monies paid to the First Appellant and  those
    monies going within his bank account.  The First Appellant had produced
    two separate bank accounts with  MCB  Bank  and  United  Bank  covering
    periods  of  time.   It  is  noteworthy  that  those  accounts  show  a
    substantial number of credit  and  debit  entries  consistent  with  an
    operating account and consistent with the flowing in of money  as  well
    as deposits.  It is also noteworthy that there  are  not  insignificant
    sums deposited over a period of time rather than simply at the time  of
    any visit application.  There was documentary  evidence  from  a  motor
    company regarding the value of certain cars owned  by  the  Appellants.
    Finally there was a letter dated 29th  May  2013  from  a  high  school
    confirming that the Second Appellant was a senior English teacher  from
    1st January 2013.

16. The Sponsor is himself an accountant and partner  in  a  firm  and  has
    produced evidence in that respect.  He has also provided oral  evidence
    which I accept as to visits made by other family members  in  the  past
    where he has been a Sponsor.  His evidence is that none of those family
    members overstayed or breached their visa requirements and certainly no
    evidence has been produced by the Respondent to suggest otherwise.

17. On balance I find the documentary and oral evidence  provided  in  this
    case demonstrates  that  the  Appellants  are  both  in  employment  in
    Pakistan in the manners which have been described and that they have  a
    good standard of living and clear ties to their home country  in  terms
    of their employment, the investments within the  business  run  by  the
    First Appellant and the property where they live.  It is also the  case
    that  they  have  other  close  family  members  in  Pakistan  and  the
    impression gained is that the Appellants and  their  siblings  are  all
    successful individuals in their own  fields.   The  evidence  indicates
    that other family members have visited the  UK  in  the  past  with  no
    difficulty in terms of returning to Pakistan.   The  Sponsor  is  in  a
    position to accommodate the Appellants and has sponsored  other  family
    members in the past and understands that responsibility.

18. In summary therefore I find both  Appellants  in  this  case  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules and I allow  this
    appeal.

Decision

19. I allow this appeal of both Appellants under the Immigration Rules.

20. Anonymity not retained.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever                23rd October 2014


