

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
      VA/16931/2013
                                                               VA/16936/2013
                                                               VA/16933/2013
                                                               VA/16928/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 24th September 2014                       |On 6th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Dhaka
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Ali Akram
                                Rabeha Begum
                                Kawsar Ahmed
                                Mahbuba Akter
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:           Ms Kenny,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Islam, Immigration Aid


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are a Bangladeshi family who all sought entry clearance
    to come to the UK as visitors. Their applications were refused  and  on
    the 25th June 2014 Judge Troup of the First-tier Tribunal allowed their
    linked appeals against that decision. The Entry Clearance  Officer  now
    has permission to appeal against that decision.


 2. One of the issues on appeal had  been  whether  the  UK  sponsor  could
    accommodate all of his guests.   The Sponsor is (a  different)  Mr  Ali
    Aktar. He is the son-in-law of  the  two  adult  Respondents,  and  the
    brother-in-law of the two minors. He lives here with his wife,  who  is
    the daughter of the first and second Respondents. He came to court  and
    gave oral evidence. He was cross-examined. He explained that he and his
    wife have three children and that as a result it would be difficult  to
    have his in-laws to stay with them for the  entire  duration  of  their
    trip. It was his intention to accommodate them at another property that
    he owned, a four bedroomed house nearby to his own home. At the date of
    the application and decision it was occupied by tenants on a short-hold
    tenancy. At the point at which his in-laws got their visas it  was  his
    intention to give the tenants notice, and prepare the house  for  their
    arrival. He provided a mortgage statement showing that the mortgage was
    paid to date. Judge Troup had regard to that evidence, and finding  the
    Sponsor to be sincere and credible, allowed the appeals.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer now has permission to appeal on the grounds
    that it was an error to find that there was  "adequate"  accommodation.
    Complaint is made that there  is  no  finding  that  the  property  was
    available at the date of decision.

 4. These grounds are entirely misconceived. There  is  no  requirement  in
    paragraph 41 that accommodation be ready and available at the  date  of
    decision.  The rule requires that on that  day  the  decision-maker  is
    satisfied that there "will be" accommodation. It  is  forward  looking.
    Much like this Sponsor.   Perhaps the real complaint in  these  grounds
    is that Judge Troup fell into error by believing a witness.  As much as
    the Entry Clearance Officer wishes it so, that is not an error of  law.
    There was absolutely no good reason to think that  Mr  Akram  might  be
    lying, or that he had any intention other than to accommodate  his  in-
    laws in his spacious four-bedroom house.    The evidence indicated that
    there would be adequate accommodation, and Judge  Troup  was  perfectly
    entitled to make the finding that he did.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   17th
                                October 2014
