
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16750/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd July 2015                     |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mangat Singh
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Muman, Counsel instructed by SKB Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against a decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Ferguson promulgated on 28th August 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Indian citizen born 1st October 1966 who on  2nd
    July 2013 applied for entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.  He indicated that the purpose of his visit was  to  attend  a
    wedding ceremony, as his niece, his sister's daughter, was due to marry
    in the United Kingdom.  The Claimant  indicated  that  he  intended  to
    travel to the United Kingdom on 1st August 2013, and return to India on
    30th August 2013.

 4. The application was refused on 25th July 2013.  The ECO did not  accept
    that the requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which require an applicant  to  prove  that  they  are  genuinely
    seeking entry to the United Kingdom for a limited period and that  they
    intend to leave the United Kingdom at the conclusion of the visit, were
    satisfied.  This was because the ECO  placed  reliance  upon  paragraph
    320(7A), contending that the Claimant had submitted  a  false  document
    with his application.  It was contended that a letter from  Goel  Sweet
    Shop was counterfeit.

 5. The ECO contended that the Claimant had only a right of appeal  limited
    to the grounds referred to in  section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 6. The Claimant appealed, contending, in summary, that the ECO's  decision
    was contrary to law, not in accordance with the Immigration Rules,  and
    the ECO had not taken into account the totality of  evidence  provided.
    It was also contended that the ECO  should  have  exercised  discretion
    differently.

 7. It was denied that the Claimant had submitted a false document.

 8. The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) on  4th  July
    2014.  The ECO had raised as a preliminary issue the  validity  of  the
    appeal.  The Presenting Officer, representing the ECO at  the  hearing,
    accepted that there was a valid  appeal  and  the  FtT  considered  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph 320(7A).  The FtT  concluded
    that the ECO had not proved that a false document  had  been  submitted
    and therefore the appeal was allowed.

 9. The ECO thereafter applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It was contended that the FtT had exceeded its  jurisdiction
    because the Claimant had a limited right of appeal against  refusal  of
    entry clearance, and the only Grounds of Appeal that  could  be  relied
    upon following the introduction of section 52 of the Crime  and  Courts
    Act 2013 on 25th June  2013,  were  the  grounds  set  out  at  section
    84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act which are set out below;

         (b)  That the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 29  of  the
             Equality Act 2010 (discrimination in the  exercise  of  public
             functions etc.), so far as relating  to  race  as  defined  by
             section 9(1) of that Act;

         (c)  That the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human
             Rights Convention) as being incompatible with the  Appellant's
             Convention rights.

10. It was contended that the FtT had not considered limited appeal rights,
    and because the Claimant had not appealed pursuant to section  84(1)(b)
    or (c) the FtT had exceeded its jurisdiction by allowing the appeal.

11. Reliance was placed upon Virk and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 652 in support
    of a submission that statutory  jurisdiction  cannot  be  conferred  by
    waiver or agreement or the failure of the parties or the Tribunal to be
    alive to the point.  It was submitted that the fact that the Presenting
    Officer accepted that there  was  a  valid  appeal,  would  not  confer
    jurisdiction upon the Tribunal.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Colyer on 6th October 2014.  Following the  grant  of  permission  the
    Claimant did not lodge any response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

13. The Tribunal issued directions that there should  be  an  oral  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether or not the  decision  of
    the FtT disclosed a material error of law.

Submissions

14. Mr Smart relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  and  submitted  that  the  FtT  was  under  the
    misapprehension that the issue to be decided related to the Immigration
    Rules.  I was asked to find that in paragraph 13 the  FtT  was  clearly
    allowing the appeal with reference to paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

15. Mr Smart pointed out that Article 8 was not mentioned or relied upon in
    the Grounds of Appeal to the FtT, and the skeleton argument  dated  3rd
    July 2014, placed before the FtT, did not seek to amend the Grounds  of
    Appeal.  I was asked to note paragraph  2  of  that  skeleton  argument
    which contended that the Claimant's case  "falls  squarely  within  the
    Immigration Appeal (Family Visitor) Regulation  2012.   The  suggestion
    otherwise is a misdirection by the ECM and should be struck  out."   Mr
    Smart submitted this was clearly wrong in law.  The remainder  of  that
    skeleton argument involved an argument in relation to  section  108  of
    the 2002 Act, which in the event did not take place before the FtT,  as
    a document verification report was provided to the Claimant, and  there
    was no need to consider a hearing in private pursuant to section 108.

16. Mr Smart argued that at no point had the FtT engaged with Article 8.

17. Mr Muman relied upon his skeleton argument which is undated  but  which
    had been prepared  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  and  which  the
    Tribunal and Mr Smart had received shortly before the  commencement  of
    the hearing.

18. Mr Muman accepted that section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 came
    into effect on 25th June 2013, and therefore the application for  entry
    clearance made by the Claimant was made after this date,  and  accepted
    that paragraph 2 of the skeleton argument placed  before  the  FtT  was
    incorrect.

19. Mr Muman argued that Article 8 had been raised in  the  grounds  before
    the FtT, as there was a reference in the second Ground of Appeal to the
    decision made by the ECO being contrary to law.

20. Mr Muman argued that the Presenting Officer before the FtT had conceded
    that Article 8 was engaged and rightly acknowledged that the only issue
    before the FtT related to paragraph 320(7A) and  consideration  of  the
    third of the five questions posed  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   That
    question being;

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

21. Mr Muman argued  that  the  FtT  had  not  erred  in  law  because  the
    Presenting Officer had conceded that Article 8 was  engaged,  therefore
    the FtT correctly dealt with the only issue that was before  it,  which
    related to paragraph 320(7A).  Mr Muman submitted that the judge had in
    fact found that the decision of the ECO was not in accordance with  the
    law which meant that the decision remained outstanding before  the  ECO
    for a lawful decision to be made.  Mr Muman submitted that  the  appeal
    had not been allowed under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

22. Mr Smart stated that it was not contended by the ECO that the  FtT  did
    not have jurisdiction, but that the FtT went  beyond  its  jurisdiction
    and did not accept that there had been any concession by the Presenting
    Officer before the FtT that Article 8 was engaged.

23. Before  oral  submissions  had  commenced,  I  had  indicated  to  both
    representatives that I was  likely  to  reserve  my  decision,  as  the
    comprehensive skeleton argument prepared by Mr Muman had  only  reached
    me fifteen minutes prior to the commencement of  the  hearing.   Having
    heard the submissions, I decided that it was appropriate to reserve  my
    decision as to whether or not the FtT had materially erred in law.

24. I asked the representatives to let me have their  views  if  I  decided
    that a material error of law was disclosed, as to whether  there  would
    be the need for a further hearing.

25. Mr Muman's view was that there had been no challenge  to  the  findings
    made by the FtT in relation to paragraph  320(7A)  and  those  findings
    should be preserved, and the appeal should therefore be allowed without
    the need for a further hearing.

26. Mr Smart took a contrary view, contending that the Grounds of Appeal to
    the FtT had not raised Article 8 as a Ground of Appeal.  Those  grounds
    had not been amended and therefore  the  FtT  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider the appeal and the appeal should  be  dismissed  for  want  of
    jurisdiction.  At this point the hearing concluded. Later  in  the  day
    the Tribunal received from Mr Muman a document headed 'Respondent note'
    timed at 11:57 hours on 3rd July 2015.   A  copy  was  provided  to  Mr
    Smart.

27. This note had been prepared  after  Mr  Muman  had  left  the  Tribunal
    hearing and addressed the submissions made by Mr Smart that the FtT had
    not had jurisdiction to consider the appeal.  Mr Muman pointed out that
    Mr Smart had accepted in making his response to Mr Muman's  submissions
    that the FtT did have jurisdiction to hear the appeal,  therefore  this
    indicated that the appeal before the FtT had already been  accepted  to
    have been a human rights appeal.  Reliance  was  again  placed  on  the
    second Ground of Appeal before the  FtT,  which  referred  to  the  ECO
    decision being contrary to law, and Mr Muman submitted that this  meant
    not in accordance with section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  It  was
    therefore contended that if the decision of the FtT is set aside,  save
    for the preserved findings in relation to paragraph  320(7A),  and  the
    Upper Tribunal re-makes the decision, the Upper Tribunal must do so  on
    the basis of the Presenting Officer's concession  to  the  effect  that
    Article 8 is engaged.

28. If the Upper Tribunal decided that the Claimant's human  rights  appeal
    as a whole required reconsideration, then there would be the  need  for
    evidence on the engagement of Article 8.

29. Mr Smart responded to the note explaining that his comment in  relation
    to jurisdiction simply meant that the FtT would  have  jurisdiction  if
    human rights had been raised as a Ground of Appeal.  In this case human
    rights had not been raised and therefore there had been no valid appeal
    before the FtT and there was no need for a further hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

My Conclusions and Reasons

30. I have reflected carefully upon the submissions made by both parties as
    to whether the FtT erred in law.  I have considered all  the  documents
    placed before the FtT, and the skeleton argument and 'Respondent  note'
    submitted on behalf of the Claimant before the Upper Tribunal.

31. The FtT was clearly aware that validity had been put in  issue  by  the
    ECO and this is noted in paragraph 2 of the FtT decision.  My  view  is
    that the FtT materially erred in law for the following reasons.

32. The FtT was not assisted by the claim made on behalf of  the  Claimant,
    in the second paragraph of the skeleton argument which  contended  that
    the appeal fell squarely within the Immigration Appeal (Family Visitor)
    Regulations 2012.  That submission was wrong in law, and  this  is  now
    accepted on behalf of the Claimant.

33. It is clear that the Presenting Officer before the  FtT  accepted  that
    there was a valid appeal.  I do not find that this  acceptance  without
    more, confers jurisdiction upon the FtT.  I have taken into account the
    principles outlined in Virk and Others.  If the appeal was  invalid,  a
    concession by a Presenting Officer that the appeal is valid,  does  not
    confer jurisdiction upon the Tribunal.

34. I do not agree that the Presenting Officer accepted that Article 8  was
    engaged.  There is no reference to Article 8 in the FtT decision.   The
    FtT set out the reason why the Presenting Officer accepted there was  a
    valid appeal in paragraph 5 which is set out below;

         "5.  The Presenting Officer accepted that there was a valid  appeal
             since the Appellant had applied to visit his sister  prior  to
             the reduction in appeal rights for  family  visitors  on  July
             2013.  It was also accepted by both parties that  the  outcome
             of the appeal turned on whether or  not  the  document  was  a
             forgery and so there was no need to hear any evidence from the
             Sponsor."

35.  The  above  makes  it  clear  the  Presenting  Officer  believed   the
    application for entry clearance had been made before  the  introduction
    of limited rights of appeal.  This was wrong.  Section 52 of the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013 came into effect on 25th June  2013.   This  meant
    that any application for entry clearance made on  or  after  25th  June
    2013 attracted only a limited right of appeal, and it is common  ground
    that those appeal rights are set out in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the
    2002 Act.

36. If racial discrimination or human rights are not raised as  Grounds  of
    Appeal, then the appeal which  is  entered  against  refusal  of  entry
    clearance as a visitor is invalid and the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction
    to consider that appeal.  In this case there is no need to consider the
    issue of racial discrimination, as it is  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant, that no such claim was made in the Grounds of Appeal.

37. The correct approach is set out in Adjei  (visit  visas  -  Article  8)
    [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC), the head note of which I set out below;

         "1.  The first question  to  be  addressed  in  an  appeal  against
             refusal to grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human
             rights grounds are available is whether Article 8 of the  ECHR
             is engaged at all.  If it is not, which will not  infrequently
             be the case, the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to  embark  upon
             an assessment of the decision of the ECO under the  rules  and
             should not do so.  If Article 8 is engaged, the  Tribunal  may
             need to look at the extent to which the Claimant  is  said  to
             have failed to meet the requirements of the rule because  that
             may inform the proportionality balancing  exercise  that  must
             follow.  Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT
             112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition.

         2.   As compliance with para 41 of HC 395 is not a Ground of Appeal
             to be decided by the Tribunal, any  findings  concerning  that
             will carry little weight, especially if based  upon  arguments
             advanced only by the Appellant.  If the Appellant were to make
             a fresh application for  entry  clearance  the  ECO  will,  if
             requested to do so, have regard to the assessment carried  out
             by the judge but will not be bound by those findings to  treat
             the Appellant as a person who, at least at  the  date  of  the
             appeal hearing, met the requirements of paragraph 41."

38. Adjei had not been decided when the FtT considered the appeal that  had
    been entered by the Claimant, but  does  set  out  the  principles  and
    procedure that should always  have  been  applied.   The  FtT  did  not
    consider as a first question, whether Article 8 was engaged at all.   I
    conclude that there has been no consideration of Article 8 by the  FtT.
    My view is that the FtT was persuaded the appeal was valid because  the
    2012  Family  Visitor  Regulations  applied,  on  the  basis  that  the
    application for entry clearance was made before 25th June  2013.   This
    was an error, it is now accepted the application  for  entry  clearance
    was made after introduction of the limited appeal rights.  The FtT does
    in fact refer to the application having been made on 2nd July 2013,  in
    paragraph 1 of the decision.  The Visa Application Form that was before
    the FtT was dated 4th July 2013, and indicated that the application for
    entry clearance had been submitted online on 2nd July 2013.

39. I find that the FtT did not consider whether Article 8 was engaged  and
    proceeded on a mistaken basis that there was a full  right  of  appeal.
    Therefore the decision is flawed and  I  must  conclude  that  the  FtT
    materially erred in law.  The decision is set aside in its entirety.

40. The decision therefore needs to be re-made.  It was  not  suggested  by
    either representative that the decision should be remitted back to  the
    FtT, and having  considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice statement I do not find that such a course of action would  be
    appropriate, and I conclude that the decision should be re-made by  the
    Upper Tribunal.

41.  I  have  considered  the   conflicting   views   expressed   by   both
    representatives.  I have decided that there is no need  for  a  further
    hearing.

42. I do not accept any concession has been made on behalf of the ECO  that
    Article 8 is engaged in this appeal.

43. I do not accept that Article 8 was raised as a Ground of Appeal  before
    the FtT.  No application was made to amend the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    include Article 8.

44. I do not accept the submission that  making  reference  in  the  second
    paragraph of the Grounds of Appeal to the FtT in which it is  contended
    that the decision is contrary to law, amounts to raising Article 8 as a
    Ground of Appeal.  Section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act has  been  set  out
    earlier in this decision.  There is no  reference  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal either expressly or implicitly to Article 8 or any reference  to
    human rights.  Reference to the decision being contrary to law,  is  in
    my view a reference to section 84(1)(e) which is set out below;

         (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;



45. This is a separate and distinct Ground of Appeal, from section 84(1)(c)
    which makes reference to this decision being unlawful under  section  6
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.

46. The issue that I have to consider is whether Article 8 was engaged.   I
    conclude that as it was not raised as a Ground of Appeal the answer  to
    that question must be that it is not.  Therefore I  conclude  that  the
    Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal entered by the Claimant is invalid.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed   Date 8th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is invalid.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 8th July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

