
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
VA/16422/2013

                                          VA/16425/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12 September 2014                     |On 15 September 2014      |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            (1) MISS RORELYE SESE
                            (2) MISS RENALY SESE

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Celia Tabita (sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin  on  30  July  2014
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lingam
           who had allowed the  Respondents'  linked  appeals  against  the
           refusal of their application for entry clearance as visitors  in
           a determination promulgated on 29 May  2014.  The  appeals  were
           determined on the papers as the Respondents had requested.


      2.    The Respondents are nationals of the Philippines,  sisters  born
           respectively on 19 December  1998  and  5  August  1996.   Their
           mother  Mrs   Froly   Sese   ("mother")   had   also   appealed,
           successfully, against the Appellant's decision.   The  Appellant
           did not seek to appeal that element of the determination  as  it
           is accepted  that  the  relationship  between  the  respondents'
           mother and the sponsor falls within the terms of The Immigration
           Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 (SI. 1532/2012).


        3. The Respondents' entry clearance had been refused because  their
           mother had been refused entry clearance so that as  minors  they
           could not show that suitable  arrangements  had  been  made  for
           their care and reception in the United Kingdom.   The  Secretary
           of State's decision had appended to it the following:"Your right
           of appeal is limited to  the  grounds  referred  to  in  section
           84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002",
           i.e., under the Equality Act 2010 and the Human Rights Act 1998.
            This was unfortunately not noticed by the judge.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted because the  judge  had  allowed  the  two
           appeals under the Immigration Rules,  when  there  had  been  no
           jurisdiction to do so.  The  Respondents  were  not  within  the
           required degree of relationship to their sponsor.


      5.    Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.




      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Tufan for the Appellant relied on the grounds and  the  grant
           of permission to appeal.  Mr Tufan filed The Immigration Appeals
           (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 (SI.2012/1532) in  support  of
           his submission that the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction
           over the Immigration Rules appeals.


        7. As  the  sponsor  was  not  formally  represented  the  tribunal
           explained the procedure  to  her  in  accordance  with  standard
           protocol.  It was inappropriate to request submissions from  the
           sponsor, who had not appeared before the judge at first instance
           and who was not legally qualified.




      The error of law finding


      8.    The tribunal announced its decision at the hearing  and  briefly
           explained to the sponsor that the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
           would have to be allowed and  reserved  its  reasons  which  now
           follow.  The determination was prepared by an experienced  judge
           but  the  tribunal  was  bound  to  find  that  the  judge   had
           inadvertently fallen into  material  error  of  law  as  to  her
           jurisdiction, as she had failed to recognise the  limited  right
           of appeal afforded to the Respondents.


      9.    The Respondents had not appealed the judge's  omission  to  deal
           with the only matters within the tribunal's jurisdiction, namely
           human  rights  and   the   Equality   Act   2010,   i.e.,   race
           discrimination.  There probably would  have  been  no  point  in
           pursuing such an appeal, as it was open to  the  Respondents  to
           submit fresh entry clearance applications.   As  their  mother's
           appeal was allowed by the judge and not  challenged  on  appeal,
           the main basis of the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal  of  her
           daughters' applications has  fallen  away.   Fresh  applications
           thus have a strong prospect of success.


      10.   The tribunal finds  that  the  determination  contains  material
           errors of law, such that it must be set aside and  remade.   The
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




      The fresh decision


      11.   As noted above, the Respondents did not raise or  pursue  issues
           of race discrimination or human rights, nor  did  they  seek  to
           cross-appeal  the  tribunal's  determination.   The   First-Tier
           Tribunal's decision can only be remade in one way, that is, that
           the appeals against the Entry Clearance Officer's decisions must
           be dismissed.  It of course remains open to the  Respondents  to
           submit fresh entry clearance applications.










      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam is set aside and  remade  as
follows:

      The appeals of the original Appellants are DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeals were dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
