
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/16589/2012
                                                               VA/16590/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 8 July 2013                                |On 9 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  FAIQA NAZ
                                MUHAMMAD TAHA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       No legal representative; sponsor present
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellants are mother and son, citizens of Pakistan.  The  respondent
   refused their applications for family visit visas, due to  inadequacy  of
   evidence.  Their appeals against those decisions came  before  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Mrs Debra Clapham on 15 January 2013.  The sponsor did not
   attend, although there had been an indication that he would.   The  judge
   noted that the relevant notices of hearing had  been  duly  issued.   She
   decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence  of  the  sponsor  and
   dismissed the appeals, again for inadequacy of the evidence.



2) A First-tier Tribunal Judge refused  permission  to  appeal  on  1  March
   2013.

3) The appellants renewed their application for permission  to  appeal,  now
   claiming that neither  they  nor  the  sponsor  had  received  notice  of
   hearing.  On 22 April  2013,  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
   permission to appeal, although  noting  that  it  was  curious  that  the
   application for permission made to the First-tier Tribunal had  not  made
   the claim that neither the sponsor nor the appellants received notice  of
   the hearing.

4) The sponsor attended the hearing in the Upper Tribunal on  8  July  2013.
   As to non-attendance in the First-tier Tribunal he said,  "I  was  unwell
   and I did not know".  I  asked  which  of  those  two  different  reasons
   explained his non-appearance.  He said that he was ill; he totally forgot
   about the date of the hearing; he was unable  to  do  anything  about  it
   because he was suffering from fever; but he did receive notice,  and  did
   know the date fixed.

5) There is nothing to suggest that the making of the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal involve the making of any error on a  point  of  law.   The
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal stands.

6) No order for anonymity has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                8 July 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
