






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16885/2013
                                                               VA/16891/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 3 November 2014                           |On: 20 November 2014         |
|Prepared: 19 November 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer: Dhaka

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mrs Mahmuda Akanjee (1)
                             Mr Kawsar Alahi (2)
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Fozilot Ali (Sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. For the sake of convenience I refer to the appellant as "the entry
      clearance officer" and to the respondents as "the claimants."
   2. The claimants are mother and son, nationals of Bangladesh, born on 8
      January 1970 and 3 March 1993 respectively.
   3. Their appeals against the decision of the entry clearance officer,
      recorded as having been made on 24 July 2013, to refuse to grant them
      entry clearance to come to the UK as family visitors was allowed by
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen in a determination promulgated on
      8 August 2014.
   4. The entry clearance officer was not satisfied that the family income
      was as claimed. There was insufficient evidence of rental income or
      earnings from land. Accordingly, the applications were refused.
   5. The sponsor, Mr Ali, attended the hearing on behalf of the appellants.
      However, there was no appearance for the entry clearance officer.
   6. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was given by Mr Ali. His
      wife had left one of the young twins in the bath when she answered the
      door. The child tragically died. She then became depressed and lost
      confidence. The first-claimant, her mother, wanted to come to provide
      support to her.
   7. The sponsor provided evidence relating to his property as well as the
      claimant's business and business interests in Bangladesh.
   8. The Judge considered the documentation produced and proceeded to
      consider their appeals on the merits and found that the appellant came
      from a reasonably affluent family with business interests and had good
      cause to return.
   9. The judge had regard to the tragedy that had occurred. There were
      highly exceptional compassionate circumstances involved. The entry
      clearance officer did not exercise discretion appropriately,
      apparently having overlooked the compassionate circumstances.
  10. Having regard to the close family members remaining in Bangladesh,
      they would have good cause to return there at the end of the proposed
      visit.
  11. On 23 September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted the
      entry clearance officer permission to appeal on the basis that since
      25 June 2013, s.84(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002 limited the right of appeal in a case such as the present to
      human rights and race relations grounds. These had not been
      considered.
  12. Judge Frankish stated that it was apparent from paragraphs 14-21 of
      the determination that the claimants had been found to qualify under
      the rules applicable up to 25 June 2013. However, the application had
      been made after 25 June 2013, namely on 29 June 2013. That accordingly
      arguably amounted to an error of law.
  13. Mr Whitwell accordingly submitted that their appeal rights had been
      restricted in this case.
  14. The changes made by the Crime and Courts Act (s.52) amended s.88A of
      the 2002 Act as inserted by the 2006 Act (entry clearance) to remove
      the right of appeal for persons visiting specified family members.
      They are still able to bring an appeal on the residual grounds in
      s.84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act, namely on human rights and race
      relations grounds, which thus restricted these claimants to those
      grounds.
  15. Further, the finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the entry
      clearance officer should have exercised discretion differently in the
      light of the tragic family events, also constituted an error as there
      is no discretion available to the entry clearance officer within
      paragraph 41 of the immigration rules.  Accordingly, the Judge had
      exercised discretion which was not available.
  16. I explained the nature of the entry clearance officer's grounds of
      appeal. Mr Ali stated that he had read the documents and understood
      the position. He did not make any submission.
      Assessment
  17. I find that the claimants' appeals were restricted to human rights and
      race relations grounds.
  18. I have had regard to the grounds of appeal before the First-tier
      Tribunal. It is contended that the entry clearance officer had not
      considered the European Convention on Human Rights. It is further
      asserted at paragraph 7 of the grounds that "the ECO stated that our
      right of appeal is limited, but it is not true." It is asserted that
      the sponsors are her sister and her sister's husband.
  19. It is noted in the reasons for refusal that the claimants' right of
      appeal are limited under the 2006 Act.
  20. However, the First-tier Judge did not determine the appeals on that
      basis but examined them on the merits and found that the financial and
      social circumstances indicated that the claimants would return. Regard
      was had to the tragedy which occurred in the claimants' family. It was
      found that the entry clearance officer overlooked those circumstances
      and failed to exercise discretion appropriately [16].
  21. The Judge found that the entry clearance officer failed to attach any
      weight to the documentation "......for reasons of me(re)  suspicion or
      speculation". Those conclusions were erroneous (15). The claimants did
      put forward an accurate description of their financial circumstances
      in Bangladesh and they come from a reasonably affluent family with
      business interests.
  22. However, the appeal was confined to human rights and race relations
      grounds. There was no discretion available to the entry clearance
      officer pursuant to paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The
      appeals were not advanced on that basis.
  23. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      involved the making of a material error of law.  I accordingly set
      aside the decision and re-make it.
  24. The claimants have not provided any evidence that the entry clearance
      officer's decision was unlawful on the basis of any discrimination in
      the exercise of public function so far as relating to race as defined
      in the Equality Act 2010. Nor has any evidence been produced that the
      decision was unlawful pursuant to s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998,
      namely that the entry clearance officer acted contrary to the Human
      Rights Convention, rendering the decision incompatible with their
      Article 8 rights.
  25. I accordingly find that the claimants have not shown on the balance of
      probabilities that their right to respect for family and private life
      has been breached, or that they have in any way been discriminated
      against.
      Decision
      Having found that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      involved the making of errors of law, I set aside the decision and
      substitute it with the following decision:
      The claimants' appeals are dismissed.
      I set aside the fee award made.






                               Signed                     Date:  19/11/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


