
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16561/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2014                             |On 6th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      UPPonER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           mokntaz ali thakur miah
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Janjua of Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th June 2014.





Background

 2. The Appellant sought a visa in order to come to the  UK  to  visit  his
    niece.

 3. The application was refused on the grounds  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that the Appellant's  circumstances  were  as
    claimed nor that his niece would be able to  maintain  and  accommodate
    him in the UK.

 4. The judge, in a brief determination, agreed with  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, found  that the evidence of the Appellant's circumstances  was
    inadequate and dismissed the appeal.  He made no findings  in  relation
    to the Sponsor's circumstances.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which  was  granted  on  28th
    August 2014.

 6. Under the Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012  the
    appeal rights of persons refused visit visas are restricted  to  family
    members as defined in Section 2(2),  which  does  not  include  nieces.
    When I raised the point with Mr Janjua he said that she was also  going
    to come and see her brother.

 7. First it is clear from the application form that the  Sponsor  in  this
    case is the Appellant's niece since she is  named  as  the  person  the
    Appellant will be staying with. Moreover she  provided  the  letter  of
    invitation and declaration in support of the application.

 8. I therefore conclude that the person to be visited in this case is  the
    Appellant's niece.  Whilst mention has been made of a brother, although
    the Entry Clearance Manager clearly had doubts as to whether they  were
    related as claimed, I am satisfied that the Sponsor, the person  to  be
    visited in the UK, is the Appellant's niece and on that basis the judge
    had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

Decision

 9. The judge's decision is set aside and remade as follows. The appeal  is
    dismissed for want of jurisdiction.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor                      4th November 2014


