
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16737/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th September 2015                | On 14th September 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE - LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        KOLAWOLE OMOGBOLAHAN TAJUDEEN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clayton promulgated on 12th March 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 16th October 1980  who  on
    21st June 2013 applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.  The Claimant indicated that he wished to attend his  cousin's
    graduation ceremony and would stay in the United Kingdom for  a  period
    of seven days.  The Claimant produced a letter from his cousin Ajaibade
    Adebola Omowola dated 20th June 2013 indicating that she graduated from
    the University of East Anglia in December 2012, and that  she  intended
    to travel to the United Kingdom for her graduation ceremony  which  was
    to take place on 17th July 2013.

 4. The application was refused on 8th July 2013.  The ECO  contended  that
    the Claimant had submitted  a  passport  containing  a  false  Nigerian
    immigration stamp dated 2nd May 2013.  The  application  was  therefore
    refused with reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    Because a false document had been submitted, the ECO was not  satisfied
    that the Claimant intended to visit the United Kingdom for  the  period
    or purpose stated, and was not satisfied that he would leave the United
    Kingdom at the end  of  the  visit,  and  therefore  also  refused  the
    application  with  reference  to  paragraph  41(i)  and  (ii)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The ECO contended in the refusal decision, that the
    Appellant had only a limited right of appeal, and that his  appeal  was
    limited  to  the  grounds  referred  to  in  section  84(1)(c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act)  which
    relates to a breach of human rights.

 5. The Claimant instructed solicitors who entered an appeal on his  behalf
    contending that the decision to refuse entry clearance was incompatible
    with the Claimant's rights under the 1950 European Convention on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention), was not in accordance with the  law,  and
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appeal was heard on 2nd March 2015.  The ECO was  not  represented,
    and the Claimant, although not present, was represented by Counsel.

 7. Judge Clayton noted that the burden of proof in relation  to  paragraph
    320(7A) rested upon the ECO, and found that the  burden  had  not  been
    discharged and the ECO had failed to produce any evidence to prove that
    a false document had been submitted.  The appeal was allowed  for  that
    reason.

 8. This decision prompted an application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal to be made on behalf of the ECO.  It was contended  that
    the judge had failed to take into account that the Claimant had only  a
    limited right of appeal.  The judge had allowed the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and had therefore exceeded  his  jurisdiction  which
    amounted to a material error of law.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  of  the  Fist-tier  Tribunal
    Grimmett who found that following the introduction of section 52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013, appeals against refusal of  entry  clearance
    as a visitor could only be  made  on  human  rights  or  race  relation
    grounds, and it was therefore arguable that the Claimant did not have a
    full right of appeal.

10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

11. The hearing took place on 4th September 2015.  There was no  attendance
    on behalf of the Claimant.  I was satisfied that proper notice  of  the
    hearing had been given  both  to  the  Claimant  in  Nigeria,  and  his
    solicitors in the United Kingdom.  There was no explanation for the non-
    attendance, and no application for an adjournment.  I took into account
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, and  was
    satisfied, taking into  account  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance had been made as long ago as 21st June 2013, that it  was  in
    the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

12. I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Melvin  who  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal and submitted
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  clearly  erred  in  law  by   not
    considering that the Claimant only had a limited right of  appeal,  and
    that the decision should be set aside, re-made and dismissed.

13. I indicated that I was  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    materially erred in considering the appeal, and set aside the decision,
    indicating that I would issue a written decision, giving my reasons for
    setting aside the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  and  re-making  the
    decision.

14. In my view the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  by  not
    appreciating that the Claimant only had a limited right of appeal.  The
    judge granting permission erred by referring to section 52 of the Crime
    and Courts Act 2013, as that only applied to applications  made  on  or
    after 25th June 2013, and this application for entry clearance was made
    on 21st June 2013.

15. However it is correct that the Claimant had only  a  limited  right  of
    appeal.  He was not seeking to visit a  family  member  in  the  United
    Kingdom  as  defined  by  The  Immigration  Appeals  (Family   Visitor)
    Regulations 2012.  The application was  made  on  the  basis  that  the
    Claimant was a general visitor, and therefore his right of  appeal  was
    limited to grounds alleging either racial discrimination or a breach of
    human rights.

16. The appeal that was entered was valid, because reference  was  made  in
    the grounds to a breach of human rights  although  no  explanation  was
    offered as to how the decision to refuse entry clearance  breached  the
    Claimant's human rights.

17. The First-tier Tribunal should firstly have considered whether  Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention was engaged, and if it  was  not,  should  not
    have gone on to consider the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   The
    correct approach has been clarified by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Mostafa
    [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), Adjei [2015] UKUT 0261  (IAC),  Abbasi  [2015]
    UKUT 00463 (IAC), and Kaur [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC).

18.  There  is  no  reference  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision   to
    consideration of human rights,  and  no  consideration  as  to  whether
    Article 8 was engaged.  The judge has considered the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and for that reason materially erred in law.

19. I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal.   The
    Claimant has not explained how Article 8 is engaged, either on  private
    or family life grounds.  The evidence indicates that the  Claimant  was
    not seeking to visit a family member in the United Kingdom, but  wished
    to accompany his cousin to her graduation ceremony.  In my view a  wish
    to attend a relative's graduation ceremony in the United  Kingdom  does
    not engage Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

20.  There  was  no  reference  in  the  Grounds  of   Appeal   to   racial
    discrimination.  As I find that Article 8 is not  engaged,  it  is  not
    necessary for me to go on and make findings as to whether the  decision
    to refuse entry clearance  interferes  with  the  Claimant's  right  to
    respect to private and/or family  life,  whether  the  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, and whether  the  decision  is  necessary  and
    proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.

The decision is re-made and the Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed   Date 4th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 4th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
