

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number:     VA/16287/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 3rd November 2014                         |On: 6th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Kobir Ahmed
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Dhaka
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh date of birth 12th May  1983.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Heynes[2] to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse him entry clearance as a family visitor.




 2. The Appellant stated that he wished to come to the  United  Kingdom  in
    order to visit his brother.  He  and  his  son  had  made  applications
    together. They stated an intention to remain in the UK for a period  of
    four weeks.


 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's (ECO) decision is  dated  the  22nd  July
    2013. It was not accepted that the applicants were genuine visitors who
    intended to return to Bangladesh at the end of  the  period  stated  by
    them: this was because the ECO was not satisfied that  the  Appellant's
    financial circumstances in  Bangladesh  were  as  stated.  Nor  was  it
    accepted that the  Appellant  and  his  son  could  be  maintained  and
    accommodated in the UK, nor that they would be able to afford the  cost
    of the return trip.

 4. The Appellant and his son both appealed and the matter came before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal examines bank statements submitted by
    the Appellant and finds that these  fall  short  of  corroborating  his
    claimed level of income. At paragraph 16 the determination reads:

         "16.  However  the  burden  of  proof  rests  upon  the  Appellant.
         Establishing his  claimed  income  is  critical  to  the  issue  of
         intention.  Nearly  ten  months  have  passed  since  the  date  of
         decision. In that time, the Appellant has provided bank  statements
         which I do not find consistent with the claimed income and  nothing
         at all to substantiate income from the sale of crops".

 5. Having made that finding the Tribunal could not be satisfied  that  the
    Appellant as to intention or that he would be able to meet the costs of
    the trip - those being shared between himself and his brother - and the
    appeal was dismissed.


 6. The grounds of appeal submit that there was a  good  deal  of  evidence
    which the First-tier Tribunal failed to have regard to.  This is listed
    as items a)-p).  It is  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    failed to make findings on that evidence, or make clear findings as  to
    the Appellant's intentions. Paragraph 5 takes issue with the  statement
    at paragraph 16 of the determination  that  "establishing  his  claimed
    income is critical to the issue of intention": the Appellant relies  on
    the authority of Sawmynaden [2012] UKUT 00161 (IAC) and submits that to
    hold that the financial circumstances of  the  Appellant  are  entirely
    irrelevant.  The finding that  the  trip  could  not  be  paid  for  is
    submitted to be contrary to the evidence of the bank  statements  which
    showed the brothers to have sufficient funds between them. It is argued
    that the determination fails to have regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's social ties to Bangladesh.

 7. Permission is granted on the ground that it is arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal failed to consider all of the evidence in the round  when
    examining the issue of intention.

 8. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.


    Error of Law

 9. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did err in the manner  set  out  in
    the grounds. The entire focus of the decision  is  on  the  Appellant's
    financial  situation.  Although  I  do   not   agree   that   financial
    circumstances are "entirely irrelevant" to intention it equally  cannot
    be said that they are determinative of it. The Appellant had supplied a
    good deal of evidence relevant to intention which was not  examined  at
    all in this determination. There was  no  consideration  given  to  his
    social ties to Bangladesh including his  family,  home  nor  any  other
    aspect of his settled family life.  Nor was any consideration given  to
    the reasons for the trip nor the weight to be attached to the  credible
    evidence of the Sponsor. For those reasons the decision is set aside to
    be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.



      Decisions

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

11. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            10th November
                                    2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on the 24th July
2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 25th April 2014

