
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16589/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2014                             |On 30th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 asia begum
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Janjua of Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer made following a hearing at Bradford on 13th June
    2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 17th July  1989.   She
    applied to come to the UK for entry clearance to see her husband, Mezan
    Miah but was refused on 18th July 2013 on the grounds  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence of her financial circumstances  and  she  had  no
    incentive to leave.

 3. The Appellant's husband is in prison.  The judge  heard  evidence  from
    his mother and wrote as follows:

         "I accept that the Appellant has family in  Bangladesh.   I  accept
         that she is impecunious and entirely reliant on others.   I  accept
         that  she  wants  to  live  here  having  previously  applied   for
         settlement and given her stated intention, I do not accept that she
         has much to return to in Bangladesh given that she has  no  job  or
         income and she sees her future as living with  her  husband  rather
         than her mother.  I do not, in those circumstances, accept that the
         purpose or period of the trip is as claimed.

         The limitation on their family life has been caused entirely by her
         husband.  He chose to offend and limit  the  relationships  he  has
         with her and others.  The Respondent's decision merely retains  the
         status quo created by him.  There is nothing unusual, compassionate
         or exceptional about this case."

The Grounds of Application

 4. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's conclusions were against the weight of evidence and irrational.



 5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Ransley  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds.

Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

 6. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to defend this determination.  First, the  fact
    that an applicant has no apparent economic reason to return to his  own
    country does not mean that he/she has no intention of doing so  at  the
    end of his/her visit (AA & Others (Bangladesh) [2006] UKAIT 00026).

 7. Second, the judge heard oral evidence  but  made  no  findings  on  the
    credibility of that evidence.

 8. Third, the Appellant in this case said that she had a  clear  incentive
    to return to Bangladesh, i.e she wants to make a settlement application
    in the future, but the judge did not engage with her case.

Re-making the decision

 9. I heard brief oral evidence from the Sponsor.  She said  that  her  son
    was in prison and would be  for  the  next  five  or  six  years.   Her
    daughter-in-law did not want to settle in the UK  at  this  stage,  but
    when her son was released from prison he would sponsor her in the  hope
    that she could come and live with him as his spouse.  The Appellant was
    fully aware that this was not an application for  settlement  and  that
    she would return after about three or four months.  The family sent her
    money in Bangladesh, around 30 to 60 Taka every couple of months.

10. So far as maintenance for the visit was concerned, there  was  a  spare
    room in the family home and her husband was working.

11. Mr Diwnycz defended the decision and  relied  on  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal.

12. Mr Junjua asked that the appeal be allowed.  He said  that  the  family
    fully intended to make a settlement application  in  the  future.   The
    Appellant's  husband  could  not  visit  her   and   other   forms   of
    communication  were  difficult.   When  the  time  came  to  make   the
    application they would have to show that the  marriage  was  subsisting
    and visits would be one way of establishing that the Immigration  Rules
    could be met.  This was not a family which had ever shown that they had
    an intention to flout the Immigration Rules.

Findings and Conclusions

13. First I am satisfied that accommodation is not an issue.  According  to
    the documentary evidence in the Entry Clearance Officer's bundle  there
    is at least one spare bedroom  available  in  the  large  family  home.
    Second, the family already remits money to the Appellant in  Bangladesh
    and there is evidence of the Appellant's father-in-law's employment and
    payslips in the bundle.  The extra amount that it would  cost  for  the
    Appellant to be fed during the course of her visit would be minimal.

14. I am also satisfied that there  is  a  very  clear  incentive  for  the
    Appellant to return.  There is absolutely no reason to  disbelieve  the
    evidence that the family intends to make a  settlement  application  in
    due course when her husband  is  released  from  prison.   Clearly  any
    breach of the conditions of the visit visa would harm her prospects  in
    such an application.  Moreover since her husband is  not  going  to  be
    released from prison for another six years, and  she  cannot  therefore
    live with him during that time, there is no basis to conclude that  she
    intends to overstay her visa in the UK. The fact that the Appellant has
    little money is not evidence of an intention to overstay  her  visa  in
    the UK when she has a clear motive not to do so.

Decision

15. The original judge erred in law.   His  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date: 28th October 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

