
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16021/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September 2014                           |On 17th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                               MRS FATIMA ZIA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S.Whitwell -  Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  J  Osborne  issued  on  28th  May  2014
    allowing under the  Immigration  Rules  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer made  on  9th  July
    2013 to refuse entry clearance as a visitor under paragraph  41  of  HC
    395 (as amended).

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born 18th June 1945.

 3.  Permission to appeal was  granted  on  7th  July  2014  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cruthers.    He said,

         "2.  As per the grounds on which the Respondent seeks permission to
             appeal, it appears  that  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  by
             reference  to  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41   of   the
             Immigration Rules, HC 395 but in relation to applications made
             from 25th  June  2013  Appellants  in  the  position  of  this
             Appellant are restricted to pursuing only equality  and  human
             rights grounds.  Therefore the  Respondent's  current  grounds
             are arguable.

         3.   I note that the Appellant's Visa Application Form (VAF)  bears
             the date 17th June 2013.  Therefore the Sponsor  should  write
             to  the  Tribunal  as  soon  as  possible  (putting  reference
             VA/16021/2013) to say whether  or  not  he  accepts  that  his
             mother's visa application was made on or after 25th June 2013.
              If the Sponsor does not accept this it may be that  the  onus
             will  be  on  the  Respondent  to  show  that   the   relevant
             application was made on or after 25th June 2013."

 4. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that the  application
    was made on 27th June 2013, two days after (by virtue of Section 52  of
    the  Crime  and  Courts  Act)  the  appeal  rights  for  visitors  were
    restricted to grounds of  race  relations  and  human  rights.   It  is
    submitted that in these circumstances it was not open to the First-tier
    Tribunal to consider whether the decision was in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules or otherwise in accordance with the law.   The  Judge
    had no jurisdiction to make such a decision and the appeal should  have
    been dismissed.  This was not raised in the refusal letter.

 5. Judge Osborne noted that the decision was made by the Respondent on 9th
    July 2013.  He went on to say that the point in time at which he has to
    consider the relevant facts for both immigration  and  Article  8  ECHR
    issues is the date  of  decision.   He  set  out  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41.  He set out the circumstances of the  Appellant,   noting
    that she lives with her youngest child and the younger of her two  sons
    in Kabul.  The Sponsor in the UK is her son.  Judge Osborne found  that
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

 6. I have a statement from the Sponsor, Mr Umar Zia,  in which he explains
    that he consulted a solicitor about his mother's intention to  make  an
    application  to come to the UK as a visitor and was told  the  law  was
    about to change. He was told that many such  applications  are  refused
    and that from 25th June 2013 an appeal  would  only  be  considered  on
    human rights or race  relations  grounds.  He  therefore  submitted  an
    application online as soon as he could. There seems to  be  no  dispute
    that the  application   form  was  completed  and  sent  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer  using the online process  on  17th  June  2013.  The
    Sponsor was ready and able when he completed the application  online to
    pay the required fee  but  it  was  for  some  unexplained  reason  not
    possible to pay the  fee  online.  He  therefore  immediately  made  an
    appointment for the Appellant and his brother who lives in Pakistan  to
    attend  the post in Islamabad  on 24th June to pay the fee. He did this
    specifically to ensure that the application was in prior to the changes
    in the law taking effect. He questions why the issue of  the  scope  of
    the appeal was not raised at the hearing before  Judge    Osborne.  His
    solicitor had requested evidence from the Respondent to prove that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had not received  the  application  until  27th
    June but nothing had been forthcoming.

 7. As I have already said it is accepted by the Respondent that the online
    application  was made and received on 17th June. Mr Whitwell  submitted
    that the Appellant must have met with the agent on 24th June  and  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer did not receive  the  payment  required  to
    create a valid application until 27th June. I  pointed  out  to  him  a
    stamp on the application form bearing the date 24th June. He said  that
    that stamp had probably been put on the form by  the  agent.  It  seems
    therefore that the position of the Respondent is that the Appellant and
    her son did not see the Entry Clearance Officer  but  the  agent.  They
    paid the fee not to him but to the agent. I did ask Mr Whitwell if  the
    Appellant would have been aware that there would be  further delay  but
    he could not give me a response.

 8. I granted Mr Whitwell a week to allow time for information or  evidence
    about the payment of the fee that he had  already  requested  from  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to arrive in the UK. On 10th September he  sent
    me an e-mail advising me that he had received nothing.

 9. I have a letter from Mr Zia's solicitor in the UK dated  5th  September
    in which she confirms that the Appellant had had  biometrics  processed
    by an agent on 24th June. Biometrics cannot be processed until the  fee
    is paid so the fee must have been paid that day. The agent was  one  of
    those nominated by the post in Islamabad  to  receive  entry  clearance
    applications on their behalf.

10. I found the Sponsor to be entirely credible.  I  accept  that  when  he
    arranged the meeting on 24th June he believed, and indeed was  entitled
    to believe, that when his mother paid the fee that would create a valid
    application, treated as lodged on 24th June. There was  no  reason  for
    him to think otherwise.   He  was  not  surprisingly  confused  by  the
    stance of the Respondent and taken aback by  the  suggestion  that  the
    application  was late because the fee had been paid to what was so  far
    as he was concerned the man he had been given an appointment  with   so
    that the fee could be paid prior to the change in the law.

11. I am concerned  at  the  circumstances  of  this  case.   The  document
    received from the Entry Clearance Officer setting out  the  details  of
    the application  does give the date of application  as  27th  June  but
    this document is not in the Respondent's bundle but was apparently sent
    to the Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit    from  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office on 2nd September 2014, presumably for  the  purpose
    of the hearing before me.   It is quite unacceptable that  neither  the
    Appellant  nor Sponsor were  made aware that the appointment  was  with
    an agent  and that it might take a couple of days for  the  application
    to  be  passed  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The   Appellant's
    representative is of course correct in saying  that  if  the  agent  is
    instructed and accepted as an agent  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    then service on the  agent  is  deemed  to  be  service  on  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer. I therefore find that the application  was lodged on
    17th June and  the  fee  paid  on  24th  June  thus  creating  a  valid
    application. The Appellant therefore had a full right of appeal against
    the refusal of entry clearance and Judge Osborne was entitled to  allow
    it under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

12.  Further, the issue of a restricted right  of  appeal  was  not  raised
    before  Judge  Osborne,  despite  the  fact  that  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Counsel. The position of Mr Whitwell, relying on Virk  &
    others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652 was that it was open  to  either  the
    First-Tier  or  Upper  Tribunal  to   take   the   jurisdiction   point
    notwithstanding the failure of  the  Respondent  to  raise  it.   Judge
    Osborne quite simply did not have jurisdiction to deal with the  appeal
    under s 41 so his decision should be set aside. I  do  not  agree  with
    that. The  only  document  before  me  which  shows  the  date  of  the
    application as 27th June is the Form referred to  above  and  it  seems
    that that was not before Judge Osborne.  The copy application  form  in
    the bundle has an online application  date of 17th June, is  silent  on
    the payment of the fee and bears a  stamp showing a date of 24th  June.
    I doubt there was anything before Judge Osborne  to  suggest  that  the
    application was received after 25th June and clearly  Counsel  for  the
    Home Office made no mention of it. Judge Osborne could  not  have  been
    expected to consider it.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
error of law and shall therefore stand.

The appeal of the Respondent is dismissed.








Signed                              Date: 16th September 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

