





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/16221/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23 September 2014                         |On 13 October 2014           |
|Prepared: 2 October  2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer: Accra

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Jeffrey Joseph Richter
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ofei-Kwatia, counsel (instructed by Victory at
Law Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience, I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  the
      "entry clearance officer" and to the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Ghana.  His  application  for  an  entry
      clearance to visit the UK for four weeks  was  refused  by  the  entry
      clearance officer on 3rd July 2013.


   3. The reasons for the refusal of entry clearance were extensive.


   4. The claimant stated that he intended to visit his wife in the UK.  The
      entry clearance officer refused his application on  the  merits  under
      paragraph 41(i), (ii), (vi) and (vii) of the Immigration Rules.


   5. The entry clearance officer also considered his  application  pursuant
      to paragraph 320(3) of the rules. That  was  on  the  basis  that  the
      claimant failed to produce to the  entry  clearance  officer  a  valid
      national passport or other document  satisfactorily  establishing  his
      identity and  nationality.  He  had  previously  been  encountered  by
      authorities and had given a different identity. Accordingly, the entry
      clearance officer could not be satisfied that he had presented a valid
      passport satisfactorily establishing his nationality and identity.


   6.  In  addition,  records  showed  that  the  claimant  had   previously
      overstayed in the UK. When interviewed, he stated that he entered  the
      UK in March 1998 and that he held a six month visit visa  obtained  in
      Accra. Home Office records showed that he was encountered  in  October
      2010 and was served with removal papers on the basis that his leave to
      enter the UK had expired in 1998.  He  was  removed  from  the  UK  in
      November 2010.


   7. Accordingly, the  entry  clearance  officer  also  refused  his  entry
      clearance pursuant to paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.


   8. His application was  also  refused  under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
      Immigration Rules. He had entered the UK in 1998 and  was  encountered
      by the authorities in May 2009 when  he  gave  a  false  identity.  He
      failed to comply with restrictions attached to this  offence.  He  was
      again encountered in October 2010. He attempted to  obtain  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK by paying someone  to  facilitate  this  for
      him. Given these facts, the entry clearance officer was satisfied that
      he had contrived in a significant way to frustrate the  intentions  of
      the rules  and  therefore  refused  his  application  under  paragraph
      320(11) of the rules.


   9. Furthermore, records indicated that he had been arrested and sentenced
      following convictions in connection with two offences.  He  failed  to
      comply with the terms imposed by  these  sentences.  Accordingly,  the
      entry clearance officer was satisfied that his exclusion from  the  UK
      would be conducive to the public  good.  It  was  considered  that  on
      balance and in the light of his conduct, it was undesirable  to  issue
      the claimant an entry clearance visa.


  10. It was recorded by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Abebrese  on  28th  May
      2014, that it had been submitted  to  him  that  the  entry  clearance
      officer had wrongly applied paragraph 320(7B) of the rules as this was
      an application made by a spouse of the sponsor.


  11. He accordingly held at paragraph 9 of the determination  that  he  did
      not find on the evidence that  the  claimant  had  breached  paragraph
      320(7B) as his application was to visit his spouse in the UK.


  12. Ms Ofei-Kwatia  accepted  that  this  was  a  material  error  in  the
      circumstances as the claimant was applying for a visit visa to visit a
      spouse and not for entry clearance as a spouse.


  13. Furthermore, although the Judge referred at paragraph 7 to "the second
      issue", namely paragraph 320(11) of the rules, he found  at  paragraph
      10 that the claimant had provided information which is not contrary to
      his evidence as to his true identity.


  14. The Judge thereafter considered the appeal on its merits, allowing  it
      under the rules.


  15. On 11th August 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  granted  the  entry
      clearance officer permission to appeal. In particular, he stated  that
      the Judge  made  a  contradictory  finding  in  respect  of  paragraph
      "320(B)(7)". At paragraph 9 of the determination the Judge stated that
      he did not find  on  the  evidence  that  the  claimant  had  breached
      paragraph "320(B)(7)".


  16. Mr  Jarvis  relied  on  the  entry  clearance  officer's  grounds  and
      submitted that paragraph 7 of the determination was "misconceived"  as
      the claimant was applying for a visit visa to visit a spouse  and  not
      an entry clearance. Accordingly, the Judge was required to, but failed
      to consider the relevance and applicability of paragraph 320(7B).


  17. Further,  the  Judge  accepted  at  paragraph  10  that  the  claimant
      intentionally gave the authorities incorrect details when  encountered
      as an overstayer in  May  2009.  However,  the  Judge  had  failed  to
      consider at all, or give reasons as to why the claimant should not  be
      refused  entry  under  paragraphs  320(11)   or   320(19).   That   is
      particularly so having regard  to  the  facts:  the  Judge  failed  to
      adequately address why as a person who overstayed for 12 years and who
      had committed offences whilst illegally in the  UK,  those  paragraphs
      did not apply as contended by the entry clearance officer.


  18. Accordingly, Mr Jarvis submitted that there had been no engagement  at
      all with paragraphs 320(11), (19) or (3) of the Rules.


  19. Ms Ofei-Kwatei accepted  that  there  were  difficulties  particularly
      regarding the way the Judge dealt with paragraph 320(7B) in this case.


  20. Furthermore, she stated that it was evident that  the  Judge  had  not
      engaged with the discretionary basis upon which  the  entry  clearance
      officer refused the claimant's application.


  21. Accordingly, both parties  accepted  that  there  had  therefore  been
      material errors of law and that the decision had to be set aside.


  22. The parties also submitted that this was an appropriate case  for  the
      appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  as  it  was  evident
      that the issues required to be determined had not been properly  dealt
      with. There would have to be  extensive  evidence  and  fact  finding,
      which rendered the case suitable for remittal.


  23. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the
      making of  material  errors  of  law.  I  accordingly  set  aside  the
      decision. There will have to be a fresh  decision  made.  I  have  had
      regard to the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  regarding  the
      issue of remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
      decision.


  24. This is  a  case  where  one  of  the  parties  has  been  denied  the
      opportunity of having his case properly presented and  determined  and
      where the Judge ignored potentially significant immigration rules.


  25. This is also a case where  there  is  a  fairly  extensive  amount  of
      judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision  to  be  re-
      made. There will be a complete re-hearing with no findings  preserved.
      I have also had regard to the overriding objective and  conclude  that
      it would be just and fair to remit the case, which I do.


     Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the  making  of
      material errors of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made. The agreed hearing  date  is  14th  January
      2015. The appeal will be heard by  any  judge  apart  from  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Abebrese.







                               Signed                     Date 2 October
                                   2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


