
[pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: VA/16574/2013
      VA/16579/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Promulgated on:                   |
|On 22 October 2014                |12 December 2014                  |
|and 10 December 2014              |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                               Noor Ahmad Khan
                               Zahida Nasreen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud and Mr L Loughlan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes and  Mr  I  Jarvis,  Senior  Home  Office
                      Presenting Officers


                          Determination and Reasons



Details of appellant and basis of claim

 1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to  the
    respondent  on  11  September  2014  by   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth in respect of the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Carroll who allowed the joint  appeals  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House by way of a determination promulgated on 7 July 2014.  For
    convenience I continue to refer to the Entry Clearance Officer  as  the
    respondent and to Mr Khan and Mrs Nasreen as appellants.

 2. The appellants are Pakistani nationals born on 26 November 1951  and  3
    February 1952 respectively. Their applications for visas to visit Aftab
    Ahmad Khan, their son and sponsor, for  a  period  of  one  month  were
    refused on 14 July 2013.  They were given a right of appeal limited  to
    the grounds  referred  to  in  section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as the ECO maintained they had  applied
    on or after 25 June 2013.

 3. When the appeals came before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent
    was unrepresented and the judge proceeded to hear  oral  evidence  from
    the sponsor and allowed the appeal under paragraph 41.

 4. In her challenge to the decision, the respondent argues that the  judge
    had no jurisdiction to hear the substantive merits of the appeal. It is
    argued that where one of the limited grounds of  appeal,  namely  human
    rights or race relations are raised, the Tribunal only had the right to
    consider those grounds. The respondent points to the notice of decision
    which makes this clear and maintains that the judge therefore erred  in
    allowing the appeal under paragraph 41. It is also pointed out that the
    judge made no findings on human rights grounds as required.

Appeal hearing on 22 October 2014

 5. The appeal initially came before me on 22 October 2014.  The  appellant
    was represented by a new firm of solicitors and  his  sponsor  attended
    with Counsel. Ms Holmes relied on the respondent's grounds  and  argued
    that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  human  rights  at  all.  The
    determination was therefore flawed.

 6. Mr Mahmud replied. He maintained that the  judge  had  jurisdiction  to
    consider the substantive merits because the appellants had  made  their
    applications before 24 June 2013. In any event they  had  raised  human
    rights in the grounds of appeal and the  sponsor's  witness  statement.
    The issue of a limited appeal was not raised before the judge or in the
    notice of decision. It was a breach of Article 8  that  the  ECO  found
    that the appellants were not settled in Pakistan. They had family  life
    with their son in the UK and it was their right to visit  him  and  his
    right to have them visit.

 7. In response Ms Holmes pointed  to  the  application  forms  which  were
    signed on 25 June 2013. She also pointed out  that  the  issue  of  the
    limited appeal had been raised in the decision notices.

 8. Further examination of the bundle revealed  some  inconsistencies  over
    whether the application was made on 24 June or 25  June  or  indeed  27
    June as maintained in the respondent's grounds. Mr Mahmud requested  an
    adjournment so that this matter could be clarified. In all fairness  to
    the appellants, I therefore agreed to the request and  the  matter  was
    listed for hearing on 10 December with the agreement of the parties.

Appeal Hearing on 10 December 2014

 9. No further evidence  relating  to  the  date  of  the  application  was
    presented when the matter resumed. On this occasion Mr Jarvis  appeared
    for the respondent and Mr Loughlan for  the  appellants.  A  bundle  of
    documentary evidence was adduced for  the  appellants  but  it  largely
    reproduced the evidence already on the court file and Mr  Loughlan  did
    not seek to refer to it during the course of the hearing.

10. Mr Jarvis sought a short break to check the  entry  clearance  database
    and returned after some 10-15 minutes to say that the  application  was
    submitted online on 24 June 2013 and biometric information was taken on
    25 June at 06.35 and  received  in  the  UK  at  10.40.  There  was  no
    confirmation of the date that the fees were paid.  However,  Mr  Jarvis
    stated that the process was still ongoing on 25  June.  The  completion
    date of 27 June was taken from the ECO's system.  He  argued  that  the
    appellants were therefore caught out by the new rules. They had limited
    appeal rights and had not sought to challenge that claim in the grounds
    of appeal. Only human rights grounds could be relied on. The judge  had
    not addressed this issue. That was an error of law.

11. Mr Loughlan did not accept that the respondent had established that the
    applications had been made on 27 June 2013. He argued  that  biometrics
    are done after the fee is paid and the on line date should be taken  as
    the date the application is made. It followed that the  appellants  had
    full appeal rights. In any event, they had raised human rights  grounds
    in the grounds of appeal and it was speculative to say that  the  judge
    had not considered them. They would have been in his mind. However,  if
    he was satisfied that the requirements of the rules had been met, there
    was no obligation for him to consider human rights.

12. Mr Jarvis responded. He submitted that the respondent's case had always
    been that the applications were made after the change of  jurisdiction.
    If the appellants asserted that was not so, it was for them to  produce
    evidence to explain why they made that  claim.  The  applications  were
    signed on 25 June 2013. The onus was not on the entry clearance officer
    to show that the applications were made thereafter. The  appellant  had
    not argued human rights before the judge. Although they had referred to
    human rights in their grounds of appeal, this had not been pursued  and
    in order for the issue to be determined, it had to be argued.

13. That completed the submissions on the issue of  the  error  of  law.  I
    reserved my decision on that issue but proceeded, nevertheless, to hear
    oral evidence from the sponsor on Article 8 in the event that an  error
    was found.

14. The sponsor gave his name as Aftab Ahmed Khan  and  he  relied  on  his
    witness statements dated 4 July and 15 November 2014. He stated he  had
    a large family in Pakistan consisting of  his  parents,  three  sisters
    (the youngest of whom was 14), a brother, uncles and aunts. His younger
    sister lived with their parents. He said that if his  parents  did  not
    leave the UK after their visit, she would have no  place  to  live.  He
    stated that he was due to be married in January 2015. He was remarrying
    his wife whom he had previously divorced. His parents had  helped  them
    to reconcile. The marriage was not taking  place  in  Pakistan  because
    this would be embarrassing and, in any event, relatives there were  not
    aware of the divorce. He had not disclosed this information  previously
    because he did not want strangers to know. He stated that it was  never
    his intention that his parents would come and  remain  here.  The  main
    reason for the application was to attend his wedding and  to  meet  his
    daughter whom they had never met. She was aged four. He stated that the
    data of his January remarriage had been arranged in December  2013.  He
    confirmed this was after his parents had made their application.

15. In cross-examination the sponsor stated that the application  was  made
    to come and attend his wedding. It was put to him  that  he  had  given
    evidence that the marriage had been arranged in  December  2013,  after
    the making of the applications. He said that was when he had  initially
    planned to have the wedding; the arrangements and planning had begun in
    early 2013. The marriage would be a civil ceremony. He had no  evidence
    regarding the booking of the  date  of  December  2013.  He  was  asked
    whether there was  anything  which  would  prevent  him  from  visiting
    Pakistan to see his parents and he replied in the negative.

16. There was no re-examination.

17. In response to questions I asked for clarification, the sponsor  stated
    that he had been living in the UK for nine and a  half  years.  He  had
    been back to Pakistan on seven or eight occasions and his  parents  had
    been here twice. They were retired. His mother was a pensioner  and  he
    sent them money every month. They  also  received  rental  income  from
    property. They lived with his sister and brother. Neither was  married.
    When asked to explain why he had  earlier  said  his  sister  would  be
    homeless if his parents left, the sponsor stated his brother  would  be
    moving to Karachi for work in February. The family currently  lived  in
    Peshawar. They owned the house. One sister lived in  Peshawar  and  the
    rest of his family were in Karachi and Lahore. Neither Mr Jarvis nor Mr
    Loughlan had any questions arising from mine  and  that  completed  the
    oral evidence.

18. I then heard submissions from the parties.  Mr  Jarvis  relied  on  his
    earlier submissions and argued that this  was  a  restricted  right  of
    appeal. With regard to Article 8,  this  was  a  qualified  right  and,
    whilst it was not impossible to show family life in these circumstances
    which met the legal authorities, the thrust  of  all  those  judgements
    related to the separation of families on removal. The extra-territorial
    cases centred round positive family reunion issues. It would defeat the
    purpose of the jurisdictional changes if judges could bypass the  rules
    and allow appeals under Article  8.  The  intention  of  Parliament  in
    approving the change was to get people  to  remake  their  applications
    rather than pursue appeals. This was a case of  adult  parents  and  an
    adult child. Even if they had  lived  in  the  same  city,  they  would
    struggle to show family life beyond the normal emotional ties. In terms
    of this case, the family ties did not amount to anything beyond normal.
    Human rights had to be decided as at the date of the  decision.  Rather
    than waiting to argue their case,  the  appellants  could  have  remade
    their applications. There was  nothing  to  prevent  the  sponsor  from
    travelling to Pakistan to see his parents and  for  them  to  meet  his
    child. Even if a family life were to be found there was  no  sufficient
    interference with it. The  appellants  were  still  living  with  their
    daughter and looking after her.  There  were  no  serious  consequences
    which would engage Article 8.

19. Mr Loughlan relied on his earlier submissions  on  the  timing  of  the
    application. He acknowledged that human rights  had  not  been  a  live
    issue before the first-tier judge but pointed out that  they  had  been
    raised in support of that appeal. He  submitted  that  the  family  had
    close relationships through their visits and therefore it must  be  the
    case that they had family and private life. This was a case of  parents
    wanting to come to the UK to see their son get married. The sponsor had
    a life here and was entitled to remain here.  The  appellant  had  been
    here before, complied with the rules and had returned. It was absurd to
    argue that they had no settled life in Pakistan. They had a 14-year-old
    child, property and savings. All their children except the sponsor live
    there. There  was  no  case  for  effective  immigration  control.  The
    refusals were an attempt to meet government targets and  nothing  else.
    The appellants were not elderly or asking to come here to be  supported
    by the sponsor. They had a strong Article 8 claim and it was wrong  for
    the government to say that they could never come to visit the  sponsor.
    The appeal should be allowed.

20. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  determination  which  I
    now give.

Findings and Reasons

Error of law:

21. The issue of a limited right  of  appeal  was  plainly  raised  in  the
    notices of decision for both appellants and in the  review  by  the  EC
    Manager where it was flagged as  a  preliminary  issue.  There  was  no
    challenge to this by the appellants until the first hearing before  me.
    Even then, whilst objections were raised, no clear evidence to  support
    the contention of an earlier application date was adduced. It  was  for
    that reason that I granted an adjournment; the sponsor being  confident
    that he would be able to obtain evidence of when the  fee  payment  was
    made. Lengthy arguments are now made in Mr Loughlan's skeleton argument
    about the timing of the application but it is of note that no issue was
    taken by the appellants before the First-tier Tribunal  in  respect  of
    the restricted right of appeal and no Rule 24 response was prepared  in
    respect of the Secretary of State's grounds for  permission  to  appeal
    and the grant of permission, both of which emphasise the limited appeal
    rights.

22. The restricted right of appeal was clearly identified both by  the  ECO
    and the ECM. I am bound to say that the judge's failure  to  deal  with
    this matter or indeed to even acknowledge it is an  error  of  law  and
    regrettably shows a lack of care in preparation by the judge. The judge
    was obliged to consider the human rights claim raised, albeit  briefly,
    in the appellants' grounds of appeal  and  to  have  made  findings  on
    whether the refusal breached their Article 8 rights as claimed. He  did
    not do so. Mr Loughlan's submission that the absence of  any  reference
    to human rights did not mean that the judge did not  consider  them  is
    rather strange. There is no reference to  anything  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings which would suggest that these were argued and  I  can  see
    nothing to support the submission that the judge had Article 8 in mind.



23. Whether the judge's error is material depends on when the  applications
    were made. If made on 25 June 2013 or thereafter, then the judge had no
    jurisdiction to determine the substantive merits of the  appeals  under
    paragraph 41 as he has done. If they were made before 25 June, then  he
    did.   The  first  issue  I  must  therefore  consider  is   when   the
    applications were made.

24. The appellants were given an adjournment to  provide  further  evidence
    pertaining to the making of the application, such as evidence from  the
    ban regarding the payment of the fee but nothing has been  forthcoming.
    The fresh bundle does not assist with the date of the applications.

25. I  have  regard  to  all  the  documents  that  are  contained  in  the
    respondent's bundle in respect to both appellants. There  is,  however,
    some confusion over  the  making  of  the  applications.  I  accept  Mr
    Loughlan's point in the skeleton argument as to the  correct  time  and
    date for the implementation of the removal of the right of appeal, this
    being an overseas case. I accept that the  correct  time  must  be  the
    equivalent of 00.00 GMT on  25  June  2013,  i.e.  05.00  in  Pakistan.
    According to Mr Loughlan's argument, the on line  application  for  the
    first appellant was made at  "12.09  a.m."  on  25  June  (paragraph  5
    skeleton argument) and at 11.56 on 24 June for  the  second  appellant.
    These timings are taken from the bottom of the  application  forms.  He
    argues that accordingly, both are "in time". The difficulty  with  this
    argument is that it does not take account of the fact that  whilst  the
    forms do indeed bear those endorsements at the bottom right,  and  also
    show an application date of 24 June 2013,  they  are  both  signed  and
    dated the 25 June 2013. That would suggest to me  that  whilst  the  on
    line application may well have commenced on 24 June, the forms were not
    fully completed until 25 June.

26. I also take account of the information provided regarding  the  receipt
    of biometric information. This is contained on  the  application  forms
    adduced by Mr Jarvis at the hearing and show that  these  details  were
    received in the UK at 10.40 on 25 June 2013. That would have been 15.40
    in Pakistan and would accord with the signatures of the same  date.  Mr
    Loughlan argues that he  was  not  aware  of  any  rule  that  required
    biometric date to be completed before an application was valid. I would
    refer him to A34(iii)(b) and 34A(iii) and (iv) which clearly state that
    biometrics must be received where they form  part  of  the  information
    required for an application.  The  latter  paragraph  also  requires  a
    signature to be given. Given that the unchallenged evidence shows  that
    the biometrics were not given/received until 25 June at a time when the
    new legislation had been implemented in the UK, the  appellants'  claim
    to have completed a valid application prior to the change of the  rules
    is untenable.  For the sake of completion, I note that the  information
    from Mr Jarvis provides  details  as  to  the  process  undertaken  and
    confirms the final results were received  at  18.43  on  25  June  2013
    (whether in the UK or in Pakistan is immaterial).

27. For these reasons I find that it is more probable  than  not  that  the
    applications  were  completed   on   25   June   2013   following   the
    implementation of the new rules removing  full  rights  of  appeal  for
    family visitors. There is no basis for Mr  Loughlan's  submission  that
    the refusals were a means of meeting government targets. That  is  pure
    speculation and wholly unjustified given the unarguable  facts  as  set
    out above.

28.  It  follows  that  the  judge's  error  is  material  and   that   the
    determination cannot stand. I set it aside in its entirety as the judge
    had no jurisdiction to make findings on the  substantive  merits  under
    paragraph 41. As he failed to  address  the  only  issue  he  did  have
    jurisdiction to consider, namely the Article 8 grounds of appeal, I now
    turn to that.

Article 8:

29. It has been argued for the appellants that they have a strong Article 8
    claim in that they have a family life with their son, the sponsor,  and
    that their rights are breached by the refusal to allow  them  to  visit
    him and attend his wedding. It must be said that at times Mr Loughlan's
    submissions appeared to veer to the substantive merits of the case  and
    the intentions of the parties. He  addressed  me  with  regard  to  the
    appellants' circumstances and their incentive  to  return  to  Pakistan
    after their visit rather than focusing on what it is that  makes  their
    relationship with the sponsor fall into the  category  of  family  life
    deserving of protection under Article 8. I was told that the appellants
    lived with their youngest unmarried  daughter  aged  14.  This  is  not
    however borne out by the evidence. The ECO noted in  his  refusal  that
    their only dependent child was an adult and it may be seen from the VAF
    (Part 4, 45-52) that there is reference to one dependent  child  living
    with them. This child is named as Umair Ahmad Khan  born  on  20  April
    1991. Plainly he is not a 14  year  old  female.   Further,  given  the
    sponsor's evidence that his brother was shortly moving to  Karachi  for
    work, it would appear that the appellants would be left alone following
    his departure.

30. I was told that the appellants had made their  applications  to  attend
    the wedding of the sponsor and that to stop them from being allowed  to
    do so was a breach  of  their  human  rights.  However,  the  sponsor's
    evidence about his re-marriage was inconsistent.  He  initially  stated
    that his wedding date was set for January 2015 and that this  date  had
    been arranged in December 2013 which was  some  six  months  after  his
    parents had made their applications. This was  then  changed  in  cross
    examination and the sponsor said that he meant that the initial wedding
    date was to have been in  December  2013.  However,  I  note  that  the
    appellants sought to travel in July 2013 and declared they would stay a
    month. The sponsor's evidence that the  application  was  primarily  so
    that his parents could attend his wedding is clearly not  supported  by
    the evidence as they would have been long gone  before  the  set  date.
    There is no suggestion that any earlier date was planned and cancelled.
     In any event, the prospect of a wedding was never mentioned until  the
    sponsor's November 2014 witness statement. His explanation that he  did
    not want "strangers" to know about this is bizarre. Had this  been  the
    primary reason for the intended visit, one would have expected  him  to
    disclose the information much earlier.

31. It is not clear on what basis the sponsor came  to  live  here  but  he
    chose to move away from his parents and to make  a  separate  life  for
    himself in the UK. He has a daughter and he  intends  to  re-marry  her
    mother. His family life is with them. Whilst he still of course  has  a
    relationship with his parents and they with him, I  have  not  seen  or
    heard anything to indicate that the relationship is anything  over  and
    beyond what one would expect between adult children and their  parents.
    The sponsor visits them quite regularly. He can continue to do  so  and
    he can take his daughter to Pakistan to meet them and the rest  of  the
    family. The appellants can of course make a fresh application for entry
    clearance. Their  applications  were  refused  because  of  a  lack  of
    adequate documentary  evidence  and  question  marks  over  substantial
    deposits not in accordance with the declared income. These are  matters
    which are easily resolvable with the right  evidence.  Their  past  two
    visits would be matters in their favour and there is nothing to suggest
    that all future applications would be refused as the sponsor maintains.
    Plainly matters have to be assessed as at the date of the decision. The
    previous visits had been made several years earlier  and  it  would  be
    ridiculous to suggest that the situation could not have changed  since.



32. In conclusion, therefore, and applying the lower standard, I find  that
    the appellants have failed to show that they have established family or
    private life with the sponsor that is deserving of protection under the
    ECHR. Whilst he helps them with money, they have an income of their own
    and have a large family in Pakistan. They have their own  property  and
    it is not suggested that they depend on the sponsor in  any  particular
    way. The sponsor's claim to provide "moral support" to his  parents  is
    unparticularised  and  takes  matters  no  further.  There   being   no
    family/private life, it follows that there can be no interference  with
    it which  would  breach  the  appellants'  human  rights.  The  refusal
    essential maintains the status quo. The appellants can continue to  see
    the sponsor when he visits them and they  have  the  option  of  making
    fresh applications to visit him with the appropriate evidence.

Decision

33. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and the determination is set
    aside. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeals  on  human  rights
    grounds. There is no jurisdiction for the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
    appeals under paragraph 41.

Anonymity

34. I see no basis for making an anonymity order.



Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?
    11 December 2014
