
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Numbers:      VA/16196/2013
     VA/16193/2013
     VA/16195/2013
     VA/16195/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |On 10th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                  abu sayem
                                Md ayas miah
                              syeda asia begum

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Baker, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior, Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The hearing  before  me  on  19th  August  proceeded  on  the  mistaken
    assumption  that  the  grant  of  permission  extended  to  all   three
    Appellants of these linked appeals, whereas, in fact, only Mr Abu Sayem
    was granted permission.  For that reason I had no jurisdiction to  make
    any decision in respect of the dismissed  appeals  of  Mrs  Syeda  Asia
    Begum or Mr MD Ayas Miah, and accordingly my extempore decision, so far
    as it relates to their cases, is set aside for procedural irregularity,
    with reference to Rule 43 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Accordingly  the  decisions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing their appeals stand.

 2. Mr Abu Sayem a Bangladeshi national born on 25 December  1995  appeals,
    with  permission,  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Fox,
    promulgated on 19th May 2014, in which  he  dismissed  the  Appellants'
    appeal against the refusal of his application for entry clearance as  a
    visitor. In the  first  instance  the  judge  found  that  because  the
    Appellant had not established he was related as  claimed,  i.e.   as  a
    full blood brother to the sponsor, he had not established  a  right  of
    appeal on the grounds argued in the notice of appeal, and, secondly and
    in the alternative, that for the same  reasons  he  had  dismissed  the
    parents appeal, namely the failure to establish they met the  financial
    provisions because of a failure to  establish  their  circumstances  in
    Bangladesh, the appeal could not succeed in any event.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal assert that:

      i) the issue of blood relationship was not before the judge,

     ii) the  documentary  evidence  before  the  judge  was  sufficient  to
         establish that the Appellant was related as claimed,

    iii) that the financial position of the parents was established.

 4. Permission was granted on the sole ground that it was arguable that the
    First-tier  tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  adequately  explain   his
    conclusions about the   relationship, which  underpinned  the  decision
    that the Appellant had no right of appeal.

 5. I am satisfied that the decision reveals no material error.  The  judge
    sets out the basis of the dispute: namely  the  implausibility  of  the
    claimed relationship because, on  the  asserted  dates  of  birth,  the
    mother would have given birth to the Appellant at the age of 50.    The
    judge finds that the respondent's doubts are reasonable, so  that  they
    require an answer.  At paragraphs 8, 15 and 16,  the  judge  notes  the
    documentation provided in support of the claimed relationship: namely a
    photocopy of a late registered (May 2010) birth certificate  issued  in
    May 2014, a copy of a letter from the local council dated 04 May  2014,
    a copy letter from his school,  and  copies  of  two  secondary  school
    certificates for 2011  and  2012.  It  is  for  the  judge  having  the
    opportunity of hearing and seeing the evidence to make their assessment
    of the factual matters in dispute. The judge  correctly  self  directed
    that the burden was on the Appellant, and the standard was that of  the
    balance of probabilities. The judge noted that the documentary evidence
    was all photocopies, and that they were all dated  significantly  after
    the ECM raised the issue on the 15 April 2014, and were only  submitted
    at the hearing. The judge found in the round that the evidence was  not
    sufficient to establish the family relationship claimed.  The  evidence
    submitted cannot be described as being determinative in  nature.    The
    judge's decision is not perverse in the context of  the  evidence.  For
    those reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  of  challenging  the
    findings on the issue of the relationship have not been made  out.   In
    any  event  the  Judge  finds  that  even  if  the  relationship   were
    established, the appeal would fail for the  same  reasons  the  parents
    appeals fell to  be  dismissed.  Permission  to  appeal  against  those
    grounds has not been granted.

 6. In short the decision of the judge dismissing Mr Abu Sayem's appeal for
    lack of jurisdiction, and  alternatively  on  the  merits,  reveals  no
    material error of law requiring it to be set aside,  and  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal stands.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier tribunal reveals no  material  error  of
    law requiring it to be set aside, and it stands.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

