
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17550/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2015                            |10 February 2015              |
|Oral judgment                                 |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DILWARA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative, Universal
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beckford following a hearing on  8  September
    2014.  Mrs Dilwara Begum had sought entry clearance  as  a  visitor  to
    visit her husband who is present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   She  was
    refused entry clearance because the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that she was a genuine visitor who intended to leave  the  UK
    at the end of her visit.   She had previously made an  application  for
    settlement which had been refused in 2011.   Her husband has  lived  in
    the UK since 1971.  He suffered a heart attack in 2012 and is suffering
    from continued ill health.  But he has visited  Bangladesh   since  the
    heart attack.

2.   The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that although the judge gave reasons for accepting that Dilwara Begum's
    daughter intends to leave the UK at the end of her  visit  because  she
    had what were described as demanding family ties, the judge was  silent
    on the first appellant's intentions or anything that might  act  as  an
    incentive for such an intention.  There is reference in the grounds  to
    the judge's findings in paragraph 36 that "I have  hesitantly  come  to
    the conclusion that the appellants have satisfied the burden  of  proof
    and that these appeals should succeed".

4.   The Entry Clearance Officer asserts that the judge has failed  to  give
    any reasons as to why he  finds  that  the  first  appellant  i.e.  Mrs
    Dilwara Begum is a genuine visitor who intends to leave the UK  at  the
    end of her visit, particularly in the light of  her  failed  settlement
    application.

5.   Permission was granted on the grounds

         "The judge's reasoning is indeed inadequate  -  his  conclusion  at
         paragraph 36 does not mention the first appellant at all.  There is
         no attempt logically to  reconcile  the  conclusion  that  she  had
         satisfied the  burden  of  proof  with  his  findings  in  the  two
         preceding paragraphs that appears adverse to her credibility.


         There is therefore an  arguable  error  of  law  disclosed  by  the
         application."

6.   The conclusions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  are  set  out  in
    paragraphs 32 - 37.  He starts by  referring  to  an  earlier  decision
    which settles previous disputes as to the relationship between  Dilwara
    Begum and Mr Anwar Ali.  He  finds  as  fact  that  Dilwara  Begum  has
    discharged the burden of proof as regards maintenance and accommodation
    and the cost of the journeys to and from the UK.   He  identifies  that
    the sole issue before him is the intention of Dilwara Begum  to  return
    to her home at the end of her proposed short stay.

7.   He sets out in paragraph 33 that  there  are  a  number  of  favourable
    indications upon which the appellants can rely.  Firstly that there  is
    no reason to think that the appellants or  the  sponsor   are  anything
    other than law abiding (and the  case  of  the  sponsor  hard  working)
    citizens of their respective countries.  There is  no  suggestion  that
    they have breached immigration law. They have made this application  in
    a perfectly proper way and have put before the  Tribunal  a  bundle  of
    evidence.

8.   The judge accepts that Mr  Anwar  Ali  is  indeed  suffering  from  ill
    health and he notes that Mr Anwar Ali's last visit  to  Bangladesh  was
    after he had had a heart attack in  2012.   He  says  that  he  is  not
    entirely persuaded that he could not visit Bangladesh despite  his  ill
    health.

9.   It is incorrect for the Entry Clearance Officer to  assert  that  there
    is no reference by the judge to Dilwara Begum.  In paragraphs 32 and 33
    the judge refers specifically to the appellants in the plural, which is
    both Dilwara Begum and her daughter who was successful in the appeal.

10.  In paragraph 34 the First-tier Tribunal Judge identifies  issues  which
    can be categorised as adverse to Dilwara Begum.  Firstly, that the  way
    in which the relationship  between  Mr  Anwar  Ali  and  his  wife  has
    developed over the years is mysterious.  Secondly, that the  answer  to
    the Entry Clearance Manager's observation that he  could  not  see  any
    evidence in Mr Anwar Ali's travel to Bangladesh between 1994  and  2012
    had not been forthcoming.  He  also  refers  to  there  having  been  a
    previous application by Dilwara Begum to come to settle in the  UK  and
    he notes that that previous application suggests that Dilwara Begum has
    "indeed an interest in  coming  to  live  in  the  UK  and  raised  the
    possibility that  they may still have such an interest".

11.  The judge at  the  same  time  quite  properly  says   "It  should  not
    automatically follow from such  a  failed  application  that  a  person
    cannot later successfully apply to make  a  family  visit  where  there
    appears to be a proper justification."

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge goes on to  then  recognise  that  it  is
    difficult to reconcile and resolve those competing strands.  He  states
    that if he had been provided with a better explanation of the  apparent
    lack of contact the resolution of the tensions might have been  easier.

13.  However in paragraph 36 he says:

         "Looking at the circumstances  the  two  appellants  including  the
         evidence which I have  accepted  that  the  younger  appellant  has
         demanding family ties in Bangladesh, I have hesitantly come to  the
         conclusion that the appellants have satisfied the burden  of  proof
         and that these appeals should succeed."

14.  The judge has clearly weighed the competing  isues.   He  set  out  the
    evidence and findings in  Dilwara's  favour.   He  has  identified  the
    issues that are adverse to her.  There is  nothing else that  has  been
    identified that should have gone in the  balance  that  the  judge  has
    failed to consider.  It is a difficult case. There are no other reasons
    that he could  have given.  He has taken   account  of  the  burden  of
    proof  and  he  quite  rightly  acknowledges  that  it  is  a  hesitant
    conclusion. The fact that it is a hesitant conclusion does  not  render
    it any less of a conclusion; there is no allegation or assertion by the
    Entry Clearance Officer that the judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct
    standard or burden of proof.  It is difficult to understand what  other
    reasons he could   have  given  other  than  perhaps  to  set  out  his
    paragraph 36 as two separate paragraphs, the result of which would have
    been  the same.

15.  Miss Holmes very properly acknowledged that it would  be  difficult  to
    say that  the  decision  is  perverse  and  confirmed  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer did not seek to rely on that ground of appeal.

16.  Although many judges would not have reached this conclusion,  and  many
    judges would have separated out the last paragraph of the determination
    in order to make it clearer that he had weighed  everything  separately
    for each appellant, it is sufficiently plain when the determination  is
    read as a whole, particularly when paragraphs 33 to 36 are  read,  that
    the judge has  very  properly  identified,  set  out  and  weighed  the
    evidence and information before him and has reached a  conclusion  that
    was open to him.

17.  I therefore dismiss the appeal of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Conclusion

There is no error of law in the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
such that the decision is set side to be re-made.

The appeal is  dismissed;  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 5 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
