
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17863/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th November 2014                            |On 2nd December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                SAIRA YOUSAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene, of Counsel instructed by Malik Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this appeal the Secretary of State becomes the respondent.  However,
    for the avoidance of confusion I shall continue to refer to the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 26th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal De  Haney  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cockrill who  allowed  the  appeal  on
    substantive grounds against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    leave to enter as a family visitor in accordance with the provisions of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. When granting permission Judge De  Haney  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    application asserted that from 25th June 2013 the right of  appeal  for
    prospective  family  visitors  was  limited  by  Section  88A  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  An appeal could only  be
    brought on the grounds set out in Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the  2002
    Act namely on human rights and race relations grounds.

 4. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me Mr Anyene submitted that
    the judge was not wrong to apply himself to the substantive issues  the
    respondent  had  got  wrong  in  the  refusal   notice   because   that
    incorporated consideration of human rights matters.

 5. Mr Tufan confirmed that  the  respondent  relied  on  the  grounds  and
    submitted that the  appeal  could  only  proceed  by  consideration  of
    Article 8 issues and not the issues which formed the basis for  refusal
    relating to finances and the genuineness of the visit  covered  by  the
    refusal decision of 22nd August 2013.

 6. After considering the matter for a few moments  I  indicated  that  the
    determination showed an error on a point of law for the reasons which I
    now give.

 7. Although the grounds of appeal before the First-tier judge raised human
    rights (paragraph 12) the determination does not show  that  the  judge
    considered any such issues, particularly those which might have  arisen
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Human Rights Convention.   Section  88A  of
    the 2002 Act removed the right of appeal for persons visiting specified
    family members save on human rights and race relations  grounds.   Such
    an appeal cannot be made against the substantive basis of the  refusal.
    However, the judge gives reasons for allowing the appeal on  the  basis
    that the conclusions in the refusal  about  finance  and  intention  to
    return were wrong.  Thus, the judge was in  error  in  considering  the
    matters in relation to which he had no jurisdiction and in  failing  to
    deal with the human rights claim which had been raised in  the  grounds
    of appeal.  The errors are such that the determination  should  be  re-
    made.

Re-making the Determination

 8. Mr Anyene submitted that  the  appellant  has  three  sisters  left  in
    Pakistan where she has a stable life but she  was  coming  to  see  her
    other sister for the first time since the latter had come to the United
    Kingdom.  He argued that they had more than mere emotional ties and the
    visit was to foster that relationship between the adult  siblings.   As
    the appellant's mother was elderly her sister in the United Kingdom had
    taken on a greater importance in the family.

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that the Rules should be regarded as a complete code
    and there were no provisions in them which would meet  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  There were no compelling  circumstances  to  allow  for
    consideration of human rights issues outside the Rules.  In  particular
    he argued that it had not been shown that there was family life between
    the appellant and her sister on the basis set out  in  Kugathas  [2003]
    INLR 170 which requiredt that there had to be more than mere  emotional
    ties between the parties.  He also  stated  that  a  fresh  application
    could be made for the visit in order to overcome the problems raised in
    the refusal.

10. In conclusion, Mr Anyene contended that the appellant may  be  deprived
    of seeing a relative who was important to her and the judge  had  found
    that the conclusions of the Entry Clearance Officer were wrong  and  so
    the decision should not have been refused in the first place.

Decision and Reasons

11. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the
    standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.

12. Apart from a brief reference in the determination to the  circumstances
    of the appellant's sister in the United Kingdom and the fact  that  the
    appellant wished to visit her sister because she "simply wanted to  see
    her family in  this  country",  neither  Mr  Anyene's  submissions  nor
    information already put before the  First-tier  Tribunal  leads  me  to
    conclude that the appellant and her sponsor have a  relationship  which
    goes beyond emotional ties.

13. There is nothing to suggest a relationship of dependency.  Indeed,  the
    appellant has been described as "financially secure in Pakistan".   The
    grounds of appeal suggest that the appellant is  supported  financially
    by the sponsor on  an  "occasional  basis"  but  this  contradicts  the
    suggestion that she is financially independent in Pakistan.  I  am  not
    satisfied that the relationship between the appellant and  her  sponsor
    is anymore than that of adult siblings with emotional  ties.   Thus,  I
    conclude there is no family life between appellant and sponsor  and  it
    follows that the human rights claim can get no further than  the  first
    stage of the five tests set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   On  this
    basis I dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal made an error on  a  point  of  law  such  that  the
determination should be re-made.  I re-make the determination by  dismissing
it on human rights grounds.



Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested nor is it appropriate in this case.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I am unable to make a fees award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

