
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17524/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2014                             |On 19th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MRs KHIN PHONE swe
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the determination  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Gillespie following consideration of this appeal on
    papers resulting in a determination promulgated on 28 May 2014.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Burma/Myanmar  who  made  application  to
    visit her brother-in-law and sponsor Mr Hla Pe, her daughter Mrs  Nilar
    Khin Bo, her daughter's husband and other family members.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the appellant's  application  in  a
    decision dated 11 September 2013.  He  did  so  relying  on  paragraphs
    41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 4. The appellant appealed that decision.  It was considered by  the  judge
    who  found,  in  allowing  the  appeal,  at   paragraph   19   of   his
    determination, that in all the circumstances it was more probable  than
    not that the appellant intended to make a genuine family visit and will
    return to her home country thereafter.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal relying on Section 52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013 which abolished the full right of  appeal  in
    family visitor visa cases.  Applications submitted on or after 25  June
    2013 are affected and so far as they are  concerned  a  full  right  of
    appeal against entry clearance as a family visitor  has  been  removed.
    Entry clearance refusal decisions attract residual rights of appeal  on
    race discrimination and human rights grounds.

 6. Although there was no appearance on behalf of the appellant at  today's
    hearing I  took  account  of  a  letter  sent  in  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors Messrs Cahill De Fonseka dated 15 July  2014.   It  requests
    the appeal to be considered once more on papers and that  the  decision
    of the Immigration Judge to allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules be set aside, but that the findings of fact be preserved and  the
    appeal allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 7. Mr Tufan relied on the grounds put forward  in  seeking  permission  to
    appeal and contended that the judge failed  to  make  any  findings  in
    relation to either race discrimination or human rights grounds.  Beyond
    that the judge materially  erred  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and in so doing had gone outwith his jurisdiction.

 8. I find that to be the position and  conclude  that  the  judge  made  a
    material misdirection of law in purporting to  deal  with  this  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and in particular under paragraph 41.

 9. Race relations is not an issue in this appeal.

10. However, I note that in her original grounds of  appeal  the  appellant
    asserted that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her
    application  as  a  family  visitor  constituted   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's right to family life.

11. In their letter of 14 July 2014 her solicitors rely on the authority of
    Razgar, R (on the Application of) v SSHD [2004] 2 AC 368 and argue that
    in circumstances  where  the  appellant's  daughter  is  married  to  a
    recognised refugee the refusal constitutes an  interference  with  both
    her and her family's right to a family life.  It is  not  possible  for
    the appellant's daughter, son-in-law and granddaughter to visit her  in
    Burma although it is acknowledged that it is possible for them to  meet
    up in  a  nearby  country.   Article  8  is  engaged  and  in  all  the
    circumstances   the   Entry   Clearance   Officer's   decision   is   a
    disproportionate response.

12. Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights states:

         "1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

13. In looking at Article 8 I have considered the decision of the House  of
    Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  The House of Lords gave guidance
    that in assessing proportionality there was  no  legal  test  of  truly
    exceptional circumstances, reaffirmed the analysis they  had  given  in
    Razgar, R (on the Application of)  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  also
    reaffirmed  the  importance  of  continuing  reliance  on   established
    Strasbourg jurisprudence relating to Article 8.  Lord Bingham's step by
    step approach in Razgar continues to  apply  in  all  expulsion  cases.
    Firstly, it is necessary to establish whether there  is  a  private  or
    family life with which removal would interfere and then Lord  Bingham's
    five questions, the step by step approach, should thereafter serve as a
    framework for deciding such cases.

14. I remind myself that the mere existence of a family relationship  or  a
    private life is not sufficient for the applicability of  Article  8(2).
    Much more is needed.  At paragraph 20 of Lord Bingham's judgment in the
    case of Huang he said this:

         "In an Article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by Article 8.  If the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide.  It is not necessary that the appellate immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality."

15. I must consider Lord Bingham's step by step approach and in so doing  I
    recognise that at all stages of the Article 8 assessment when  deciding
    whether there is a family or private life, when  deciding  whether  any
    existing family or private life  is  the  subject  of  an  interference
    having  grave  consequences  and  when  deciding   whether   any   such
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved, the approach  is  to  take  into  account  a  wide  range  of
    circumstances including the appellant's previous  family  and  personal
    circumstances and the likely developments in the future.

16. In Razgar Lord Bingham gave the following guidance:

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be likely  to
         fare  before  an  adjudicator,  as  the  tribunal  responsible  for
         deciding the appeal if there were an appeal.  This means  that  the
         reviewing court must ask itself  essentially  the  questions  which
         would have to be answered by  an  adjudicator.   In  a  case  where
         removal is resisted in reliance on Article 8, these  questions  are
         likely to be:

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

17. I have had regard to all the written evidence and  submissions  but  do
    not find that I can allow this appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.   It
    is understandable that the appellant may wish to visit  family  members
    in the United Kingdom.  However,  I  find  that  the  relationship  the
    appellant has with her family members in the United  Kingdom  does  not
    constitute family life as envisaged by Article 8.  As I  say  the  mere
    existence  of  a  family  relationship  is  not  sufficient   for   the
    applicability of Article 8(2).  There is no evidence  that  the  family
    life there is cannot carry on as it has before and the appellant's  own
    solicitors acknowledge the family has the prospect  of  meeting  up  in
    other nearby countries to Burma/Myanmar.  Whilst the decision may be an
    interference with the exercise of the appellant's right to family  life
    it does not have consequences of such gravity as potentially to  engage
    the operation of Article 8.   Having concluded that the answer here  to
    the second of Lord Bingham's questions is a negative one  there  is  no
    need for me to proceed further.

18. I do not find that it has been established on  the  evidence  that  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer is unlawful under Section 6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998 and accordingly I will dismiss the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

Summary

19. For the reasons detailed above the judge erred in allowing this  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

20. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

21. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it  on  human  rights
    grounds.

22. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 19 August 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appellant's appeal I do not consider it  appropriate
to make a fee award in this appeal.






Signed                                  Date 19 August 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
