
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17492/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 1 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            Muhammad Umar Farooq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a 39 year old citizen of  Pakistan,  has  appealed  with
    permission against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kempton
    (promulgated on 30 April 2014) who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    refusal to grant him entry clearance  for  the  purposes  of  a  family
    visit.  Judge Kempton decided the appeal on the papers and  without  an
    oral hearing  at  the  request  of  the  appellant.   He  thus  had  no
    opportunity to test  the  evidence  or  hear  oral  evidence  from  the
    sponsor, the appellant's brother, who lives in London.

2.   The Entry Clearance Officer had refused  the  application  on  17  July
    2013 because he was not  satisfied  with  the  financial  documentation
    submitted by the appellant. He was not satisfied, on the evidence, that
    there would be adequate maintenance and accommodation for him in the UK
    or that he would be able to meet the cost of his  return  journey.   In
    general he was not satisfied that the appellant was  genuinely  seeking
    entry for the limited period of 14 days, as stated in the  application,
    or that he would leave the United Kingdom at the end of his visit.

3.   In his determination, Judge Kempton, at [9] -[11], set out his  reasons
    for dismissing the appeal.  Although the  appellant  claims  to  be  in
    partnership with another individual it was noted that the appellant was
    not a signatory on the business bank account,  there  was  no  evidence
    that  other  funds  could  be  easily  liquidated  if  necessary   and,
    generally, the financial evidence  was  such  that  the  judge  had  no
    confidence that they addressed the reasons for  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had not "properly  taken  into  account  the  tenor  and
    weight of the available evidence".  That was the essential issue raised
    in the application for permission to appeal.

5.   At the hearing before me, although  notice  of  the  hearing  had  been
    given both to the appellant and to his London based sponsor, there  was
    no attendance or representation on behalf of the appellant.  Mr  Deller
    for the respondent submitted that there was no  error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination and  that  the  determination
    should stand.

6.   I agree.  It was entirely a matter for the appellant  and  the  sponsor
    as to whether or not the original  appeal  and  the  appeal  before  me
    should, in effect, be dealt with on the papers without  the  attendance
    of the sponsor.  It may be that oral evidence from  the  sponsor  would
    have assisted but, having examined all the  documentary  evidence  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was entitled to reach the decision that he made and  for
    the reasons that he gave.  I am satisfied that there was  no  error  of
    law in his determination such that it should be set aside.

Decision

There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction was requested and none is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
31 July 2014
