
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers: Va/17835/2013
           VA/17836/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London           |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 October 2015                     |            On 2 November 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ANKARA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MORIS GELASHVILI
                            MISS NATIA GELASHVILI
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Tom Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:   Mr Boris Gelashvili (Sponsor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the ECO) appeals against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuell)
    allowing the respondents' appeals against a decision taken on 21 August
    2013 to refuse entry clearance as family visitors.



Introduction

 3. The respondents are citizens of Georgia, brother and sister, born there
    in 1997 and  1994.  They  applied  to  visit  their  father,  Mr  Boris
    Gelashvili ("the sponsor"), who is lawfully resident in the UK  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national.

 4. The ECO accepted the respondents' identity and nationality but  doubted
    their account as to how they were supported in Georgia by their  mother
    and thus how their studies would continue. The ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that the respondents were genuinely seeking entry to the UK as visitors
    or that they intended to leave the UK at the end of  their  visit.  The
    applications were refused and the  appeal  was  reviewed  by  an  entry
    clearance manager on 14 January 2014 who maintained the decision.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  sponsor
    attended an oral hearing at Richmond on 1  June  2015.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the respondents met the requirements  of  paragraph
    41 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and that  the  basis  of  the
    refusal was unfounded. The only right of appeal was  under  Article  8.
    The judge found that there was family life between the sponsor and  the
    respondents. The respondents remained dependents and under the  control
    of their parents. It was entirely reasonable that the sponsor wished to
    receive the children in his own home and to introduce them to his  life
    in the UK. The refusal constituted an interference with  the  sponsor's
    right to family life. The ECOs decisions were incorrect and that had  a
    major bearing on  proportionality.  There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    respondents were likely to breach their visa  conditions  or  otherwise
    infringe UK law if they were permitted to visit  the  UK.  The  appeals
    were allowed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because the proportionality assessment was inadequate.  The  judge  did
    not find any reasons why the sponsor could not visit the respondents in
    Georgia. The decision did not interfere with family  life  between  the
    sponsor and the respondents.

 7. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McClure on 31 July 2015. It was arguable that  the  decision  did
    not  interfere  with  family  life,  rather  the  insistence   of   the
    respondents that they be able to exercise family life by way of a visit
    to the UK. It was also  arguable  that  where  the  sponsor  can  visit
    Georgia, such means that the decisions are proportionately justified.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9.  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the   proportionality   assessment   was
    inadequate. Paragraph 14 of the decision refers to Mostafa  (Article  8
    in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 {IAC)  and  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 262 (IAC) but the fact  that  the  sponsor  does
    visit Georgia was not included in the proportionality assessment. Natia
    was 18 as at the date of application on 7 August 2013. There is nothing
    to prevent the  respondents  from  re-applying  and  relying  upon  the
    judge's finding that the requirements of the Rules are met. There is no
    dispute as to the facts but the  decision  should  be  remade  and  the
    appeals dismissed.

10. The sponsor submitted that he has tried to obtain visit visas  for  the
    children for the last  five  years.  Natia  is  very  good  at  English
    language. The children want to visit the UK. The sponsor wants to bring
    them here for two weeks. They have a very big interest in the UK.

11. I have considered Mostafa and Adjei. The first question to be addressed
    in an appeal against refusal to grant  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor
    where only human rights grounds are available is whether Article  8  of
    ECHR is engaged at all. If it is not, which will  not  infrequently  be
    the case; the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment
    of the decision of the ECO under the Rules and should  not  do  so.  If
    Article 8 is engaged then the Tribunal may need to look at  the  extent
    to which the claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules because that  may  inform  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise that most follow. As compliance with paragraph 41 of the Rules
    is not a ground of appeal to be decided by the Tribunal,  any  findings
    concerning that will carry little  weight,  especially  if  based  upon
    arguments advanced only by the appellant. If the appellant were to make
    fresh application for entry clearance then the ECO will,  if  requested
    to do so, have regard to the assessment carried out by  the  judge  but
    will not be bound by those findings to  treat  the  appellant  who,  at
    least at the date of  the  appeal  hearing,  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 41 of the Rules.

12. Mostafa  is  not  authority  for  the  proposition  that,  despite  the
    legitimate legislative intention to remove a right  of  appeal  against
    adverse entry clearance applications in visit cases on the grounds that
    the ECO was wrong to find the claimant did not meet the requirements of
    the Rules, the Tribunal can  nonetheless  continue  to  determine  such
    issues. The point being made in Mostafa at paragraph 24 is simply  that
    where it is established that Article 8 is  in  fact  engaged,  it  will
    still be necessary to assess whether the claimant meets  the  substance
    of the Rules. Put another way, a person who satisfies the Tribunal that
    he does meet the requirements of paragraph 41 of  the  Rules  does  not
    succeed on that account. He  still  has  to  demonstrate  that  refusal
    represents an unlawful infringement of rights protected by  Article  8.
    For a person who does not satisfy the requirements of paragraph  41  to
    succeed in an appeal there would  have  to  be  cogent  and  compelling
    reasons demanding that he should succeed.

13. The Upper Tribunal in Mostafa made it clear that it was dealing with  a
    very narrow range of claimants. In practical terms, that is  likely  to
    be limited to cases where the relationship is that of husband and  wife
    or other close life partners or a parent and minor child and even  then
    it will not necessarily be extended to cases where,  for  example,  the
    proposed visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to  the
    time that the people involved spend together. It is a question of  fact
    in each case whether relationships  between  adult  relatives  disclose
    sufficiently strong ties such as to fall within the scope of Article 8.
    There can be family life between adults  but  the  issue  will  be  how
    dependent the older relative is upon the younger ones and whether  this
    dependency represents more than normal emotional ties. From Ghising and
    others [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), adults will  need  to  be  valuing  and
    depending on  each  other  for  mutual  support  and  affection.  I  am
    satisfied  that  this  case  falls  within  the  "very  narrow   range"
    identified in the recent case law, given the  fact  that  Moris  was  a
    child as at the date of  decision  and  both  respondents  were  wholly
    dependent upon their parents.

14. In this case, the ECO does  not  dispute  that  there  is  family  life
    between the respondents and the sponsor. I find that there  is  nothing
    in the case law to the effect that visit visa  appeals  cannot  succeed
    under Article 8 if the sponsor  can  visit  the  country  where  family
    members reside. The judge correctly used his findings on the  Rules  to
    inform the proportionality balancing exercise. This case was previously
    before the Upper Tribunal on 25 July 2014 when  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Bruce stated at paragraph 8 of the decision that,  "If  the  appellants
    could demonstrate that they  were  genuine  visitors  who  intended  to
    return to Georgia after three weeks, the (ECO) could hardly demonstrate
    that their exclusion was somehow necessary for the public interest".  I
    find that the decision of the judge  was  wholly  consistent  with  the
    approach previously adopted by the Upper Tribunal in this case.

15. Whilst the judge did not explicitly refer to the  sponsor's  visits  to
    Georgia it is evident that the judge was aware  of  those  visits.  The
    proposed visits to the UK were clearly not based upon  a  whim  because
    the application process has been ongoing since at least 2013. There  is
    no evidence that the visits will not add significantly to the time that
    the respondents  and  appellants  spend  together,  particularly  if  a
    pattern of visits can be established. No error of law arises  from  the
    finding that the ECOs decision amounts to a substantial interference in
    the sponsor's right to family life  with  the  respondents.  The  judge
    correctly took into account the  legitimate  wish  of  the  sponsor  to
    receive the respondents in his home and to introduce them to  his  life
    in the UK. I further find that no material error of law arises from the
    proportionality assessment.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondents'
    appeals under Article 8 did not involve the making of a material  error
    of law and its decision stands.

Decision

17. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the ECO.

[pic]

Signed                          Date   30 October 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


