
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: va/17133/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2014                             |On 5 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer-Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  SAKINA BI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented.  Sponsor attends.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("ECO").  However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 18 November  1959.   She
    made an application for entry clearance as a visitor, that  application
    having a date of 27 June 2013 on  the  visa  application  form  ("VAF")
    itself but recorded as having been received by the respondent on 3 July
    2013.  For the purposes of this appeal the actual date is not material.



 3. In a decision dated 15 July 2013 the ECO refused the application.   The
    basis of the refusal was  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    evidence of support that she is  said  normally  to  receive  from  her
    husband, and her son in the UK.  It was also  said  that  she  had  not
    provided evidence as to her husband's whereabouts,  employment,  income
    or his ability to support her.  The ECO concluded  that  the  appellant
    had not established that her personal and  financial  circumstances  in
    Pakistan are as she had made them out to be  and  had  provided  little
    evidence of any social or economic ties to Pakistan, or in relation  to
    any close family she may have there.  It was concluded that  there  was
    little to encourage the appellant to leave Pakistan at the end  of  the
    period of the visit to the UK.  Thus, it was decided that she  had  not
    established that she was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor to the UK
    or that she intended to leave the UK at the end of the visit.

 4. Her appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Ghaffar on 16 June 2014.  At that hearing, the sponsor Mr Hussain Abid,
    the appellant's son, attended and gave evidence.

 5. Judge Ghaffar made  findings  of  fact  in  favour  of  the  appellant,
    concluding that the appellant lived in Pakistan  with  her  family,  is
    supported by her sons and is in receipt of a pension.   Notwithstanding
    what appeared on the Visa Application Form in terms  of  the  appellant
    having stated that her husband lived with her, he accepted that he  had
    in fact passed away and that the appellant was in receipt of a  pension
    from him.  He accepted the appellant's explanation as to the completion
    of that form.  He made various other findings and  ultimately  came  to
    the conclusion that the appellant had established that  she  intends  a
    family visit to the UK and that she would return  at  the  end  of  the
    period of the visit.

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against the  judge's
    decision on the basis that, in fact, the appellant's  right  of  appeal
    was limited to race discrimination and human rights grounds.  This,  it
    was contended, is the effect of section 52 of the Crime and Courts  Act
    2013 ("the Crime and Courts Act").  Permission to appeal was granted on
    that basis by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  appellant  was  not
    legally represented, and was not represented at the hearing before  me.
    There was no interpreter at the hearing before me.  By coincidence, the
    day prior  to  the  hearing  before  me  I  made  a  decision  that  no
    interpreter was required, given that the issue was one of  law  and  it
    was not expected that any oral evidence would be given.  In the  event,
    at the hearing before me there was a friend of the sponsor who attended
    and assisted the sponsor to understand the proceedings.   Nevertheless,
    I offered the sponsor the opportunity of having the  hearing  adjourned
    so that he could have the benefit of  a  court  appointed  interpreter.
    The sponsor however, was clear that he wanted the hearing to proceed.

 8. At the end of the hearing I informed the sponsor  that  my  provisional
    view was that the First-tier Judge had made an error in law and that it
    was likely that I would change his decision and dismiss the appeal.  In
    more formal language, I have decided that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal does involve the making of an error on  a  point  of  law
    such as to require the decision to be set aside to be re-made.

 9. The point in issue is in fact a relatively straightforward one in legal
    terms. For present purposes, I have taken the date of  the  application
    for entry clearance as 27 June 2013. On 25 June 2013, section 52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013 came into force. It made  certain  amendments
    to the (amended) section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). The new, amended, section 88A  of  the  2002
    Act, from 25 June 2013, so far as material, now provides as follows:


           "88A Entry clearance


           (1) A person may not appeal under section 82(1) against  refusal
           of an application for entry clearance unless the application was
           made for the purpose of-


           (a) ...


           (b) entering as the  dependant  of  a  person  in  circumstances
           prescribed by regulations for the purpose of this subsection.
           ...
           (3) Subsection (1)-


           (a) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal on either or both
           of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and (c), and


           (b) is without prejudice to the effect of section 88 in relation
           to an appeal under  section   82(1)  against  refusal  of  entry
           clearance."

10. Section 88A(1)(a), which is deleted by virtue of the Crime  and  Courts
    Act, related to "visiting a person of a class or description prescribed
    by regulations". That, in effect, with the regulations that were  made,
    allowed for appeals in family visitor cases.

11. The meaning of "the bringing of an appeal on  either  or  both  of  the
    grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b) and (c)" in  section  88A(3)(a)
    above is that appeals on race discrimination or  human  rights  grounds
    may still be brought in an appeal against a refusal of entry clearance,
    even where it is not an appeal of  a  type  concerning  entering  as  a
    dependant (as set out in section 88A(1)(b) above).

12. The Crime and Courts Act 2013 (Commencement No.1 and  Transitional  and
    Saving Provision) Order 2013, (S.I. 2013  No.1042)  ("the  Commencement
    Order"), amongst other provisions of the Crime and Courts Act,  brought
    section 52 into force on  25  June  2013.   Article  4  of  that  Order
    provides that section 52 only  applies  to  an  application  for  entry
    clearance made on or after 25 June 2013.

13. This appeal is 'caught' by the amendment to the 2002 Act. The effect of
    the Crime and Courts Act and the Commencement Order is that the grounds
    of appeal in this case are limited to  race  discrimination  and  human
    rights grounds.

14. However, Judge Ghaffar purported to decide the appeal with reference to
    paragraph 41 of the immigration rules. Although no doubt the  amendment
    brought about by the Crime and Courts Act was not specifically  brought
    to his attention, the ECO's decision does in fact refer  to  a  limited
    right of appeal. (The question of whether there was a  period  of  time
    when by  legislative  oversight  the  race  discrimination  ground  was
    deleted from the 2002 Act does not need to be discussed here). The fact
    is, the First-tier judge had no jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appeal
    under the immigration rules.  In these circumstances,  I  am  satisfied
    that he erred in law and that that error of law requires  the  decision
    to be set aside.  The decision then requires  re-making  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, it not being appropriate to remit the matter.

15. Whilst it is, at least in general terms, apparent from the  grounds  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant does refer  to
    her "human rights", nothing specific is indicated in terms of  how  the
    decision would involve an interference with her human rights.

16. The only aspect of human rights that could be in play is the  right  to
    family life under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Private  life  rights  under
    Article 8 in these circumstances could not  conceivably  apply.   There
    was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to the effect  that  the
    appellant's relationship  with  her  son  in  the  UK,  who  was  born,
    according to the VAF, on 20 May 1979,  amounts  to  a  relationship  of
    anything other than a normal  relationship  between  parent  and  adult
    child.  There is nothing to indicate that there are  features  of  that
    relationship that extend beyond  normal  emotional  ties  between  such
    family members.  Similarly, there was no evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal, or indeed before me, to the effect  that  the  appellant  has
    family life with any person in the UK.  Her family life appears  to  be
    firmly rooted in Pakistan.

17. It is not necessary, or indeed appropriate, for  me  to  determine  the
    issue of whether the  appellant  does  genuinely  intend  a  visit  and
    intends to leave the UK at the end of the period of the visit.  In  any
    new application that will be a matter for the ECO to consider.

18. In the circumstances, considering the only conceivable ground of appeal
    that is available to the appellant, the appeal under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR is dismissed.

    Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside and the decision re-made, dismissing the appeal under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     10/10/14
