
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17183/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 December 2014                   |On 27 January 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

             THE PRESIDENT, THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Medhat Mohamed Ibrahem Mostafa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs S E Medhat El Sheikh, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. There is no need for any order restricting  publication  of  any  facts
    relating to this case and we make no order.

 2.  The  appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Entry  Clearance   Officer",   has
    permission to appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
    appeal  of  the  respondent,  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  against  a
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer on 5  September  2013  refusing
    him entry clearance to the United Kingdom for the purpose of  a  family
    visit.  He said that he wanted to visit  his  wife  who  is  a  British
    citizen ordinarily  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  claimant  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of HC 395. In short the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the claimant intended a  visit
    for the limited period stated by him or intended to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom at the end of the period of the visit.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision informed the claimant  that  his
    right of appeal was  limited  to  the  grounds  identified  at  Section
    84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  that  is
    to say "that the decision is unlawful under  Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights  Act  1998  ...  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
    Convention rights."

 4. Although the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly
    expressed disagreement with the Entry Clearance Officer's finding  that
    the claimant did not intend to return after the visit they additionally
    and unequivocally relied on Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights. This approach was echoed in the skeleton  argument  which
    also developed the suggestion in the grounds that the findings of  fact
    reflected  an  approach  that  was  contrary  to  policy.  The  closing
    paragraphs of the skeleton argument refer to the decision being "not in
    accordance to (sic) the Immigration Rules, namely paragraph 41, not  in
    accordance to (sic) the law and not in accordance with Article 8 of the
    ECHR."

 5. It is therefore slightly surprising that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeal "under the Immigration Rules" but made no finding on
    the ground raising Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
    ("ECHR").

 6. Predictably this was challenged by the Entry Clearance Officer who  was
    given permission to appeal by an Upper Tribunal Judge.  The grounds  of
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal point out that, with  effect  from  25
    June 2013, section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 amended  section
    88A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 so  that  there
    is no right of appeal against refusal of entry clearance  in  a  family
    visitor case  except  on  grounds  alleging  that  the  decision  shows
    unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998. This is wider than the limited grounds  identified  in
    the "Refusal of Entry Clearance" but nothing turns on this.

 7. The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds continue at paragraph 6:

         "Where there is a right of appeal on one of these grounds the First-
         tier Tribunal must only consider those grounds, it is not  open  to
         the First-tier Tribunal to consider  whether  the  decision  is  in
         accordance with the Immigration Rules or  otherwise  in  accordance
         with the law."

    We remind ourselves that section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  applies  and
    although the Tribunal can consider evidence that was not in  existence,
    or not  produced,  at  the  date  of  decision  it  can  only  consider
    additional evidence of "circumstances appertaining at the time  of  the
    decision".

 8. Notwithstanding the way his case was pleaded (see above) Mr Jarvis made
    it plain that it was not his case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    bound by the findings of fact made  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    Those findings could be challenged in an appeal which had to be decided
    on the evidence.  There were restrictions on  that  evidence,  in  this
    case restrictions limiting the evidence to matters in existence at  the
    time of the decision but there was no basis on which the Tribunal could
    make a decision except by evaluating the evidence.  If the evidence led
    the Tribunal to conclude that the claimant  did  in  fact  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules then that is what the Tribunal should decide.

 9. Here the First-tier Tribunal noted that the claimant  and  his  sponsor
    were married and further found that the claimant intended only a  short
    visit after which he would return to Egypt. Such a finding  should  not
    be made lightly in a case involving a husband and wife who  might  very
    often be expected to want to live together but here  the  claimant  had
    strong ties with Egypt  including  those  arising  from  his  being  in
    regular, rewarding work and his children living there. Additionally the
    sponsor had property in Egypt and had organised her  affairs  to  spend
    long periods of time there. Further, although there  have  indeed  been
    "widespread changes" in Egypt in recent  times,  as  contended  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, the evidence showed that this  claimant  lived
    safely  in  a  tourist  area  that  was  substantially  unaffected  and
    continued to attract tourists.

10. None of these findings was challenged in the grounds.  This was not  an
    oversight.  The findings were reasoned and made after hearing  evidence
    where both parties were represented. There is no basis for  considering
    them anything other than entirely reasonable conclusions based  on  the
    totality of the evidence.

11. Nevertheless the First-tier Tribunal had  no  basis  for  allowing  the
    appeal "under the Immigration Rules".  There was no  power  in  law  to
    entertain an appeal on those grounds. Out of an abundance of caution Mr
    Jarvis reminded us, following the decision in Virk & Ors v SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 652, that the parties cannot agree to the Tribunal  exercising
    a jurisdiction that has not been given it by Parliament.  The  contrary
    was not suggested and this is, of course, correct. Mr Jarvis  submitted
    that the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  was
    clearly wrong in law.

12. The claimant's wife, Mrs El Sheikh,  was  supported  by  a  friend  but
    neither of them claimed to be legally qualified.  She had taken  advice
    from the claimant's former representatives. She read out some  of  that
    advice to us but did not make any argument against the points  outlined
    above.

13. We are quite satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal was wholly wrong to
    allow the appeal in the way that it did and we set aside the  decision.
    It had no power to entertain a  ground  of  appeal  alleging  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules,  still  less
    to allow the appeal on that ground. It did have the power to consider a
    ground of appeal contending that the decision was incompatible with the
    claimant's convention rights but it neglected to consider  that  ground
    even though it was clearly raised.

14. This means that the original appeal by the claimant has to be resolved,
    including his reliance on human rights grounds, in a remaking exercise.

15. Mr Jarvis submitted that we should follow the approach outlined by  the
    House of Lords in the case of R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.
    While we are familiar with this decision, this is an occasion  when  we
    do consider it appropriate to set out the five tests identified by Lord
    Bingham of Cornhill:

         (i)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic wellbeing of  the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

16. Mr Jarvis could not argue against the  suggestion  that  excluding  the
    claimant interfered with his and his wife's right to respect for family
    life.  We regard it as settled law  that  in  an  Article  8  balancing
    exercise the rights of all those closely affected, not  only  those  of
    the claimant, have to be considered.  It is our view that the  decision
    in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT  02212  is  to  be  followed  and  that  the
    obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family life of  those
    affected by the decision.  Where one party to a marriage is entitled to
    be in the United Kingdom we consider that  a  qualified  obligation  to
    facilitate spousal unification for the limited purpose of a short visit
    and sojourn may arise.

17. We have no hesitation in saying that on the  facts  of  this  case  the
    decision to exclude the claimant interferes with  his  and  his  wife's
    private and family lives and the interference is of sufficient  gravity
    potentially to engage the operation of Article  8.  None  of  this  was
    seriously disputed before us.

18. Mr Jarvis, who was taking conspicuous care in a case where the claimant
    was not professionally represented, suggested that,  if  we  made  that
    finding, we should proceed to conclude that the decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer not in accordance with the law. We do not agree  that
    such a decision would always be  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law".
    Plainly that would be the case if the decision complained of  was,  for
    example, perverse but here the decision may have  been  permissible  on
    the evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer but decided differently
    by the First-tier Tribunal which had the benefit of  more  illuminating
    and  extensive  evidence.  Nevertheless  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    clearly right to ask itself if the claimant satisfied the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules because it had  to  decide  the  human  rights
    grounds  and  a  decision  on  whether  the  claimant   satisfied   the
    requirements of the rules would  illuminate  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise.

19. Here the First-tier Tribunal has decided that  the  claimant  satisfied
    the requirements of the Rules. We have no basis for reaching any  other
    conclusion.

20. We must now ask ourselves if excluding the claimant by refusing to give
    him entry  clearance  for  the  specific  and  limited  purpose  sought
    interferes disproportionately with the private and family lives of  the
    claimant and his wife.

21. In these circumstances the Entry Clearance  Officer  must  justify  the
    interference and satisfy us that the interference is proportionate.  We
    can see no justification for stopping a husband joining his  wife  when
    their circumstances satisfy the requirements of the Rules  unless,  for
    example, they had contributed to  the  erroneous  initial  decision  by
    presenting inaccurate information or by omitting something material  or
    committing some comparable misdemeanour. We can accept that it might be
    proportionate  to  exclude  someone  whose  application  suffered  from
    deficiencies  such  as  these  because  good  administration   requires
    applicants to engage with the system and,  further,  we  consider  that
    there are duties of candour and co-operation on all applicants.   There
    are no such failings here.

22. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal should have allowed the  appeal
    not under the Immigration Rules but on Article 8 grounds.  This is what
    we do.

23. We have considered carefully the effect that this decision  could  have
    in other cases.  Plainly this will mean that the underlying  merits  of
    an application and the ability to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,  far
    from being excluded, are likely to be a  central  issue  in  an  appeal
    based on human rights but they will not be  determinative.   They  will
    only be relevant if the interference is such as to engage Article  8(1)
    ECHR and a finding by the Tribunal that an appellant does  satisfy  the
    requirements of the rules will not necessarily lead to a  finding  that
    the exclusion is disproportionate to the proper  purpose  of  enforcing
    immigration control. However it is likely to be  a  strong  reason  for
    allowing the appeal that must be weighed with the others facts  in  the
    case.

24. It is the very essence of Article  8  that  it  lays  down  fundamental
    values that have to be considered in  all  relevant  cases.   It  would
    therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given the
    intensely factual and contextual sensitivity of  every  case.  Thus  we
    refrain from suggesting that, in this type of case, any particular kind
    of relationship would always attract the protection of Article 8(1)  or
    that other kinds of relationship would never come within its scope.  We
    are, however, prepared to say that it will  only  be  in  very  unusual
    circumstances that a person other than a close relative will be able to
    show that the refusal of entry clearance  comes  within  the  scope  of
    Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely to be limited to  cases
    where the relationship is that of husband and wife or other close  life
    partners or a parent and minor child. In the  limited  class  of  cases
    where Article 8 (1) ECHR is engaged the refusal of entry clearance must
    be in  accordance  with  the  law  and  proportionate.  If  a  person's
    circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and they have not  acted
    in a way that undermines the system of immigration control,  a  refusal
    of entry clearance is liable to infringe Article 8.

    Notice of Decision

    We therefore allow the appeal of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  the
    extent that we set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   We
    substitute this decision allowing the appeal of  the  claimant  against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer under Article 8 ECHR.

    Fee Award

    In the circumstances we make no fee award.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 January 2015                |

