

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: VA/17306/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                  Decision  and  Reasons
                                             promulgated
On 2 December 2014     On 5 December 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Beijing
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Zeshan Daoud
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Akhtar of Sony Sadaf Haroon Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Andonian promulgated on 5 September 2014 allowing  Mr  Daoud's  appeal
      against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  ('ECO')  dated  6
      August 2013 to refuse to grant entry clearance as a family visitor.


   2. Although before  me  the  ECO  is  the  appellant  and  Mr  Daoud  the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to  Mr  Daoud  as  the
      Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 22 April 1993.  On  25
      June 2013 the Appellant completed a visa application by payment of the
      due fee, seeking entry clearance to visit, primarily, his  brother  Mr
      Adeel Ahmed ('the sponsor').  The  Appellant  was,  and  still  is,  a
      student of medicine at the University of Shihezi in China, and so  the
      application was made to the entry clearance service  in  Beijing.  The
      application was refused for reasons set out in a Notice of Immigration
      Decision dated 6 August 2013 with particular reference  to  paragraphs
      41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules. Essentially,  the  Respondent
      was not satisfied in respect of the financial  support  the  Appellant
      claimed he was receiving to enable him  to  continue  his  studies  in
      China, and in consequence was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was
      genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period and intended
      to leave the UK at the end of the proposed visit.


   4. The Notice of Immigration  Decision  specified  that  the  Appellant's
      right of appeal was limited to the  grounds  referred  to  in  section
      84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The Grounds  of  Appeal  challenged
      the basis of the refusal under the Rules,  but  did  not  raise  human
      rights grounds. Indeed Ms Akhtar candidly acknowledged before me  that
      when the grounds were drafted the Appellant  and  his  representatives
      were not alert to the limitation in his right of appeal, and that  the
      Grounds did not address the limited scope of the right of  appeal.  Ms
      Akhtar also acknowledged that the evidence presented to the First-tier
      Tribunal,  by  way  of  the  witness  statement  of  the  sponsor  and
      supporting documents also focused upon the decision  under  the  Rules
      and did not seek to address any Article 8 issues.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge, having heard evidence from the sponsor,
      allowed the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds  for  reasons  set
      out in his determination. (See further below.)


   7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which  was  granted  (along
      with an  extension  of  time)  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
      Hutchison on 17 August 2014 on the basis that "it is arguable that the
      Judge made a material misdirection of the law in its  [sic.]  approach
      to Article 8 by failing to identify why the Appellant's  circumstances
      amounted to exceptional circumstances that warrant a  grant  of  leave
      outside the Immigration Rules when he only seeks to visit  his  family
      for a few weeks before he returns to his studies".


Consideration: Error of Law

   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised the  limited  nature  of  the
      right of  appeal  (determination  at  paragraphs  2-3)  and  commented
      "notwithstanding that the  appellant  had  not  made  a  reference  to
      section 84(1)(c) of the rules, nevertheless I  dealt  with  the  issue
      before me under article 8". Moreover, at paragraph 10  and  under  the
      heading 'Decision', it is clear that the Judge purported to allow  the
      appeal under Article 8.


   9. However, otherwise the Judge's focus was upon  the  basis  of  refusal
      under the Rules. The Judge identifies "the only point of the  refusal"
      at paragraph 5. He thereafter evaluates the evidence demonstrating, to
      his satisfaction, that  the  sponsor  was  adequately  supporting  the
      Appellant in his studies in  China;  and  further  concludes  that  in
      circumstances where the Appellant was at an advanced stage of studying
      medicine it would be "absurd" that he should  have  any  intention  of
      overstaying in the UK - "It simply makes no sense why an up and coming
      doctor would want to overstay in the UK on a visit visa. All he  wants
      to do is visit his family here... It is far more beneficial for him it
      is reasonable to conclude to complete his studies,  and  to  become  a
      Doctor rather than remain in the UK as an overstayer" (paragraph 8).


  10. Although, at paragraph 9, the Judge makes reference to  the  sponsor's
      difficulties in visiting the Appellant because he is busy at work,  he
      does not set this aspect of the evidence, or any other aspect  of  the
      evidence in the framework of human rights. Nor does the Judge make any
      express findings as to the nature and quality of  private/family  life
      that may exist between the Appellant and  the  sponsor,  or  give  any
      consideration  to  the  extent   of   interference   with   any   such
      private/family life in consequence of the Respondent's decision. There
      is no attempt in the determination to analyse the circumstances of the
      case by reference to the established jurisprudence on Article 8.


  11. Indeed Ms Akhtar, realistically and  frankly,  acknowledged  that  the
      determination essentially read as if it  were  an  assessment  of  the
      Appellant's case within the parameters of the Rules, and conceded that
      the Judge "did go wrong".


  12. In such circumstances  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      materially erred, and that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      must be set aside.


Remaking the Decision

  13. Both representatives acknowledged that the  appeal  was  suitable  for
      consideration by the Upper Tribunal. Ms Akhtar, with the assistance of
      the sponsor - and with no objection from Mr Jarvis - clarified certain
      matters by way of background. The sponsor had been  in  the  UK  since
      2007, and had not seen the Appellant since that  time.  The  Appellant
      had left Pakistan to commence his studies in China in  2008,  and  had
      not returned to Pakistan until a visit in July 2014.  The  Appellant's
      and sponsor's parents and siblings remain in Pakistan. The sponsor had
      commenced working for his current employer in January  2013,  and  had
      been promoted to the more demanding role of area manager in May  2013.
      The sponsor and his wife are expecting a baby in April 2015:  however,
      it  was  acknowledged  that  conception  post-dated  the  Respondent's
      decision by approximately 12 months  and  therefore  this  was  not  a
      relevant consideration as it was not a matter pertaining at  the  date
      of  the  Respondent's  decision.   The   representatives   then   made
      submissions.


  14. Although the Respondent's decision was  based  on  the  Appellant  not
      meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and although  I  am
      not embarked upon a  consideration  of  an  appeal  where  the  ground
      pursuant to section 84(1)(a) is available  to  the  Appellant,  it  is
      nonetheless the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made  findings
      of  fact  -  not  themselves  expressly   challenged   and   eminently
      sustainable  -  to  the  effect  that  the  Appellant  did  meet   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of the  Respondent's
      decision.


  15. Mr Jarvis accepted if the  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant  entry
      clearance  ran  contrary   to   the   requirements   of   the   Rules,
      notwithstanding the limited scope of the  right  of  appeal  this  was
      nonetheless relevant in any appeal founded on Article 8 grounds to the
      third, fourth and fifth Razgar questions. Where an appellant  met  the
      requirements of the Rules it could not be maintained that the decision
      was in accordance with the law;  further,  it  could  not  readily  be
      argued that any consequent interference with private/family  life  was
      necessary in circumstances where it was not justified under the Rules;
      yet further,  the  imperative  of  maintaining  effective  immigration
      control could not readily  be  relied  upon  as  a  justification  for
      interference in circumstances where an appellant met the  requirements
      imposed by the Rules as a mechanism of such control.


  16. However, it was the Respondent's case that either or  both  the  first
      two Razgar questions should  not  be  answered  affirmatively  in  the
      Appellant's favour.


  17. I have noted what has been said by Ms Akhtar on the Appellant's behalf
      with regard to the commendable level of brotherly responsibility shown
      by the sponsor in financially supporting  the  Appellant  through  his
      studies. To that extent it is to be acknowledged that the Appellant is
      not financially independent. However, in my judgement, both he and the
      sponsor are otherwise leading lives where on a day-to-day  basis  they
      are independent both of each other and indeed of  the  family  members
      based in Pakistan. Their respective private lives have been led  apart
      since 2007 and it seems to me that there is no particular interference
      with the private lives of either in consequence  of  the  Respondent's
      refusal. Each will continue to enjoy his respective life as before and
      the frustration of not being able to see each other for a few weeks in
      the UK will of no very great moment.


  18. Whilst it may be said that there is some element of mutual family life
      by reason of the brotherly relationship - underscored by the financial
      support provided by the sponsor - I am not satisfied that this equates
      to the sort of 'more than the normal emotional ties'  contemplated  in
      Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31  as  a  requisite  to  the  protection  of
      Article 8 in cases involving  adult  offspring  or  adult  siblings  -
      particularly in circumstances where on the  instant  facts  there  has
      been such a lengthy geographical separation.


  19. Further, I  have  considered  the  effect  of  the  refusal  of  entry
      clearance denying the Appellant the opportunity of seeing his  brother
      in the UK in the wider context of it being said that the  sponsor  has
      difficulties in making arrangements to see  the  Appellant  either  in
      China or Pakistan. Practical  problems  such  as  are  mentioned  with
      regard to work commitments are a  commonplace  fact  of  modern  life;
      however no compelling reason has been advanced to lead me to  conclude
      that  such  practicalities  are  not  readily  surmountable  with  due
      planning and coordination. Similarly, no particular evidence has  been
      put to me to indicate that the expense of arrangements to meet in some
      country outside the UK would be prohibitive or otherwise unreasonable.


  20. Having regard to the matters set out above, I am  not  satisfied  that
      either of the first and second Razgar questions are to be answered  in
      favour of the Appellant.


  21. Accordingly, I find that the Respondent's decision was not  in  breach
      of the Appellant's or anybody else's Article 8 rights.


  22. For the avoidance of any  doubt  I  have  had  regard  to  the  public
      interest considerations incorporated  at  sections  117A-117D  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (pursuant  to  amendments
      introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014).  However,  because   the
      Appellant's  appeal  fails  by  reference  to  the  first  two  Razgar
      questions, the 'public interest question' does under 'proportionality'
      does not arise.


Notice of Decision

  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  24. I re-make the decision. The appeal is dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     3 December 2014




