
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17913/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd October 2014                             |On 9th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between


                       ms Fathima Shaheena Abdul Salam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer, chennai

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Nnamani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thorne promulgated on 25th April 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 9th  April  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Ms Fathima Salam.  The Respondent Entry Clearance
    Officer, subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born on  3rd
    March 1988.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    20th August 2013 refusing her application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor under paragraph 41 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she wishes to come to  the  UK  in  order
    visit her sister and her sister's husband.  She herself was  a  teacher
    in Sri Lanka teaching at the City College and intended to  return  back
    to that employment after the visit.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge began by making it clear at the outset that the appeal  could
    only succeed only Article 8 grounds of the Human Rights Act (given that
    as of 25th June 2013 under Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013
    there was a limit to right of appeal on grounds of race  discrimination
    and human rights only).  In doing so, the  judge  emphasised  the  fact
    that, "It was made clear that my task on an appeal on  an  ECHR  ground
    against the decision of the primary  decision-maker...  was  to  decide
    whether the challenged decision was unlawful as  incompatible  with  an
    ECHR right ..." (paragraph 28).

 5. The judge reminded himself that in so doing, the Appellate Authority

         "Should bear  in  mind  several  factors,  including:  the  general
         administrative desirability of applying no Rules  if  a  system  of
         immigration control was to be workable, predictable, consistent and
         fair as between one  claimant  and  another;  the  damage  to  good
         administration...; the need to discourage non-nationals admitted to
         the UK temporarily from believing that they  could  commit  serious
         crimes...;  and  the  need  to  discourage  fraud,  deception   and
         deliberate breaches of the law" (paragraph 29).

 6. The judge  considered  the  factors  in  the  Appellant's  favour  (see
    paragraphs 45 to 49) and  then  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine visitor and that immigration control and the public order  were
    not undermined by allowing her to visit  her  sister  in  the  UK  (see
    paragraph 50).

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law  because
    the ECO had attempted to contact the school where the Appellant alleged
    to work but there was no  answer  from  the  school.   Furthermore  the
    Appellant had not been able to demonstrate that she had a  relationship
    with her sister that goes  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.   Moreover,
    under Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 the judge could  only
    allow the appeal on limited grounds and he did not follow  the  correct
    approach when making for his findings as to the Appellant's  Article  8
    rights to family and private life because he failed to have  regard  to
    Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  making  his  Article   8
    assessment.  The judge did not  give  proper  regard  to  the  relevant
    sections of the Immigration Rules.  Finally, the case of  Nagre  [2013]
    EWHC 720 was overlooked.

 9. On 29th May 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 2nd October 2014, Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Entry Clearance  Officer  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in a number of respects.  First, he  made  findings  of
    fact as if the considerations under paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were  in  issue.   When  those  findings  of  fact  fell  in  the
    Appellant's favour, he then proceeded to allow the appeal under Article
    8 by relying on those findings and this was an error of  law.   Second,
    the  decision  in  Gulshan  requires  some  analysis  of  circumstances
    justifying Article 8 consideration outside the Rules and the judge here
    had not engaged with this situation in the proper manner.

11. For her part, Ms Nnamani submitted that there was no material error  of
    law.  One had to look at the determination as a whole.   It  was  clear
    that the judge made himself aware of the nature  of  his  jurisdiction.
    He reminded himself at the outset (paragraphs 26 to 27) that the appeal
    could only be allowed on Article 8 grounds, and then examined what this
    meant for the Immigration Appellate Authorities (see paragraphs  28  to
    29).  It is true he made findings of fact.  However,  in  making  these
    findings, he then asked himself the  relevant  human  rights  question,
    namely, whether the interference by the Respondent  decision-maker  was
    "proportionate" with the rights and interests  of  the  Appellant  (see
    paragraph 43).  The judge applied the authorities (see Huang and Beoku-
    Betts).  Finally, it was spurious to suggest that the  authorities  had
    contacted the Appellant's school and met with  no  reply  at  the  City
    College because  the  judge  considered  this  very  question  and  had
    evidence before him in the form of a letter from the City College dated
    24th March 2014 "stating that the Appellant was  employed  there  as  a
    teacher since June 2012" and the judge held "I accept  her  explanation
    as to why no-one at the school answered the phone" (see paragraph 47).

12. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that if one looks at the findings that the
    judge actually made (at paragraphs 45 to 49) it is clear  that  he  has
    almost directly quoted  from  the  old  paragraph  41  requirements  by
    stating that the Appellant has to be a person who is "genuinely seeking
    entry as a visitor for the limited period" and that  "she  intended  to
    leave the United Kingdom at the end of the proposed  visit"  (paragraph
    45) before also addressing the question of  whether  "the  Sponsor  can
    provide sufficient accommodation and maintenance" (paragraph 46),  none
    of which was relevant to the question of a human rights appeal.  It was
    clear that the judge had erred in law.



No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside that decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, the judge reminds himself that this is a human rights appeal and
    that, "the Appellate Immigration Authority had  to  decide  for  itself
    whether the impugned decision was lawful, and, if not, but only if not,
    reverse  it"  (paragraph  28).   The  judge  set   out   the   relevant
    considerations (paragraph 29).  Thereafter,  the  judge  broke  up  the
    consideration of the facts and  issues  before  him  on  the  basis  of
    language that is drawn directly, not from the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    from human rights law, setting  out  the  questions  as  to  whether  a
    protected  right  was  engaged  (paragraph  34),  whether   there   was
    interference (paragraph 36), whether there was a legitimate  aim  being
    pursued (paragraph 38), whether the decision was in accordance with the
    law  (paragraph  14)  and  whether  the  decision   in   question   was
    proportionate (paragraph 42).

15. It is true that the  judge  thereafter  considered  (at  paragraph  45)
    whether the Appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor  for  a
    limited period, but it is significant that the  judge  does  not  refer
    here to the requirements of paragraph 41, but only to  making  findings
    of relevant facts, which are subsequently to be taken into  account  in
    the overall assessment of the  Appellant's  human  rights.   The  judge
    thereafter finds facts  that  are  overwhelmingly  in  the  Appellant's
    favour (see paragraphs 45 to 49).

16. It is only after this is done, that the judge then proceeds to consider
    whether "the human rights of the Appellant (and her family in  the  UK)
    are not outweighed by the public interest"  (paragraph  51).   Had  the
    judge stopped earlier, it may well have been argued that the judge  has
    simply transposed a consideration of findings in relation to  paragraph
    41 into a decision under human rights law.  It is clear that the  judge
    did no such thing.  He proceeded (after paragraph 51) to then weigh  in
    the balance the requirements of "effective  immigration  control"  (see
    paragraph 52) with the Appellant's right  to  visit  and  her  sister's
    right to be visited by the Appellant.

17. Important case law was then brought into  play,  namely,  the  case  of
    Chikwamba where Lord Scott had famously  stated  that,  "policies  that
    involve people cannot be, and should not be allowed to  become,  rigid,
    inflexible Rules" and invoking the spectre of Kafka  and  warning  that
    this should not be allowed to take  root  in  this  country.   What  is
    important about this analysis by the judge is  that  he  addresses  the
    very question, which the Respondent may well rely upon, namely,  of  an
    Appellant, who cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  thereafter
    simply applying and reapplying again.

18. Faced with this scenario, the judge is clear that, "it seems to me that
    refusing the Appellant's appeal in  these  circumstances  (where  I  am
    satisfied that she is and was always a genuine visitor)  and  requiring
    her to reapply would be wholly disproportionate and Kafkaesque  in  the
    extreme" .

19. Another judge, of course, may well have decided the matter differently.
     What is clear about this determination, however,  is  that  the  judge
    does go out of his way to  consider  the  position  specifically  under
    human rights law, in the way that it is not necessary to consider under
    the application of domestic Immigration Rules, and in so doing,  allows
    the appeal because it would be wholly disproportionate not to.

20. Second, as to the suggestion that the judge ought to have had regard to
    Appendix FM because this is a "complete code" such  that  the  case  of
    Gulshan requires some analysis of circumstances  justifying  Article  8
    consideration outside the Rules, the judgment  of  Lord  Aikens  in  MM
    (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 was emphatic in stating that there is not
    much utility in imposing a further intermediary test, if  an  Appellant
    cannot comply with the Immigration Rules, because,  "if  the  applicant
    cannot satisfy the Rules, then there  either  is  or  there  is  not  a
    further Article 8 claim.  That  will  have  to  be  determined  by  the
    relevant decision-maker" (see paragraph 128).  In this case, the  judge
    did address this specific question, and having  addressed  it,  allowed
    the appeal.  It was a matter for the judge to do so.

Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th October 2014

