
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Numbers: VA/17836/2013

                                  VA/17835/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th July 2014                     |On: 30th July 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Natia Gelashvili
                              Moris Gelashvili
                                 Appellants
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul
                                                          Respondents

For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondents:   Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants are both nationals  of  Georgia.  They  are  sister  and
brother.  They have permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Higgins)  who  on  the  17th  April  2014
dismissed their linked appeals against decisions  to  refuse  to  grant
them entry clearance as visitors.  Those decisions had been  served  in
Istanbul on the 21st August 2013.

The Appellants wished to come to the UK in order to see  their  father,
Mr Boris Gelashvili.   They did not however have a full right of appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to the Immigration Appeals  (Family
Visitor) Regulations 2012 because their father is not  settled  in  the
UK. He has a right of residence in the UK as the family member (spouse)
of an EEA national exercising her free movement rights. As such they do
not get a full right of appeal. They are however entitled to appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal on human rights grounds, and this is what  they
did.

The reason for refusal was that the  Appellants  had  not  demonstrated
that they were genuine visitors who intended to leave the UK at the end
of the period stated by them. The ECO did not consider  that  they  had
submitted sufficient evidence of their  social  and  economic  ties  to
Georgia.  They had said that they were supported by  their  mother  and
that they were studying but the ECO found there to be  no  evidence  in
respect of their mother's finances  and  was  not  satisfied  that  the
Appellants' studies were "sufficiently established at this  time".  The
ECO appeared to be concerned that in fact the Appellants only source of
income was remittances from their father.

On appeal the First-tier Tribunal properly directed itself  in  respect
of the limited right of appeal. The determination notes that  the  only
possible basis to challenge this decision was on Article 8 grounds,  in
respect of the Appellants' family life with their  father.   The  Judge
was satisfied that the Appellants maintain a  close  relationship  with
him, though frequent telephone and Skype contact; he also  notes  their
father's financial support for them.  The Judge was  further  satisfied
that the decision interfered with  their  family  life  and  found  the
Article engaged.   Having found that the decision was lawful in that it
was taken in pursuit of the legitimate aim of the  economic  well-being
of the country the determination addresses proportionality as follows:

         "13. The judgement I have to make is whether the prejudice  to  the
         family life enjoyed by the Appellants was sufficiently  serious  to
         amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  8  bearing  in  mind  all   the
         considerations in favour of enforcing immigration control strictly.
         The interests of the wider community have to be weighed against the
         prejudice to the Appellants' rights that exclusion  was  likely  to
         have caused.


         14.  The  requirements  in  paragraph  41  of  the  Rules  that  an
         applicant for entry clearance demonstrate  that  he  is  a  genuine
         visitor and it is his intention to leave the UK are legitimate  and
         proportionate restrictions on the freedom of foreign  nationals  to
         visit this country. I am satisfied that refusal of entry  clearance
         on the basis that those requirements were not met was proportionate
         to the legitimate public end sought to  be  achieved.  I  therefore
         dismiss the  appeals  on  the  only  ground  it  was  open  to  the
         Appellants to bring them" [my emphasis].



The grounds of appeal are drafted by the First Appellant. She complains
that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give  any
consideration at all to the "substantive documentary evidence  provided
together with the grounds of appeal" which included evidence concerning
the Appellants' mother's business and  funds,  and  evidence  that  the
First Appellant not only enrolled at Tbilisi State  Medical  University
to study medicine, but  that  she  has  been  awarded  the  prestigious
Presidential Scholarship to do so.  The Appellants  reiterate  a  point
made in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  they
believe that they were discriminated against as citizens of Georgia.

The Respondent did not supply a Rule 24 response but in his submissions
Mr Duffy agreed that if  the  failure  to  consider  the  evidence  was
material to the consideration of proportionality then this would be  an
error of law.  He  however  submitted  that  the  consequences  of  the
decision for the Appellants could not be of such gravity for it  to  be
disproportionate.  Their father can visit them at home if he wishes.


Error of Law

There is no evidence to suggest that either the Respondent or the First-
tier Tribunal discriminated against the  Appellants  because  they  are
Georgian.   Although the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with this
ground of appeal this error is not material since the ground could  not
be made out.

The grounds in respect of the overall Article 8  assessment  have  more
merit.  Both Respondent's and  Appellants'  bundle  contained  evidence
relating to the  Appellants'  social  and  economic  ties  to  Georgia.
Without looking at any of that evidence it is difficult to see how  the
First-tier Tribunal could conclude, as it does at paragraph 14  of  the
determination, that the Appellants did  not  qualify  for  entry  under
paragraph 41 (and in the case of the Second Appellant  paragraph  46A).
Although they had no direct appeal under the Rules the issue of whether
they in fact met the requirements for entry  as  visitors  was  plainly
pertinent to the Article 8 balancing exercise,  as  the  ratio  of  the
determination  demonstrates:  the  appeal  was  dismissed  because  the
Appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules. That finding has
simply been adopted from the refusal notice. The determination does not
consider at all whether the ECO was right.   If  the  Appellants  could
demonstrate that they were genuine visitors who intended to  return  to
Georgia after three weeks, the Respondent could hardly demonstrate that
their exclusion was somehow necessary  to  the  public  interest.   The
decision is set aside and I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
for remaking.

There was no appearance at the hearing before me: from the file  it  is
not clear  whether  the  Appellants'  father  was  informed  about  the
hearing.  The Appellants may wish to consider whether they wish to  now
have an oral hearing. It may assist the next Judge who deals with  this
matter to hear from their father.  If the Appellants do wish to have an
oral hearing they need to pay an additional fee, and should contact the
Tribunal administration in order to do so.   Otherwise the appeal  will
be listed for paper disposal in the First-tier Tribunal  not  before  6
weeks from the date that this determination is promulgated.

In granting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Landes
observed that the Appellants appear to qualify for entry  clearance  as
family members under Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
2006.   The evidence before me indicates that both their stepmother and
father are working in the UK. If that remains the position  then  Judge
Landes is correct.   The Appellants may  wish  to  consider  making  an
application under the Regulations to avoid any further delay.


Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
is set aside.

Having regard to the extent of judicial fact finding required I  direct
that the matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

I make no direction as to anonymity. None was in place before the First-
tier Tribunal and I was not asked to make one in the Upper Tribunal.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             25th  July 2014
