
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17489/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 September 2014                            |On 3 October 2014          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                          Mrs busao bolanle aladele
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Oke
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a 26 year old citizen of Nigeria who  has  been  given
    permission to appeal a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens
    promulgated on 14 May 2014.



The Background to this Appeal

 2. The appellant applied to come to the United Kingdom as a family visitor
    on 30 July 2013.  Her application was refused and  did  not  attract  a
    full right of appeal.  The appellant's right of appeal was  limited  to
    the grounds  referred  to  in  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal indicating that the decision contravened Article 8 of the
    Human Rights Act.

 3. Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Owens on 28 April 2014
    and in a determination promulgated on 14  May  2014  he  dismissed  her
    appeal.

 4. On 9 June 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  refused
    permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "1.  The Judge has pointed out in the determination at Paragraph 21
             that it was expressly agreed by all parties at the  outset  of
             the appeal  that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
             substantive Immigration Rules.   At  Paragraph  19  the  Judge
             referred to  Article  20  of  TFEU  conferring  the  right  of
             residence.  The Judge was dealing with the submissions made on
             behalf of the Appellant.  It was argued that the  refusal  was
             preventing the Union citizen, in this case the  child  of  the
             Sponsor, from exercising his right to live  and  work  in  the
             Union contravening EU law.  It was argued that the  mother  by
             virtue of the fact that she is a primary carer has a right  to
             live and work in the United Kingdom.  The child lives with his
             mother.  It was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that  the
             Judge could consider this submission that the decision was not
             in accordance with the EEA Regulations as a ground of  appeal.
             The Judge indicated that she did not agree.   The  grounds  of
             appeal were limited to human rights  and  race  discrimination
             grounds only.  No error of law  has  arisen.   The  Judge  was
             dealing with an appeal against  the  refusal  to  grant  entry
             clearance as  a  visitor  pursuant  to  an  application  under
             Paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge has  pointed
             out at Paragraph 3 of the determination what the scope of such
             an appeal consists of.  The Judge has made  findings  of  fact
             open to her.  The Judge has correctly analysed the application
             of Article 8.  The Judge has reached conclusions entirely open
             to her.  The Judge at Paragraph 44 states that she gave  great
             weight to the fact that the appeal related  to  a  visit  visa
             application and not a settlement application.  The analysis of
             proportionality entails no error of law.  In relation  to  the
             decision in Zambrano the scope of the intention of the  parent
             is a material factor.  The Judge in the determination  of  the
             subject of this application  has  made  findings  of  fact  in
             relation to that intention entirely open to her.  At Paragraph
             25 the Judge states that she does not find that the  Appellant
             would return to Nigeria to apply for settlement.

         2.   In the application for permission reference  is  made  to  the
             Immigration (European Economic Area (Amendment (2)) Regulations
             2012 (SI2012/2560).  The argument has been put forward  in  the
             context of the conferring rights of entry and residence on  the
             primary carer of a British citizen.  This  matter  under  these
             Regulations was not before the Judge.   No  error  of  law  has
             arisen  which  would  lead  to  a   different   outcome.    The
             application for permission to appeal effectively rests upon the
             final submission referred to by the Judge at  Paragraph  19  of
             the determination."

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and on
    7 August 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  The grounds of appeal allege that the Judge of the  First-tier
             Tribunal erred in his  consideration  of  the  rights  of  the
             appellant's child as an EEA national and had  not  taken  into
             account the fact that the appellant is the permanent carer  of
             the child.

         2.   The Judge correctly applied the law: this appeal  was  limited
             to human rights and to race relations as the  application  was
             made after 25 June 2013.  The Judge found that  the  appellant
             was not a genuine visitor and gave  clear  reasons  for  that,
             finding  that  the  appellant  had  been  untruthful  in   her
             assertion that she would return to Nigeria.  Moreover, he  was
             correct to find that the sponsor is not the primary  carer  of
             the child.

         3.   However it is arguable that he had not properly considered the
             position of the appellant's son who is  an  EEA  national  and
             that therefore the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
             law.

         4.   I therefore consider that the grounds of appeal are arguable."

The Evidence and Submissions

 6. At the outset of the hearing I raised with the parties the EEA point of
    law that had been raised in the grounds of appeal.   Mr  Oke  confirmed
    that he had not drafted the grounds and was not responsible  for  them.
    Both parties agreed before me that there was no EEA law  point  in  the
    appeal before me and that the issue concerned Article 8  and  the  best
    interests of the child.

 7. Mr Oke for the appellant submitted that the  mother's  application  was
    for a family  visit  and  the  child's  interests  were  treated  as  a
    secondary matter in the context of Article 8.  The  best  interests  of
    the child were the only issue being pursued in relation to  Section  55
    of the Borders Act 2007 and how  that  affected  proportionality  under
    Article 8.  The determination dealt with Article 8  from  the  mother's
    perspective but has not given any  consideration  to  the  child.   The
    child is now 1 year and 7 months old and there  should  have  been  far
    greater weight given to the interests of the child at such an early age
    being able to bond with his father who resides in  the  United  Kingdom
    and to have his mother with him to be in a family unit.  Those  factors
    should have been given weight in order to allow the mother to obtain  a
    visitor visa.

 8. Mr Jarvis for the respondent submitted that the EEA grounds  of  appeal
    had no merit because of statutory restriction on the right  of  appeal.
    The new issue before me, the best interests of the child was not raised
    in writing by way of application for permission to appeal and this is a
    new point.  Mr Jarvis went on to say the judge did make lawful findings
    about the intention of the application albeit on the basis of a  visit.
    The judge spent considerable time looking at Article 8 and he does make
    proper regard to the child's best interests and was  plainly  aware  of
    the circumstances, the position of the mother and her attempts to  gain
    settlement and his decision is completely compliant with the  interests
    of the child in accordance with Supreme Court case  law  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4. The remedy for the appellant is to work on  her  English
    language skills, pass the English language test and be able  to  travel
    to the United Kingdom as a spouse for  settlement.   In  reply  Mr  Oke
    repeated his earlier submissions that  the  determination  omitted  any
    consideration of the family units and the benefit of  the  child  being
    able to bond with the father at this important stage in his young life.
     The determination focused entirely on the age of the child being young
    and focused on the mother whereas he should have looked at  the  family
    unit as a whole.



Discussion and Decision

 9. I find that the judge did not err in law in his  determination  in  his
    consideration of Article 8 and the rights of the child.  As  the  judge
    makes clear at paragraph 41 he had considered the best interests of the
    child and he fully understood the fundamental principle that  the  best
    interests of a child are served by being brought up by both of  his  or
    her parents.  But as the judge correctly observed the  child  is  young
    and has not been able to form any strong  attachments  outside  of  his
    immediate family and has little  awareness  outside  of  his  immediate
    surroundings indeed the child would be  focused  predominantly  on  the
    mother with whom he had lived since birth.

10. The judge correctly pointed out that Article 8 is not a  mechanism  for
    circumventing the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge
    correctly observed that the refusal of the visit visa does  not  strike
    at the heart of the family life and would not  result  in  a  permanent
    separation because the appellant  can  work  on  her  English  language
    skills from Nigeria and make a further application for settlement  when
    she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

11. The judge properly took into  account  all  of  the  competing  factors
    before him and balanced the rights  of  the  appellant  and  her  child
    against the respondent's  legitimate  aim  of  a  fair  and  consistent
    immigration system and found the balance  of  proportionality  fell  in
    favour of the respondent.  This was a decision  properly  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before him and  the  grounds  before  me  do  not
    establish any error of law.

Summary of Decisions

12.  The appeal in respect of the immigration decision is dismissed.

Anonymity

13. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              2 October 2014


Judge E B Grant

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


