
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17976/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2014                                 |On 14 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Office - Nairobi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                           Ally Abdallah Mohammed
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Not represented
For the respondent:    Mr J Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Ally Abdallah Mohammed, date  of  birth  24.12.76,  is  a
    citizen of Tanzania.

 2. This  is  the  appeal  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hillis,  who  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer,
    dated  17.9.13,  to  refuse  his  application  made  on  27.8.13  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor pursuant to  paragraph  41
    of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  dealt  with  the  appeal  on  the
    papers on 7.4.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Vaudin  d'Imecourt  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 21.5.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 10.7.14 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Hillis should be set aside.

 6. The appellant had applied to visit the UK for a period of 10 days.  The
    appellant stated that he had  no  friends  or  family  in  the  UK  and
    intended only to visit historical sites.

 7. The  application  was  refused  because  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    considered that there was  insufficient  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    financial circumstances so as to satisfy the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    that this was a genuine application for a short visit  following  which
    he intends to leave the UK.

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the  grounds  that
    the decision is wrong  and  additionally  that  it  breaches  the  Race
    Relations Act in discriminating against him.

 9. The right of appeal was limited to  the  grounds  set  out  in  section
    84(1)(b) & (c) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    namely discrimination and human rights.

10. There was, therefore, no jurisdiction to, and no purpose in, the  judge
    considering whether the appellant did or did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules; the appellant has no right of
    appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer that he  did
    not, except on human rights grounds.

11. The judge found that the appellant had failed  to  establish  that  the
    decision was unlawful pursuant to the Race Relations Act 1976. He  also
    found that the refusal did not engage the appellant's article 8 rights,
    given that he had no family in the UK.

12. However, the judge allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    despite having no jurisdiction to do so,  finding  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 41(i) and (ii).

13. The grounds of application for permission to appeal point out that  the
    judge had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal against refusal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

14. In granting permission to appeal, the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated,
    "The grounds raise the judge's jurisdiction to hear or allow the appeal
    given the limited grounds. The  grounds  are  arguable.  Permission  to
    appeal is granted on all grounds."

15. For the reasons set out above, I find that the judge was  in  error  in
    allowing the appeal on immigration grounds. In the circumstances, there
    was an error of law in the making of the decision such that  it  should
    be set aside and remade.

16. For the same reasons set out above, it is obvious that the appeal  must
    fail.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on  a  point  of  law  such  that  the  decision  on
    immigration grounds should be set aside,  preserving  the  decision  on
    discrimination and human rights grounds.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal  by  dismissing  it
                    and finding that there is no valid appeal on immigration
                    grounds that can be determined.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 10 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: There was no valid right of appeal.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 10 July 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
