
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17487/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                           |On 29th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               mr OLIUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VISA OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Solicitor, instructed by Lincoln's
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh whose appeal to be allowed  to
    enter this country for  a  family  visit  under  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg  in  a
    determination promulgated on 13th August 2014.  Grounds for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal were lodged.

 2. Firstly, it was said that the Sponsor  was  a  person  who  was  highly
    credible and reliable being a Minister of religion  who  had  sponsored
    his father as a visitor in the past and sent  him  back  to  Bangladesh
    well before the expiry date of the visa.

 3. Secondly, there was no concrete reason given for the judge's conclusion
    which was based on suspicion only.  Furthermore, the judge had  ignored
    relevant  post-decision  evidence  which  went  to  the  "circumstances
    appertaining " at the date of decision and therefore had  been  wrongly
    rejected. It was said that the judge had taken into account  irrelevant
    factors and  had  failed  to  appreciate  that  the  Appellant  was  an
    established businessman earning a decent income in Bangladesh and  that
    he had great incentives to return there.  The judge's findings did  not
    reflect this. Permission to appeal was duly granted.

 4. Before me, Mr Ahmed reminded me that the sole issue before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had been whether or not the  visit  was  a  genuine
    one. The judge had made a  number of errors as set out in the  grounds.
    I was invited to set the  decision  aside  and  substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appeal.  Failing that then the appeal should  go  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for full consideration of the issues.

 5. For the Home Office Miss Isherwood relied on the  Rule  24  Notice  and
    submitted there was no material  error  by  the  judge.  She  had  been
    correct to find that there was no  credible  evidence  before  here  to
    explain how within a period to two years  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    build up his business to the extent mentioned (paragraph 9).   She  was
    correct to find that whilst she took into account  that  the  Sponsor's
    father had come here and returned each  applicant  must  be  considered
    separately (paragraph 10).  There was therefore no error of law in  the
    determination which should stand.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. It transpired that I and  both  parties  had  conducted  research  into
    whether or not there was a full right of appeal in this case given  the
    terms of Section 52(2) of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 which abolished
    the full rights of appeal in family visitor visa  cases.   However,  it
    appears that applications submitted on or after 25th June 2013 are  the
    ones that are affected and because this  application  was  made  before
    that date namely on 27th May 2013 the judge was correct  to  deal  with
    the appeal on the basis that the Appellant had a full right  of  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 8. However it seems to me that the judge fell into error in  a  number  of
    ways.

 9. Specifically,  the  judge  made  no  findings  on  the  credibility  or
    reliability of the Sponsor and his ability to ensure that the Appellant
    would return.  The judge was wrong to dismiss evidence as being  "post-
    decision" evidence for the reasons put forward by Mr Ahmed.  The effect
    of the exclusion of that evidence might be said to be unclear  but  the
    judge seems to attach weight to the lack of credible evidence as to why
    the Appellant was able to build  up  his  business  so  quickly  -  the
    connection with that finding and whether or not  the  Appellant  was  a
    genuine visitor is not  entirely  obvious.   More  importantly,  it  is
    unclear to me why the application was refused - the judge seems to have
    paid no attention to the fact that, on  any  view,  the  Appellant  has
    substantial roots in Bangladesh and therefore a considerable  incentive
    to return there at the conclusion of his visit.

10. In these circumstances I have hesitated on whether I can  simply  grant
    this appeal outright as Mr Ahmed urged me to do but  I  have  concluded
    that the safest course of action is for the matter to be heard again by
    the First-tier Tribunal so that proper findings  can  be  made  on  the
    integrity of the  Sponsor  to  which  Mr  Ahmed  attached  considerable
    importance.  What is clear is  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  are
    inadequate and there is a lack of  coherent  reasoning.   It  therefore
    seems to me that, unfortunately, the matter will have  to  have  to  be
    heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in
    its entirety. No findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  stand.
    Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal. There is no need for an anonymity order.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 23rd December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

