
IAC-BFD- MD
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/17045/2013
                                                             & VA/17043/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                     |
|Prepared on 31 July 2015             |                                     |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                     Mrs Fariba neisary - 1st Appellant
                     miss marziyeh talei - 2nd Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmoud Talei, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Iran. They are mother and daughter. They
    appeal with permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Hindson) which in a determination promulgated on 3rd June  2014,
    dismissed their appeals against the Respondent's decision of 25th  July
    2013 refusing to grant them entry clearance to the UK as visitors.

 2. They applied to visit Mr Gholam Hossein Talei, who is  the  husband  of
    the first Appellant and the father of the second. They also  wanted  to
    visit Mr Mahmoud Talei who is the son of the first  Appellant  and  the
    brother of the second. At the time of the  applications  Mahmoud  Talei
    was living in the same area as  his  father.  He  has  now  removed  to
    Glasgow.

 3. When their appeals came before Judge Hindson it was  expected  that  Mr
    Gholam Hossein Talei would attend the hearing to give evidence on their
    behalf. He did not attend but Mr Bari from Chapeltown Law  Centre  did.
    Mr Bari had clearly expected Mr Gholam  Hossein  Talei  to  attend  the
    hearing because the Judge records this at [2] of his decision. It would
    appear then, that being without  instructions,  Mr  Bari  withdrew  his
    representation.

 4. In the absence  of  any  explanation  for  the  non-attendance  of  the
    sponsor, Judge Hindson proceeded with the  hearing  forthwith.  He  was
    entitled to do and no criticism attaches to him for that decision.

 5. The Judge went on to hear submissions from the respondent and dismissed
    both Appellants' appeals.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought and initially refused by the FtT, but a
    renewed  application  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  was  granted.  The
    relevant parts of the grant are set out below:

         "The materials before the FTTJ were not  of  the  strongest  but  a
         number of  concerns  arise  from  the  determination.  Firstly,  as
         suggested in the grounds, it is arguable that  the  FTTJ  erred  in
         failing to  take  into  account  the  various  financial  documents
         provided as to the income and financial  status  of  the  financial
         sponsor (the brother/ son of the appellants) including a profit and
         loss account from his accountants. The FTTJ at [5] and [6] does not
         seem to take those documents or any  others  into  account,  merely
         agreeing in general terms with the refusal letter  which  does  not
         mention them. Secondly, there is  evidence  on  the  correspondence
         spike of the file of the father/husband of  the  appellants  having
         significant mental health problems.  It  is  additionally  arguable
         that the FTTJ was not entitled at [6]  to  draw  a  strong  adverse
         inference from his non-appearance."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the FtT decision  contains
    an error of law requiring it to be set aside.

    Mr Diwnycz appeared for  the  Respondent  and  Mr  Mahmoud  Talei,  the
    Appellants' son/brother attended on their behalf.

Error of Law

 7. I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz  for  his  customary  helpful  submissions.
    Although a Rule 24 response  had  been  served  defending  the  Judge's
    determination, he accepted that there was an issue  of  the  Judge  not
    being aware of the financial status and income of Mr Mahmoud Talei  who
    appears to have become the main sponsor  Mr  Gholam  Hossein  Talei  is
    disabled and too ill to attend any hearing.

 8. Mr Diwnycz surmised that the financial documents which are now attached
    to the file, may well not have been brought to the Judge's attention at
    the original hearing.

 9. Following those submissions I announced that I was satisfied  that  the
    decision of the FtT must be set aside for legal error on the basis of a
    failure to take into account relevant evidence.

10. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the appropriate course now should be for  the
    matter to be remitted to the FtT. This would then give  the  respondent
    the opportunity to review all the financial  evidence  produced  by  Mr
    Mahmoud Talei. It would also give him the opportunity of producing  any
    further evidence, which he considers may be required and  to  attend  a
    hearing to give oral evidence.

11. Mr Mahmoud Talei now lives in Glasgow. It is appropriate therefore that
    this matter be remitted for a fresh  hearing  to  the  FtT  sitting  in
    Glasgow. The consent of that Tribunal has been obtained  for  an  early
    hearing of this matter which will now take place on 28th  August  2015.
    Mr Mahmoud Talei is aware of the new hearing date.

Decision

12. The decision of the FtT dismissing the Appellants' appeals is set aside
    for legal error. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    hearing in Glasgow on 28th August 2015. The hearing will be a full  re-
    hearing with all issues at large.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
