
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/18360/2013
                                                               VA/18361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 26th March 2015                            |On 7th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
               (acting for Entry Clearance Officer, abu dhabi)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Muhammad Aman
                                 BALAN BIBI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant Secretary of State:    Mr  N  Smart,  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:                Mr T Muman instructed by  Messrs  Sehgal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This decision is to be read in conjunction with my  decision  in  these
    appeals promulgated on 4th February 2015  in  which  I  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thomas and gave directions
    for the future conduct of the appeals.  As in that earlier  decision  I
    will continue to refer to Muhammad Aman and his wife Balan Bibi as  the
    Appellants, the title by which they were known  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I will refer to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent.
    I stated in directions annexed to that earlier decision that the issues
    to be decided at the resumed hearing were whether Article 8 was engaged
    and if so whether  the  Appellants  should  succeed  in  their  appeals
    against the original  decisions.   The  significance  of  the  "barrus"
    ceremony would be considered in that context.

 2. The resumed hearing  was  listed  before  me.   The  document  produced
    consisted of the Appellants' original bundle extending to 74 pages  and
    a further bundle comprising 21 pages.  For the  Respondent  I  had  the
    core  bundle  and  an  extract  from  Wikipedia  concerning   religious
    ceremonies.  Mr Muman for the Appellants said that there were  elements
    under Article 8, 9 ECHR relating to the ceremony  referred  to  and  he
    asked me to reopen the question of the relevance of Article 9 to  these
    appeals.  I declined for the reasons explained in my  earlier  decision
    and said that all matters would be considered in the context of Article
    8.  I was aware of the recent reported decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC)  and
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SM and Others  (Somalia)  v  ECO
    Addis Ababa [2015] EWCA Civ 223 to which I said  I  would  refer  if  I
    thought these cases relevant.  I heard oral evidence from  the  Sponsor
    Mohammed Rafiq, son-in-law of the Appellants, upon which he was  cross-
    examined.  Following that oral evidence I heard submissions  from  both
    representatives and at the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

 3. In his statement for the initial hearing the Sponsor had set  out  that
    it was becoming increasingly difficult for the family  as  a  whole  to
    visit Pakistan.  There were many family members  in  this  country.  He
    then stated (paragraph 10)

         "Furthermore, my father-in-law's sister - Barish Jan is  buried  in
         the UK.  She was very close to my father-in-law.  She  passed  away
         in 2012 and wishes to visit the grave.  There is an annual ceremony
         where we pay our respects to her.  This is known as barrus and is a
         fundamental part of the religion.  During this ceremony we all  get
         together and pay our respects.  Prayers are said at the  graveside.
         My father-in-law has been denied the opportunity to be part of this
         ceremony and wishes to attend to be part of this occasion."

    At the hearing before me on 26th March 2015  the  Sponsor  adopted  his
    later statement signed on 19th March 2015.  In that he said that he had
    attempted to contact local mosques to provide documentary  evidence  to
    explain how important the ceremony was to their religion,  culture  and
    traditions.  He first attended Mr Muhammad Sajjad the imam at Paigham-E-
    Islam mosque and it was there  that  he  was  advised  that  the  death
    anniversary was known as a barsi ceremony and  not  barrus  as  he  had
    previously stated.  It appeared that where he came from in Pakistan the
    common  term  was  barrus.   The  barsi  ceremony  took  place  on  the
    anniversary of a person's death.  During the ceremony the whole  family
    gathered together to attend the grave of the loved one.   Prayers  were
    recited, food was prepared so that the family could eat  together.   If
    the person had passed away in Pakistan food was  also  donated  to  the
    poor.  In the UK they simply made a donation to  the  local  mosque  or
    charity of choice.  The Appellants had been denied the  opportunity  to
    attend such a fundamental ceremony despite the judge  in  the  previous
    hearing being satisfied that they would return upon completion  of  the
    visit.  That was  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it  was  the  first
    Appellant's sister Barish Jan who passed away and as  such  she  was  a
    very close family member.  Furthermore it was known to the family  that
    this was one of her last wishes.  Her husband had since died also.

 4. He continued in his oral evidence stating that the Appellants had  five
    children in this country and twelve grandchildren of whom  eleven  were
    under the age of 18.  At the barsi ceremony it was  important  for  the
    deceased that the Appellants should attend.  It was an opportunity  for
    closure for her brother the first Appellant.  It was affecting him that
    he could not see the burial place and pay his respects.  Relatives were
    going to Pakistan and paying respects to him and mentioning  the  death
    of his sister.  They had been very close and without him coming to  the
    grave the witness said there would be no closure.  It was an  important
    matter being able to come to pay last respects, lay flowers, recite the
    Holy Book and have an imam present together with close family.  In  the
    UK donations were also given to charity.  The  ceremony  could  not  be
    done in Pakistan because the burial site was in the United Kingdom.

 5. He was asked in cross-examination when the  Appellants  had  wished  to
    visit the United Kingdom and he said it was about July of 2013.  It was
    pointed out to him that the application  form  appeared  to  have  been
    signed on 31st July 2013 and if the anniversary of the death  was  21st
    July 2013 and if the visit was not going to  take  place  until  August
    then that was after the anniversary had occurred.  He responded that it
    was not necessary for the ceremony to take place an  exact  year  after
    the death but it could be approximately, within two months either way.

 6. The witness was then asked whether the Appellants had tried  to  attend
    the funeral itself  in  2012.   The  witness  replied  that  the  first
    Appellant was very distraught at that time  but  he  had  not  made  an
    application.  The witness could not say why that  was  the  case.   The
    first Appellant had missed out in 1981 when another sister had died  in
    this country.

 7. It was put to him that the information from the Wikipedia  site  seemed
    to show different ceremonies in different countries.  The witness  said
    that he was not familiar with the practice in other countries.  It  was
    put to him that the letters from imams referred to the ceremony  taking
    place on the anniversary of the death and there was no  mention  of  it
    being approximately the anniversary date.  He replied that the ceremony
    would take place annually but in their village in the Atok region  they
    were flexible concerning the timing.  They call the ceremony barrus.

 8. The deceased had lived in the United Kingdom  since  about  1964.   The
    first Appellant he thought had visited in 1980 for a short period  when
    he had stayed with the deceased and close family.  He said that she had
    visited him in Pakistan, the last occasion being in 1992.

 9. In submissions Mr Smart asked me to dismiss the  appeal,  he  said  the
    issue of whether or not Article 8 was engaged depended on relationship.
     It was clear from Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 that a sufficient
    relationship  between   adults   could   only   exist   in   particular
    circumstances in order  to  gain  the  protection  of  Article  8.   He
    referred to paragraph 21 in Mostafa.  There had to be  relevant  family
    life.  In practical terms the necessary relationship was likely  to  be
    between a husband and wife or parents and a minor child.  He  submitted
    that the appeals failed the first question posed  by  Lord  Bingham  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The relationship aspects  failed  to  meet  the
    test for Article 8.  Specific customs relating to barsi/barrus  had  to
    be seen in the factual circumstances.  With regard to the ceremony  the
    evidence indicated that it was tied  to  the  death  anniversary.   The
    applications made by the Appellants would not have permitted them to be
    present at the anniversary but significantly after the  anniversary  of
    the deceased's death.  They intended to  visit  for  four  months,  not
    simply to attend the ceremony.

10. He accepted that the findings of Judge Thomas  as  to  the  Appellants'
    circumstances and intentions were preserved which would mean that  they
    were in a position to make a fresh application to the ECO on the  basis
    of those findings.  If the barrus ceremony was, as claimed,  an  annual
    event they could apply to come on another occasion.

11. In response Mr Muman said it was a curious case and did not concern the
    usual Article 8 circumstances.  It included the Article 8 rights  of  a
    deceased in connection with funeral arrangements.   He  submitted  that
    involved the family and private life of the  deceased.   During  visits
    she had said that she wanted her brother to be present and there was  a
    relationship between him and the deceased.  Mostafa did not  deal  with
    those circumstances and there seemed to be no relevant case law as yet.

12. In the context of Article 8 he asked me to filter in Article 9.   There
    was  objective  evidence  with  regard  to  the  barsi  ceremony.   The
    Appellants' beliefs were serious and genuine and met the test  set  out
    in R (Williamson) v Secretary of State  for  Education  and  Employment
    [2005] UKHL 15.  The applications had not been  based  on  a  whim  and
    there was real significance in the trip which could not  be  undertaken
    by anyone else.  The deceased's last wish had been for her  brother  to
    attend the barrus/barsi ceremony.  The  documents  were  supportive  of
    there being religious implications of not carrying  out  those  wishes.
    They related to a "good death".  He submitted that  the  first  of  the
    Razgar questions was satisfactorily met.  There was also the  issue  of
    the relationship grandparents and minor  grandchildren,  most  of  whom
    were under the age of 18.  Once the first question of Razgar was passed
    the fact that the Appellants met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules meant that the decisions under appeal were not in accordance with
    the law.  He relied upon Mostafa which referred  to  the  promotion  of
    family life.  Article  8  did  not  specifically  define  the  type  of
    relationship required and there might be unusual circumstances such  as
    the time spent on the barsi ceremony.  However the principal point  was
    the observance of the last rites of  the  deceased  for  religious  and
    cultural reasons.  The Article he said was engaged.

13. In considering the merits of this appeal I bear in mind that the burden
    of proof in  establishing  that  Article  8  is  engaged  is  upon  the
    Appellants and that the relevant date for considering the merits of the
    appeal is the date of decision.  I accept the Sponsor's  evidence  that
    the Appellants live in Pakistan and have not visited this country since
    1982 and that a substantial section of their family lives in the United
    Kingdom, including five children and twelve  grandchildren,  eleven  of
    whom are under the age of 18 years.   I  also  accept  that  the  first
    Appellant was  the  brother  of  the  late  Barish  Jan,  who  died  in
    Birmingham on 21st July 2012, she having lived in  this  country  since
    about 1964 and having last visited the Appellants in Pakistan in  1991.
    The Appellants have a natural desire to see members of their family but
    I accept that another reason for wishing to come to this country was to
    visit the grave of the late Barish Jan with the intention of  gathering
    at the graveside on or about an anniversary of the death for the barrus
    or barsi ceremony.

14. I pointed  out  in  directions  that  I  would  need  to  consider  the
    significance  of  the  barrus  ceremony.   The  Sponsor  described  the
    ceremony as fundamental to the family's religious and cultural beliefs.
     There were in  the  Appellants'  second  bundle  statements  from  two
    ministers of religion Muhammad Sajjad and Mohammed Iqbal.  Both are  in
    precisely the same form.  They recite that it was the last wish of  the
    deceased to see her brother and for him to be present  at  her  funeral
    and that he wished to fulfil his sister's wishes by  being  present  at
    the annual  death  anniversary  or  barsi.  They  stated:  "This  is  a
    fundamental part of our culture, tradition and religious  beliefs."   A
    further letter from the secretary of  Kings  Heath  mosque  Mr  Suleman
    Isakji refers to attendance at the anniversary ceremony being  a  means
    of consoling and respecting the sister's wishes  and  easing  emotional
    pain as a result of the death.  The reference in  the  letters  to  the
    wishes of the deceased  and  of  the  first  Appellant  appears  to  be
    hearsay.  No source is given for the writers having such knowledge from
    any direct means.

15.  A  further  document  in  the  Appellants'  second  bundle  is  headed
    "Transferring Rewards to the Dead  (Esaal-E-Sawab)".   That  refers  to
    various ceremonies including barsi.  It describes a  gathering  of  the
    family on the third, tenth and 40th day after the death  or  the  death
    anniversary of a family relative as being a  common  practice  in  many
    Muslim communities especially in Pakistan and India and refers to these
    ceremonies as being innovative practices and Muslims being required  to
    refrain from them.  There therefore appear to be differing opinions  as
    to the significance of ceremonies including barsi.  It  is  noted  that
    the first Appellant did not attempt to come to the United  Kingdom  for
    the funeral itself and no reason was given for this.  On  the  evidence
    before me I find on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  there  is  a
    traditional ceremony called barsi (or sometimes barrus)  and  I  accept
    that it was the wish of the first Appellant to go to the grave  of  his
    sister with other family members for  the  purpose  of  this  ceremony.
    There appear to be no religious consequences of failing  to  attend  or
    carry out the ceremony and it is more in the nature of a tradition than
    a religious obligation.  Neither of the ministers who referred  to  the
    practice as being "fundamental" explained in what way it was  described
    as such.  The other document produced clearly indicated that it was not
    fundamental but merely a folk tradition.  I was told that  it  was  the
    dying wish of the deceased that her brother should attend  the  funeral
    or ceremony but there was no direct evidence of this from  anybody  who
    was present at the death and the point is not established.  I do not in
    any event accept that Article 8 rights of the deceased can be in  issue
    for the reasons I touched on in the earlier decision. There is  a  very
    substantial difference between the desire of a British resident  for  a
    particular form of cremation to enable the soul or  spirit  to  be  set
    free ( as referred to in the cremation case of R(Ghai) v Newcastle City
    Council and the SSHD [2009] EWHC 978  (Admin))  and  a  desire  for  an
    overseas resident to attend a graveside ceremony without any  specified
    consequences if the ceremony is not performed with all parties present.



16. On the evidence I do accept that members of the family  in  the  United
    Kingdom would like the Appellants to attend a barsi ceremony and during
    the course of a four month visit  it  was  intended  that  they  should
    together go to the barsi ceremony for the deceased. That is the factual
    context in which I consider whether Article 8  is  engaged  so  far  as
    private life is concerned.  The family are  separated  because  members
    have emigrated to the United Kingdom.  There will be no change  to  the
    current exercise of private life by the Appellants or by the family  in
    the United Kingdom as a result of  the  decisions  under  appeal.   The
    Appellants are seeking to take a  further  step  or  to  develop  their
    private life by coming to the United Kingdom and, amongst other things,
    attending the barsi ceremony.

17. I do not regard that proposed step as being of sufficient  significance
    to engage Article 8.  Lord Carnwath emphasised in Patel  and  Others  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 (at paragraph 57) that it was important to remember
    that Article 8 was not  a  general  dispensing  power.   He  said  that
    Article 8 was concerned with private or family life  not  education  as
    such.  "The opportunity for a promising student to complete his  course
    in this country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself a
    protected right under Article 8."  The desire of a student  to  develop
    private life through education was not protected.  Similarly in my view
    the wish of the Appellants to attend the barsi ceremony, together  with
    the wish of the family in the United Kingdom for  them  to  do  so,  is
    simply not sufficient  to  engage  Article  8.   In  Nasim  and  Others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  stated  that  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in Patel served to refocus  attention  on
    the nature and purpose of Article 8 and in particular to recognise that
    Article's limited utility in private life cases that were  far  removed
    from the protection of an individual's moral  and  physical  integrity.
    There is some support for this view also at  paragraph  24  of  Mostafa
    where it is stated

         "... it will only be in very unusual circumstances  that  a  person
         other than a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal
         of entry clearance comes within the  scope  of  Article  8(1).   In
         practical terms this is likely to be limited  to  cases  where  the
         relationship is that of  husband  and  wife  or  other  close  life
         partners or a parent and minor child and  even  then  it  will  not
         necessarily be extended to cases where, for example,  the  proposed
         visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the  time
         that the people involved spend together ..."

    I accordingly find that as regards private life the appeals do not meet
    the test for the first of Lord Bingham's criteria in Razgar.

18. So far as family life  is  concerned  I  find  that  it  has  not  been
    established that family life for the purposes of  Article  8  has  been
    established to exist between the  Appellants  and  the  United  Kingdom
    family.  I explained in my earlier  decision  that  I  found  that  the
    guidance in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  was  binding  upon  me.
    There was no evidence before me of any  especial  level  of  dependence
    between the Appellants and the UK members of the family.  There was  no
    evidence of support going beyond the normal affection of  adult  family
    members.  So far as the minor grandchildren are concerned whilst family
    life could exist if the family were living together in a household  and
    there were elements of dependency that  is  not  the  case  here.   The
    Appellants and their grandchildren live far apart.  The Appellants  are
    not quasi parents.  This view is consistent with the guidance given  in
    Mostafa.  That is not to say that there is not great affection  between
    members of the family.  It is very  important  to  bear  in  mind  that
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 is quite distinct from family
    life in the popular usage of that term.

19. I have already dealt with the other points relied upon  in  my  earlier
    decision.  For these reasons the appeals are dismissed.  I  made  clear
    in my earlier decision that the factual findings of  Judge  Thomas  set
    out at paragraphs 10 to 12 inclusive of her decision had not  been  set
    aside although the decision she reached had.   The  Appellants  are  of
    course free to make a further application if advised citing in  support
    the relevant parts of that decision.  That is a matter for them.

20. There was no request for an anonymity order.  As the appeals  have  now
    been dismissed the fee awards made must also fall.

Notice of Decisions

For the reasons referred to above the decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal
contain material errors on points of law and have been set  aside.   I  have
remade the decisions and for the reasons set out  above  these  appeals  are
dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under   the   Human   Rights
Convention.  No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date 13 April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



