

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: VA/18460/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House                               Decision & Reasons
Promulgated


 On 4 March 2016                              16 March 2016



                                   Before



                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE  KAMARA


                                   Between

                               THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

         Appellant


                                     and


                              MRS SHAKEELA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr I Ali, counsel


                        DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Sangha, promulgated on 26 September 2014, allowing  an
       appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to enter the
       United Kingdom as a visitor.



                          � CROWN COPYRIGHT 2016


 Background

    2. On 19 August 2013, the respondent, then  aged  57,  sought  leave  to
       enter the United Kingdom, in order to visit her adult  daughter,  HJ,
       who  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  husband  and  four
       daughters.  A  covering  letter  from  HJ's  husband  (the  sponsor),
       explained that his wife had travelled frequently to Pakistan  to  see
       her mother but this was becoming "increasingly  difficult"  owing  to
       the children being at school.  He  also  mentioned  that  his  wife's
       sister was married to his own brother and that  they  also  had  four
       children. Otherwise, the sponsor emphasised that the  respondent  had
       close family in Pakistan, including "her husband and two sons;"  that
       she had grandchildren, a home  and  savings  in  Pakistan  and  would
       happily return there after the visit.  The sponsor proposed  to  meet
       the cost of her return tickets and any other costs of the visit.

    3. The visa application was refused on 11 September 2013 as the ECO  was
       not satisfied that the respondent was genuinely seeking entry only as
       a visitor or that she intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end
       of the visit. The ECO particularly noted that there was  no  evidence
       that the respondent was supported by her husband and did  not  accept
       that her  personal  and  financial  circumstances  were  as  she  had
       claimed.

    4. Detailed grounds of appeal were enclosed with the notice  of  appeal,
       in which it was argued that family life was engaged  where  a  mother
       wished to visit the above- mentioned family members. It was said that
       the family members in the  United  Kingdom  were  "unable"  to  visit
       Pakistan owing to changing  circumstances,  notwithstanding  previous
       frequent visits. It was further argued that the appellant had a home,
       husband and four children in Pakistan.

    4. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)  reviewed  the  decision  to  refuse
       entry  on  14  January  2014.  The  decision  to  refuse  entry   was
       maintained. The ECM relied on the decision in Sun Myung  Moon  v  ECO
       Seoul (2005) UKIAT 112 and was of the view that the appellant did not
       have  any  family  life  with  the   United   Kingdom   sponsor,   or
       alternatively, the decision in question did not  interfere  with  any
       family life. It was noted that no "satisfactory" reason had been  put
       forward as to why the relative in the United Kingdom  was  unable  to
       travel to Pakistan.

    5. The FTTJ found, in essence, that the relationship the respondent  had
       with her daughter, son-in-law and grandchildren  amounted  to  family
       life.  He  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
       accordance with the law because the appellant met the requirements of
       the Rules relating to visitors and also that  the  decision  breached
       the respondent's rights under Article 8 ECHR.










    6. Error of law

    7. The grounds of application argue, under the  first  ground  that  the
       FTTJ made a material error of law in reversing the burden of proof in
       his finding that the onus was on the Secretary of State to show  that
       there was no breach of Article 8. Furthermore, it was said  that  the
       FTTJ had used Article 8 as a general dispensing power  and  that  the
       decision in question did not impinge  upon  the  respondent's  family
       life.

    8. The second ground drew attention to the fact that  the  FTTJ  allowed
       the appeal as not being in accordance with the law on the basis  that
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules had been met and that  this
       was outside his jurisdiction.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the FTT failed to adequately explain why he concluded there  was
       family life; it was also unclear when the parties last lived together
       and whether there was any dependency. The grounds were also  said  to
       be arguable.

    9. At the hearing before me, Mr  Mills  relied  upon  the  decisions  in
       Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)[2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC),  Adjei
       (visit visas - Article 8) [2015]  UKUT  261  (IAC)  and  Kaur  (visit
       appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC).  In essence,  he  argued
       that Article 8 was not engaged at all and emphasised that it would be
       rarely the case that a case, other than that  involving  partners  or
       parents of minor children, would come within  the  scope  of  Article
       8(1).

   10. Mr Ali argued that permission ought not to have been granted  on  the
       basis that family life was not established, because this did not form
       part of the grounds of appeal. He did not accept  that  this  was  an
       obvious point. He asked me to accept that family life was established
       owing to the biological connection between  the  respondent  and  her
       family and that, with reference to Ghising (family life  -  adults  -
       Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC), this did not come to  an  end
       because the children had become adults.

   11. Mr Ali asked me to  note  that  the  FTTJ  had  recognised  that  the
       respondent did not live with her family  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
       reaching  his  findings.  With  regard  to  whether  there  was   any
       interference with family life, Mr Ali said that the sponsor found  it
       "difficult" to visit Pakistan owing to school and  work  commitments.
       He told me that the last visit was in December 2013, during which the
       respondent had lost her husband. She wanted to  spend  more  "quality
       time" with the grandchildren since then. He further argued  that  the
       family members in the United Kingdom were limited in  the  time  they
       could  spend  in  Pakistan,  whereas  the  respondent  was   not   so
       restricted. He conceded that only a three-week visit was proposed  in
       the visa application.

   12. Mr Ali relied on Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement  -  Article
       8) [2015] UKUT 463 (IAC) and argued that the public interest was less
       potent in some contexts; asking me to note that the respondent wanted
       time to grieve with her family and that this scenario was  recognised
       in the case law. He conceded that the respondent's husband  had  died
       three months after  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  to  the  United
       Kingdom.

   13. Mr Ali was of the view that there was no need to show  dependency  in
       order to establish family life in visitor cases; in this he  referred
       to the very last sentence of Mostafa.

   14. In reply, Mr Mills stressed the need  for  dependency,  referring  to
       Adjei. He acknowledged that absent dependency,  family  visits  could
       engage Article 8(1), if there was something compelling  in  addition,
       with reference to Abbasi, where a  visit  was  proposed  following  a
       death and in order to attend to post-funeral rites.   In  this  case,
       the bereavement was a post-decision issue and did not  form  part  of
       the reasons why the FTTJ found that family  life  existed.  The  FTTJ
       conclusions as to family life were not open to him where there was no
       dependency and nothing compelling. The only outcome was the opposite.

   15. I permitted Mr Ali to add to his submissions at his request. He added
       that Mostafa was presided over by a presidential panel and there  had
       been no mention of dependency then, nor was there in  Kaur.  However,
       if I was not with him, he wished to state  that  the  respondent  was
       financially dependent on her daughters in the United Kingdom.

   16. In further reply, Mr Mills drew my attention to the fact that at  the
       time of the hearing, the evidence was that the respondent was a widow
       who had applied for a widows' pension and was dependent upon her sons
       in Pakistan as well as her daughters in the United  Kingdom.  Whereas
       at the time of the decision she was married and was probably  reliant
       on her husband's pension.

Decision on error of law

   17. I find that the grounds of appeal were sufficiently widely drafted to
       include a challenge to the FTTJ's finding that there was family life.
       In [1(a)] of the grounds it is argued that the FTTJ erred in  stating
       that the burden was on the Secretary of State to show  there  was  no
       breach of Article 8. It is apparent from [20]  of  the  decision  and
       reasons that this was indeed the approach of the FTTJ and given  that
       he considered that the ECO had not discharged the burden,  he  failed
       to adequately address whether there was family life at all,  in  line
       with the relevant case law.

   18. In the alternative, I consider  that  the  FTTJ  granting  permission
       rightly considered the issue of whether family life  was  established
       to be an obvious point in an appeal based on Article 8.

   19. The FTTJ erred in categorising the respondent's relationship with her
       adult children and their families in the  United  Kingdom  as  family
       life for the following reasons.

   20. The FTTJ failed to provide  any  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  his
       finding that there was family life. At [19] and [20] he repeats  that
       he finds family life, "even thought she is an adult and  despite  the
       vast distance  that  separates  them."  Yet  nowhere  are  there  any
       positive findings, which might explain what led him to  be  satisfied
       that family life existed between a mother and her adult children  who
       lived in different countries.





   21. I find that the FTTJ's misunderstanding in relation to the burden  of
       proof might explain why he considered it was  unnecessary  to  engage
       properly with the issue of family life.

   22. Furthermore, the FTTJ did not adequately explain  why  he  considered
       the ECO's decision to amount to an interference with family life,  in
       view of the evidence before him showing that the family in the United
       Kingdom had regularly visited the respondent in Pakistan and were not
       prevented from doing so in the future.

   23. I accordingly, set the decision of the FTTJ aside, albeit I  did  not
       disturb his findings of fact between [11] and [14]; that is that  the
       respondent had  satisfied  him  as  to  her  personal  and  financial
       circumstances.

   24. The ECO's appeal is, therefore, allowed.

Decision on remaking

   25. I was able to immediately remake the decision in this case on account
       of Mr Ali's acceptance that there  was  no  further  evidence  to  be
       adduced.  I therefore invited submissions from both  representatives.



   26. Mr Ali maintained that family life existed on account  of  the  blood
       relationship between the  respondent  and  her  daughters  and  other
       relatives in the United Kingdom. He referred me  to  the  six  visits
       from United Kingdom family to Pakistan, which took place between 2001
       and 2013. He relied on the sponsor's  witness  statement  as  to  the
       difficulties experienced by the  family  here  in  visiting  Pakistan
       owing to the differing ages of  the  children  and  stages  of  their
       education.  The  family  was  unable  to  spend  time  together.   He
       emphasised that the respondent was only intending a  visit  of  three
       weeks and was not planning to settle here. The relationship between a
       grandparent and grandchildren was valuable and it was not  reasonable
       for the family in  the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  to  visit  the
       respondent in Pakistan. The finding of the FTTJ that the  Rules  were
       met was not challenged and this was  a  weighty  factor  in  deciding
       whether refusal was proportionate. There was no prejudice to the  ECO
       in the respondent succeeding.

   27. Mr Mills argued that the respondent's case fell down at the first and
       second questions set  out  in  Razgar.   He  relied  on  his  earlier
       submissions. Article 8 was not engaged, with reference to Mostafa and
       Adjei. The only potential argument was the bereavement issue, however
       this occurred after the date of decision and this matter could not be
       relied upon. If I was not with him on that issue, there would  be  no
       interference. What was argued was only that it  was  more  convenient
       for the respondent to visit the United Kingdom. There was no evidence
       that visits to Pakistan were impossible,  just  more  difficult.  The
       respondent could apply for a  further  visit  visa;  this  time  with
       positive preserved findings from the FTTJ. He believed that  the  ECO
       would abide by those findings. Mr Mills accepted that  if  I  reached
       the  fifth  question  in  Razgar,  then   it   was   likely   to   be
       disproportionate to refuse entry.





   28. Mr Ali replied,  by  stressing  that  the  respondent  now  had  nine
       grandchildren and restating his reliance on Adjei.

   29. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.

   30. The respondent sought entry to the United Kingdom in order  to  visit
       her daughters, sons-in-laws and their children for a period of  three
       weeks. Hitherto, various combinations of these relatives had  visited
       the respondent in Pakistan on four occasions prior to the decision to
       refuse entry and two occasions immediately thereafter. At the time of
       the ECO's decision, the respondent was residing with her husband  and
       two sons in Pakistan. According to the sponsor's letter  of  support,
       the respondent had a home and savings and her husband had income from
       his pension.

   31. Following the ECO's decision, the respondent's  husband  had,  sadly,
       died and an additional reason for visiting arose, that of wishing  to
       grieve with her children in the United Kingdom.   The  issue  of  the
       respondent's bereavement post-dates the ECO's decision and  owing  to
       section 85(5) of  the  2002  Act,  is  not  a  matter  which  can  be
       considered on appeal.

   32. I have been guided by what was said in the headnote  in  Adjei;  "The
       first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to  grant
       entry clearance as a visitor where  only  human  rights  grounds  are
       available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all.  If  it
       is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has  no
       jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of the  ECO
       under the Rules and should not do so. If article 8  is  engaged,  the
       Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which the claimant is said
       to have failed to meet the requirements of the rule..."

   33. In considering whether there is family life  between  the  respondent
       and her daughters, I have had regard to Kugathas v SSHD  (2003)  INLR
       170, where it was said that, in order to establish family life, it is
       necessary to show that there is a real committed or effective support
       or relationship between the family members and the  normal  emotional
       ties between a mother and an adult son would not,  without  more,  be
       enough.

   34. This is a case where I consider there to be no element of  dependency
       and no evidence  of  a  relationship,  which  extends  beyond  normal
       emotional ties. At the time  of  the  decision,  the  respondent  was
       enjoying family life with her husband  in  Pakistan  and  potentially
       with her adult sons who had continued to live in the family home. The
       respondent's relationship with her children in the United Kingdom was
       maintained by a  series  of  visits  in  the  years  following  their
       respective decisions to leave Pakistan in order to live in the United
       Kingdom with their husbands.

   35. I therefore conclude that the respondent did not enjoy a family  life
       with her daughters in the United Kingdom.









   36. While it has been said that the respondent is  financially  dependent
       upon her daughters in the United Kingdom, I note that this  situation
       arose following her husband's death and during the  period  when  she
       was awaiting an award of a widows' pension. At the time of the  ECO's
       decision, the respondent was living with and financially supported by
       her husband,  possibly  with  some  contribution  from  her  sons  in
       Pakistan. Indeed the sponsor's supporting letter makes  no  reference
       to financial support from the United Kingdom.

   37. I have also been guided by  [24] of Mostafa where  comment  was  made
       that "it will only be in  very  unusual  circumstances  that  someone
       other than a close relative will be able to show that the refusal  of
       entry clearance comes within the scope of Article 8(1). In  practical
       terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the relationship is
       that of husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and
       minor child and even then it will  not  be  necessarily  extended  to
       cases where, for example, the proposed visit is based on  a  whim  or
       will not add significantly to the time that the people involved spend
       together. "

   38. Evidently, the respondent's relationship with her daughters and their
       families does not amount to that of a close life  partner  or  parent
       and child and there was no element of dependency in place at the time
       of the decision to refuse  entry.  Furthermore,  the  respondent  was
       intending a visit of  only  three  weeks  and  the  evidence  of  her
       daughters was not that they could not visit the appellant in Pakistan
       but that their husbands' work and children's schooling made  it  more
       difficult to organise such visits. Therefore, even had I found  there
       to be family life, it is the case that the relationship  between  the
       parties, as at the time of the decision, could  continue  by  way  of
       short visits by the daughters and their families to the respondent in
       Pakistan, much as it had previously.

   39. As family life has not been established, there is no need for  me  to
       embark on a proportionality assessment.


   40. I accordingly dismiss the appeal.






















 Decision


  1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
     making of an error on a point of law


  2) The decision of the FTTJ to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR is
     set aside.

  3) I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the respondent's appeal under
     Article 8 ECHR.

 No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
 such a direction.


 Signed     Date: 5 March 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

-----------------------
Appeal Number: VA/18460/2013


8



