
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18641/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 November 2014                           |On 5 November 2014             |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                oksana grant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although the Secretary of State is, strictly,  the  appellant  to  this
    appeal, for the sake of consistency I refer to her  as  the  respondent
    and to the original appellant as such.

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision (Judge Blake)  promulgated  on  19  August
    2014 allowing the appellant's appeal against the refusal of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to grant her a family visit visa to the UK.


3.   The grounds submit that the judge made an error of law  in  failing  to
    take account of the fact that the appellant had only limited Grounds of
    Appeal - in this case on human rights grounds only - as the application
    had been made after 25 June 2013, the date on which Section 88A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  was  amended.   It  was
    submitted that the judge appears to have applied the law  as  it  stood
    before 25 June 2013 and made no findings under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   Brief submissions were made by  both  representatives,  the  Presenting
    Officer relying simply on the grounds.  Ms Loughran  acknowledged  that
    there had been no specific mention of Article 8  in  the  determination
    but suggested that the judge's findings  of  fact,  in  favour  of  the
    appellant, were sufficient implication that  the  judge  was  making  a
    decision on human rights grounds.

5.   Notwithstanding the submissions  of  Ms  Loughran,  it  is  regrettably
    clear from the judge's determination that he has made no  reference  at
    all to human rights other than an oblique reference in [27] to  a  case
    decided in 2001.  It was clear  from  the  respondent's  decision  and,
    indeed, from the original Grounds of Appeal that the only issue  before
    the judge was that of Article 8.  I note that  the  appellant  was  not
    legally represented at the First-tier Tribunal and the respondent chose
    not to send any representative at all.  The  judge  was  therefore  not
    given any guidance - even though none should have been  needed  -  that
    the only issue before him was the question of Article 8  human  rights.
    But he appears to have decided the  case  under  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules, to which  he  referred  in  detail,  and  not  under
    Article 8.

6.   That is a clear error of law and the decision  must  therefore  be  set
    aside.

7.   The judge, however, did hear oral evidence and  found  the  sponsor  to
    have been a credible and honest witness.  There is therefore no  reason
    why the judge's findings as to the evidence  at  [66]  -  [75]  of  the
    determination should not be preserved.

8.   Human rights was the only issue.  That issue has  not  been  considered
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  all.   The  appellant's  appeal  must
    therefore be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  rehearing  on
    that issue.

Notice of Decision

9.   The First-tier Tribunal determination contained an error of law and  is
    hereby set aside save as to paragraphs  [66]  -  [75]  which  shall  be
    preserved.

10.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  to  be
    heard as to the human rights issues by  any  judge  (other  than  Judge
    Blake).



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
4 November 2014
