
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18930/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                               Mr Gurdev Singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bexson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the respondent, the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department ("the Secretary of State"),  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("the ECO"). The Secretary of State  appeals  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Petherbridge  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal solely on the basis that the appellant's visit  visa
    application met the requirements of the Immigration Rules "in full".

2.   Unfortunately, the Entry Clearance Manager misrepresented  the  grounds
    of appeal that were before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of
    appeal that were before the Tribunal  included  a  clear  reference  to
    Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002. It is common ground that following refusal of an application  for
    a visit visa the unsuccessful applicant may only appeal  that  decision
    under sub-paragraph (b), on the grounds that it is unlawful because the
    decision is contrary to the race relations' discrimination legislation,
    or, under sub-paragraph (c), on the basis that, as a public  authority,
    the Secretary of State is bound not to  contravene  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 (see section88A  of  the  2002  Act).  Section  6
    requires public authorities in  the  UK,  including  the  Secretary  of
    State, to comply with the requirements of the Human  Rights  Convention
    of 1950 ("ECHR") by respecting the appellant's Convention rights.

3.   The Immigration Judge was clearly under a  misapprehension  as  to  the
    extent of the right of appeal in this case, despite the fact that  both
    parties were represented and despite the fact that there was clearly  a
    reference by one or both of the parties to the  limitation  in  Section
    88A to the relevant sub-paragraphs of Section 84(1)  to  which  I  have
    referred.  This is highly unfortunate but my reference to the notes  of
    evidence within the notes of  hearing  suggests  that  the  matter  was
    referred to at the hearing. Unfortunately, the Immigration Judge  seems
    to have omitted to keep at the forefront of  his  mind  the  fact  that
    there was no right of appeal from the actual decision to  refuse  entry
    clearance under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules,  save  on  the
    limited basis indicated.

4.   Therefore there is clearly a material error of law which  requires  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.  The question that
    then arises is: whether out of the favourable decision in favour of the
    appellant I can spell out an analysis of Article 8 such as to allow  me
    to allow the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  stand?  In  other
    words is it possible to read the decision of the First  -tier  Tribunal
    as a consideration of the issues  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    including the allegation that the ECO had contravened  the  appellant's
    rights under the ECHR?

5.   Regrettably  recent  case  law  tends  to  suggest  that  the  starting
    position for any consideration of Article 8 is the requirements of  the
    Rules.  That  would  include  a  consideration  of  whether  the  rules
    themselves adequately address the need to facilitate family reunion  in
    appropriate cases and whether there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing in its present form. I do not think  that  there
    is enough consideration of Article 8 or analysis for me  to  make  that
    leap, and conclude that the appeal ought to be allowed under Article  8
    notwithstanding the appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision under the Immigration Rules. In any event I would struggle  to
    see how in situations where a foreign national applies to come  to  the
    UK for the purposes of a family visit it would constitute a  breach  of
    that person's Article 8 rights to  refuse  entry  clearance,  albeit  I
    recognise that there is a duty  on  public  authorities  to  facilitate
    family reunion wherever possible.  I do not think  there  was  anything
    like an adequate analysis of that situation here for me  to  substitute
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in  a  way  that  is  favourable  to  the
    appellant, and it seems to me that if the appellant wants  to  come  to
    the UK purely on the basis of Article 8 the appellant ought to  make  a
    fresh application.

6.   Furthermore there is no cross-appeal in this case  on  the  basis  that
    the Immigration Judge's decision, and in  particular  his  analysis  of
    Article 8, was inadequate or unreasonable. In particular the  appellant
    could have submitted a response under rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008 indicating that  the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal ought to be upheld  on  the  alternative  basis
    that it constituted a proper analysis under Article 8.  It  seems  that
    the Immigration Judge forgot about Article 8 altogether and went on  to
    consider the requirements of the Rules as if that was a  matter  before
    him when in fact it was not.

7.   It is an unfortunate set of circumstances and I have got some  sympathy
    with the appellant, who, having achieved a favourable  outcome  to  his
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, then  faces  an  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Immigration Judge erred in law. However,   I  regret  to
    say that, based on my experience of Article 8, I do not  consider  that
    sufficient evidence was presented before the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the Immigration Judge to allow the appeal solely  on  that  basis.  The
    appellant did not have any right of appeal on any other basis that  was
    raised in the grounds of appeal.

Decision

8.   For those reasons I allow the Secretary of State's appeal on the  basis
    that there was a material error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    substitute the decision of this  Tribunal  which  is  that  the  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer fails and hence the
    decision to refuse entry clearance in this case stands.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


