
IAC-AH-pc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18086/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 December 2014                       |On 16 December 2014       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Jafri Alia
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr E Waheed (Counsel instructed by SAJ Law Chambers)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shamash) promulgated on 2 September 2014 in  which  she  allowed
    the Claimant's appeal against  a decision made by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) in  Abu  Dhabi  refusing  entry  clearance  as  a  family
    visitor.

2.   The Claimant's date of birth is 17 November 1951 and she is  a  citizen
    of Pakistan.

Background

3.   The Claimant is a 62 year old widow living with her youngest  son,  his
    wife and their child in Karachi.  She applied for a  visit  visa  under
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules to visit her son  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Entry Clearance Officer refused the  application  on  the
    grounds that the  Claimant  had  not  established  sufficient  ties  in
    Pakistan. It was accepted that there was evidence of sufficient  income
    and maintenance in the United Kingdom.  However, the Secretary of State
    was not satisfied that the Claimant intended to leave the UK at the end
    of the visit because the ECO was unclear of the Claimant's domestic and
    family circumstances.

4.   The Tribunal determined the appeal on the papers.  There was a  limited
    right of appeal under Section 84 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act).  The  Tribunal  made  clear  that  the
    documentary evidence produced by the Claimant met the  requirements  of
    the rules under paragraph 41 of HC 395; there was  sufficient  evidence
    of ties in Pakistan and of the Claimant's independence to discharge the
    burden of proof.  In particular the Tribunal found  that  the  Claimant
    lived in Karachi all of her life where she has significant  assets  and
    has a son and grandchild for whom she cares.  [14].

5.   In considering Article 8 ECHR the Tribunal found that the Claimant  was
    an elderly woman who wished to visit her son and that there was  little
    more that she could have provided in order to show that she had  assets
    and ties in Pakistan [17].  The Tribunal considered Article  8  in  the
    context of the rights for family members to visit and to maintain  such
    relationships, and the obligation  on  the  State  to  facilitate  such
    rights.  The Tribunal found that there was  an  interference  with  the
    Claimant's family life because she was prevented from visiting  members
    of her family in the UK.  There  was  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had
    visited the Claimant in Pakistan and could continue to do so.

Grounds of Application

6.   The Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal  erred  by  failing  to
    make a finding that the Claimant has  family  life  in  the  UK,  which
    should be the starting point for any consideration (S v United  Kingdom
    [1984] 40 DR 196).  There was no evidence or  finding  of  any  further
    elements of dependency such as to engage Article  8  (Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31).

7.   Furthermore, the Tribunal failed to identify  compelling  circumstances
    not recognised by the Rules following Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)
    and Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  on  the  meaning  of  exceptional
    circumstances, namely, that the refusal would lead to an  unjustifiably
    harsh outcome.  The Claimant would have been able to reapply for  entry
    clearance given that the judge found she  met  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Tribunal  should  have  found  that  the  decision  to  refuse  was
    proportionate had it taken into account such matters.

Permission

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 28  October  2014.   The  grounds  and  determination  disclosed  an
    arguable material error of law.

The Hearing

Submissions

9.   Mr Tarlow relied  on  the  comprehensive  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application.  The Tribunal had given  no  consideration  to  the  first
    stage in Nagre and Gulshan as regards compelling circumstances.

10.  Mr Waseem submitted that  the  overall  approach  demonstrated  by  the
    Tribunal was correct and that any apparent errors related to the  style
    and structure of the decision.  He submitted that there were sufficient
    findings of fact at [15] to show that  the  Article  8  assessment  was
    correctly made.  He further  submitted  that  the  Tribunal   correctly
    identified the unique feature of this  case,  namely,  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review was insufficient by failing to attach weight
    to the fact that the claimant lived with her son  and  the  information
    contained in the Form B.

11.  Mr Waseem submitted that Kugathas was not relevant  in  this  case  and
    placed reliance Ghising (Family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  [2012]
    UKUT 00160 (IAC).  There can be family  life  absent  any  elements  of
    dependency and it was clear that there was family life  between  a  son
    and his elderly mother.  The five stages of Razgar were discernable  in
    the decision of the Tribunal.

Discussion and Decision

12.  This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there were  material  errors  disclosed  in  the  Tribunal's  decision.
    Essentially the grounds complain that the Tribunal failed  to  set  out
    and consider the necessary steps to justify consideration of Article  8
    outside of the Rules and thereafter in the Article 8 assessment did not
    make a finding of family life and did not consider proportionality.

13.   First of all, the Tribunal considered  the  evidence  submitted  under
    the Immigration Rule HC 395 at paragraph 41 and found that the Claimant
     met the requirements of the Rules.

14.    Thereafter the Tribunal went on to consider  the  Article  8.   There
    was no consideration of the "Gulshan/Nagre test". However,  I  find  no
    material error in the Tribunal's approach having regard to  R  (on  the
    application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
    00539 (IAC) in which the headnote states: There is nothing in R (Nagre)
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)  or  Shahzad  (Art  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that suggests that a  threshold
    test was being suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a
    need to look at the evidence to see if there was anything which has not
    already been adequately considered in the context  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and which could lead to  a  successful  Article  8  claim.  These
    authorities must not be read  as  seeking  to  qualify  or  fetter  the
    assessment of Article 8. This is consistent with para 128 of  R  (MM  &
    Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985,  that  there  is  no  utility  in
    imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as   a   preliminary   to   a
    consideration of an Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion-based
    Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin),
    there is no prior threshold which  dictates  whether  the  exercise  of
    discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment
    and the reasoning which  are  called  for  are  informed  by  threshold
    considerations.

15.  The Tribunal considered Article 8 but failed to follow the five  stages
    set out by Lord Bingham in the judgment of Razgar.  The  Tribunal  made
    no clear findings of fact that addressed  any  of  the  five  questions
    posed including whether or not there was family life and  the  question
    of proportionality.

16.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision  discloses  an  error  of
    law in its dealing with the second stage assessment.

17.   However, I do not find a material error in  light  of  the  facts  and
    evidence that were before the Tribunal. I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
    context of family visits there is a family life  between  the  Claimant
    and her son that engages Article 8 without the  need  for  establishing
    dependency over and above normal ties for adults. The Claimant  is  the
    mother of the sponsor and she is in receipt of income from him  and  is
    therefore partially dependant on him.  The consequences of the  refusal
    are of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8. The decision amounts  to
    an interference with the family life because the Claimant is  not  able
    to see her son and his family in their home in the UK.  In  considering
    proportionality I take into account that the Tribunal  found  that  the
    requirements under the Rules were met  having  regard  to  evidence  of
    social, economic and family ties in Pakistan.   The  Claimant  has  the
    funds available and there is  suitable  accommodation  and  maintenance
    from the sponsor.  The sponsor has in the past visited his  mother  and
    there is no reason why he cannot continue to do so,  however  this  has
    financial implications for the family.  Furthermore family life is  not
    limited to physically being able to see a family member but encompasses
    being able to spend time in the family home,  experiencing  their  life
    style and developing emotional  bonds  in  particular  with  her  young
    grandchildren.  The Secretary of State has not raised  any  factors  to
    indicate that the visit is not in the public interest.  On the facts as
    established I am satisfied that the decision was not proportionate.

18.    There was no material error law in the determination.

19.   The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.



No anonymity order made


Signed        Date 15.12.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



No fee award made.

Signed   Date 15.12.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
