
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/18640/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 16 April 2015                          |On 20 April 2015                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Javeda AKhtar

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Hussain of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    promulgated on 30 June 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Graham  which
    allowed the Article 8 appeal of the respondent.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to Mrs  Akhtar  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is the mother of the adult sponsor who lives  in  the  UK
    with his wife and daughter. She applied for entry  clearance  to  visit
    these relatives, having done so at least three  times  previously  from
    2010 onwards, staying for a period of 16 months in total.

 4. It was common ground that, having been refused  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the only ground of appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    that of Article 8 ECHR.  The appeal was allowed for the reasons set out
    at [8] to [12]. The key reason why the appeal was allowed under Article
    8 is at  [12].  The  sponsor's  wife  and  daughter  cannot  visit  the
    appellant in Pakistan as  they  are  recognised  refugees  in  need  of
    protection from return to that country.

 5. The respondent's first challenge to the decision is that nowhere is the
    first "Razgar" question addressed so as to show how the appellant could
    be said to have a family life for the purposes of Article  8  with  her
    adult son, daughter-in-law and granddaughter. No  particular  emotional
    ties or dependency were shown in the evidence to support a  finding  of
    family life. The son had lived in the  UK  since  2006,  firstly  as  a
    student and then had established a family of  his  own.  The  appellant
    lived in Pakistan with her husband and other adult children.

 6. Ms Hussain maintained for the appellant that she  had  been  instructed
    that the appellant had  a  particularly  close  relationship  with  her
    granddaughter as she had been in the UK for a great deal of time  since
    the child was born. She was unable to  take  me  to  any  part  of  the
    determination showing that the First-tier Tribunal assessed whether the
    appellant's family life was engaged  at  all,  however.  She  was  also
    unable to maintain that evidence of a particularly  close  relationship
    with the granddaughter or a submission to that effect had  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Where that was so, it was my judgement  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made a material error  on  a  point  of  law  in  failing  to  make  an
    assessment of how the family life of the appellant was engaged for  the
    purposes of Article 8. It cannot be said that the material  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowed only for the conclusion  that  family  life
    was engaged where it is also the case that no  evidence  of  particular
    dependency or emotional ties was put to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I found that the error of law was material and such that  the  decision
    had to be set aside. I proceeded to remake the appeal.

 9. I noted the comments of the  Presidential  panel  at  [24]  of  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), thus:

        "We are, however, prepared to say that it  will  only  be  in  very
        unusual circumstances that a person other  than  a  close  relative
        will be able to show that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  comes
        within the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this is likely
        to be limited to cases where the relationship is  that  of  husband
        and wife or other close life partners or a parent and  minor  child
        and even then it will not necessarily be extended to  cases  where,
        for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim or will not  add
        significantly to the time that the people involved spend together."

10. This is not a case of "husband and wife or other close life partners or
    a parent and minor child" stated in Mostafa to  be,  in  practice,  the
    kind of relationships that could found an Article 8 family  life  claim
    in a visit visa application.  As above, other than the appellant having
    spent 16 months in the UK since her granddaughter was born, it was  not
    argued before me that there was anything that  might  demonstrate  that
    family life for Article 8 purposes had been established. I did not find
    this period of time spent living with the UK relatives as a visitor  to
    be a sufficient indication that the appellant  has  established  family
    life with her granddaughter or other UK relatives; Kugathas v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) applied.

11. The Article 8 claim therefore fails at the first stage of the Article 8
    assessment.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

13. I re-make the appeal, refusing it under Article 8 ECHR.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 16 April 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
