

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
VA/18260/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13th November 2014                        |On: 5th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Naghina Faiz
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent Ms Faiz is a national of  Pakistan  date  of  birth  4th
    October 1985. On the 12th June  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Smith MBE TD) allowed her appeal against a refusal to grant  her  entry
    clearance as a visitor to the UK. The Entry Clearance Officer  now  has
    permission to appeal that decision on the grounds  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to allow the appeal under the immigration rules and  there
    was a paucity of reasoning in respect of the human rights grounds.


 2. Anyone can apply to come to the UK as a visitor. It was the case for  a
    long time that appeals against refusals of such applications could only
    be brought by 'close family members' of sponsors in the UK.  Since  the
    25th June 2013 this has no longer been the case. On that day s52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013 came into effect, which amended s88A  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  effect  of  those
    changes is that appeals against a refusal of a visit visa can now  only
    be brought on two grounds: race discrimination and human rights.


 3. Ms Faiz made her application for entry clearance  on  the  17th  August
    2013. It was refused on the  9th  September  2014  and  the  Notice  of
    Refusal indicated that the right of appeal was "limited to the  grounds
    referred to in section 84(1)(c) of the NIAA 2002". An  entry  clearance
    officer reviewed the refusal on the 5th February 2014 and upheld it: he
    reiterated that  there  were  only  limited  grounds  upon  which  this
    decision could be appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  detailed  and
    appear to have been drafted by a  'legal  advisor'  in  Pakistan.  They
    dispute the matters set forth in the reasons  for  refusal  letter  and
    conclude by asserting "not  granting  a  family  visitor  visa  to  the
    appellant is wide violation of human right act  1998  article  8".  The
    grounds do  not  expand  on  why  refusal  of  this  visa  might  be  a
    "violation" of the UK's human rights obligations.

 5. When the matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Presenting
    Officer did not, apparently, pursue  the  point  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal  were  limited:  this  is  recorded  at  paragraph  11  of   the
    determination. The hearing appears to have proceeded on the basis  that
    this was an 'old style'  appeal  under  the  rules.  Having  heard  the
    credible evidence of the sponsor,  Ms  Faiz's  brother  Mr  Ahmed,  the
    Tribunal found that Ms Faiz met all of the requirements of paragraph 41
    of the Rules at the date of decision and therefore allowed  the  appeal
    outright. At paragraph 11 the determination also says this:

         "In any event in the particular circumstances of  this  appeal  and
         particularly given the  inability  of  the  sponsor  to  travel  to
         Pakistan because of his serious illness I  take  the  view  that  a
         refusal to allow the appellant to visit the United Kingdom would be
         a disproportionate interference with his right to family life  with
         his sister"

    This was a reference to the evidence that Mr Ahmed had  been  suffering
    from oral cancer and had undergone a  number  of  operations.  On  this
    basis the appeal was also allowed on human rights grounds.

      Error of Law

 6. I am satisfied that it was an error of law to allow  the  appeal  under
    the Rules. For the reasons set out above there was no  jurisdiction  to
    do so. That decision must be set aside.


 7. In respect of the human rights ground of appeal  I  am  satisfied  that
    this was a matter before the First-tier Tribunal, since 'article 8'  is
    expressly raised in the grounds of appeal, albeit it  in  a  vague  and
    rather unhelpful way.

 8. It would seem likely that the class of visitors  who  will  succeed  on
    human rights grounds in such appeals  is  going  to  be  small.  It  is
    difficult to see how 'human  rights'  grounds  can  avail  the  average
    visitor, since family relationships with relatives in  other  countries
    will generally be, by definition,  quite  distant,  and  would  in  the
    normal course of events be maintained  by  contact  through  telephone,
    skype etc. It seems likely that the class  who  will  succeed  will  be
    limited to applicants who are seeking to  visit  a  very  close  family
    member who would for some reason be unable to visit them.  This  appeal
    might be such a case.  It  could  be  inferred  that  the  relationship
    between a brother and sister would be  very  close,  and  that  if  the
    sponsor were unable to travel to Pakistan due to his  serious  illness,
    it could arguably be a breach of Article  8  to  refuse  to  allow  the
    applicant who meets all of the requirements of  the  rules  entry.   It
    would appear from paragraph 11 of the determination that this  was  the
    reasoning employed here.   I  cannot  however  be  satisfied  that  the
    evidence did in fact show that Mr Ahmed  was  unable  to  continue  his
    family life with his sister in the same way that he has always done. He
    himself told the Tribunal that he has been in Pakistan as  recently  as
    18 months ago and that  he  has  plans  to  go  again  in  the  future.
    Presumably  they  maintain  their  relationship  by  'modern  means  of
    communication'.  There was no medical evidence to indicate that he  was
    unable to travel at present nor at some point in the future.  There was
    not, therefore, the evidential basis for concluding  that  the  refusal
    would be a breach of Article 8 and this decision too must be set aside.

 9. That said the Entry Clearance Officer will no doubt wish to review this
    decision in light of the unchallenged positive findings of fact made by
    the First-tier Tribunal. This young lady wishes to  visit  her  brother
    who has been seriously ill with cancer and the First-tier Tribunal  has
    accepted that she meets all of the requirements of the Rules.   At  the
    very least any future application should be assessed in light of  these
    findings.

      Decisions

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


11. The decision in the  appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
    dismissed on human rights grounds".




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            19th December
                                    2014
