

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number VA/18527/2013
                                          VA/18528/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at Sheldon
                      Determination Promulgated
On 9th September 2014
                  On 17th September 2014
Prepared 16th September 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             MARTIN NGWA AKENJI
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                      IRENE EPSE AKENJI MANDEH ABONGWA
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Anonymity direction not made
For the Appellant: Mrs H A (Sponsor)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the determination of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Whalan promulgated on the 27th of May 2014 in
   which the Appellants' visit visa appeal were allowed. The grounds are to
   the effect that as the applications post-date the 25th of June 2013 the
   Judge was prohibited from considering the merits of the appeals under the
   Immigration Rules and was limited to considering human rights and race
   discrimination and was wrong to allow the appeal under the rules.

2. The determination is clearly flawed as by the provisions of section 52
   of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 the rights of appeal in family visit
   visa applications were curtailed and limited to human rights and race
   discrimination grounds. The Judge had no power to consider the merits of
   the substantive application and was wrong to do so, the appeal could not
   be allowed on that basis.

3. At paragraph 5 the Judge noted that human rights and racial
   discrimination had been raised but without any specific detail. At
   paragraph 13 the Judge dismissed any suggestion that the decision was a
   consequence of racial discrimination or a breach of the Appellants' human
   rights.

4. At the hearing the Appellants were represented by the Sponsor. As the
   appeal had been a paper appeal the Sponsor's submissions were limited as
   the hearing before the Upper Tribunal was not to be a further appeal on
   the merits and having sought a paper appeal it would not be fair for the
   ambit of the hearing to be enlarged.

5. From what the Sponsor said it is clear that she had had a difficult year
   in terms of her health and that she wanted the Appellants to attend her
   graduation and to provide family support that had been lacking. It is a
   situation that commands sympathy for her and her distress at the refusal
   was both clear and understandable. However, at the hearing I explained
   that the Upper Tribunal role was limited to correcting an error by the
   First-tier Tribunal and that while I would consider the position she was
   not to be optimistic about the possible outcome.

6. The Grounds of Appeal were set out in a letter of the 2nd of November
   2013. The letter set out the Sponsor's circumstances and addressed the
   merits of the appeals. The only reference to the limited rights of appeal
   4th page in the 6th and 7th paragraphs. It is stated that the decision
   breached the Sponsor's and Appellants' human rights and was based on race
   rather than evidence but no evidence or particulars were given. This was
   a view maintained by the Sponsor at the Upper Tribunal hearing.

7. The Judge was right to observe that the grounds were raised and was also
   right to observe that there was no detail as to how the assertions could
   be maintained. Evidence is required to show that either is made out and
   in the case of human rights it is necessary to show that there is family
   life, i.e. that between adults there is some form of dependency beyond
   what would be expected. There was no evidence to that effect and no
   evidence of racial discrimination. The dismissal of these grounds at
   paragraph 13 was appropriate and was the only finding that the Judge was
   entitled to make on the information available to him.

8. In summary the Judge erred in considering the substantive application
   and the decision to allow the appeals under paragraph 41 was not legally
   open to him. The findings made in respect of human rights and race
   discrimination were properly made and open to the Judge on the
   information available. The substantive decision is set aside leaving only
   the findings on the remaining issues, on that basis the appeals are
   dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and I re-make the decision in the appeal
dismissing the appeal of the Appellants.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I make no
direction.

In dismissing the Appellants' appeals I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
       Dated: 17th September 2014
