
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18847/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th September 2014                          |On 2nd October  2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                 SHAH BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar of Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advisory Services (UK) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal  the  Secretary  of  State  now  becomes  the
    appellant.  However, for the avoidance of confusion, I  shall  continue
    to refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 8th July  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Omotosho  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M Smith  in  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse entry clearance
    as a family visitor in accordance with the provisions of  paragraph  41
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In granting permission Judge Omotosho pointed out that the  grounds  of
    application contended that the judge failed to consider that the appeal
    rights of applicants proposing family visits  had  been  restricted  on
    25th June 2013 by virtue of Section 52 of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act
    2013.   An  appeal  could  only  be  brought   on   human   rights   or
    discrimination grounds.  The determination showed that  the  judge  had
    made no reference to either human rights or discrimination.

 4. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the respondent relied upon the  grounds  of
    appeal.  She pointed out that the Entry Clearance Manager who  reviewed
    the decision on 22nd February 2014 had confirmed the limited rights  of
    appeal and that the original grounds of appeal  had  raised  Article  8
    although this appeared to have been overlooked by the judge.  Mr Sarwar
    also agreed that the judge had been in error in dealing with the appeal
    against the provisions set out in paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules
    but in failing to deal with the eligible element of the appeal on human
    rights grounds.  Both representatives  agreed  that  the  determination
    would have to be re-made on the eligible human  rights  grounds  alone.
    He also pointed out that no interpreter had been requested  and  so  he
    suggested that the appropriate mode of disposal would be to  remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Nottingham.

 5. I announced that I was satisfied that the determination showed an error
    on a point of law because the judge had clearly failed to deal with the
    appeal on the limited grounds permitted by Section 52 of the 2013  Act.
    Having regard to the fact that the appeal would have to be  reheard  on
    all issues relating to human rights I was satisfied that application of
    paragraph 72(b) of the Practice Statement by the  Senior  President  of
    25th September 2012 made it appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Nottingham
    for hearing on all issues related to the limited right of appeal.

 2. The hearing will take place on 5th November  2014  and  should  not  be
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E. M. Smith.

 3. Representatives should submit a consolidated bundle  of  all  documents
    and other evidence to be relied upon at the hearing by filing the  same
    with the Tribunal at least five days before the hearing date.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
