
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18004/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31st July 2014                               |On 15th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         mr Oluwatobi Samuel Salami
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - lagos
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Jibowu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24th  August  1993.   The
    Appellant had applied for a visit visa  for  one  month  to  visit  his
    mother in the United Kingdom.  His application was  refused  in  August
    2013 by the Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Whalan sitting at Taylor House on 7th May 2014.  In a determination  on
    the papers the  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. On 20th May 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal  pointing  out  that  the  judge  had  gone  beyond  his
    jurisdiction and had therefore erred  in  law  and  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  On  12th  June  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colyer granted permission to appeal.  It is  on  that  basis  that  the
    appeal comes before me.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  within  the
    Tribunal proceedings the Secretary of State is referred  to  herein  as
    the Respondent and Mr Salami as the Appellant albeit that  this  is  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State.

 4. The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel  Mr  Jibowu  and  the
    Secretary of State by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Saunders.

Submissions

 5. Mr Saunders submits the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in  law  in
    that he had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and therefore he asks me to find that there is a  material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, to  set  aside
    the decision and to remake the decision in favour of the  Secretary  of
    State.

 6. Mr Jibowu acknowledges that the Appellant is  precluded  from  bringing
    his appeal under the Immigration Rules but submits that once the matter
    is before the Immigration Judge he is not precluded from looking at the
    substance of the matter and  that  once  it  came  before  him  he  was
    entitled to look at the case on its merits and that this is what he has
    done and that the decision therefore does  not  disclose  any  material
    error of law and he asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 9. There has been a considerable  change  over  recent  years  as  to  the
    jurisdiction of the Immigration Tribunal to address issues relating  to
    appeals against the refusal of the granting of  visit  visas  by  Entry
    Clearance Officers.  Originally the degree of relationship  between  an
    Appellant  and  Sponsor  was  substantially   reduced   in   the   2012
    Regulations.  Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act came  into  effect
    on 25th June 2013 and that restricted  further  the  appeal  rights  of
    visitors coming to visit family members in the UK.  It is pertinent  to
    note that those restrictions only apply  to  applications  made  on  or
    after 25th June.  This application was made some  six  to  seven  weeks
    later in early August 2013.  The effect of the changes to the Crime and
    Courts Act amended Section 88A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 to remove the right of  appeal  of  a  person  visiting
    specified family members.  The only basis upon which an appeal can  now
    be brought are the residual grounds in Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of  the
    2002 Act namely

       . that the decision is unlawful by Section 29  of  the  Equality  Act
         2010 and

       . that the decision is unlawful under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998 (public authority not to  act  contrary  to  Human  Rights
         Convention) as being compatible  with  the  Appellant's  Convention
         rights.

10. It is clear that the appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    on the basis that the  Grounds  of  Appeal  alleged  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's rights under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  Those
    grounds are handwritten.

11. The appeal appeared before Immigration Judge Whalan on the papers.   He
    considered the evidence at paragraphs 6 to 9 and made a  finding  based
    on the balance of probabilities at paragraph 12 that the Appellant  was
    a genuine applicant whose  appeal  should  be  allowed.   He  therefore
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

12. At paragraph 13 of his determination he addressed  the  fact  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal made reference to a breach of the Appellant's  rights
    under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 although no submissions or
    arguments were proffered as to how this could be so.  He concluded that
    those Grounds of Appeal were without merit and should be dismissed.  He
    was perfectly right and entitled to draw such a conclusion.

13. Where the judge erred was its final sentence of paragraph 13.

         "These  conclusions  do  not,  however,  undermine  my   considered
         conclusions in respect of the Immigration Rules."

14. The judge was wrong in reaching that conclusion.  He may well not  have
    been wrong in his findings under the Immigration Rules but what he  was
    wrong in doing was concluding that he had any jurisdiction to entertain
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  It is clear that  pursuant  to
    statute  he  now  does  not  have  that  authority   although   it   is
    understandable as to how the judge perhaps came to consider it  bearing
    in mind the matter was put before him in a paper list.   That  happened
    because the Grounds of Appeal referred to Article  6  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights which as shown above constitute a basis  for
    an appeal to an Immigration Judge.  Having properly decided that  there
    was no basis whatsoever in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  the  judge  should
    merely have dismissed the appeal under Article 6.  He should  not  have
    gone on to consider the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

15. I explained all this  to  the  Appellant's  Sponsor.   It  is  not  the
    intention of the immigration authorities to prevent genuine  visits  to
    this country.  Further it  is  not  for  me  to  speculate  as  to  the
    genuineness of this application save to note that one of my  colleagues
    in the First-tier Tribunal has already found that his view was that the
    visit was genuine.  The correct approach  now  is  for  the  Appellant,
    should  he  wish  to  make  his  proposed  visit,  to  make  a  further
    application to the Entry Clearance Officer.  He  would  be  advised  to
    note the basis upon which the appeal was refused in the first place and
    to ensure that all appropriate  documentation  is  submitted  with  the
    application.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law  and  is  set  aside.   The  decision  is  remade  dismissing   the
    Appellant's appeal for lack of jurisdiction.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date 8th August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


