






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18597/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23 September 2014                         |On 9 October 2014            |
|Prepared:  2 October 2014                     |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer: Abuja


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Amonia Benjamin Allison
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emezie, Solicitor (DCK Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      "entry clearance officer" and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria, born  on  29th  June  1952.  Her
      appeal against the  entry  clearance  officer's  decision  dated  26th
      September 2013 refusing to grant her an entry clearance as  a  visitor
      was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins under the  substantive
      immigration  rule.  He  explicitly  stated  at  paragraph  10  of  the
      determination that this was not an appeal to which Article  8  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights could, in his judgment, apply.


   3. On 12th August 2014, Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
      granted the entry clearance officer permission to  appeal.  He  stated
      that the grounds of application were well made. The Judge had recorded
      that the claimant applied for entry clearance on 16th September  2013.
      That was after 25th June 2013 when s.52 of the Crime  and  Courts  Act
      2013 came into effect, limiting the grounds of appeal in such cases to
      human rights and race relations.


   4. He also noted the Judge's reference in his conclusions  that  this  is
      not an appeal  to  which  Article  8  could  apply.  Designated  Judge
      McCarthy also stated that it was arguable that in the  light  of  that
      finding and in the absence of any reliance on race relations  grounds,
      the outcome is confused. The Judge gave no reasons  for  that  finding
      and it may be that he did not think that he needed to do more,  having
      allowed the appeal under the rules.


   5. At the hearing on 23rd September 2014, Mr  Emezie  accepted  that  the
      Judge had erred by allowing the appeal under the immigration rules. He
      submitted however that the Judge had failed to engage with or make any
      decision regarding Article 8.


   6. Mr Jarvis accepted that  to  that  extent  the  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.


   7. It was evident from paragraphs 11 to 19 the grounds of  appeal  before
      the First-tier Tribunal that there had been substantial  reference  to
      Article 8.  Submissions  in  accordance  with  Article  8  were  made.
      Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal had only limited jurisdiction  in
      this case and  was  only  entitled  (and  required)  to  consider  the
      claimant's human rights claim.


   8. I find that the decision of the first-tier Judge involved  the  making
      of a material error of law.  The decision is accordingly set aside and
      will have to be remade.


   9. Both parties therefore agreed that this was  an  appropriate  case  to
      remit to the First-tier Tribunal on the appellant's Article 8 appeal.


  10. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  practice  statement
      regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for a fresh decision.


  11. This is a case where the appellant has been denied the opportunity  of
      properly presenting her case and where the Judge  failed  to  consider
      the Article 8 claim at all. This is an appropriate case  to  remit  to
      the First-tier Tribunal.


     Decisions


    The decision of the first-tier Judge involved the making of a  material
    error of law.  The decision is accordingly set aside and will  have  to
    be remade.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made.


     No anonymity order made.


     Directions


     The agreed hearing date is the 8th January 2015, with a  time  estimate
of one hour.


     The appeal will be heard by any Judge apart  from  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Malins.














                               Signed                     Date   2 October
                                   2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge







