
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18459/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                  entry clearance officer (ECO), abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mrs kursheed
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ali, instructed by Mohammed Iftikhar (sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant ECO  appeals  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sangha that was promulgated on 29 September 2014.

 2. Mr Mills relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that since those
    grounds were settled there had been  significant  developments  in  the
    case law relating to human rights grounds and family  visitor  appeals.
    I will have to consider that  case  law  below  and  therefore  do  not
    recount all  of  Mr  Mills's  submissions  at  this  juncture.   It  is
    sufficient to say that the ECO alleges that Judge Sangha failed to make
    appropriate findings to give adequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that
    article 8(1) ECHR was engaged on the facts of this case.  As a  result,
    the judge had no proper basis for considering proportionality.

 3. In reply, Mr Ali relied on his skeleton argument and reminded  me  that
    even though Judge Sangha had not had the benefit of  the  jurisprudence
    that has developed since  he  allowed  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, his decision and  reasons  were  fully  consistent  with  the
    approach now advocated in  such  guidance.   Mr  Ali  took  me  through
    relevant sections of the current case law to  advance  his  submissions
    but as I will have to examine the case law  below  I  do  not  need  to
    rehearse his arguments in full here.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  he
    reminded me of  parts  of  the  current  jurisprudence  which  he  said
    undermined the arguments presented by Mr Mills.

 4. At the end of the hearing I gave my decision which is  to  dismiss  the
    ECO's appeal (with the effect that the  decision  of  Judge  Sangha  is
    upheld).  I gave brief reasons at the end of the hearing but  indicated
    I would reserve my full reasoning which I now give.

 5. Mr Mills and Mr Ali both direct me to  the  current  case  law  on  the
    proper approach to human rights grounds in family visitor appeals.

 6. It is well known that the changes brought about by s.52  of  the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013 restricted  the  grounds  of  appeal  available  to
    family visitors from 25 June 2013 when the right of appeal  for  family
    visitors was removed from part 5 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  As a result, from that date a family visitor  who  is
    refused entry clearance was able to appeal against the refusal of entry
    clearance only on grounds relating to human rights and  race  relations
    issues.

 7. I mention that further changes  to  the  2002  Act  introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 and in force from 6 April 2015 means there  is  no
    longer a right of appeal against a refusal of entry clearance but  that
    is of no relevance to this appeal because the decision  refusing  entry
    clearance was made on 12 September 2013.

 8. The appellant in this appeal relied on human rights grounds  only,  and
    relied in particular on her family life rights protected by  article  8
    ECHR.

 9. As is usual when the law changes significantly the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    quickly put in a situation to resolve disputes as to what  the  changes
    actually mean and how they apply.  There have been a  number  of  cases
    and the following two bring the relevant  considerations  and  guidance
    together: Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement - Article 8)  [2015]
    UKUT 463 (IAC) and Kaur (visit appeals;  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  487
    (IAC).  Between them, these decisions provide guidance as to  the  fact
    that visits can be an integral part of respecting family life  even  if
    there is no element of dependency and of the role the immigration rules
    have when assessing whether an immigration decision gave proper respect
    to family life.

10. I turn to the determination  and  whether  the  findings  made  are  in
    accordance with the current case law.

11. Judge Sanga's determination reveals that his starting point was whether
    the appellant would have  met  the  immigration  rules  then  in  force
    regarding visitors.  At paragraph 14 he found that  the  appellant  met
    the relevant requirements and this led Judge Sangha's to his conclusion
    at paragraph 17 that the ECO's refusal of entry clearance was arbitrary
    to the extent that it was not in accordance with the law.

12. At paragraph 15 Judge Sangha properly directed himself to  the  limited
    grounds of appeal and  in  the  subsequent  paragraph  found  that  the
    appellant enjoyed family life with her relatives settled in the UK.  He
    gives detailed reasons for that finding, identifying  that  the  family
    has maintained relationships through family visits  over  a  number  of
    years.

13. In light of these  findings,  it  is  unsurprising  that  Judge  Sangha
    concluded that because family life existed between  the  appellant  and
    her relatives in the UK and because the decision appealed  against  was
    not in accordance with the law, the decision refusing  entry  clearance
    could not be proportionate in  all  the  circumstances.   These  points
    summarise paragraphs 18 and 19 of his determination.

14. I am satisfied that the findings and decisions made are fully in accord
    with the current case law.  It is evident from Abbasi that family  life
    can take different forms.  Although Mr Mills suggests that Judge Sangha
    gave insufficient reason for finding family life exists in  this  case,
    it is clear from the detail in  paragraph  16  that  is  an  allegation
    without  any  reasonable  foundation.   The  human  rights   convention
    required the ECO to respect family life and that  includes  recognising
    the fact that extended members of a family might  need  to  visit  each
    other from  time  to  time  to  maintain  their  relationships.   Judge
    Sangha's careful examination of the evidence as set out in paragraph 16
    reveals that this is such a case.

15. Having found family life exists, the fact that the requirements of  the
    immigration rules were in fact met at the date of decision  was  strong
    evidence that the ECO's decision was not in accordance with the law and
    therefore arbitrary.  This is not to say that the ECO was not  entitled
    to make the decision appealed against.  The complaint is that  the  ECO
    failed to give proper  consideration  to  the  evidence  and  arguments
    presented.  Judge Sangha's careful analysis upheld that complaint.   He
    was entitled to come to those findings and  on  so  doing,  because  he
    gives ample and cogent reasons, there is no  possibility  of  regarding
    his findings as being legally perverse.

16. Having found that the requirements of the immigration rules had in fact
    been met at the date of decision can only be a  significant  factor  in
    assessing proportionality because, as we  know  from  the  guidance  in
    Kaur,  the  immigration  rules  set   out   public   policy   regarding
    immigration.  There can be no public interest in maintaining a decision
    to refuse entry clearance where the  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules are met.  As a result, and  as  identified  by  Judge  Sangha  in
    paragraph 19, the personal  circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  her
    relatives outweigh the public interest.

17. The only negative comment regarding the determination might be that the
    structure might have been different if Judge Sangha had the benefit  of
    the current case law.  But that is no criticism  because  even  without
    the benefit of current case law, the fact he dealt with every  relevant
    issue reveals that his  determination  is  somewhat  prescient  of  the
    guidance that followed.

18. Because there is no legal error in the  determination,  I  dismiss  the
    ECO's appeal to the Upper Tribunal with the effect that  I  uphold  the
    decision of Judge Sangha for the reasons he gave.

Decision

The ECO's appear to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed  because  there  is  no
legal error in the  determination  of  Judge  Sangha  and  his  decision  is
upheld.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
