
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18587/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2015                     |On 10 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SUBI BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, Counsel, instructed by JA Stifford Law,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  applied,  together  with  her
    mother, for entry clearance to visit in the UK her husband, who has two
    children by his previous marriage to his first  wife,  the  Appellant's
    sister, who has sadly died.

2.   The applications were refused.   The  ensuing  appeals  were  heard  by
    Judge Cockrill sitting at  Taylor  House  on  13  January  2015.   Both
    parties  were  represented,  the  appellants  by   Mr   Khan.    In   a
    determination of 13 January 2015, promulgated on 19 January, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant,  whilst  dismissing  that  of  her
    mother.  At the hearing before me Mr Khan said that the mother's appeal
    had been  withdrawn.

3.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal, essential  on  the  grounds
    that  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  by  the  judge  was
    inadequate and was being utilised beyond its proper scope as a  general
    dispensing power, bearing in mind that it is virtually the only  ground
    of appeal in a visit visa application.  As subsequently supplemented by
    procedural directions, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  4  March
    2015,  by Judge Chambers in the following terms:

         "1.  Permission is sought in time, to appeal against  the  decision
             of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal T Cockrill promulgated  on
             19 January 2015.

         2.   The ground seeking permission challenge the  findings  of  the
             Judge that family  life  arrangements  would  be  breached  by
             refusing entry  clearance  to  the  appellants  to  visit  the
             Sponsor.

         3.   The grounds are arguable.  Permission is granted."

4.   The Sponsor attended the error of law hearing  before  me,  which  took
    the form of submissions.  I have taken  these  into  account,  together
    with the skeleton argument of Mr Melvin.  I reserved my decision.

Determination

5.   Adjei (Visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261  (IAC)  held  that  the
    first question to be addressed in an appeal against  refusal  of  entry
    clearance as a visitor where only human rights grounds are available is
    whether Article 8 is engaged at all.  If it  is  not,  which  will  not
    infrequently be the case, the Tribunal has no  jurisdiction  to  embark
    upon an  assessment  of  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  under  the
    Immigration Rules and should not do so.  If Article 8 is  engaged,  the
    Tribunal may need to look at the extent to which the claimant  is  said
    to have failed to meet the requirements of the Rules, because that  may
    inform the consequent proportionality balancing exercise.  As  held  in
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC),  this  is
    capable of being a  weighty,  although  not  determinative,  factor  in
    deciding proportionality.

6.   The issue is whether Judge Cockrill considered whether  Article  8  was
    engaged at all.  He did not articulate and answer  this  question.   He
    addressed the application of Article 8 in paragraphs  43,  50  and  53,
    concluding that the  level  of  interference  with  the  right  of  the
    Appellant to respect for her family life was  sufficiently  marked  and
    disproportionate  to  the  need  for  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control.  These  paragraphs  may  be  construed  to  either
    conclusion about whether he considered whether Article 8 was engaged at
    all.  Read in the context of the decision as a whole, which reviews all
    of the  evidence,  I  conclude  that  he  did  address  this  question,
    concluding that Article 8 was engaged.

7.   On that basis, the application for permission  to  appeal  argues  that
    the proportionality assessment is inadequate.  The judge considered the
    reasons given by the Sponsor preventing him travelling  to  Bangladesh.
    The Respondent submits  in  the  permission  application  that  he  had
    visited Bangladesh in order to marry the Appellant and that he was able
    to do so.  This becomes a disagreement upon the  judicial  findings  of
    fact.  It does not, however, evidence an error of law.  I find that the
    conclusions which the judge reached were reasonably open to him on  the
    evidence and not therefore erroneous in law.

8.   Mr Melvin added an additional oral submission that the approach of  the
    judge was perverse.  On a holistic assessment of the decision, I do not
    accept this challenge.

9.   I accordingly conclude that the decision of the judge does not  reflect
    an error of law.

Decision

10.  The original determination does not contain an  error  of  law  and  is
    upheld.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Dated: 5 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

