
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
VA/18805/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                       |On 28 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MISS MAHTA DOUSTKHAHVAJARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS







      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ievins on 12 September 2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague who
           had allowed the Respondent's appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds
           against the refusal of her application for entry clearance as  a
           visitor in a determination promulgated  on  21  July  2014.  The
           appeal was determined  on  the  papers  as  the  Respondent  had
           requested.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Iran, born on 21 September 1975,
           currently studying in Malaysia.  She wished to visit the  United
           Kingdom for the purpose of sitting a  professional  examination.
           The Entry Clearance Officer  had  refused  her  entry  clearance
           application on the grounds in summary that (a) the source of her
           funds had not been sufficiently proved; (b) her right to  remain
           in Malaysia as a student was in doubt; and (c) her intention  to
           leave the United Kingdom at the end of her visit was  in  doubt.
           The Appellant's right of appeal was limited to human rights  and
           Equality Act 2010 issues.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted  because  the  judge  had  misapplied  CDS
           (Points Based System: "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT
           00305 (IAC) (which applied to a student already  in  the  United
           Kingdom) and had treated Article 8 ECHR as a general  dispensing
           power, contrary to Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.  The  judge  had
           not considered whether or not the Respondent's human rights were
           engaged.


      4.    Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal in  standard  form.
           The Respondent was not represented at the hearing and  had  sent
           in no further  material  for  the  tribunal  to  consider.   The
           tribunal considered that the onwards appeal  could  nevertheless
           be justly determined.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Wilding for the Appellant relied on the grounds and the grant
           of permission to appeal.  The  Respondent's  human  rights  were
           simply not engaged  on  the  facts  and  the  determination  was
           misconceived.  Patel (above) applied.




      The error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal agreed with Mr Wilding's submissions. The  tribunal
           finds that the determination contains material errors of law, as
           identified in the grant of permission to appeal,  such  that  it
           must be set aside and remade.  The appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
           is allowed.




      The fresh decision


      7.    As noted above, the Respondent did not raise or pursue issues of
           race discrimination or human rights in her Notice of  Appeal  to
           the First-tier Tribunal.   It is not easy  to  guess  what  they
           could possibly have been.  The Respondent had no private life in
           the United Kingdom.  No such point was "Robinson obvious": see R
           v the Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p  Robinson
           [1997]  3  WLR  1162.   There  is  no  human  right  to  sit  an
           examination in the United Kingdom.  It was open to the Appellant
           to make a  fresh  entry  clearance  application  addressing  the
           issues raised by the Entry Clearance Officer when  refusing  her
           application.  The First-Tier Tribunal's  decision  can  only  be
           remade in one way, that is, that the appeal  against  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer's decision must be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague is set aside  and  remade  as
follows:

      The appeal of the original Appellant is DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     28 October 2014






      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     28 October 2014
