
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18458/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2015                          |On 29th January 2015          |
|Prepared 16th January 2015                    |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD SOHAIL IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICEr, ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Imran Hussain (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 26th June 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham on 11th June  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Muhammad  Sohail  Iqbal.    The   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  22nd
    November 1984.  He applied for entry clearance as a family visitor  and
    on 16th April 2013 the Entry Clearance Officer rejected his application
    because false representations had been made or false documents had been
    submitted, and the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine visitor who would leave the UK at  the  end  of
    the visit.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant's  sponsoring  father,  Mr
    Javed Iqbal and in his opening statements set down the burden of  proof
    and the standard of proof, explaining that, "in immigration appeals the
    burden of proof is  upon  the  Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof
    required is upon a balance of probabilities" (see paragraphs 4  to  5).
    The judge then set down the relevant  Immigration  Rules  pointing  out
    that, "the relevant Immigration Rules are set out in  paragraphs  40-43
    and 320(7A) of HC as amended" (paragraph 6).

 4. The judge then went on to consider the  basis  of  the  ECO's  refusal.
    This was that in a previous application, which went to appeal  and  was
    dismissed in 2011, the Appellant had said that he was  unemployed.   In
    this application he now claims to have been employed since  2005.   The
    judge held that there is no evidence of the Appellant's income  in  his
    bank statements.  There are only random cash  deposits.   He  owned  no
    property.  He had no assets.  He had no dependants.  Therefore the  ECO
    had refused the application (paragraph 10).

 5. Having examined the evidence, the judge concluded that "on the totality
    of the evidence before me" he was satisfied  that  "the  Appellant  did
    make a false statement by purporting to have been employed since 2005."
     This is because question 107  of  his  application  form  notes  that,
    "previously my application was refused because the ECO objected that, I
    was unemployed, and now I am employed and I have presented letters from
    Union Council ..."  But the Appellant also claimed to  be  running  his
    own business.  He claimed to have agricultural land and a  house.   The
    letter from the Union Council, however, said that he had  been  running
    his own business since 2005.  The letter from  the  employer  now  said
    that he was employed as a furniture polisher since 2005.  As the  judge
    exclaimed, "what exactly does the Appellant do?  Does he have  his  own
    business or is he  an  employee?"  (paragraph  14).   The  judge  heard
    evidence from Mr Javed Iqbal, the Appellant's father, that he had  made
    a mistake.  The judge did not accept this holding, "I am satisfied that
    in 2011 he was unemployed and reliant upon his father."

 6. The judge then went on to dismiss the appeal under paragraph 320(7A) on
    the basis that it was clear that false representations  had  been  made
    (see paragraph 16).  Additionally, however, the  judge  also  dismissed
    the appeal under paragraph  41  of  HC  395  as  well.   As  the  judge
    explained,

         "The submission of conflicting evidence from the Union Council  and
         his employer and his claim in his Grounds  of  Appeal  to  now  own
         agricultural land and a house is  at  such  complete  odds  to  the
         information in his  application  form,  that  I  do  not  find  his
         evidence to be credible and therefore  must  doubt  that  he  is  a
         genuine visitor who will leave the UK at  the  end  of  his  visit"
         (paragraph 16).

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in placing
    the burden of proof on  the  Appellant  as  far  as  an  allegation  of
    misrepresentation was concerned relevant to paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. On 5th August 2014 permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the judge's reference to the burden of proof being upon  the  Appellant
    at paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the determination "may have influenced  the
    outcome of the appeal."

 9. On 13th August 2014 a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary  of
    State to the effect that, notwithstanding what the judge had said,

         "It was not material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   The  judge
         factually describes what is wrong with the Appellant's evidence and
         it is obvious in the  determination  that  he  does  not  find  the
         Appellant's evidence satisfactory.  This would have been  the  same
         outcome had he correctly addressed the  burden  of  proof  thus  is
         immaterial to the outcome" (see paragraph 3).

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 16th January 2015, Mr Hussain, appearing on
    behalf of the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    submitted that he was particularly concerned that, even  if  there  was
    evidence which eventually would have led to the refusal of this  appeal
    in any event, the use of paragraph 320(7A) to  effect  such  a  refusal
    would shut this Appellant out from the possibility of ever  being  able
    to apply for a visitor's visa for the next ten years,  and  given  this
    draconian impact, it behoved the judge to exercise greater care in  the
    way that he set down the considerations of burden of proof.

11. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that there was no error of law because
    the judge had started the determination at paragraphs 4 to 6 by placing
    the burden of proof upon the Appellant in a  way  that  had  no  actual
    consequence.  This is because the burden upon the Secretary of State is
    to show evidence of misrepresentation.  The Secretary of State  did  do
    so.  The Respondent here pointed to the 2007 application.  In that  the
    Appellant had said he was unemployed.  The burden was discharged by the
    Respondent.

12. The judge looked to the Appellant's side for an explanation, and did so
    at paragraph 12, taking  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  father,  and
    observed that, "he said  at  the  time  of  the  last  application  the
    Appellant was working but took time off to help build the family  home.
    He said that he is still working for the same employer as he  had  been
    in 2011 and said that he had been to his place of work ..."  (paragraph
    12).  Having considered the evidence, the judge concluded that,  "I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant did make a false statement ..." (paragraph
    14).  Therefore, there was no consequence to the judge saying that  the
    burden of proof was upon the Appellant.  What one had to do was to look
    at the judge's approach.  This could not be faulted.

13. In the alternative, Mr Smart submitted that if I was to decide that the
    judge had erred, then I should make a finding  of  error  of  law,  and
    determine the appeal myself.  To that end, I should have regard to  the
    earlier determination of Judge Telford on 10th November 2011 (which  Mr
    Smart handed up).  In this determination (VA/27949/2011) Judge  Telford
    records that the Appellant

         "Claimed in the appeal grounds to have begun work on 20th June 2011
         some eight days before the decision  on  20th  June  2011  but  his
         father has blown that claim 'out of the  water.'   The  father  was
         adamant that work began only in July 2011." (see paragraph 15).

14. Mr Hussain submitted that if regard was to be had to the  determination
    of Mr Telford in 2011 then I should adjourn the  hearing  in  order  to
    enable the Sponsor, Mr Javed Iqbal, to give evidence, following  advice
    from his legal representatives, so that it can be explained exactly why
    these statements were made in the way that they were made.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the decision of Judge Hawden-Beal is not  one  that
    amounts to an error of law.  What the judge has done  here  is  to  set
    down the burden of proof in standard and conventional terms for visitor
    appeals, as is often  done  by  judges.   He  states,  "in  immigration
    appeals, the burden of proof is upon the Appellant and the standard  of
    proof required is upon a balance of probabilities."  It is only in  the
    next paragraph (at paragraph 6) that he  goes  on  to  say  that,  "the
    relevant Immigration Rules are set out in paragraphs 40-43 and  320(7A)
    of HC 395" (paragraph 6).

16. Thereafter, however, the analysis of the judge in no way suggests  that
    the burden of proof is placed upon 320(7A) of HC 395  as  amended  (see
    paragraph 6).  Thereafter, the analysis does not suggest that the judge
    has placed the burden of proof  upon  the  Appellant  with  respect  to
    paragraph 320(7A).

17. This is because the judge states (at paragraph  10)  that,  "the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application  because,   in   previous
    application, which went to appeal and was dismissed in  2011,  he  said
    that he was unemployed and in this  application  claims  to  have  been
    employed  since  2005"  (see  paragraph  10).   In  the  body  of   the
    determination the judge proceeds then  to  analyse  the  evidence  (see
    paragraphs 11 to 13), with  respect  to  the  Appellant's  explanation,
    which includes the giving of the evidence by his father,  Javed  Iqbal,
    for these anomalies.  The judge  eventually  concludes  that,  "on  the
    totality of the evidence before me," that he would be  "satisfied  that
    the Appellant did make a false statement by  purporting  to  have  been
    employed since 2005" (paragraph 14).  Accordingly, what appears  to  be
    an error of a statement in law is not a material error.  An examination
    of the body of the determination does not bear this out.

18. Second, and in any event, the judge  proceeded  to  refuse  the  appeal
    under Section 41 anyway  because  he  held,  "I  would  not  have  been
    satisfied that the Appellant met all the requirements of  paragraph  41
    anyway" (paragraph 16).

19. I reject Mr Imran Hussain's submission before me,  though  it  was  put
    forward  with  his  customary  elegance,  that  there  should   be   an
    adjournment of these proceedings to enable an explanation to  be  given
    for these discrepancies.  There has been ample  opportunity  taken  for
    this, both in 2011, and now in 2014, and  the  fact  remains  that  the
    judge was entitled to conclude, on a  balance  of  probabilities,  that
    matters fell to be determined as they were indeed determined.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        28th January 2015

