

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: VA/18638/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reason Promulgated     |
|On December 17, 2014              |On December 22, 2014              |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   MS THERESE NJOUGUELA SOUOP EPSE TACHOUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Wainwright (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born January 16, 1949  is  a  citizen  of  Cameroon.  On
    August 10, 2013 she submitted an application for a family visit visa to
    visit  her  daughter  and  son-in-law.  The  respondent   refused   her
    application under the Immigration Rules on September 26, 2013.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 22, 2013
    and raised human rights in her appeal. The respondent considered  those
    grounds of appeal  but  maintained  her  position  in  a  letter  dated
    February 20, 2014. On August 15, 2014 Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal
    Majid (hereinafter referred to as the  "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal.  He
    allowed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and Human Rights in
    a decision promulgated on August 29, 2014.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on September 4, 2014 submitting
    the FtTJ erred in allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
    failed to give adequate reason for allowing the appeal under article  8
    ECHR. On November 7, 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer
    granted permission to appeal finding it  arguable  the  FtTJ  may  have
    erred for the reasons outlined in the respondent's grounds of appeal.

 5. The sponsor did not attend but Mr Wainwright was content to proceed  in
    her absence. He accepted at the outset the FtTJ had erred  by  allowing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules because there was  no  right  of
    appeal to the tribunal in respect of that decision. He did argue though
    that the FtTJ was entitled to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds
    because the visit was genuine, the FtTJ felt she met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and at  paragraph  [16]  the  FtTJ  had  found
    reasons  for  family  life  and  refusing  the  application  would   be
    disproportionate especially as the sponsor was expecting a child.

 6. Mr Duffy submitted there was no automatic right to family life but even
    if there was family life it was not being interfered with and the  FtTJ
    had failed to consider the evidence. In particular, the  appellant  had
    never been to see her daughter in the United  Kingdom  and  their  last
    direct contact was in 2012 when the sponsor visited  the  appellant  in
    Cameroon. He submitted the case fell at that point and the  FtTJ  erred
    by proceeding any further.

    ASSESSEMENT OF ERROR OF LAW


 7. For the reason set out above in  paragraph  [5]  and  the  respondent's
    grounds of appeal I am satisfied there has been  a  material  error  in
    respect of the allowing of the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Since June 25, 2013 there are no rights of appeal under the Immigration
    Rules for visit visa appeals and the FtTJ erred materially in  allowing
    the appeal. The respondent was not  represented  and  whilst  the  FtTJ
    should have been alert to this issue it is  regrettable  Mr  Wainwright
    actively pursued this issue at the original hearing. Whilst  compliance
    with the Rules is a factor potentially in an article 8 claim there  are
    no circumstances where a FtTJ can be invited to allow the appeal  under
    the Rules. I therefore set aside that decision under the  Rules.  I  do
    not dismiss the appeal under the Rules quite simply because there is no
    jurisdiction to make a decision on that aspect of the appeal.

 8. I have considered the FtTJ's decision to allow the appeal on article  8
    grounds.

 9. The FtTJ set out case law in paragraphs [15], [16], [18]  and  [19]  of
    his determination. He made no findings on the  evidence  save  that  he
    concluded in paragraph [21] that the appeal should be  allowed.  It  is
    clear he allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds purely  based  on  the
    fact the Rules were, in his opinion, met. I am satisfied  that  is  the
    incorrect approach to take.

10. In order to succeed under article 8 ECHR the appellant  would  have  to
    demonstrate that there was family life and  that  the  right  had  been
    interfered with. If the appellant satisfied those requirements then the
    remaining tests as set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027 would also  have
    to be considered.

11. The evidence before the FtTJ was limited. Her daughter is a Cameroonian
    national who was in the United Kingdom and had studied  here,  and  was
    now working. The appellant's application form revealed that she had not
    travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  to  see  her  although  an  earlier
    application from February 2013 had previously been  refused.  She  last
    saw her daughter in April 2012. Her daughter was an adult and there was
    extremely tenuous family life based on the above history.

12. In allowing the appeal under article 8 the FtTJ paid  no  attention  to
    the history but simply based his decision on the fact he was  satisfied
    the appellant met the Rules. That approach is  flawed  and  I  find  an
    error in law.

13. The FtTJ had no evidence before him of family life beyond  their  adult
    relationship. There was no evidence the parties had seen each over  for
    over two years. The family life they had was possibly telephone contact
    and I am satisfied refusing the appeal under article 8 ECHR  would  not
    interfere with that contact.

14. I therefore find that the appellant has failed to show that any  family
    life would be interfered with and accordingly I remake the decision  on
    article 8 ECHR and I dismiss it.

    DECISION


15. There was a material error of law and I set aside the whole decision.

16. I dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.


17. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:     Dated: December 22, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I set aside the decision to make a fee award.



Signed:     Dated: December 22, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
