
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/18274/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23rd September 2015                |                On 25th September    |
|                                      |2015                                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Miss Rita Opoku
                       (anonymity direction NOT MAde)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sharma, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal  against  a  decision  by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davey, who, on  12th  December  2014,
      allowed the appeal of Ms Rita Opoku, a national of  Ghana,  against  a
      decision by the Entry Clearance Officer  dated  19th  August  2013  to
      refuse her application  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  family
      visitor.

   2. The appellant, who at the date of decision was  34  year  old,  sought
      permission  to  enter  the  country  to  attend  the  wedding  of  her
      guardians' son (her guardians  are  Grace  and  Charles  Basoah).  Her
      application  was  made  on  26  July  2013.  The  guardians  had  been
      supporting the appellant since she was 6 years old. Although  resident
      in the United Kingdom  they  had  visited  Ghana  frequently  and  had
      provided the Appellant with a substantial amount of financial support.

   3. The Entry Clearance Officer was not however satisfied that  the  funds
      the Appellant claimed were available to her were in fact so available.
      The Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  therefore  satisfied  that  the
      appellant genuinely intended to enter the UK only  as  a  visitor,  or
      that she would leave the United Kingdom at the end of her stay.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   4. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the sponsor guardian,  and
      considered  a  number  of  documents  provided  in  support   of   the
      application. In a  careful  and  considered  decision  the  First-tier
      Tribunal engaged  with  all  the  concerns  identified  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer and was satisfied that the appellant  was  genuinely
      employed in Ghana as the owner of a hairdressing salon. The First-tier
      Tribunal was satisfied as to the source of funds  that  had  been  put
      into her bank account. Having holistic regard  to  this  evidence  the
      First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the appellant  only  intend  to
      enter the UK as a visitor and that she would leave the United  Kingdom
      at the end of her proposed visit. Having so found  the  judge  allowed
      the appeal under the immigration rules. No consideration was given  by
      the Judge to Article 8.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   5. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal  the  decision
      of the First-tier on the basis that, having allowed the  appeal  under
      the immigration rules, the judge materially erred in law. The  Grounds
      noted that Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act  2013  commenced  on
      25th  June  2013.  This  amended  Section  88A  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which, in effect, removed a  right  of
      appeal for a family visitor  other  than  on  human  rights  and  race
      relations grounds. As  the  judge  failed  to  make  any  findings  in
      relation to the human rights ground, the only one reasonably available
      to him, his decision was not sustainable.

Identification of a material error of law

   6. At the outset of the hearing I indicated my concern to Ms Sharma,  who
      very  ably  represented  the  appellant,  that  the  Entry   Clearance
      Officer's Grounds accurately represented the law at the  date  of  the
      application and that the Judge should only have considered the  appeal
      on the basis that the decision breached the Human Rights Act  1998  or
      that the decision was racially discriminatory.

   7. While accepted that the Grounds did reflect the law as it was  at  the
      date of both the entry  clearance  application  and  the  respondent's
      decision, Ms Sharma valiantly sought to persuade  me  that  there  was
      material before the Judge relating  to  the  appellant's  relationship
      with her guardians and that he did, albeit  implicitly,  consider  the
      article 8  aspect  of  the  appeal.  Having  carefully  considered  Ms
      Sharma's submissions, and having had regard to the evidence  that  was
      before the First-tier Tribunal and the  decision  itself  I  was  left
      without  any  doubt  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law   by
      approaching the appeal exclusively on the  basis  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The Judge simply did not consider the relationship between  the
      appellant and her guardians  and  he  made  no  findings  relating  to
      Article 8.

Re-making of decision

   8. I indicated to both representatives that I had no  concerns  with  the
      First-tier Tribunal's assessment  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
      decision under the Immigration Rules. This had not been challenged  by
      the Entry Clearance Officer in the permission grounds. The  First-tier
      Tribunal gave full and sustainable reasons for its conclusion that the
      appellant did intend to enter the UK only as a visitor  and  that  she
      fully intended to return to Ghana at the end of her stay. The issue  I
      have to decide is whether the refusal,  in  light  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's factual findings and the fact that  the  immigration  rules
      were regarded as having been met (a factor relevant to  my  Article  8
      assessment; see Adjei (visit visas -  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  00261
      (IAC)), breached Article 8. In so doing I have to first decide whether
      Article 8 is even engaged, applying the well-known Razgar test.

   9. The appellant at the date of the decision was a single 34  years  old.
      She ran a successful hairdressing business and she had run it for  the
      previous five to six years.  Her guardians, who have lived in  the  UK
      since 1967, visited Ghana frequently and provided the appellant with a
      significant amount of financial  support.  The  fact  remains  however
      that, for her entire life, and certainly since the age of six when her
      mother passed away, the appellant's guardians have always lived in the
      United  Kingdom.  The  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
      guardians has been conducted remotely,  that  is,  at  a  considerable
      distance. The guardians only see the appellant two to  three  times  a
      year.

  10. It was submitted by Ms Sharma that the purpose of the visit (to attend
      the marriage of the guardians' son) was a very  good  reason  and  one
      that  demonstrated  the  strength  of  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and her guardians. In so doing she relied on the decision in
      Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement  -  Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
      00463 (IAC) which found that Article 8 was engaged in  respect  of  an
      entry clearance application by two brothers who wished to attend their
      late grandfather's funeral. It is worth noting that the President,  in
      that case, indicated that cases of this kind would be  fact  sensitive
      (paragraph 17).

  11.  I fully accept that the appellant has a good  relationship  with  her
      guardians. They have been providing  her  with  support  and  guidance
      since she was a young child. I am not however satisfied, having regard
      to the particular  facts  of  this  case,  that  the  relationship  is
      sufficiently strong such as to engage Article 8.

  12. I rely on the authority recently promulgated in the Court of Appeal of
      Singh & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA
      Civ 630. at paragraph 24 the Court of Appeal stated,


         The love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings
         will not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to
         be something more.  A  young  adult  living  with  his  parents  or
         siblings will normally have a family life  to  be  respected  under
         Article 8. A child enjoying a family life with his parents does not
         suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight  as  he  turns  18
         years of age. On the other hand, a young adult living independently
         of his parents may well not have a family life for the purposes  of
         Article 8.

  13. I am not satisfied that there is anything  more  in  the  relationship
      between the appellant and her guardians  over  and  above  the  normal
      relationship one would have between adults children and their parents.
      The appellant is an adult, living independently at  some  considerable
      distance from her guardians. She  has  her  own  successful  business,
      albeit one that was established with money provided by her  guardians.
      It is difficult to ascertain in what context the sponsors continue  to
      be 'guardians' given her age and independence. In Kaur (visit appeals;
      Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held: unless  an
      appellant can show  that  there  are  individual  interests  at  stake
      covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so as to give
      rise to a "strong claim that compelling  circumstances  may  exist  to
      justify the grant of LTE [Leave to Enter] outside the rules": (see  SS
      (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]) he or she is exceedingly
      unlikely to succeed. That proposition must also hold good  in  visitor
      appeals. Given my factual  findings  I  am  not  satisfied  there  are
      individual interests at stake covered by Article 8.

  14. In these circumstances I find that the First-tier has erred in law and
      I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.  I
remake the decision dismissing the appeal

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]                               24 September 2015
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



[pic]                               24 September 2015
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

