
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/18591/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Notice Promulgated                |
|On 4th December 2014              |On 11th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                       THE RIGHT HON. MRS JUSTICE CARR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                          MS VALENTYNA PALAMARCHUK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - WARSAW
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant was not represented and did not attend
For the Respondents:   Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine. She has been given  permission
       to appeal the determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  LK  Gibbs
       ("the FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision of 24 September 2013 to refuse  her  entry  clearance  as  a
       visitor to visit her daughter and her family  in  the  UK  under  the
       provisions of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.


    2. The only reason for the respondent's refusal of the  application  was
       because of the conclusion that the appellant had previously travelled
       to the UK in 2009 and applied for  permanent  leave  to  remain.  The
       appellant appealed. Both parties  were  represented  at  the  hearing
       before the FTTJ  and  the  appellant's  daughter  attended  and  gave
       evidence. The FTTJ found that the respondent's conclusion  was  based
       on a false premise. The appellant had  not  made  a  application  for
       permanent leave  to  remain.  However,  as  the  appellant  was  only
       entitled to appeal on human rights grounds, the FTTJ considered these
       but concluded  that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  show  that  she
       succeeded on Razgar principles. She dismissed the appeal.


    3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal,  which  was  granted.
       However, the appellant's representatives  have  now  written  to  the
       Upper Tribunal withdrawing the appeal. No reasons have been given. Mr
       Jarvis did not object to the appeal being withdrawn.


    4. We consent to the appellant  withdrawing  her  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal which amounts to a withdrawal of her case under rule 17  (1)
       (a) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. The effect
       of this is that the decision of the FTTJ to dismiss  the  appellant's
       appeal stands. Notice of this  withdrawal  should  be  given  to  all
       parties.






   .............................................


   Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden                               Date 8
       December 2014
