

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal number: VA/19525/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On December 5, 2014                  |On December 9, 2014         |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Mr Tayel Hossameldin Mostafa Abdelmoteleb
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born February  15,  1988  is  a  citizen  of  Egypt.  On
    September 23, 2013 he submitted an application for entry clearance as a
    family visitor.  The  respondent  refused  his  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules on November 4, 2013 and limited his right  of  appeal
    to the  grounds  set  out  in  Section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  December  2,
    2013. The respondent reviewed those grounds of appeal on  February  26,
    2014 but maintained the original decision. On September 8,  2014  Judge
    of the First Tier Tribunal  Metzer  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") heard his appeal. He allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules in a determination promulgated on September 23, 2014.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on September 25,  2014  and  on
    October 31, 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ransley  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the  FtTJ  had  erred  because
    there was no right of appeal under the Immigration  Rules  because  the
    original application was made after June 25, 2013 and Section 52 of the
    Crime and Courts Act 2013 restricted  such  rights  of  appeal  to  the
    grounds in section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the 2002 Act.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response filed by the  appellant  and  the  matter
    came before me on the above date. Neither the sponsor nor her solicitor
    was in attendance. A notice of hearing had been sent to the solicitors,
    sponsor and appellant on November 12,  2014.  In  the  absence  of  any
    explanation  for  their  non-attendance  I  proceeded   to   hear   the
    respondent's application.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 6. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted  the  FtTJ  had
    erred by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules. There was  no
    power to consider the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  for  the
    reasons set out in the grounds he submitted there was a material error.



    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 7. As the application was submitted on or after June  25,  2013  there  is
    only a right of appeal under  section  84(1)(c)  of  the  2002  Act  as
    Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 removed the right of appeal
    except on human rights or race relation grounds.

 8. By allowing the appeal under the Rules the  FtTJ  materially  erred.  I
    therefore allow the respondent's appeal  and  set  aside  the  original
    decision.

 9. I then asked Mr Walker what I should do with this case as the FtTJ  had
    made no findings on human rights grounds.

10. He submitted that I could either find there was no appeal before me  or
    simply deal with the article 8 claim  on  its  merits.  If  the  latter
    course of action was taken he submitted the appellant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM for entry clearance as a partner as  he
    did not meet Section E-ECP 2.10 of Appendix FM and he  also  failed  to
    satisfy  paragraph  276ADE  HC  395.  The  appellant  had   failed   to
    demonstrate it would be disproportionate to refuse  him  entry  as  his
    only reason for wanting to come here was to see the  country  and  meet
    his wife's family. He reminded me that the  couple  lived  together  in
    Egypt and had done so for sometime and they now had a child  who  would
    also be going to live with them in Egypt  and  already  had  a  nursery
    place booked.

    DECISION ON HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM

11. As this was an application that should only  have  been  considered  if
    human rights had been raised  in  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  I
    firstly referred to those grounds. The reasons advanced were:

     a. He wanted to come here to spend time with his wife who had returned
        to the United Kingdom to give birth.


     b. The refusal meant the sponsor had to travel back to Egypt to ensure
        their family and private life were not hindered.

     c. He met the Rules.

12. I accept the appellant tenuously raised human rights in the grounds but
    I am also satisfied, having considered  the  FtTJ's  determination  and
    notes of hearing, that the appellant did not advance any argument under
    ECHR legislation. He was represented by counsel at that hearing  albeit
    counsel perhaps should have known there was no right of appeal  (as  of
    course should the respondent's counsel) under the Immigration Rules.

13. There was nothing before the FtTJ that demonstrated they could meet the
    Immigration Rules for  article  8  purposes  or  article  8  ECHR.  The
    statements and evidence was all about meeting the Immigration Rules.

14. In EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope)  Ethiopia  [2013]
    UKUT 00143(IAC)

        "45. Although section 11 of the  2007  Act  extends  the  right  of
        appeal (with permission and subject to excluded  decisions)  to  an
        appeal "on any point of law" save for extraordinary cases, a  party
        will not normally be given permission to appeal, and  will  not  be
        expected to seek permission to appeal, a point that would not  make
        a material difference to the  outcome.  However  that  party  might
        still have very good reasons to respond to  an  appeal  by  arguing
        that the First-tier Tribunal should have dismissed or  allowed  the
        appeal for reasons other than those given in the  Determination  or
        rather for grounds which were unsuccessful in the proceedings  that
        are the subject of the appeal.


        46. Suppose a man seeks entry clearance as a  husband  and  suppose
        that the Entry Clearance Officer finds that he has not  shown  that
        he can be either accommodated or maintained in accordance with  the
        rules. A First-tier Tribunal Judge may  decide,  arguably  wrongly,
        that the husband can satisfy the accommodation requirements but not
        the maintenance requirements. In that event the judge would dismiss
        the appeal. The Entry Clearance Office would have  no  interest  in
        appealing. He is content with the decision to dismiss  the  appeal.
        The husband however may want to challenge the  decision.  He  might
        want to argue that  the  decision  that  he  did  not  satisfy  the
        maintenance requirements was wrong in  law  and  he  may  be  given
        permission to appeal. In that event the Entry Clearance Officer may
        well want to argue not only that the decision that the husband  did
        not meet the  maintenance  requirements  was  right  but  that  the
        decision that he did meet the accommodation requirements was wrong.
        In short,  without  wanting  to  appeal  the  decision,  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer may want to rely on a ground that  failed  before
        the First-tier Tribunal. Rule 24 permits the Entry Clearance Office
        to give notice of his intention to raise such a point in  a  reply.
        In short rule 24 does have a meaning that does  not  depend  on  Ms
        Dubinsky's premise and we reject the construction that she urged on
        us. Rule 24 does not create a right of appeal to a  party  who  has
        not asked for permission to appeal. Rule 24 is not in any way to do
        with seeking permission to appeal and it is not an  alternative  to
        seeking permission where permission is needed.  It is  to  do  with
        giving notice about how the respondent intends to  respond  to  the
        appeal that the appellant has permission to pursue. If a respondent
        wants to argue that the First-tier Tribunal should have  reached  a
        materially  different  conclusion   then   the   respondent   needs
        permission to appeal."

15. Having allowed the respondent's appeal in respect of the decision under
    the Immigration Rules I am faced with a determination that is silent on
    the article 8 claim and whilst there  has  been  no  cross  appeal  for
    permission I take the view that as the FtTJ should have dealt with  the
    appeal only on human rights grounds I should address that issue.

16. I have considered the appeal outside of the Rules because  firstly  the
    appellant has no appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  secondly  the
    law gives a right of appeal under the Human Rights Act 2008.

17. Following the principles in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027 I accept there  is
    family life between the appellant and sponsor as they are  husband  and
    wife. However, the decision to refuse the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules is not an interference with that right because  the  sponsor  and
    appellant both live in Egypt. The appellant wanted to come and see  her
    and her family and see the country but  that  can  hardly  be  said  to
    infringe his right to family life.

18. I therefore dismiss the appeal under ECHR legislation.


    DECISION


19. There was a material error of law I set aside the original decision and
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

As the respondent's application succeeded I reverse the fee award.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
