
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19520/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      PRADEEPA RAMYA SAMANMALI FARTHING
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pullig promulgated on 22  May  2015
    allowing the appeal of Mrs Farthing against a decision by  the  ECO  in
    refusing her entry clearance as a visitor in order for her to visit her
    husband. For the sake of convenience I  will  refer  to  the  appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal  as  the  claimant  and  the  respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal as the Entry Clearance Officer.

2.   The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka.   Her  date  of  birth  is  18
    November 1967.  She had been granted indefinite leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom on 14 June 1990 but she and her husband returned to  Sri
    Lanka in 1991 where they ran a hotel.  Some time in 2012  Mr  Farthing,
    the claimant's husband, underwent surgery in this country for  a  brain
    tumour.  He is a British citizen.   Prior  to  that  the  claimant  had
    visited the United Kingdom in 1997 and 1998, then in 1999 and again  in
    2004.  She had always left the United Kingdom before the expiry of  her
    leave to enter. In October 2013 the claimant sought to enter the United
    Kingdom to visit her husband.

3.   The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the  claimant
    genuinely intended to  seek  entry  as  a  visitor  for  a  period  not
    exceeding six months. The Entry Clearance Officer noted the links  that
    the claimant had to Thailand which included the running of  the  hotel,
    the fact that her daughter lived there and another business. The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not however satisfied, given that her husband had
    been unwell for an extended period, that she would in fact leave at the
    end of her proposed visit.

4.   The claimant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.   Since
    25 June 2013 she could only appeal on limited grounds  including  human
    rights grounds.  At a hearing  on  1  December  2014  the  judge  heard
    evidence from the sponsor, who was also cross-examined, and  considered
    various documents relating to the claimant's links with Sri Lanka.  The
    judge set out the relevant Immigration Rules, paragraph  41,  and  then
    considered the relevant principles and authorities relating to  Article
    8 assessments. The judge additionally made reference to paragraphs 117A
    and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

5.   In the section entitled "Conclusions" beginning at paragraph 30,  judge
    stated:

         "I find that there is family life  between  the  appellant  and  Mr
         Farthing. Of necessity that family life has  to  be  pursued  at  a
         distance because of Mr  Farthing's  ill  health.   It  matters  not
         whether he is medically unfit to fly in the  sense  that  it  would
         have an adverse effect of his  physical  health.  Anyone  who  goes
         through what he has gone through would  really  understand  how  he
         would  be  extremely   fearful   of   travelling   long   distances
         particularly by air, where  he  would  be  away  from  the  medical
         services that have supported him following his  treatment  for  his
         brain tumour. The decision under appeal  does  interfere  with  his
         right to family life with his wife."

6.   At paragraph 32 the judge found that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was not proportionate under Article 8. In his reasoning the judge noted
    that  the  assessment  of  whether  the  decision  under   appeal   was
    proportionate may depend particularly upon whether or not the  claimant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

7.   At paragraph 33 the judge gave full reasons  for  his  conclusion  that
    the claimant only intended to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor and
    that she would return to Sri Lanka at the end of her  stay.   He  noted
    that the fact that her husband lives in the UK and  that  she  has  two
    children who were British citizens  did  not  lead  to  the  reasonable
    inference, in light  of  all  the  other  evidence,  that  she  had  an
    intention of settling or staying beyond the period of proposed stay. At
    paragraph 35 the judge then considered the various  factors  identified
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. Having regard to  all  these  factors,
    and approaching the evidence holistically, the judge was  of  the  view
    that proportionality fell firmly in favour of the claimant.

8.   The Entry Clearance Officer sought to appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge made a material misdirection of law.  The grounds stated that the
    proportionality assessment was inadequate. It was claimed the judge did
    not make a  finding  whether  there  were  insurmountable  difficulties
    preventing the sponsor from  visiting  the  claimant  and  the  grounds
    generally,  and   vaguely,   attacked   the   judge's   proportionality
    assessment.

9.   There was no appearance  by  the  sponsor  at  the  appeal  hearing.  I
    received a letter from Jade Law Solicitors indicating that they were no
    longer instructed in this matter and that they would not  be  appearing
    on behalf of the claimant.  I satisfied myself that the sponsor and the
    claimant had  been  informed  by  first-class  post  dispatched  on  23
    September 2015 of the time, place and date of this appeal  hearing.   I
    considered that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with  the
    hearing pursuant to rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

10.  I heard brief submissions from Mr Duffy.  I had  indicated  earlier  to
    Mr Duffy that I would  take  into  account  the  authority  of  Mostafa
    (Article 8 and  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC)  and  the
    authority of Kaur (Visitor appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT  00487.   Mr
    Duffy very fairly indicated  that  he  faced  difficulty  in  light  of
    Mostafa in seeking to undermine the lawfulness of the judge's decision.
     Mr Duffy noted that, as with Mostafa, it was clear that a family  life
    relationship existed between the sponsor and the  claimant.   Mr  Duffy
    accepted that there was no legal test requiring the  judge  to  make  a
    finding as to whether there were insurmountable difficulties preventing
    the sponsor from visiting the claimant as suggested in the  grounds  of
    appeal.

11.  I read firstly from the head note of Mostafa:

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control."

12.  I read also briefly from the head note of Kaur:

         "In visit appeals the Article 8 decision on  an  appeal  cannot  be
         made in a vacuum.  The starting-point for deciding that must be the
         state of the evidence about the appellant's  ability  to  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules."

13.  Having regard to the principles enunciated in  both  authorities  I  am
    satisfied the judge did not make an  error  of  law.  The  judge  first
    considered whether there was in fact family life between  the  claimant
    and his wife.   Given  that  they  are  spouses,  and  given  the  very
    legitimate reasons why the sponsor remains in the UK separated from his
    partner (as a result of his  previous  brain  tumour  and  the  medical
    treatment he received for it) I am entirely satisfied  that  the  judge
    was entitled to find that not only was there family life but  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance constitute a breach with that family life.

14.  The judge went on to consider whether the breach was  lawful  and  then
    considered  whether  the  refusal  was   proportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances. In considering proportionality  the  judge  specifically
    found that the claimant had met all the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules. The judge gave sustainable reasons for his conclusion  that  the
    claimant only intended to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor, having
    regard to the substantial links that she maintained with Sri Lanka.

15.  Having thus found that the Immigration Rules were met  the  judge  went
    on to consider the relevant factors in Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.
    The judge gave appropriate weight to those factors and, noting that the
    requirements of the immigration rules  were  met,  concluded  that  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance was  disproportionate.  This  was  a
    decision that was open to the judge on the evidence before him and  for
    the reasons that he gave. In these  circumstances  I  can  identify  no
    material error of law and  I  dismiss  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    appeal and uphold the initial decision by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

