
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19502/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2014                          |On 22nd September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Siddik Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - dhaka

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chohan, promulgated on 20th September 2013, following  a  hearing
    at Sheldon Court on 16th September 2013.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of Siddik Ahmed.  The Appellant subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  16th
    August 1987.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 26th April 2012 to refuse  his  application  to
    visit his sponsoring cousin, Mr Aref Ahmed, and two other  cousins,  Mr
    Katar Ibn Shahin and Mouhammed Saleh, under paragraph 41 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is single, lives with his father,  and
    his two younger  sisters.   He  is  self-employed,  and  owns  his  own
    business, and has agricultural land.  He wishes to come to the UK on  a
    family visit.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed "how, when one considers the documentary evidence as
    a whole, it is not easy to follow" (paragraph  6).   However,  he  held
    that he was satisfied with the personal and financial circumstances  of
    the Appellant in Bangladesh (see paragraph  6).   The  judge  had  more
    difficulty with the question of the relationship of the Appellant  with
    his cousins that he was visiting in the  UK.   The  judge  went  on  to
    observe that the Appellant had been given a full right  of  appeal  and
    "it was made clear that upon any appeal the Appellant would be expected
    to show evidence of his relationship" but that  on  this  occasion  the
    Sponsor  has  "simply  reaffirmed"  the  relationship  and   that   "no
    documentary  evidence  has  been  submitted"  with   respect   to   the
    relationship.  The failure of the Sponsor, Mr Aref Ahmed to attend with
    "no  satisfactory  explanation  for  his  non-attendance"  was  telling
    because it was clear that the relationship could  not  be  proved  (see
    paragraph 7).  The judge went on to hold that "it is not clear  who  is
    actually sponsoring the Appellant and the fact that Mr Ahmed failed  to
    attend the hearing" was fatal (see paragraph 8).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    dismissed the appeal in the circumstances that he did.

 6. On 29th January 2014, permission to appeal was granted on two  grounds.
    First, that the  judge  made  no  actual  finding  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant was related in the  manner  claimed.   Second,  although  the
    judge held that the Appellant was not  generally  seeking  entry  as  a
    visitor he made no reference to the evidence which caused him to  reach
    that conclusion.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 11th September 2014,  Mr  Aref  Ahmed,  the
    Sponsor, attended in person.  He explained that  this  was  the  fourth
    time that he had come  to  the  appeal  hearing.   The  first  time  he
    attended in London for an appeal hearing.  He could not understand  why
    the judge had taken the view that he had  chosen  not  to  attend.   He
    explained that when he arrived at the hearing  in  Birmingham  on  16th
    September 2013 the official at the reception told him that there was no
    need for him to go into the court room.  He said he was there  to  give
    evidence.  However, he was prevented from doing so.

 8. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that if it indeed was  the  case  that
    there had been an administrative  error  preventing  the  Sponsor  from
    attending the hearing and giving evidence about his  relationship  then
    there had clearly been a failure of a duty to afford a fair hearing  to
    the Appellant and in these circumstances the matter should properly  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal so that Mr Aref Ahmed can give
    evidence.  However, it must  be  born  in  mind  that  both  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge, UT J King,  and  Mr  Chohan,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge,  were  baffled  by  the  extent  of  the  documentary   evidence
    submitted, which was wholly disorganised, and difficult to follow.   Mr
    King submitted that there was  today  before  this  Tribunal  a  single
    bundle, but it referred to the  Appellant's  financial  situation,  and
    there was still no evidence whatsoever in relation to the  family  ties
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant.  He had to provide that evidence
    in a bundle that could be followed.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that it falls to be set aside.  My reasons are as follows.

10. The Sponsor, Mr Aref Ahmed did attend the hearing before Judge  Chohan,
    I find, but was prevented from entering the court room by the  official
    at the reception desk.  The attendance of the Sponsor was vital to  the
    determination of the issues before Judge Chohan.

11. Indeed, Judge Chohan held that, but for the non-attendance of  Mr  Aref
    Ahmed, he may well have been satisfied that  the  claimed  relationship
    existed between the parties, so as to enable him to find in  favour  of
    the Appellant on this issue.  Judge  Chohan  was  satisfied  about  the
    financial  circumstances.   He  was  not  satisfied  about  the  family
    relationships.

12. In the circumstances, this clearly was  a  material  issue  before  the
    judge, but its materiality was  not  allowed  to  be  assessed  on  the
    evidence, because Mr Aref Ahmed was prevented from going into the court
    room.  In these circumstances, under Practice Statement 7.2,  the  only
    proper course of action is for this matter to be remitted back before a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, other than Judge Chohan, to be determined de
    novo.

13. The Appellant is directed to leave in place his last  submitted  bundle
    of some sixteen pages that deals with his financial situation.   He  is
    directed, however, to submit a further short bundle that deals with his
    relationship with his cousin's in the UK.   This  must  be  done  in  a
    single stapled bundle that is paginated with page numbers, and which is
    easy to follow, so that a person hearing it can note the details of the
    relationship.

14. A failure  to  submit  this  evidence  may  be  construed  against  the
    Appellant.  That will be a matter for the judge at  first  instance  to
    determine whether the matter arises before him.  This appeal is allowed
    to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo by  a
    judge other than Judge Chohan with the view to determining the evidence
    relating to the relationship of the Appellant  with  the  Sponsor,  and
    making a final decision as to whether the Appellant can  discharge  the
    burden of proof that is upon him under paragraph 41 of HC 395.

16. No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th September 2014


