
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/19517/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2014                        |On 25 November 2014        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                          OPEOLUWA VICTORIA KAZEEM
                           (ANONYMITY NOT ORDERED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O Williams, promulgated
    on 10  June  2014  which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  22  September  1950  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria. On 24 October 2013 the Appellant applied for  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom as a family  visitor.  On  5  November  2013  the
    Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application.  The  refusal
    letter gave a number of reasons on the basis that the Appellant did not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 41(i) and  (ii)  of  the  Rules  and
    advised the Appellant that by virtue of  section  84  (1)  (c)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 her right  of  appeal  was
    limited.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The Appellant appealed the decision stating that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules, not in  accordance  with  the
    law and was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 5. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Williams (hereinafter called "the  Judge")  allowed  the
    appeal under  the  Rules.  The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was
    economically settled in Nigeria,  had  strong  family  ties,  that  the
    sponsor could  afford  to  maintain  and  accommodate  her  mother  the
    Appellant and that the Appellant would return at the end of her trip.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  22  July  2014  Designated  Judge
    Woodcraft gave permission to appeal stating that the Judge;

         "overlooked the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  rights  were
         restricted by operation of section 52 of the Crime and  courts  Act
         2013 to human rights and race relations grounds, neither  of  which
         were considered  in  the  determination(or  indeed  raised  at  the
         hearing."

 7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal; the right of appeal
    in this case was limited and the substantive issues  addressed  by  the
    Judge were irrelevant.



The Law

 8.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration.



Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

11. This was an appeal against  a  refusal  of  an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a family visitor made on 24 October  2013.  From  25  June
    2013, a person refused entry clearance to visit  relatives  in  the  UK
    will be unable to appeal against that immigration  decision  except  on
    (i) human rights and (ii) race relations grounds.  This change  is  the
    result of s.52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013.   The  new  provisions
    apply to any application made after 6 April 2013. The limited right  of
    appeal was set out in the refusal letter sent to the Appellant dated  5
    November 2013. The Appellant raised human rights as one of her  grounds
    of appeal and the matter therefore  proceeded  to  a  hearing  on  that
    basis.

12. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal judge to address  and  determine
    the case on the basis of whether the decision involved a breach of  the
    Appellant's human rights constitutes a clear error of law. This error I
    consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted this  exercise
    the outcome could have been different. That in my view is  the  correct
    test to apply.

13. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety and I indicated to the  Appellant's  sponsor  Rasidat   Erinle
    that I proposed to rehear the  case  unless  there  was  wished  me  to
    consider adjourning the matter. She  was  content  for  the  matter  to
    proceed.



The Law

14. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability. Where  applicable,  it  is
    for the Appellant to satisfy me that he or she has an Article 8 private
    and/or family life which will be interfered with by the decision  under
    appeal. If that is  shown,  the  Respondent  must  establish  that  the
    decision is legitimate, taken  in  pursuit  of  a  legitimate  aim  and
    necessary and proportionate in a democratic society.

15. I have determined this matter based upon facts that  were  appertaining
    at  the  time  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  being
    constrained by Section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)



Evidence

16. I had a copy of the Respondent's bundle. I had a copy of the grounds of
    appeal which the Appellant's daughter Mrs Erinle had drafted.

17. I heard evidence from Mrs Erinle in which in essence  she  stated  that
    she wanted her mother,  the  Appellant  to  visit  her  in  the  United
    Kingdom. She accepted that there was nothing  preventing  her  visiting
    her mother in Nigeria and she had last  visited  her  mother  there  in
    2013.



Findings

18. The Appellant is a 64 year old citizen of Nigeria who was refused entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a family visitor to see her daughter
    the sponsor Mrs Erinle. As the application was made after 6 April  2013
    the refusal letter set out that the Appellant had a  limited  right  of
    appeal and that the  grounds  she  could  rely  on  included  that  the
    decision involved a breach of her human rights..


19.  Mrs Erinle on behalf of her mother has submitted that the  Appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the Convention are engaged. I have determined
    the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27





Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


20. I heard evidence from the sponsor Mrs  Erinle  who  I  found  to  be  a
    credible witness and it was clear to me that she  enjoys  a  close  and
    supportive relationship with her mother. The Appellant and her daughter
    have maintained their close family relationship through visits and this
    relationship must be respected.





If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


21. Having heard the evidence of Mrs Erinle I am satisfied that the refusal
    does not prevent them enjoying their family  relationship  because  Mrs
    Erinle accepted in evidence that there was no  difficulty  for  her  in
    visiting her mother in Nigeria and indeed she had been there  in  2013.
    Therefore I am satisfied that the refusal must fail at this stage.


22. However if I am wrong  about  this  I  have  considered  the  remaining
    questions posed in Razgar.





If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


23. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate her conduct
    by reference to it.





If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


24. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.





If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


25. In making the assessment  I  have  must  take  into  account  that  the
    Immigration Rules provide a basis  for  family  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom and at the time  of  her  application  the  Appellant  did  not
    provide the necessary evidence to meet the requirements of  the  Rules.
    It may well be given the findings made by Judge Williams in relation to
    the matters put in issue by the ECO and my own  positive   findings  on
    Mrs Erinle's  credibility  that  a  future  application  would  succeed
    allowing the Appellant to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.  However  the
    decision in issue does not prevent the enjoyment by the  Appellant  and
    her daughter of  their  family  life  as  the  sponsor  can  visit  the
    Appellant in Nigeria. In those circumstances in determining whether the
    decision would be proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  immigration
    control I find that none  of  the  facts  underpinning  the  Appellants
    circumstances taken either  singularly  or  cumulatively  outweigh  the
    legitimate purpose of the refusal decision.


26. I have considered the issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
    Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not
    a vulnerable person. I see no reason to  make  any  direction  in  this
    regard.




Decision

27. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the decision is set aside

28. I remake the appeal.

29. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.





Signed      Date 25.11.2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

