
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19406/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th November 2014                           |On 29th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          miss Edna Josephine Kopoi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, freetown
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Rebekah Wilson (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Tipping, promulgated on 1st September 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Taylor House on 12th August 2014.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Edna Josephine  Kopoi,  to  enter  the  UK  on  a
    visitor's visa for three weeks.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra  Leone.   She  was  born  on  11th
    August 1991.  She seeks to visit her uncle, Mr Emmanuel Kopoi,  who  is
    the daughter of Emmanuel's uncle, Edmound (see Rebekah Wilson's witness
    statement dated 5th August 2014 before the First-tier  Tribunal).   The
    appeal, after mid-2013, can only be made on human rights grounds or  on
    race discrimination grounds.  The witness  statement  of  Miss  Rebekah
    Wilson makes it clear that her appeal was made under the Equalities Act
    2010 and Article 8 of the Human Rights Act, as well as the Children Act
    1989 (with reference being made to exhibit A in her witness statement).



The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge recorded the evidence as the Appellant having been engaged in
    studies at the faculty of law at the University  of  Sierra  Leone  and
    that, "the Appellant had at the date of decision completed her studies,
    as she claimed,  and  was  seeking  work  in  Sierra  Leone",  although
    following the decision by the Entry Clearance  Officer,  there  is  now
    "the offer  and  acceptance  of  a  position  at  GT  Bank"  which  was
    "postdecision", but a matter which the judge said, "I can take it  into
    account ... insofar as it provides evidence of  the  situation  at  the
    date of the decision" (paragraph 9).  The job offer to the Appellant by
    GT Bank, was dated 4th June  2014,  and  was  confirmed  in  a  written
    document, known as exhibit B, which was before the judge,  as  well  as
    before this Tribunal.

 4. As for the sponsoring relatives in the UK, the judge had regard to  the
    fact that the Sponsor, Miss Rebekah Wilson, was a practising  barrister
    (though not in immigration law) in London, and her husband was employed
    by the United Nations, where she had  met  him  during  her  sabbatical
    leave from her law practice when she went to Nepal, as a civil  affairs
    officer for the UN (see paragraph 6).

 5. The judge made clear findings that, "I  found  the  Sponsor's  evidence
    clear and cogent" and that she spoke of "the Appellant's  circumstances
    in Sierra Leone from her own knowledge" and that "she was adamant  that
    the Appellant would comply with the terms of any leave granted to  her"
    (paragraph 8).  The appeal was allowed "on  immigration  grounds"  (see
    paragraph 10).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that as of 25th June 2013, Section  52
    of the Crime and Courts Act came into force so that visitors  would  no
    longer have the right of appeal for refusals  for  family  visit  cases
    unless they could bring an appeal on the residual  grounds  in  Section
    84(1)(b) and (c) of the NIAA 2002, namely on human rights  or  on  race
    relations grounds.   The  reference  to  human  rights  grounds  was  a
    reference to the Human Rights  Act  1998  and  the  reference  to  race
    relations was a reference to Section 29 of the Equality Act 2010.   The
    grounds allege that the judge had allowed the appeal wrongly on grounds
    that were not open to him, and thereby exceeded his jurisdiction, so as
    to have fallen into error of law.

 7. On 7th October 2014, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis
    that, given the restriction that came into force  with  the  Crime  and
    Courts Act, the judge should have made findings in relation to  Article
    8 family life grounds and failed to do so, such that he fell into error
    of law.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 24th November 2014, Mr Whitwell,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent, stated that there was no consideration  of
    Article 8 by the judge at all and the appeal was allowed erroneously on
    "immigration grounds" so that it clearly was a  decision  made  on  the
    basis of a jurisdiction that the judge could not exercise.  No findings
    of Article 8 were made.  Furthermore, it was questionable whether there
    was a family life between the sponsoring relatives and the Appellant in
    Sierra Leone.  But even if there was, it could not be said  that  there
    was an interference by refusing this particular Appellant the right  to
    visit the relatives in the UK.  Therefore, the appeal could not be  won
    on Article 8 grounds anyway.

 9. For her part, Miss  Wilson,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    submitted that the appeal was expressly only ever made on the  residual
    grounds of human rights and  race  discrimination.   She  referred  the
    Tribunal to her witness statement of 5th August 2014, which was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and which had not been challenged.

10. Indeed, no evidence that had been presented had been  challenged.   She
    submitted that her two boys, "Charles"  (who  was  born  in  2009)  and
    "Christo" (who was born in 2012) have the right to  enjoy  family  life
    with their father's  side  of  the  family.   She  explained  that  she
    herself, only had limited family in the UK, so that the  children  only
    had one grandparent (Miss Wilson's mother), one uncle, one  aunty,  and
    one cousin.  Their  father  had  no  relatives  in  the  UK.   All  his
    relatives were in Sierra Leone.  They were entitled to learn about  the
    culture and the language of their father by having visits  from  Sierra
    Leone.

11. This had been the evidence.  The evidence had not been challenged.   At
    the same time, although Charles had been to  Sierra  Leone  in  January
    2011, he could not now go because of the  outbreak  of  Ebola,  and  it
    would be irresponsible to send him there now, but the Appellant  should
    be allowed to visit, if this was the only way in which the family  life
    could be maintained from both sides.

12. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no family life and  even
    less a case where Article 8 would be engaged.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007).  The question is whether I should set aside this  decision.   I
    have concluded that I should not.  The error by the judge  is  that  he
    has not set down his findings of fact in relation to Article 8.   Given
    the limited right of appeal, he should have done so.  However, one  can
    see why he did not do so because he stated  that,  "I  have  found  the
    Sponsor's evidence clear and cogent"  and  that  "the  Sponsor  visited
    Sierra Leone in January 2011 with Charles" and that "she speaks of  the
    Appellant's circumstances in Sierra Leone from her own knowledge"  such
    that it was clear from this (see paragraph 8) that the  judge  accepted
    the evidence as presented, in relation to Article 8 (which was  in  any
    event singularly  unchallenged  anyway)  without  having  to  make  any
    findings of fact himself.   In  that  event  I  note  that  "the  Upper
    Tribunal may (but need not) set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (see Section 12(2)(a) of TCEA 2007), so that this  is  a  case
    where the decision in this matter, on the evidence as accepted  by  the
    judge, was bound to have fallen in this manner in any case.   This  was
    for the following reasons.

14. First, this is a case where family life clearly  existed  between  both
    sides of relatives.  The  judge  observed  that  "the  Sponsor  visited
    Sierra Leone in January 2011 with Charles" (see paragraph 8)  and  this
    was the evidence in the Sponsor's witness statement (see bottom of page
    1).  The Sponsor also stated that "we speak regularly to  their  family
    there.  I speak daily to them about their family there, who  they  are,
    what they do and how much they love them" (bottom of  page  1).   These
    are matters on which the judge was fully cognisant because he makes  it
    clear that "the sources  of  evidence  as  to  the  Appellant's  claim"
    include "the witness statement of the Sponsor dated  5th  August  2014"
    (see paragraph 4).

15. It is clear from this witness statement that the commitment  of  family
    members in this case runs deep and is of a special nature.  Miss Wilson
    in her witness statement explains that  her  husband,  Emmanuel  Mattia
    Christopher Kopoi, whom she met whilst on a  human  rights  mission  in
    Nepal, where the two of them were working, would  not  have  even  been
    able to sit his O level exams because,

         "During the war Emmanuel lacked US$5 to be able to sit his O  level
         exams.  It was his uncle [Admound] that provided him with that  and
         looked after him in Freetown where he attended  college.   Emmanuel
         then secured himself a job and now a career of  over  twelve  years
         with the United Nations" (see page 2).

16. There is therefore this particularly important  tie  between  Emmanuel,
    the husband of Miss Wilson, and the Uncle Edmound, because were it  not
    for him, Emmanuel would not have even been able  to  sit  his  O  level
    exams.  Given her  own  limited  family  members  in  the  UK,  she  is
    particularly concerned that her children, Charles and Christo, are able
    to maintain family ties with their father's family in Sierra Leone,  to
    the extent that she even took Charles there in 2011.

17. It is significant that her witness statement draws no attention to  the
    rise of Ebola in Sierra Leone, but what she does say is that "they  are
    two very small children and it is well-known fact that  the  healthcare
    structure in Sierra Leone is perhaps one of the worst in the world" and
    that taking the children there now would  have  "potentially  dangerous
    impact on their welfare" (page 2).

18. Yet the family life is something that is important to her so that,  "it
    is vital that Edna is able to visit us to spend  some  time  with  them
    (i.e. her children), speak in Mende with them and promote the right  to
    family life that all children in the UK have" (page 2).  It is  equally
    important to note that Miss Wilson  begins  her  witness  statement  by
    pointing out that, while she is a  barrister  in  practice  in  London,
    "integrity and honesty however do form an essential part of my practice
    and also my family life" (page 1) and the assurances that she  gave  to
    the judge below with respect to the bona fides of the Appellant in this
    visit were readily accepted.

19. In the circumstances, the judge was bound to have found that, not  only
    did family life exist, but that the refusal of  a  visit  visa  to  the
    Appellant, was going to engage Article 8 of the Human Rights  Act,  and
    although it was in accordance with the law (because the law has changed
    in mid-2013), and was even arguably necessary in a  democratic  society
    in the interests of the rights and freedoms of others, but it  was  not
    an interference that was proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  end
    that was sought to be achieved, because the maintenance of family  life
    in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case  was  an   important
    consideration, especially for children of this young age.

Decision

20. Accordingly, this determination shall stand.  I  am  satisfied  that  I
    need not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  given
    Section 12(2)(a) of TCEA 2007.  I do  not  remake  the  decision.   The
    appeal of the Respondent Entry Clearance  Officer  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Tipping stands.

21. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014
