

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/19232/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 2nd December 2014                          |on 9th December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 YASMIN BEGUM


                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, of Muzaffar Associates Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 1st January 1956.  She applied for clearance to enter the  UK  as  a
    visitor.  The ECO considered her application under paragraph 41 of  the
    Immigration Rules but was not satisfied that she  had  established  her
    personal and  financial  circumstances  nor  "that  you  are  genuinely
    seeking entry as a visitor or that  you  intend  to  leave  the  UK  on
    completion of your visit".  The refusal notice dated 5th November  2013
    states that the right of appeal is limited to the grounds contained  in
    Section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act, namely that the decision is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being incompatible with
    the appellant's Convention rights.

 3. Notwithstanding that restriction, the  appellant  filed  an  appeal  on
    grounds which in part insist on the case within  paragraph  41  of  the
    Rules that the appellant intends  only  a  genuine  family  visit.   At
    ground (d) the appellant says that the decision is unlawful:

         Under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 because the  appellant
         has been denied right of access to  a  family  member  settled  and
         residing in the UK.  Although her  son  may  visit  Pakistan  [her]
         daughter-in-law is a citizen of  Poland  who  has  reservations  to
         visit Pakistan along with the granddaughter of the appellant due to
         security concerns. ... The appellant  wishes  access  to  her  son,
         daughter-in-law and granddaughter living in Edinburgh for  a  short
         period ...  The  decision  is  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
         Convention rights.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton allowed the appellant's appeal  by  a
    determination promulgated on  8th  May  2014,  in  which  she  set  out
    paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  examined  the   family
    circumstances.   She  noted  the  sponsor's  reluctance  to  travel  to
    Pakistan with his wife (paragraph 15). The sponsor also said it may  be
    difficult for them to arrange to meet in  a  third  country  where  the
    appellant would not have a sponsor.   Paragraph 18 of the determination
    is rather confused as to the significance of finding that Rule 41 might
    be satisfied in an appeal which does not turn on  that  question.   The
    judge goes on:

         19.  ...There  are  minor  deficiencies  in  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant's savings and sources of income.  However,  she  has
             significant family ties to Pakistan to ensure her return.  The
             ... appellant's right to family life is not the only issue ...
             There is the right of a  little  girl  to  meet  in  her  home
             territory her  grandmother  whom  she  has  never  met  and  I
             consider that to be a very important  argument.   Interference
             with that child's  family  life  is  disproportionate  to  any
             perceived risk that the appellant will not return. ...

         20.   ... It is  appropriate  that  the  appeal  be  allowed  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR for the appellant to enjoy  family  life
             with her family and for her  granddaughter  to  meet  her  and
             enjoy family life with her...

 5. The ECO appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the  grounds  that  the  judge
    misdirected herself as to the relevance of paragraph 41 of  the  Rules;
    made no finding on the existence of family life between the sponsor and
    the appellant; overlooked the established principle (on  the  authority
    of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31) that family life for Article 8 purposes
    does not exist between a parents and adult child without more than  the
    normal emotional ties; and used the Article 8 ground to  determine  the
    case on the basis of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Mr Mullen said that  the  relationship  between  a  grandparent  and  a
    granddaughter  was  within  the  ordinary  understanding  of  a  family
    relationship, but did not constitute family life for  the  purposes  of
    the protection of Article 8 unless there were some exceptional features
    in the case.  The judge held at paragraph 19 that there was a right  of
    a little girl to meet her grandmother on home territory.  No such right
    could be deduced from Article 8. The judge was not entitled to go on to
    consider  whether  the  interference  was  disproportionate,  where  no
    protected family life had been established.  The  determination  should
    be set aside and reversed.

 7. Mr Iqbal in response said that although the judge set out paragraph  41
    of the Rules and considered its requirements, that was only to set  out
    the background.  The judge mentioned at paragraph 10 that it was agreed
    that the only issue was Article 8 and the right to  family  life.   The
    judge went on to consider that issue properly at paragraphs 15, 16, 19,
    and 20 and  gave  reasons  based  on  the  evidence  before  her.   The
    appellant had a right to see her daughter-in-law, a Polish citizen, and
    her granddaughter, who also has a Polish passport [as Mr Mullen pointed
    out, she is probably also  entitled  to  a  Pakistani  passport].   The
    sponsor had genuine concerns about taking his wife as  a  foreigner  to
    Pakistan.  He has been unable to persuade her to travel there.  The ECO
    raised doubts about the appellant's intention to return, but the  judge
    correctly found that her age and family circumstances  were  such  that
    she would do so. There had been the suggestion that they might carry on
    family life by meeting in a third country, but  the  judge  dealt  with
    that.  The respondent had not identified any material error of law  and
    the determination should stand.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9.  Family  life  for  Article  8  purposes  is   mostly   restricted   to
    relationships between husband and wife (or the equivalent)  or  between
    parents and minor children.  Extended family  relationships,  including
    those among adults and their adult children, spouses of adult children,
    and grandchildren, raise at the outset questions (partly  of  law,  but
    mainly of fact) whether there exist, unusually, ties strong  enough  to
    constitute family life for purposes of Article 8 protection.

10. The judge did not explain in this case  why  she  thought  family  life
    existed for Article 8 purposes.  The absence  of  any  explanation  for
    that finding is an error of law.

11. The judge also went wrong in saying that Article 8 involves  the  right
    of a granddaughter to meet her grandmother on the granddaughter's  home
    territory.  There is no vouching for that proposition.   Mr  Iqbal  did
    not say that any could be found.  Again, it would  require  an  unusual
    case.

12. The determination reads rather as if the appeal was allowed because the
    judge thought it likely that the appellant genuinely  intends  a  visit
    and no more, but the human rights ground of appeal cannot  be  used  to
    convert an appeal into one under the Rules.

13. The findings that family life exists for Article 8 purposes,  and  that
    grandparent and grandchild have the right to meet at  the  grandchild's
    home, are plainly crucial to the outcome, so the  determination  cannot
    stand.

14. It does appear an unsympathetic and unattractive outcome  to  stand  in
    the way of a grandmother visiting her grandchild.  However, there is no
    evidence to support a finding  that  family  life  is  established  for
    Article 8 purposes in this case.   Even  if  there  was,  it  would  be
    difficult  to  hold  that  the  refusal  of  entry   clearance   is   a
    disproportionate interference with the exercise of that  right.   There
    are other places to meet, and no great difficulties about  EU  citizens
    visiting Pakistan.

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The appeal,
    as originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

16. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            4 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




