

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: VA/19227/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 13th November 2014                        |On 5th January 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                            Ghulam Gadir Qureshi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:         Ms Rafiq, Bellamy & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date of birth 1st January 1954.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Herwald)[2] to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant him entry clearance as a family visitor.

 2. The Appellant had applied for entry clearance stating that he wished to
    come to the UK to visit his adult son and daughter who both live  here.
    He wished to come for 6 weeks. The Respondent had refused  to  grant  a
    visa on the grounds that the Appellant had not demonstrated that he  is
    a genuine visitor who intends to leave the UK at the end of the  period
    stated by him, or that he would be maintained and accommodated  without
    recourse to public funds, or that he  could  afford  the  cost  of  his
    onward journey.  It was further stated that the grounds  of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal were limited to those referred  to  in  section
    84(1)(c) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal no-one  appears  to
    have  noticed  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  limited  to   race
    discrimination and/or human rights;  at  least  neither  representative
    brought this to  the  Judge's  attention.   Judge  Herwald  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant's son, said to be an Imam at a mosque,  and
    the  Appellant's  daughter.   The   determination   notes   significant
    discrepancies in their evidence about their father's  circumstances  in
    Pakistan. Notably the Appellant's son claimed that he was the owner  of
    two shops, his daughter did not know  how  many  he  owned,  whilst  he
    himself had not mentioned owning any at all.   The  Judge  was  further
    troubled by the evidence about the circumstances of the sponsors.  Both
    claimed to be working in the UK and to only be entitled  to  two  weeks
    paid holiday per year. When it was put to them  that  such  contractual
    terms are actually prohibited by UK law both witnesses sought to change
    their evidence. Overall the Tribunal was not satisfied as to any of the
    matters in issue and the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The grounds of appeal are that the determination was flawed because the
    Tribunal did not take into account all of the evidence, and because the
    negative credibility findings were based on  misunderstandings  arising
    from "cultural factors". The First-tier Tribunal Judge is also  accused
    of "simply bullying" the witness when he enquired about his contract of
    employment and of applying the  wrong  standard  of  proof  of  'beyond
    reasonable doubt'.  Lastly it is  said  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    address human rights, an argument raised on appeal.



    Error of Law

 5.  It is extremely unfortunate that the Appellant's representatives  have
    advised him to pursue an appeal that has absolutely no hope of success.
    As Judge Appleyard observes  in  granting  permission  "the  first  two
    grounds disclose no arguable error of law. The judge has  given  cogent
    and sustainable reasons which were fully open to him  on  the  evidence
    for concluding that the evidence before him  was  not  credible".   The
    Judge was entitled to  draw  adverse  inferences  from  the  fact  that
    neither witness before him could give a straight answer  about  whether
    their father owned any shops  and  if  so  how  many.  He  was  further
    entitled to be confused about why the Appellant's son, who has lived in
    the UK for 16 years and is a British national, gave evidence that  "we"
    (ie including himself) all live together with his  father  in  a  joint
    family system.  It is not "bullying" for the Judge to  clarify  with  a
    witness his evidence that he works full time for below the minimum wage
    and only gets two weeks off a year. In the context of clear legislation
    to the contrary the  Judge  was  entitled  to  understand  whether  the
    witness was in fact working in  unlawful  conditions  or  whether,  for
    instance, he was lying about his employment.  There is nothing  in  any
    of the challenged in respect of the evidence.


 6. That said all of those challenges were in fact irrelevant  since  there
    was no appeal 'under the rules' before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Since
    the 25th June 2013 there has been no unfettered right of appeal to  the
    Tribunal against refusal of entry clearance as a visitor. On  that  day
    s52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 came into  effect,  which  amended
    s88A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The effect  of
    those changes is that appeals against a refusal of a visit visa can now
    only be brought on two grounds: race discrimination and human rights.

 7. The only ground upon which this appeal was brought was on human  rights
    grounds. It is correct to say that the determination does  not  address
    this matter.  Failure to deal with a ground of appeal  is,  ordinarily,
    an error of law.

 8. I am not however satisfied that this is an error such that the decision
    should be set aside. No evidence was given as to  why  neither  of  the
    Sponsors could visit their  father  in  Pakistan,  nor  maintain  their
    relationship through methods of  communication  such  as  telephone  or
    Skype.  There was no evidence presented to  the  Tribunal  to  indicate
    that Article 8 was even engaged, since the decision did  not  interfere
    with the family life as it has been  enjoyed  hitherto.   Even  if  the
    Appellant had managed to show that he did enjoy a family life with  his
    adult children that could only reasonably be enjoyed through the medium
    of temporary visits to the UK, he could not have shown any interference
    to be disproportionate. He had not shown that he met  the  requirements
    of the Rules and there was nothing in the evidence  to  show  that  the
    decision had  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the  individuals
    involved.


      Decisions

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    in  that  the  appeal  should  not  have  been  considered  under   the
    immigration rules. Paragraph 14 of the determination is  replaced  with
    the following: "there is no appeal  before  me  under  the  Rules.  The
    appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds".






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            29th November
                                    2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 23rd June 2014 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge Appleyard
[2] Determination prepared on the 19th May 2014

