
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19709/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th October 2014                            |On 5th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        prathaban kirshnan prathaban

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shahzad, Solicitor, instructed by Selva & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is  the  Secretary  of  State  who  was  the
    Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  When  the  subject  of  the
    immigration decision, the Respondent before me, was the Appellant.  For
    ease of reference I shall refer to the  parties  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the claimant respectively.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
    Judge Harmes, who in a  determination  promulgated  on  3rd  July  2014
    allowed this 64 year old male Sri Lankan claimant's appeal against  the
    refusal of entry clearance as a visitor.

 3. The Claimant was seeking entry to see  his  daughter  who  had  herself
    travelled here in 2009 with entry clearance as the dependent spouse  of
    a Sri Lankan citizen who was here with refugee status.  By the time  of
    the application matters had moved on in terms of  the  spouse's  status
    because he was no longer here with refugee status, but with  indefinite
    leave to remain. The ECO found that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395  in  respect  of  accommodation,
    maintenance, and intention to return after a short visit. The  Claimant
    appealed, in summary arguing the decision  breached  his  human  rights
    because it was a wrongful interference with  his  enjoyment  of  family
    life with his daughter and grandchildren in the UK, not least,  because
    he did meet the requirements of the rule.

 4. The judge allowed the appeal on the basis  that  all  of  the  disputed
    requirements of paragraph 41: intention to conduct a  short  visit  and
    return to Sri Lanka, maintenance and accommodation were  all,  contrary
    to the findings of the Entry Clearance Officer, satisfied on  the  oral
    and documentary evidence.  The judge made no findings  or  decision  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR family and private life rights.

 5. The Secretary of State  challenges  the  decision  on  the  basis  that
    Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act, operative from 25th June  2013,
    restricted the appeal rights of visitors coming to visit family members
    by amending Section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002. The only available grounds of  appeal  are  set  out  in  Section
    84(1)(b) and (c)  of  the  2002  Act,  namely  human  rights  and  race
    relations.  In that context the judge had no jurisdiction to allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the Claimant satisfied the substantive rule at
    paragraph 41 of HC 395, i.e. on Immigration Rules grounds as set out at
    Section 84(1) (a).   Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J M Hollingworth on the basis that "the judge has erred in  law
    as to the scope of the appeal".

 6. The matter proceeded before me  on  the  basis  of  submissions,  there
    having been no application to adduce additional evidence.

 7. Ms Pettersen relied on the application for  permission  and  the  grant
    thereof in respect of establishing error, and invited me to  set  aside
    the decision and re-make it dismissing the Appellant's appeal  on  ECHR
    grounds.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    directed  at  the  provisions  of  paragraph  41  and  raised   nothing
    substantive in respect  of  ECHR.  Although  the  Sponsor  had  refugee
    status, the Appellant's daughter had travelled to him and so had status
    as a spouse dependant.  There was nothing preventing her  returning  to
    Sri Lanka to visit the Appellant, and, in  the  context  of  the  wider
    family, the claimant had visited Italy in the past and so it  was  open
    to the family to conduct family life by further visits in  Italy.   The
    fact that the judge had disagreed with the Entry Clearance  Officer  in
    the context of the requirements of the Rules, to  the  point  that  the
    judge found that they were in fact satisfied, did not of itself cause a
    breach of Article 8.

 8. Mr Shahzad submitted the reverse.  He pointed out that in  the  Grounds
    of Appeal at paragraph 3 the legal framework clearly indicated that the
    Grounds of Appeal were 84(1)(c) i.e. an unlawful decision under Section
    6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the
    Appellant's Convention rights.  In that context the judge's finding  in
    respect  of  paragraph  41  remained   relevant   to   the   Convention
    consideration.  Whilst  he  accepted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    appreciate the correct framework, the error was not material because on
    the basis of the  factual  finding  the  decision  was  not  Article  8
    compliant.

My Consideration

 9. I find that on the face of the decision the judge failed to  appreciate
    that restricted rights of appeal operate in this case so that there was
    no jurisdiction to allow the appeal on Immigration Rules  grounds.  The
    Grounds of Appeal before the judge were framed in the  context  of  the
    Convention ground at s 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act. Accordingly Article  8
    was the ground that  the  judge  needed  to  determine.   The  decision
    reveals errors of law both in allowing the appeal on Immigration  Rules
    grounds and failing to deal with the Article 8 ground. I consider  what
    to do about the error.

10. There was no issue before me that the factual matrix revealed a  family
    life sufficient to deserve  respect  in  the  context  of   Article  8,
    rather the argument was that interference caused by  the  decision  was
    slight, with the availability of visits  in  third  countries  such  as
    Italy,   so that  there were no significant consequences  sufficient to
    engage article 8.  I am satisfied that that is wrong. The threshold  of
    engagement is not a high one. The facts found at the first tier  reveal
    work and family commitments of the claimant's daughter and  spouse,  as
    well as the presence of a number of grandchildren here on a commonsense
    basis demonstrate barriers to the enjoyment o the family   relationship
    if it cannot be able to be enjoyed, at  least  in  part,  here.     The
    inability to conduct visits in the UK  is  a  significant  interference
    with the family relationship.  It follows I am satisfied that the first
    two tests in Razgar are answered affirmatively for the claimant.

11. In the absence of any challenge to the factual findings of the judge it
    is evident that on a proper application of the Rules the  claimant,  as
    at the date of decision, met the rules and so  had  an  entitlement  to
    enter.  The decision, albeit wrong on the facts is a lawful one because
    it was none the less made "in accordance with the law" because  it  was
    made pursuant to the  lawful  domestic  framework  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. I move  to  the  fifth  question  of  proportionality  in  the  context
    justifying interference which serves the legitimate  economic  aim.  Ms
    Pettersen's  submission  is   to   the   effect   that   although   the
    proportionality of the decision is not made out, as  would  usually  be
    the case, by a proper application of the rules, it is, none  the  less,
    made a proportionate decision by the ability of the claimant to  travel
    to Italy to meet with his family there, and the ability of his daughter
    and grandchildren to travel to Sri Lanka, alone if circumstances in Sri
    Lanka do not permit the son-in-law to travel with  them,  to  meet  the
    claimant there. In short there is simply no need for  the  claimant  to
    visit the family in the UK. I find that position is of no avail to  the
    Respondent, it is too onerous to the claimant and his family here,  not
    least  because  of  the  self  evident  increase  in  expenditure   and
    disruption to their employment and family circumstances here that  that
    would entail.  It is also an unattractive submission in the face  of  a
    wrong decision under the rules.  I find it does not  adequately  answer
    the obligation of the UK to positively respect  the  family  life  ties
    which exist in this case, and fails to appreciate that there is  little
    weight to be afforded to the public interest in refusing  entry  to  an
    applicant who, as this claimant has been found to  do,  meets,  at  the
    date of the immigration decision, all the requirements of the rules.

13. In the circumstances I find the errors material making  it  appropriate
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  re-make  the
    decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Signed E DAVIDGE                             Date 04 November 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


