

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
VA/19231/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 February 2016                     |         On 22 February 2016         |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                ZAITOON BEGUM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Chan (KBM Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Zaitoon Begum, a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  1
       March 1965, against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer of 28
       October 2013 to refuse her  application  for  entry  clearance.  That
       appeal having been allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, the  Secretary
       of State now appeals to the Upper Tribunal with permission.


    2. The application was for Ms Begum to visit her daughter in the  United
       Kingdom, Mehnaz Bi, to be present at the birth of her child. Ms  Bi's
       father, Muhammad Riaz, was  the  Appellant's  husband  by  way  of  a
       polygamous marriage: he acknowledged that he was  "conscious  of  the
       fact that you can only keep one wife in the  United  Kingdom"  in  an
       accompanying declaration.


    3. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application  because  of
       dissatisfaction with the evidence as to the  availability  of  rental
       income said to be received by her, and due to inadequate  information
       as to the location of her husband, all of  which  cast  doubt  as  to
       whether she would truly leave the United Kingdom at the  end  of  her
       visit. An Entry Clearance Manager upheld that refusal taking the view
       that there was no established family life between  the  couple  given
       that the Appellant was Mr Riaz's second wife and  had  not  regularly
       visited him here; it was their choice to live in different countries.
       The decision thus did not interfere with any family life and  was  in
       any event proportionate.


    4. This decision has already been the subject of appeal  proceedings,  a
       decision of 23 October 2014 of the First-tier Tribunal  finding  that
       the Appellant met all the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
       impressed as it was by the oral evidence from Mr Riaz and Ms  Bi  and
       by the fact that  Ms  Begum  had  previously  returned  abroad  after
       visiting this country in 2011.  However the subsequent success of the
       appeal was predicated on satisfaction of the Immigration Rules alone,
       the Judge overlooking the fact that her jurisdiction was  limited  to
       the decision's compatibility with  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
       Convention.  The  appeal  was  accordingly  remitted  for  re-hearing
       afresh.


    5. This time around  the  First-tier  Tribunal  recorded  the  Sponsor's
       evidence before it that Mr Riaz visited Ms  Begum  for  three  months
       each year, most recently from March to June 2015, during which period
       they would cohabit. He supported Ms Begum by giving her  cash  during
       his visits, which supplemented her  income  from  rent.  Now  he  had
       retired it was Ms Bi who would be financing her  mother's  visits  in
       future. Ms Begum had no children in Pakistan, though in this  country
       she had a son and daughter-in-law. In Pakistan she had her brother-in-
       law and his family (who was a neighbour to her),  and  three  sisters
       and their children. Ms Bi had visited her mother in 2011 and 2012. Ms
       Begum and the Sponsor's father had married in 1982; he  had  come  to
       the United Kingdom in 1955 or 1956.


    6. Allowing the appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  it  was
       appropriate to treat the earlier decision as the starting point,  and
       joined with that Tribunal in accepting the application's  credibility
       and compatibility with the Immigration Rules; it accepted the further
       evidence given before it as to the regularity of  visits  between  Ms
       Begum and Mr Riaz. Having directed  itself  in  accordance  with  the
       decision in Mostafa, it found that family life was established  given
       the closeness of the relationships shown by the family's history.  As
       to proportionality, compliance with the Immigration Rules might be  a
       weighty factor though it was not determinative. Assessing whether the
       decision struck a fair  balance  between  private  right  and  public
       interest, the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the Appellant's good
       character, and those  statutory  considerations  that  were  relevant
       applying section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002 to the facts of the case, pointed in favour of finding continued
       refusal of the application to be disproportionate.


    7. Judge Grimmett of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
       appeal on 23 December 2015 on the basis that there  was  an  arguable
       error in  the  acceptance  of  family  life  when  it  had  not  been
       established that family life  had  previously  been  enjoyed  in  the
       United Kingdom. Before me Ms Everett relied on  the  grounds  of  the
       appeal which had alleged that the parties  to  the  relationship  had
       chosen to conduct their family life via a pattern of  lengthy  visits
       by the Sponsor to the Appellant. For the Respondent Ms Chan contended
       that there were family relationships interfered with by the  decision
       to refuse entry clearance beyond that of husband and wife, and  there
       was no evidence that it was financially realistic for Mrs Bi  or  the
       children to visit Pakistan regularly. The decision  was  unflawed  by
       any relevant error of law.


Findings and reasons

    8. The relevant Immigration Rules (the  old  Rule  41  rather  than  the
       modern Appendix V given the date of  decision)  are  those  governing
       visit  appeals  and  have  of  course  already  been  identified   as
       satisfied. Mostafa (Article 8 in entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112
       (IAC) reminds us that the satisfaction of those Rules, however,  does
       not carry the day for a visitor Appellant, for with  effect  from  25
       June 2013, section 52 of  the  Crime  and  Courts  Act  2013  amended
       section 88A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  so
       that there is no right of appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance
       in a family visitor case except on grounds alleging that the decision
       shows unlawful discrimination or is unlawful under Section 6  of  the
       Human Rights Act 1998.


    9. The acceptance on the earlier appeal that Rule 41 is satisfied  does,
       of course, give the Appellant a positive footing from which to launch
       this appeal, for it  permits  her  to  assert  that  she  has  firmly
       established herself as a person who will not remain beyond  6  months
       and fully intends to leave the United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  her
       visit, who will not abuse the  route  by  living  here  for  extended
       periods through frequent or successive visits and does not intend  to
       take employment or otherwise conduct economic  activities  here;  and
       can be  maintained  and  accommodated  adequately  out  of  resources
       available to the family without recourse to public  funds  or  taking
       employment.


   10. The difficulty for the Secretary of State is in establishing that her
       grounds in truth constitute a legitimate challenge.  They  read  very
       much as a submission on the merits of the appeal  at  first  instance
       without identifying any of the recognised forms of error of  law.  In
       her submissions Ms Everett argued that inadequate reasons were given:
       but the reasoning of the Judge below is  perfectly  transparent.   It
       was accepted that family  life  was  established  given  the  lengthy
       pattern of visits and the  various  connections  between  the  family
       members. It adjudged that the interference was a significant one that
       rendered it sufficiently serious to engage Article  8  ECHR,  and  it
       went onto find, by reference to a range of  public  interest  factors
       that the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse entry clearance
       was disproportionate. It seems to me that the balance that was struck
       was a perfectly reasonable one and that no evidence was overlooked.


   11. As to the submission that the First-tier Tribunal should  have  found
       that the established pattern of this family's life was such that  the
       immigration decision would not threaten the ability  of  Mr  Riaz  to
       continue to visit Mrs Begum abroad, that ignores the  fact  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal specifically directed attention to  this  feature
       of the case, and fails to appreciate the whole basis of  Mrs  Begum's
       application, which was not founded on any particular wish to see  her
       husband in this country but rather to spend time with her daughter in
       order to help her to bring her granddaughter  into  the  world  (and,
       inevitably given the  passage  of  time  since  which  has  seen  the
       granddaughter born, to spend time with the two of them). It seems  to
       me that the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal  fully  sufficed
       and were sufficiently detailed to show the principles upon  which  it
       acted and the reasons for its decision.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any  material
    error of law and stands. The  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.





Signed:                                            Date: 5 February 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


