
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/19317/2013
                                                               VA/19318/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2015                              |On 13 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between


                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, lagos
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             BLESSING ONAGHINOR
                              BEAUTY ONAGHINOR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Komolafa, Legal Representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.   The appellant in this case  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who
      appeals with the permission of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Abebrese  to  allow  the
      appeals of Ms Blessing Onaghinor and  Ms  Beauty  Onaghinor,  Nigerian
      nationals born on 3  September  1994  and  5  May  1990  respectively,
      against decisions 18 October 2013 refusing  them  entry  clearance  in
      order to visit their brother,  Mr  Henry  Onaghinor  in  the  UK.  The
      appeals were allowed by Judge Abebrese who found the  requirements  of
      paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules, HC395 were met. The  judge  did
      not consider any other ground of appeal.


   2.    It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. From now on I  shall  refer  to  Ms  Blessing
      Onanghinor and Ms Beauty Onaghinor as  "the  appellants"  and  to  the
      Entry Clearance Officer as "the respondent".


   3.   I was not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   The parties were in agreement that the judge's decision  contains  a
      material error of law such that it should be set aside.


   Error of law
   5.   The respondent sought and was granted permission to  appeal  against
      Judge Abebrese's decision in respect of the appellants on  the  ground
      that he failed to recognise that the grounds of appeal were restricted
      to human rights and discrimination. It clearly noted on the notices of
      decision that the grounds of appeal were restricted.


   6.   By virtue of section 52 of the Crime  and  Courts  Act  2013,  where
      applications are  made  for  visit  visas  after  25  June  2013,  the
      applicants  will  only  be  able  to  appeal  on  human   rights   and
      discrimination grounds.


   7.   It is plain that Judge Abebrese did not direct himself correctly and
      he failed to recognise that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  to  allow  the
      appellants' appeals under the rules. He made no reference  at  all  to
      human rights or, for that matter, race discrimination. He exceeded his
      jurisdiction and I therefore set aside his decision.


   8.   I re-make the decision as follows.

   Decision substituted
   9. The grounds of appeal lodged against the respondent's decisions argued
      the decisions interfered with the appellants' rights under  article  8
      of the Human rights Convention, which protects  the  right  to  family
      life.


  10. The burden of proof is on the appellants and the standard of proof  is
      the ordinary civil standard of a  balance  of  probabilities.  Section
      85(5)  of  the  2002  Act  provides  that  I  may  consider  only  the
      circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision to  refuse.  In
      AS (Somalia) UKHL 32, the House  of  Lords  held  that  section  85(5)
      applied to human rights grounds of appeal.

  11. Article 8 states as follows,


         "1.    Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
         life, his home his and correspondence.
         2.     There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with
         the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
         law and is necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

  12. There is no provision within  Appendix  FM  of  the  rules,  which  is
      expressly concerned with the application of article 8  to  immigration
      decisions, to visitors. Appendix FM is  concerned  with  family  unity
      where the respective family members wish to live together permanently.
      It is now clear that, if after considering  the  rules,  the  Tribunal
      considers that the article 8 claim has been fully addressed, it is not
      necessary to go on to look outside the rules unless there are arguably
      good grounds for doing so, although there is no threshold test  (Singh
      and Anr v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  74,  see  paragraph  66).  Given  the
      absence  of  any  rule  designed  to  protect  family  life   in   the
      circumstances of family visits, I shall assess the case  by  reference
      to the case law which set out the  guiding  principles  prior  to  the
      amendment of the rules.


  13. It is for the appellants to show there would be an  interference  with
      their right to family life, although  in  entry  clearance  cases  the
      correct approach to this issue may be to assess whether  the  decision
      amounts to an unjustified lack of respect for family life, focusing on
      the UK's positive obligations to facilitate family reunion (Shamim Box
      [2002] UKIAT 02212). Article 8 is a qualified right expressed in  such
      a way as to allow for exceptions and it is for the respondent to  show
      that the lack of respect is lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.
      I then have to assess whether the decision is disproportionate to that
      aim.

  14. I reminded myself of the five questions to be answered in  determining
      an article 8 ground of appeal, as set out in paragraph  17  of  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27, an approach confirmed in paragraph 7  of  EB  (Kosovo)
      [2008] UKHL 41. I also reminded myself that I am not solely  concerned
      with the rights of the appellant but I must also consider  the  direct
      impact of the refusal on her family members (Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL
      39).


  15. Mr Komolafa  relied on the recent case of Mostefa (Article 8 in  entry
      clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112  (IAC)  to  support  his  argument  that
      ability to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  is  capable  of  being  a
      weighty, though not determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  a
      refusal is a proportionate decision.


  16. However, in the case he relied on the Upper Tribunal  also  stated  as
      follows:



         "24. It is the  very  essence  of  Article  8  that  it  lays  down
         fundamental values that have  to  be  considered  in  all  relevant
         cases.  It would therefore be extremely foolish to  attempt  to  be
         prescriptive,  given   the   intensely   factual   and   contextual
         sensitivity of every case. Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in
         this type of case, any particular kind of relationship would always
         attract the protection of Article  8(1)  or  that  other  kinds  of
         relationship would never come within its scope.  We  are,  however,
         prepared to say that it will only be in very unusual  circumstances
         that a person other than a close relative will be able to show that
         the refusal of entry clearance comes within the  scope  of  Article
         8(1). In practical terms this is likely  to  be  limited  to  cases
         where the relationship is that of husband and wife or  other  close
         life partners or a parent and minor child and even then it will not
         necessarily be extended to cases where, for example,  the  proposed
         visit is based on a whim or will not add significantly to the  time
         that the people involved spend together. In the  limited  class  of
         cases where Article 8 (1) ECHR is  engaged  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance must be in accordance with the law and proportionate.  If
         a person's circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and  they
         have not acted in a way that undermines the system  of  immigration
         control, a refusal of entry clearance is liable to infringe Article
         8."


  17.  It  is  necessary  therefore  to  consider  whether  the  appellants'
      circumstances engage article 8.1.


  18. The question of  whether  family  life  exists  between  adult  family
      members was considered in detail in paragraphs 50  to  62  of  Ghising
      (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160  (IAC).  The
      guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  that  case  was  subsequently
      approved by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 46  of  Gurung  &  Others
      [2013] EWCA Civ 8. Most of the case law has been concerned with  adult
      children living with their parents. The thrust of the guidance is that
      each case depends on its own facts.

  19. There was scant evidence regarding the relationship before  the  entry
      clearance officer, despite an interview being held  with  one  of  the
      appellants, such that there was even doubt that they were  related  at
      all to the sponsor. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral  evidence  from
      the sponsor and accepted the relationships were as claimed.


  20. I also heard brief oral evidence from the sponsor, Mr Henry Onaghinor,
      and his wife, Ms Angeligue Rama. Mr Walker made no challenge to  their
      evidence, which I accept was credible.


  21. The following facts are clear. The appellants were,  at  the  date  of
      decision, pursuing undergraduate studies in Nigeria. They  lived  with
      their mother. They were aged 19 and 23 respectively. The sponsor  left
      home in Nigeria in 1997. He lived in Germany and Spain  before  coming
      to the UK in October 2004. He visited Nigeria once in  2004,  once  in
      2007 (with his wife) and again in 2008. The appellants have two  other
      siblings in Nigeria and another in Spain. The sponsor has  sent  money
      to his mother for their upkeep since 1999. The sponsor did  visit  the
      family again in Nigeria in April 2014 but that was after the  date  of
      decision. The appellant's mother was granted entry clearance  and  has
      twice visited the UK in 2013 and 2014. Again that was after  the  date
      of decision.


  22. The available evidence falls considerably short of  showing  there  is
      family life between the parties in this case. There is  some  evidence
      of financial dependency between the parties  but  little  evidence  of
      anything beyond the usual  ties  of  affection  between  adult  family
      members. The sponsor came to the UK  when  the  appellants  were  very
      young and they have effectively grown up without their  older  brother
      being present in the household. During the sixteen years  between  his
      departure from Nigeria and the date  of  decision,  the  sponsor  only
      visited Nigeria three times. Whilst he may speak to the appellants  on
      the telephone when he calls his mother, there is no basis  for  saying
      that their relationship is sufficiently close to amount to family life
      for the purposes of article 8.


  23. I must  therefore  dismiss  these  appeals.  The  appellants  met  the
      requirements of paragraph 41 but I cannot allow the appeals on Mostefa
      principles unless family life is shown. Article  8.1  was  engaged  in
      that case because  the  facts  concerned  a  husband  and  wife.   The
      circumstances of these appeals are far different.




NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  I  re-
    make the decision in the following terms:

     The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.

    No anonymity direction.


                               Signed                 Date 13 March 2015






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


                               Signed                 Date 13 March 2015






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal


