
IAC-fH-ck-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/19597/2013
                                                               VA/19598/2013
                                                               VA/19599/2013
                                                               VA/19600/2013
                                                               VA/19601/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2014                  |On 16 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Zuhair Al Dulaimi
                         Master Abdullah Al Dulaimi
                           Miss Reemas Al Dulaimi
                            Mrs Thanaa Al Dulaimi
                          Master Sajjad Al Dulaimi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Salfiti, the Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   There is before me an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

2.   The application in this case was made on 27 October  2013  and  it  was
    made on the basis of a family visit whereby the  Dulaimi  family  could
    visit Mr Salfiti and his wife in the UK, I was told, for  a  period  of
    three weeks.  On the face of it that application was a  straightforward
    one and there is no reason why it should not have been  successful  but
    unfortunately, based on the documents that were  submitted,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied as to the financial requirements of
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules being met.

3.   The way that this  matter  came  before  me  for  hearing  followed  an
    adverse decision for  the  ECO  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Secretary of State appealed the matter to the Upper Tribunal and  Judge
    Osborne identified that Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 had
    come into force on 25 June 2013.  That point  had  been  taken  by  the
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  and  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.  In
    particular, the Entry Clearance Manager's review makes clear  that  the
    right of appeal has been severely curtailed by that legislation so that
    you can only appeal on one of two bases and  the  two  bases  that  are
    relevant or potentially relevant are that of human rights and  that  of
    discrimination on grounds of racial or other discrimination.

4.   The appeal by the respondent is therefore on the basis  that  there  is
    no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal on the substantive merits;  i.e.
    to ascertain whether or not the requirements of  paragraph  41  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met.

5.   The ECM's review states that the two grounds  of  appeal  that  can  be
    advanced in the light of Section 52 of the 2013 Act, are under  Section
    19B of the Race Relations Act 1976 or under  Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.

6.   Mr Salfiti makes the valid point  that in the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal reference was made to the Human Rights Act (on page 4, paragraph
    1).  Unfortunately that was not  referred  to  or  dealt  with  by  the
    Immigration Judge before the First-tier Tribunal and there is no cross-
    appeal by the appellant against the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  below
    against that failure.

7.   I have to say, it appears that a properly directed tribunal would  take
    some persuasion that a visit visa application could  succeed  on  human
    rights grounds where it would fail under the Immigration Rules  but  in
    any event the appeal before me does not raise that question.  It  seems
    that the appeal has been properly brought by the  respondent,  who  has
    correctly identified that the Immigration Judge  simply  did  not  have
    jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  substantive  merits  of  the  appeal.
    Therefore I have no alternative but to find a material error of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that that decision must be
    set aside. I would be forced to substitute the decision that the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules be dismissed.

8.   As a postscript, however, I would say  that  I  have  got  considerable
    sympathy with the appellants' position given that they had raised human
    rights in their grounds of appeal and given that there was an  apparent
    failure by the respondent to point out to the First-tier Tribunal  that
    there was a potential jurisdictional issue. With respect, the  lack  of
    jurisdiction should  have  been  brought  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    attention.

9.   I  would  also  encourage  Mr  Salfiti  to  make  a  fresh  application
    supporting his application with appropriate evidence because  it  would
    seem to me that on the face of it this is a proper  family  visit  visa
    application in absence of anything adverse known about the appellants .
    It ought to succeed but that is entirely a matter for the respondent to
    deal with in due course.

10.  For those  reasons  I  conclude  that  the  appeal  today  is  allowed.
    Following the hearing I have revised slightly the reasons given for  my
    decision at the hearing as set out above.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is allowed. The decision of the ECO to refuse  entry
clearance stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 16 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
