
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19231/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                         |On 3rd February 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              mrs Zaitoon begum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stone, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole issued on 20th October 2014
    allowing, under the Immigration Rules,  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer in Abu  Dhabi  made
    on 28th October 2013 to refuse entry clearance as a visitor.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born 1st March 1965.

 3. On 5th December 2014 a First-tier Tribunal Judge granted permission  to
    appeal.  He said:

         "2.  The Respondent's reasons for the refusal decision did not pick
             up on the fact that the application (as it then was in October
             2013) could only  succeed  on  restricted  grounds.   The  ECM
             review did  do  so.   Perusal  of  the  determination  however
             indicates no mention is  made  of  the  restricted  rights  of
             appeal prevailing arising from the Crime and Courts Act 2013.

         3.   All the grounds are arguable."

 4. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that Judge Wellesley-
    Cole had no jurisdiction to consider the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules due to the amendment that was made to the law on 25th  June  2013
    by Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act.  This restricted the  appeal
    rights for visitors coming to visit  family  members  to  two  grounds,
    namely that the decision breached the Appellant's rights  under  either
    the Human Rights Act or Race Relations Act.  These restricted   grounds
    are set out at Section 84(1)(b) and (c) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  Reliance is placed  by  the  Respondent   on  the
    decision Virk and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652  in  which  it  was
    held that statutory jurisdiction  cannot  be  conferred  by  waiver  or
    agreement or the failure of the parties or the Tribunal to be alive  to
    the point.

 5. Judge Wellesley-Cole set out the evidence that  she  heard.   She  took
    into account the various documents before her.  She concluded that both
    witnesses were credible and found herself  to  be  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395 (as amended) were  met.   At  no
    point did she refer to the fact that the Appellant only had  an  appeal
    on the two restricted grounds.  She had no jurisdiction  to  deal  with
    paragraph 41.  I agree with  what  was  said  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.

 6. Mr Stone submitted that the only way forward in this case  is  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de  novo
    so that the Article 8 ECHR issues can be examined. Article 8 was raised
    in the original Grounds of Appeal but the family life  element  of  the
    application has never been considered.

 7. I accept that it would be difficult  for  this  appeal  to  succeed  on
    Article 8 grounds but in light of the fact that  this  application  was
    wrongly dealt with by the ECO and the Tribunal and  the  fact  that  no
    evidence to support a claim under Article 8 has  been  put  forward  or
    considered, the correct approach is  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard anew.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date: 2nd February 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird
