
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
VA/19471/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 16 December 2014                    |On 9 January 2015           |
|                                       |............................|
|                                       |...........                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR BESART VITIJA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chambers  on  11  November
           2014 against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Bircher who  had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  under  the
           Immigration Rules against the refusal  of  his  application  for
           entry clearance as a visitor in a determination  promulgated  on
           29 September 2014. The appeal was determined on  the  papers  as
           the Respondent had requested.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Kosovo, born on 8 July 1994.  He
           is a student, but the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  not  been
           satisfied with the evidence  provided  and  concluded  that  the
           Respondent's intention to leave the United Kingdom at the end of
           his visit was in doubt.  The right of appeal to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal was limited to  human  rights  and  Equality  Act  2010
           issues.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted because the judge had misapplied  the  law
           in that there was no longer any right of appeal  to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal under paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.   The
           judge had not considered whether or not the  Respondent's  human
           rights were engaged.


      4.    Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal in  standard  form.
           The Respondent was not represented at the hearing and  had  sent
           in no further  material  for  the  tribunal  to  consider.   The
           tribunal considered that the onwards appeal  could  nevertheless
           be justly determined.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Tufan for the Appellant relied on the grounds and  the  grant
           of permission to appeal.  The  Respondent's  human  rights  were
           simply not engaged  on  the  facts  and  the  determination  was
           misconceived.   In  any  event  it  was  proportionate  for  the
           Respondent to make a fresh entry clearance application.






      The error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal agreed with Mr Tufan's submissions, which need  not
           be repeated.      The  tribunal  finds  that  the  determination
           contains material errors of law, as identified in the  grant  of
           permission to appeal, such that it must be set aside and remade.
            The full right of appeal for family visitors ended on  25  June
           2013.  There was no evidence before the tribunal  to  show  that
           the entry clearance application had been submitted prior to that
           date.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.




      The fresh decision


      7.    In this part of the determination it is convenient to  refer  to
           the parties by their original designations.  As noted above, the
           Appellant did not raise or pursue issues of race  discrimination
           or human rights in  his  Notice  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.   It is not easy to guess  what  they  could  possibly
           have been.  No such point was "Robinson obvious": see  R  v  the
           Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Robinson [1997]
           3 WLR 1162. The Appellant who is an adult lives  in  Kosovo  and
           has no private or family life in the United Kingdom.     It  was
           open  to  the  Appellant  to  make  a  fresh   entry   clearance
           application addressing the issues raised by the Entry  Clearance
           Officer  when  refusing   his   application.    The   First-Tier
           Tribunal's decision can only be remade in one way, that is, that
           the appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  must
           be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on a  point of law.  The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The
decision    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher is set aside and remade  as
follows:

      The appeal of the original Appellant is DISMISSED

      Signed                                 Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
