

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/19414/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 27 January 2015                            |On 24 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD MUMTAZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Nadia Mehboob Khan (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home office presenting officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Froom) promulgated on 14th October 2014 in which  he  dismissed
      the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8 ECHR.






   Background
   2.   This was a family visit appeal with a restricted right of appeal  to
      race  relations  grounds  or  human  rights  grounds.   The  Appellant
      requested an oral hearing. The Tribunal determined the appeal  in  the
      absence of  the  parties  having  ascertained  that  the  Sponsor  and
      Appellant had been properly served with the  notice  of  hearing  [8].
      And further decided that the Sponsor had not attended for the  hearing
      [8].


     Grounds
   3.   The grounds of appeal assert that the Sponsor had in  fact  attended
      for the hearing on 10th October 2014 and that  he  was  in  the  Court
      building until 3 pm.  He was then informed that the Tribunal heard and
      dismissed the matter.  There was unfairness to the  Appellant  as  the
      Sponsor was unable to give evidence in support.


   4.   The Respondent opposed the appeal in a Rule 24 response.


         Permission
   5.    Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mcdade  on  9th
      December 2014.  He stated that " the Appellant  and Sponsor need to be
      in a position to prove that the Sponsor had attended  at  the  hearing
      centre and may wish to  consider  contacting  the  hearing  centre  to
      obtain any evidence of this prior to  an error of law hearing.  In the
      meantime I give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt and I hold that
      because of the possibility of an error on the  part  of  the  Tribunal
      there is an arguable error of law in not hearing  the  case  with  the
      Sponsor present. "

   6.   At the hearing before me the Appellant was not represented.  Mr  and
      Mrs Khan, the Sponsors attended in person.  I explained the  procedure
      that would be followed.  Mrs Khan expanded on the grounds  of  appeal.
      I asked if they had been able to find any evidence to  show  that  the
      Sponsor attended the hearing centre.  Mrs Khan  stated  that  she  had
      sent an email but she did not have a copy of it with her.

   7.    In the court file I found an email chain which  included  an  email
      dated 10th October 2014 from the Sponsor setting out the position  and
      complaining to  the  Tribunal  that  the  hearing   proceeded  in  the
      Sponsor's absence despite his having attended all day.  I read out the
      contents of the email. I am satisfied that it is consistent  with  the
      account given in the grounds of appeal and by Mrs Khan.  There was  no
      response to the email in the file from the Tribunal.

   8.   On the basis of that evidence I am satisfied that the Appellant  has
      established that the Sponsor was at  the  Tribunal  for  the  hearing.
      This was not disputed by Mr Tufan.  However, he submitted that in  the
      event that the appeal was restricted to and dismissed on human  rights
      grounds, the error was not material.  He could think  of  no  evidence
      that the Sponsor could have given that would have altered the  outcome
      to establish that Article 8 was engaged.

   9.   I am satisfied that  there  was  a  procedural  error  of  law  that
      amounted to unfairness to the Appellant, who  had  requested  an  oral
      hearing and his Sponsor had attended the hearing centre  intending  to
      give evidence in support.  I take into account that the Appellant  was
      not legally represented.  Whilst acknowledging that  the  Sponsor  did
      not produce any witness statement which would have been  helpful.   It
      cannot be decided without hearing evidence from the Sponsor whether or
      not that evidence has  any  impact  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,
      regardless of the restricted right of appeal.  The  Sponsor  ought  to
      have the opportunity to given evidence as  to  family  life  with  the
      Appellant.  Further notwithstanding the restricted right of  appeal  I
      observe that the Tribunal made no findings as to the extent  to  which
      the Appellant failed to meet the rules as a family visitor, which  may
      be relevant considerations under Article 8.



DECISION

  10. Accordingly I am satisfied that there  is  a  material  error  of  law
      following a procedural irregularity  that  lead  to  unfairness.   The
      decision is set aside.  The appeal is to be reheard  at  Hatton  Cross
      (excluding Judge Froom) on a dated and time to be notified.



NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE



                               Signed                     Date 27.1.2015


                               GA BLACK
                                Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


NO FEE AWARD

                                        Signed                     Date
                                   27.1.2015


                               GA BLACK
                                Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

