
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/20358/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th June 2013                               |On 25th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                tanzeela khan
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Muhammad Arshad Naz, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Designated Judge
    Dearden made following a hearing at Bradford on 21st June 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15th  April  1984.   She
    applied to come to the United Kingdom  to  visit  her  cousin  but  was
    refused on 8th May 2012.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied
    about her financial position in  Pakistan,  since  her  father-in-law's
    bank statements show large deposits not consistent with the history  of
    the account, and whilst affidavits and land and property documents  had
    been filed, they did not demonstrate evidence of employment  or  income
    generation.

 3. The judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor  whom  he  found  to  be
    credible, but he said that Mr Naz could not assist him as to where  the
    sums in the family's bank account had come from.  The judge noted  that
    the family said that they were employed in agriculture and whilst there
    were crop receipts, land documents and petrol accounts in  the  bundle,
    there was no cogent or persuasive evidence as to their earnings.

 4.  It  was  also  said  that  the  family  had  earnings  from  a  carpet
    manufacturing business but there was no evidence  of  it.   Finally  no
    cogent explanation had been provided as to why the Appellant needed  to
    bring her dependent children with her  on  holiday.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  it  was
    clear from an inspection of the bank statements  that  the  crop  sales
    receipts provided in support of the appeal  correlated  with  the  sums
    deposited.  With respect to the carpet  factory  the  Sponsor  did  not
    visit it and did not know any detail but had been told that it existed.
     Thirdly the Sponsor has 4 year old twins and could not  reasonably  be
    expected to leave them behind when she came to the UK for a holiday.

 6. On 12th  March  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

The Hearing

 7. Mr Naz took me through the crop receipts in  the  bundle  for  February
    2012 which did in aggregate match the deposits in the bank account  for
    February and March 2012.

 8. He said that when he was giving his evidence in front of the  judge  he
    did not have the bank statement in front of him and  was  told  by  the
    judge that he would look at all the receipts and make a decision on the
    basis of what they said.  Since the judge had said he would review  the
    documents he did not say anything else.  He accepted that  he  did  not
    know anything about the carpet factory but said that the whole  purpose
    of coming on the holiday was for his cousin to bring  her  children  to
    visit his family, one of whom was exactly  the  same  age  as  his  own
    twins.

 9. Mrs Pettersen accepted that there was an error in this determination in
    respect of the crop receipts although she maintained that the judge was
    entitled to reach the decision that he did in respect of  the  evidence
    of the carpet factory.



Consideration of whether there is a material error of law

10. The judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant had  not  adduced
    satisfactory  evidence  in  relation  to  the  carpet  factory  and  to
    therefore not place reliance on it as a source of  income.  However  as
    Mrs Pettersen acknowledged, the judge did not examine the crop receipts
    and the bank statements with sufficient care  because  if  he  had,  it
    would have been apparent that, as the Sponsor said, the source  of  the
    income would have been disclosed.

11. The mistake is entirely understandable, since the bank  statements  are
    poorly copied and difficult to read and although they match the sums in
    the bank statement for the  relevant  months  there  is  not  a  single
    deposit of 720,000 rupees, which is the  sum  mentioned  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer. The sums are the cumulative total of the receipts.

12. Accordingly the judge erred in law in not taking into account  relevant
    evidence and his decision is set aside.

Re-making the Decision

13. The Sponsor gave evidence and said that  he  had  previously  sponsored
    three people before, namely his parents, who stayed from 14th July 2006
    until 28th October 2006, his sister-in-law and her daughter who  stayed
    from 7th August 2009 to 22nd October 2009 and another cousin who stayed
    from 19th May 2011 to 2nd June 2011.  He said that the Appellant had  5
    year old twins who got on very well with his youngest daughter and they
    intended to come purely for a holiday.  This was a strong family and he
    guaranteed that she would return to live with her husband.

14. Mrs Pettersen left the decision in my hands.

15.  I  accept  the  Sponsor's  evidence.   He  was  entirely  candid   and
    straightforward.  He has a good history of sponsoring relatives in  the
    UK who have all returned within the currency of their visa.  I bear  in
    mind that it is the Appellant's intentions which are the most important
    but there is no reason to doubt that she will not return to her husband
    and other family in Pakistan.  The doubts  raised  about  the  family's
    financial circumstances have been answered. It is plain that she  would
    want to bring her young 5 year old twins with her when visiting the  UK
    rather than leaving them behind.

Decision

16. The original judge erred in law and his decision  is  set  aside.   The
    appeal is allowed.


Signed

                                Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
