
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/21046/2012
                                                               VA/21051/2012
                                                               VA/21060/2012
                                                               VA/21067/2012
                                                               VA/21071/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2013                               |On 29 July 2013              |
|Prepared 24 July 2013                         |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                            mrs rahima begum (1)
                        mr anamul haque chowdhury (2)
                      mr md ruhinul haque chowdhury (3)
                     miss taiyeba jannath chowdhury (4)
                     master redwanul haque chowdhury (5)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Qureshi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Holmes, Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal N M K Lawrence  promulgated  on  20  December  2012
    dismissing their appeals against the decisions of the  respondent  made
    on 9 May 2012, refusing their applications for entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as visitors pursuant to paragraph 41, and in the case of
    appellants three to five, paragraph 46 of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent also refused  the  applications  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants, paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The first appellant is married and is the mother of the second to fifth
    appellants.   In  addition,  she  has  another  child,  Emdadul   Haque
    Chowdhury born in 1994.  The appellants' case is that they wish to come
    to the United Kingdom to visit family;  the  first  appellant's  mother
    lives here as do three of her brothers and two of  her  sisters.   They
    are to be supported and accommodated  whilst  here  by  Mohammed  Abdul
    Hannan, husband of the first appellant's sister ("the sponsor").

 3. In summary, the respondent refused the applications on the  basis  that
    when an unannounced visit had been conducted to the appellants' home on
    9 February 2012, it transpired that the second  appellant  had  serious
    eyesight problems and was unable to continue with his studies; that the
    second eldest son was at home despite it being a school day,  that  the
    third child was supposed to be at school but, when an officer  went  to
    the school, could not be found; and, the two youngest children were  at
    home.

 4. The respondent considered that the first and second appellants had  not
    mentioned  properly  the  second  appellant's  eyesight  problems   and
    inability to continue with his studies, that therefore the  information
    supplied - that he was a student - was incorrect and would thus  engage
    paragraph 320(7A).  Further, that the first  appellant  had  failed  to
    provide details of her youngest child and whilst one  innocent  mistake
    might be acceptable, in combination they  amounted  to  an  attempt  to
    mislead the respondent with regards to the appellants' circumstances in
    Bangladesh.

 5. The respondent considered that the attempt to  mislead  undermined  the
    credibility of the application as a whole leading him  to  doubt  their
    intentions, noting also that the husband's bank  account  had  recently
    been inflated and that no provenance for these funds had been provided.
     He therefore refused the applications on the basis  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellants were genuine  visitors  who  intended  to
    leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period, or that  they  could
    meet the costs of their onward and return journey.

 6. The respondent considered also, in the  case  of  the  third  to  fifth
    appellants, that as their mother had been refused entry, they  had  not
    demonstrated that suitable arrangements had been made for their  travel
    to and reception and care in the United Kingdom.

 7. In the grounds of appeal it is stated:

      i) that the appellant has five children; that the youngest is Redwanul
         (the fifth appellant) and that the second  son,  Emdadul,  did  not
         apply for a visa as he did not get permission from school;

     ii) that the application form was completed on the  appellants'  behalf
         by Mr Ahsan Chowdhury who made a mistake when completing the forms,
         omitting the youngest applicant's name from the form (sic);

    iii) that the two eldest children, Anamul  (the  second  appellant)  and
         Emdadul, are both in education, confirmed by attached letters; and,
          that although the second appellant did have  a  problem  with  his
         eye, this  has  now  improved,  he  has  resumed  his  studies  and
         therefore no necessary information was withheld;

     iv) that on the date of the UKBA visit, Ruhinul (the  third  appellant)
         was in school and the school denies receiving any contact from UKBA
         officials on the date in question;

      v) that the fourth appellant was at home on the day from school as she
         had a stomach pain and could not attend school;

     vi) that the large recent deposits into the husband's bank account were
         from the sale of a vehicle;

    vii) that there had been no attempt to deceive in any way.

 8. In the Entry Clearance Manager's  ("ECM")review, it is stated:

      i) that no weight can be attached to the documents  showing  that  the
         husband's bank account was inflated due to the sale of a vehicle;

     ii) that no weight can be  attached  to  the  letter  from  the  second
         appellant's school stating that he had returned as it postdates the
         decision and is not pertinent to the circumstances at the  date  of
         decision;

    iii) that no weight should be attached to the letters from  the  various
         schools attended  by  the  appellants,  in  particular  the  letter
         stating that the second appellant (sic) was at school on the day of
         the visit despite him being found  at  home  and  this  should  not
         challenge to the grounds of appeal;

     iv) that it was not credible that all the children bar the one who  did
         not apply would be at home sick  on  the  same  day.   It  was  not
         credible that the school letters provided would be  in  English  if
         signed in Bengali; and,

      v) that if the appellant had signed the application forms  to  declare
         that the information contained was true  and  complete,  signing  a
         declaration that they did not use an agent to complete  the  forms,
         now they say that, contrary to that declaration, they  did  use  an
         agent.

 9. The appeals then came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  who
    heard evidence from the sponsor.   The  judge  noted  [12]  that  Ahsan
    Chowdhury said in his letter that he is related to the first  appellant
    and her husband and that he had erred in not including the name of  one
    of the children.  He notes also that the  sponsor  "denied  that  Ahsan
    Chowdhury is related to the first appellant" and that "if  the  sponsor
    is telling the truth Ahsan Chowdhury is not and vice versa.  In  either
    event I am unable to accept either and act on it".  He considered  that
    the contradiction in the evidence undermines  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant and so he was unable to rely on the documents has adduced  in
    support of the appeal and  did  not  accept  her  explanation  for  the
    mistake.  He found that the first appellant did attempt to mislead  the
    respondent [15] thus dismissed all the appeals.

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:

     i) the judge had erred in finding a discrepancy between  the  evidence
        of the sponsor and the  first  appellant  given  that  it  was  not
        reasonable to expect the sponsor to know each and every relative of
        the first appellant and her husband [2] and that  the  sponsor  had
        said that the person may be a relative but he was not aware of him;
        and,

    ii) that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to
        documentary evidence provided in particular evidence  showing  that
        the UKBA officials had not returned to the school.

11. On 10 May 2013 Designated Judge  McDonald  granted  permission  on  all
    grounds noting that the Record of Proceedings appeared  to  record  the
    sponsor as saying "I do not know if  related"  which  would  dilute  or
    eliminate the contradiction founded on so strongly by the judge.

Does the determination of the First-tribunal involve the making of an  error
of law?

12. When the matter came before me, I ensured that both parties had  copies
    of the Record of  Proceedings.  It was agreed that the relevant part as
    recorded by the judge is as follows:

         "I do not know who Ahsan Chowdhury.   He  may  be  the  person  who
         completed the form.  I do not know if he is related."

    Ms Holmes very fairly conceded that there is a clear difference between
    "I do not know if they are related" and a denial that they are related.
    If follows that the judge misunderstood the  evidence  before  him  and
    that the finding that there was a discrepancy was based on a misreading
    of the evidence and was therefore irrational and thus,  amounts  to  an
    error of law.

13. This was not  a  finding  of  fact  on  a  minor  matter.   The  entire
    determination and the adverse credibility findings in  respect  of  the
    appellant are predicated on this discrepancy.   It  follows  from  this
    that  the  error  was  capable  of  affecting  the   outcome   of   the
    determination.  It also  follows  that,  given  the  rejection  of  the
    appellants' credibility was used to reject all  the  other  documentary
    evidence, none of the findings of fact can stand.

14. For these reasons, and as I announced at the hearing, the determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error  of  law.
    It is necessary to set it aside, and it  requires  to  be  re-made.   I
    directed also that the remaking would proceed on the basis that none of
    the findings of fact made by the previous judge could stand.



Remaking the decision

15. I then  heard  evidence  from  the  sponsor  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement subject to amending paragraph 6 to read  second  eldest  son.
    He said that his wife is the first appellant's elder sister but he  did
    not know who Ahsan Chowdhury is as he  had  not  seen  him  but  he  is
    related to  the  appellant's  husband.   He  said  that  of  the  first
    appellant's five children, the second oldest, Emdadul, would be staying
    behind.  The sponsor said that the first appellant  has  four  brothers
    and two sisters living in the United Kingdom and no siblings  currently
    living in Bangladesh.  He said that the first appellant's mother is not
    in good health, suffering from a mental condition as well  as  diabetes
    and has not returned to Bangladesh since she arrived here  some  twenty
    years ago.  He said  that  he  would  be  providing  accommodation  and
    maintenance for the family whilst they are  here  but  that  they  will
    paying the cost of the air fares.  There was no cross-examination.

16. Ms Holmes indicated that she would be relying  on  the  refusal  letter
    although only in asking me to determine the appeal indicating that  she
    considered the first appellant had made  a  genuine  mistake  and  that
    there would have been no benefit to her in concealing the existence  of
    a child who would not be travelling to the UK given that that would  be
    likely to indicate stronger ties to that country.

17. Ms Qureshi submitted that the appeal should be allowed, submitting that
    the refusal notice was confused as to the identities  of  the  children
    and it was indicative of the confusion that the visit  report  had  not
    been adduced and that therefore there was no evidence  to  back-up  the
    allegations in respect of the schools.  She submitted  that  sufficient
    evidence had been adduced to confirm the provenance of recent  deposits
    into the  husband's  account  and  that  there  were  letters  on  file
    confirming that the first appellant's mother suffers from schizophrenia
    and type 2 diabetes.  She submitted also that there was no challenge to
    the sponsor's evidence that, owning  a  five  bedroom  house  with  two
    receptions rooms, she would be able to provide  adequate  accommodation
    and, had the resources to cover the appellants'  costs  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

18. There is a substantial degree of confusion in both the  refusal  letter
    and the ECM's review as  to  which  children  were  identified  by  the
    officer who visited the home as being there.  It is accepted  that  the
    first appellant has five children, however as the names of the children
    are not given in the refusal notice, it is not possible to discern from
    it who the respondent considered to be  is  the  youngest  child.   The
    youngest of the appellants was born in 2010 and all the evidence points
    to the child who was omitted from the  applications  being  the  second
    oldest.

19. The reference to the "second son" in the refusal letter appears to be a
    reference to Emdadul and his absence from school that is  confirmed  in
    the letter from Lutfur Rahman High School dated 5 June 2012  (AB,  page
    18).  The reference to the second son being home would appear to  be  a
    reference to Ruhinul, (the third appellant) and the third oldest child.
     The reference to the third child is  apparently  a  reference  to  the
    fourth appellant, Taiyeba, but as it is noticed that the  two  youngest
    children are at home, the 6 year old has yet to have started education.

20. The confusion continues further in the grounds of appeal where [3]  the
    eldest two children, Anamul and Emdadul, are said to be in school; that
    the UKBA officials state that they visited  Ruhinul's  school  [5]  and
    that Taiyeba was at home on the day of the visit [6].

21. In the ECM's review it is recorded that the grounds of appeal make  the
    submission that the second, fourth and fifth appellants  were  at  home
    from school as well as the fifth child due to various illnesses.  It is
    stated "I did not find it credible that all children bar one  (the  one
    who did not apply) would be at home sick on the same day".

22. The difficulty with this statement is that the fifth appellant was born
    in 2010 and elsewhere the Secretary of State asserts  that  the  fourth
    appellant had not yet  started  school.  Had  the  actual  report  been
    produced it may have been possible to disentangle this  confusion,  but
    it is not.

23. I bear in mind that  the  appellants  do  not  speak  English  and  are
    therefore dependent on the application forms being explained  to  them.
    I accept, on the basis of the evidence put before me, that a  relative,
    Mr Ahsan Chowdhury, assisted with  the  completion  of  the  forms.   I
    consider that it is entirely plausible  that  the  child  who  was  not
    coming to  the  United  Kingdom,  Emdadul,  was  not  included  in  the
    application form for  that  reason.   I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor, which was not challenged, that Mr Ahsan Chowdhury is not known
    to him but he has been told, is a relative of the appellant's  husband.



24.  Whilst  that  does  therefore  result  in  the  declaration  from  the
    appellants that they had not used an agent in completing the form to be
    less than truthful, I accept the submission that they were  unaware  of
    this and that in any event Mr Chowdhury was a relative assisting rather
    than an agent acting on  a  commercial  basis  or  for  a  fee.   I  am
    satisfied that this was an innocent mistake.  I am satisfied also  that
    what Mr Chowdhury said, that the fifth child was omitted as  an  error,
    is also truthful.

25. It is not at all clear how the respondent  concluded  that  the  second
    appellant had ceased education owing to serious eye  difficulties.   It
    is the appellants' case, supported by documentation which has not  been
    challenged before me, that he did have problems with his eyes, but that
    this has now been resolved; and, that he has resumed education.  It is,
    however, accepted that his education had been prolonged on  account  of
    the eye problems having to be resolved.  Accordingly, I considered that
    he has not been deceptive about his status in his application.

26. Whilst I note the objection  to  the  documents  from  the  appellants'
    various schools, I do not consider that they could be rejected  on  the
    basis that they do not relate  to  circumstances  as  at  the  date  of
    decision  or  prior  thereto.   They   can   fairly   be   taken   into
    consideration.  They are written in English, but signed in Bengali,  it
    does not necessarily follow that these are unreliable.  Given that  the
    documents were prepared for use in proceedings in the United Kingdom, I
    consider that it is plausible  that  they  were  therefore  drafted  in
    English for the benefit of the authors.  This is not a  case  in  which
    the  respondent  has  contacted  the   relevant   schools   to   obtain
    confirmation of whether the letter as being false or not.

27. Taken with the evidence of the sponsor and the witness statement of the
    first appellant, I am satisfied that the letters  are  reliable  and  I
    note that in any event the respondent has adduced no  evidence  of  any
    attendance at any school attended by any of the appellants.

28. I have considered carefully the evidence relating to the husband's bank
    account and the documents relating to the sale of a vehicle.  Whilst  I
    noted the objection to the sale receipt, that the original has not been
    produced so that  the  translation  could  be  verified,  I  find  this
    objection has no merit.  The translation has been certified, copies  of
    the original document have been produced  in  the  appellants'  bundle.
    They are therefore  made  available  to  the  respondent  who,  at  the
    hearing, took no objection to this.

29. Accordingly, I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me that
    the appellants have provided a sufficient  explanation  for  the  large
    recent deposits into the husband's bank account.

30. In conclusion therefore, I find  that  the  respondent  has  failed  to
    satisfy me that the appellants have made any false  representations  or
    statements in connection with their applications and accordingly,  that
    paragraph 320(7A) is not engaged.   Whilst  the  applications  did  not
    contain full information, I am satisfied that this was on account of an
    innocent mistake.

31. I am satisfied also, in the light of that finding, and in the light  of
    the findings in relation to the husband's bank account, and reading the
    evidence as a whole, in the absence of any submissions to the contrary,
    that the appellants are genuine visitors to the United Kingdom, seeking
    in the case of the first appellant to see her mother who is unwell  and
    relatives who are settled in the United Kingdom.

32. The appellants have  significant  ties  to  Bangladesh,  through  their
    father and Emdadul, who will remain  in  Bangladesh  during  the  short
    visit to this country.  I am  satisfied  also,  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence supplied by the sponsor, which is not challenged, that  he  is
    able to provide accommodation and maintenance for the appellants.  I am
    satisfied also, from the documentary evidence before me, including  the
    bank statements, that the appellants can meet the cost of their  onward
    or return air flights.

33. As the mother of the third to fifth appellants, now  be  granted  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor, there will, in  light  of
    the other findings, be sufficient arrangements in place for their  care
    and reception in the United Kingdom.  I  therefore  allow  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law.  I set it aside.

2.   I remake the decision by allowing the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
