
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: VA/21792/2012
      VA/21856/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2013                            |On 01 November 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                               MRS NOOR JAHAN
                            MISS QURAT ULAIN KHAN
                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Otchere, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These linked appeals of mother and daughter come  before  me  following
    the grant of permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish
    on 9 August 2013. The appellants are from Pakistan and were born on  17
    March  1956  and  27  November  1982  respectively.   They  seek  entry
    clearance to visit the sponsor, Sohail Khawar. He  is  married  to  the
    first appellant's daughter.  Their applications  were  refused  by  the
    respondent on 7 June 2012.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  about  their
    circumstances in Pakistan, their social and economic ties or that  they
    would be adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK or that  they
    would leave the UK after their visit. They  did  not  request  an  oral
    hearing and the appeals were determined on the papers and dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie by way of a determination  dated  25
    April  2013.  The  challenge  to  that  determination  led   to   these
    proceedings.

 2. The appellants had also previously been  refused  entry  clearance  but
    their challenge against that refusal led  to  a  successful  appeal  in
    2007. A copy of the determination of Judge Neilson based in Glasgow  is
    included in the court file.

Error of law hearing

 3. Four grounds for permission are put forward.  The  first  is  that  the
    judge ignored the fundamental concept of  res  judicata  and  erred  in
    making findings on issues already addressed in the 2007  determination.
     The second is that there was unfairness because the respondent did not
    comply with directions "until the date  of  the  decision".  The  third
    ground is that the judge referred in his determination  to  photographs
    being provided whereas it is maintained that  the  appellants  did  not
    submit any photographs. Finally it is argued that the  appellants  paid
    separate fees and their appeals should not have been treated as one.

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Otchere. He conceded that it
    was difficult to criticise the judge's determination and accepted  that
    the judge had considered relevant matters and had not taken account  of
    irrelevant matters. However, he nevertheless submitted that the sponsor
    was settled and had sufficient resources to support the appellants.  He
    had not been able to attend the hearing. Mr Otchere did not  argue  the
    first two points made in the grounds.

 5. Ms Kiss responded briefly in view  of  Mr  Otchere's  submissions.  She
    added,  however,  that  there  had  been  discrepancies   between   the
    statements of the sponsor and his wife with  regard  to  their  address
    which gave further cause for concern and  which  reinforced  the  ECO's
    refusal. She submitted that  the  judge  had  properly  considered  the
    evidence and his determination could not be criticised.

 6. Mr Otchere stated that the sponsor and his wife were  going  through  a
    divorce hence the different addresses. He accepted that  this  impacted
    upon the issue of accommodation particularly as the sponsor had  failed
    to attend the hearing.

 7. At the conclusion of the hearing I gave reasons as to why I intended to
    uphold the judge's determination. These are set out below.

Findings and conclusions

 8. There is no merit whatsoever in the first ground. The reported decision
    in Mobu and Others (immigration appeals -  res  judicata)  [2012]  UKUT
    00398 (IAC) makes it plain that the principle of res judicata does  not
    operate in immigration appeals).  A  copy  of  this  determination  was
    handed to the parties at the start of the hearing; I can  only  comment
    that the author of the grounds should have been familiar  with  it.  In
    the circumstances, Mr Otchere quite  properly  did  not  then  seek  to
    pursue that argument.

 9. The second ground is difficult to follow and Mr Otchere was  unable  to
    clarify the point.  The  respondent  and  appellant  were  issued  with
    directions that any further documentary evidence to be relied on should
    be provided within a  certain  time  frame.  The  respondent's  appeals
    bundle was received by the Tribunal on 7 January 2013. A copy was  made
    available to the appellants and their representatives.  The  appellants
    submitted further documentary evidence through their sponsor. The judge
    determined the appeal on 27 March 2013. He had both bundles before him.
    The complaint that the appellants were  somehow  disadvantaged  by  the
    respondent's failure to comply with directions "until the date  of  the
    decision" is incomprehensible. There were no additional  documents  the
    respondent chose to submit once the bundle  had  been  served  and  the
    appellants had all those  documents  well  before  the  judge  came  to
    determine the appeal and so had the opportunity to  comments  on  them,
    and indeed did so.

10. The third complaint is that the judge  referred  to  photographs  which
    were on file and which had no relevance  to  these  appellants.  It  is
    quite correct that there are some photographs  on  file  and  that  the
    judge referred to having these at paragraph 6. I  accept  they  do  not
    relate to these appellants as they show individuals  with  turbans  and
    the appellants are not Sikhs. How they got  on  the  Tribunal  file  is
    unclear. What is clear, however, is that the photographs played no role
    in the judge's decision making. He did not refer to them in his reasons
    for dismissing the appeals and Mr Otchere confirmed  that  it  was  not
    suggested that the judge had relied on  any  documents  which  did  not
    pertain to the two appellants.

11. The last criticism is that the judge should have prepared two  separate
    determinations. However, there is no clarification on why a failure  to
    do so is an error  of  law.  The  judge  plainly  dealt  with  the  two
    appellants as  individuals  in  his  determination.  He  sets  out  the
    circumstances of both and then the different reasons for refusal  given
    by the ECO. He then considers the evidence. It should be noted that the
    same documents were relied on in both cases.  He then proceeds  to  set
    out his reasons for rejecting the case of the first appellant  followed
    by the reasons for rejecting the case of the second appellant. The fact
    that all  this  is  contained  in  a  single  determination  is  hardly
    surprising given the fact that the appellants are mother  and  daughter
    seeking to visit the same sponsor. It certainly does not amount  to  an
    error of law.

12. The judge gave clear and  sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    requirements of the rules had not been met. In doing so  he  gave  full
    regard to previous visits made by the appellants. His  conclusions  are
    wholly sustainable and do not disclose any errors  of  law.  It  should
    also be pointed out that there was no challenge in the grounds  to  the
    judge's findings on the lack of evidence regarding accommodation.  Even
    if the grounds had some substance, therefore, which they  do  not,  the
    appeals  would  have  failed  on  that  basis  alone.  The  issue   was
    specifically raised in the refusals  by  the  ECO  yet  no  independent
    documentary evidence to address the ECO's concerns was adduced  at  any
    stage. I am now told that the sponsor and his wife live apart  as  they
    are going through a divorce. That only serves to reinforce the  judge's
    findings on the difficulties regarding accommodation. It is open to the
    appellants to make fresh entry clearance applications she they wish  to
    do so on the basis  of  the  change  in  the  sponsor's  circumstances.
    However, if they choose that route, they should  ensure  that  all  the
    necessary evidence is adduced.

Decision

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any errors of  law  and  his
    determination dismissing both appeals is upheld.


Signed


Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
31 October 2013

