
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/22417/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 19 June 2013                                 |On 28th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                         Mr Olufemi abayomi falebita
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Modupe Falebita, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr Ouseley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born 30 April 195, is a citizen  of  Nigeria  living  in
    Botswana. He applied for entry clearance to visit his  British  citizen
    brother in the United Kingdom, Mr Modupe Falebita. This application was
    refused by an Entry Clearance Officer in a decision dated 23  May  2012
    in the following terms:

         "You state that you will visit your brother in the  UK.   Whilst  I
         recognise that your sponsor proposes  to  bear  the  cost  of  your
         visit, I must take into account  your  own  personal  and  economic
         circumstances in Botswana when coming to my decision.   Whilst  you
         have submitted  evidence  of  company  registration,  there  is  no
         documentary evidence regarding  the  company's  income.   You  have
         submitted personal bank statements  and  company  statements  which
         show large deposits  and  I  note  there  is  no  documentation  to
         demonstrate the origin of these funds.  Furthermore, you state that
         you are married and your wife resides with you in Botswana, however
         you have chosen not to submit  any  documentary  evidence  of  your
         family circumstances.  All of these factors lead me to  doubt  that
         your circumstances are as claimed and this leads me to  doubt  your
         credibility and intentions on your proposed visit.  Therefore I  am
         not satisfied that you are seeking a  genuine  visit  or  that  you
         intend to leave the UK at the end of your visit.  41(i) and (ii)."

 2. The appellant thereafter submitted lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  and  a
    substantial amount of additional documentation to the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer. An  Entry  Clearance  Manager  reviewed  these  documents  and
    responded on the 17 January 2013, stating:

         "The appellant states that he  is  self-employed  as  the  managing
         partner of Da Xiong PTY Ltd.  He has  submitted  various  documents
         relating to the business and I note that he is  not  named  on  any
         official registration documents.  He has provided evidence that  he
         is a director of a company named  Sinai  Holding  (PTY),  but  this
         company is not mentioned on his application  form  and  it  is  not
         clear whether he derives any income from it.  Therefore,  whilst  I
         acknowledge that evidence that  the  business,  Da  Xiong  PTY,  is
         functioning has been provided, the appellant has not satisfactorily
         demonstrated that his role in the business  is  as  claimed.   This
         leads me to doubt that the appellant's circumstances in Botswana or
         his intentions in the UK are as claimed.

         I acknowledge that the appellant has  provided  evidence  that  his
         spouse resides in Botswana with him.  The grounds  of  appeal  also
         state that the appellant travelled to the  UK  in  1986.   However,
         this was 26 years ago and I am not  satisfied  that  this  previous
         trip is relevant when considering  the  appellant's  intentions  on
         this occasion.

         Given all of the above I maintain  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
         clearance."

 3. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott  on
    15 February 2013 and was dismissed in a determination promulgated on 26
    March  2013.   In  his  determination  the  judge  observes  that   the
    respondent re-refused the appellant's application pursuant to paragraph
    320(7A) of the Immigration Rules on 4 December  2012,  it  having  been
    concluded  by  the  ECO  that  the  appellant   had   submitted   false
    documentation with his entry clearance application.

 4. Much of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  thereafter  concerns
    itself with  the  paragraph  320(7A)  refusal,  and  it  is  ultimately
    concluded that the Entry Clearance Officer had made out his case  under
    this paragraph of the Rules.

 5. When coming to its conclusions the First-tier Tribunal  make  reference
    to a Document Verification Report dated 13 November 2012.  It  is  said
    that this document is to be found  in  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    bundle and that it sets out the ECO's conclusion to the effect  that  a
    bank account, claimed by the appellant to be held in his  name  at  the
    Stanbic Bank in Harare, does not in fact exist; according to the bank.

 6. By way of a decision dated 29 April 2013 Designated  Immigration  Judge
    McClure granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, stating:

         "3.  The documentation produced by the appellant with regard to his
             account commenced at page D47.  From a cursory examination  of
             the photocopies there is reference at least to the appellant's
             address as Gaborone.  If the document verification report does
             emanate from Harare then it may be arguable that the  document
             verification report does not relate to the  appellant  or  his
             account.  The ECO in the refusal and the ECM in his review  do
             not identify a document verification report relating  to  this
             application.

         4.   From an examination of the bundle I cannot see on file a  copy
             of a document verification  report.   The  determination  does
             refer to a bank account held in Harare and indicates that  the
             account does not exist on the bank's system.  It  is  arguable
             that the document verification report does not relate  to  the
             bank account in respect of the appellant as it is evident from
             the documentation he is based in Gaborone and his bank account
             appears to be based there as well.

         5.   As the document verification report is the  basis  upon  which
             this matter was dismissed and was  the  only  reason  for  the
             judge  to  dismiss  this  matter,  the  grounds  are   clearly
             arguable."

 7. Thus the matter came before me.

Error of Law

 8. Having had opportunity to thoroughly examine the Tribunal's file  prior
    to the hearing of the appeal, I observed,  and  informed  the  parties,
    that the file did not contain a copy of a Document Verification Report,
    a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 4 December 2012 or  the
    First-tier Tribunal's record of the proceedings for the hearing  of  15
    February 2013.

 9. Mr Ouseley, thereafter, provided the tribunal with a copy of a Document
    Verification Report dated 16 January 2013. This report is  plainly  not
    the document referred to by the First-tier Tribunal, given its date and
    its contents. The report relates to an account purportedly held by  'Da
    Xiong  PTY  Ltd'  at  the  Standard  Chartered  bank,  not  an  account
    purportedly held in the appellant's personal name at the  Stanbic  Bank
    in Harare. Further, the conclusion of  the  report  was  not  that  the
    account did not exist but rather that the Standard Chartered bank  were
    not willing to provide any information to assist  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

10. Mr Ouseley confirmed that there were  no  other  Document  Verification
    Reports  on  his  file.  He  accepted,  as  a  consequence,  that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal could  not  stand,  it  having
    based its conclusions on a document which was  not  before  it  in  the
    instant appeal and, insofar as it existed at all, did not relate to the
    instant appellant.

11.  I  entirely  agree  with  Mr  Ouseley's  concession.   None   of   the
    documentation before me supports the First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusion
    that the Entry Clearance Officer took a paragraph 320(7A) point against
    the appellant. The DVR, and the further decision of the ECO relied upon
    by the First-tier Tribunal, is said to  pre-date  the  Entry  Clearance
    Managers' decision of 17 January 2013. In such  circumstances,  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal is correct in its conclusion that there was  (i)  a
    DVR in existence dated in November 2012 relating to this appellant  and
    (ii) a decision of the ECO dated 4 December 2012 based on such DVR,  it
    is somewhat surprising that the Entry Clearance Manager does not  refer
    to either document in his reasoning of  January  2013.  It  is  equally
    surprising that Mr Ouseley has not been  able  to  acquire  a  copy  of
    either document.

12. For these reasons I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    involved the making of an error on a point of law, and I set  it  aside
    in its entirety.

Re-making of the Decision

Law

13. The burden of proof, in relation to paragraph 41 of HC 395, is  on  the
    appellant and the standard of proof is to the balance of probabilities.
     By virtue of Sections 85 and 85A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, I am required only to take into account  circumstances
    appertaining as at the time of the decision  to  refuse  the  appellant
    entry clearance.  In the instant case that is 23 May 2012.

14. The requirements of the Rules in issue in the instant appeal are  those
    found in paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of HC 395:

         "(i) is genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a  limited  period
             as stated by him, not exceeding six months; and

         (ii) intends to leave the United Kingdom at the end of  the  period
             of the visit as stated by him..."

Evidence

15. I have before me a bundle produced by the  ECO  and  dated  29  January
    2013. This bundle runs  to  page  D67.  I  also  have  a  copy  of  the
    appellant's  notice  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   which
    incorporates numerous attachments.

16. I have taken into account the oral evidence given by the sponsor before
    the First-tier Tribunal, as recorded in paragraphs 9 to 10 of the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination. Whilst the sponsor attended  before  the
    Upper Tribunal he was not called upon to provide further oral evidence.

Submissions

17. Mr Ouseley indicated that he had nothing to add to terms of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision, upon which he placed reliance.

18. I invited the sponsor to make submissions, however he indicated that he
    was content to rely upon the documentation before the tribunal.



Findings and Reasons

19. I have set out above the reasons given by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and the Entry Clearance Manager for refusing  to  grant  the  appellant
    entry  clearance.   At  the  core  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    conclusion is the rejection of the appellant's  assertions  as  to  his
    circumstances in Botswana.

20. The Entry Clearance Manager accepts that there  is  evidence  that  the
    appellant's spouse  resides  in  Botswana  with  the  appellant.   Such
    evidence has also been placed before me and I  accept  the  appellant's
    assertion that he lives with his spouse in Botswana and that his spouse
    is not travelling with him to the United Kingdom.

21. Despite nearly 200 pages of documentation having been placed before  me
    neither party has produced a copy of the appellant's  Visa  Application
    Form.  I observe, from the  terms  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review, that the appellant must have indicated in his Visa  Application
    Form that he was the managing partner of  a  company  called  Da  Xiong
    (PTY) Limited.  It is clear that neither the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    nor the Entry  Clearance  Manager  was  of  the  view  that  there  was
    sufficient documentation before them to demonstrate the truth  of  this
    assertion.

22. In this regard, I have before me a letter signed by a Mr Mbulawa  dated
    30 April 2012. He identifies himself as  the  director  of  the  Divine
    Family Restaurant in Gaborone.  The letter is on headed notepaper, with
    the heading indicating that the Divine Family Restaurant is the trading
    name for Da Xiong (PTY) Limited. This  is  consistent  with  the  terms
    Standard Chartered bank statements I have before me, which refer to the
    company holding the account as "Da Xiong PTY Limited t/a Divine  Family
    Restaurant". The letter from Mr Mbulawa asserts the appellant to be the
    managing partner of Da Xiong (PTY) Limited. It also purports to  detail
    the appellant's monthly income and his percentage share of  the  firm's
    profits. A  Certificate  of  Registration,  certifying  that  Da  Xiong
    (Proprietary) Limited carries on business in the name of Divine  Family
    Restaurant is also contained within the documentation before  me.  This
    document is dated 18  September  2006  and  is  signed  by  the  Acting
    Registrar of Business Names and stamped by the Botswana Police Service.
    It provides an address for the business which is  consistent  with  the
    address given on other documents before me.

23. The appellant further provides a letter purportedly from  the  Gaborone
    City Council which, again, is  on  headed  notepaper.  This  letter  is
    stamped and signed by the licensing officer and purports to  provide  a
    licence to  Da  Xiong  (PTY)  Limited  trading  as  the  Divine  Family
    Restaurant.  Again, the address  for  the  business  provided  on  this
    document  is  consistent  with  the  address  found  elsewhere  in  the
    documentation before me. A Tax  Clearance  Certificate  has  also  been
    provided, dated 25  August  2011,  relating  to  Da  Xiong  Proprietary
    Limited.

24. There are numerous further  documents  before  me,  including  purchase
    orders and invoices, in the business  name,  all  in  a  similar  vein.
    Various other documents before me, such  as  water  bills  and  utility
    bills, receipts for the payment  of  such  bills  and  other  invoices,
    identify banking details for the Divine  Family  Restaurant  which  are
    consistent with those found on  the  statements  of  account  from  the
    Standard Chartered bank. Significantly, a covering letter to the series
    of statements of account from the Standard  Chartered  bank  identifies
    the appellant as being a signatory to the account held in the  name  of
    Da Xiong Proprietary Limited.

25. When assessing the weight to be attached to the  documents  purportedly
    originating from the Standard Chartered bank I take  into  account  the
    contents of the Document Verification Report of 16 January 2013. It  is
    plain that the Standard Chartered bank would not engage with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's verification process.  This is  a  matter  for  the
    Standard Chartered bank and there is no  suggestion  on  the  documents
    before me that the appellant had any  part  to  play  in  the  Standard
    Chartered bank's actions in this regard.  The statement of accounts, if
    reliable, support the contention that Da Xiong Proprietary Limited is a
    healthy going concern and has been for some considerable time.

26. The Entry Clearance Officer raises issues over large payments into  the
    appellant's personal account, which is said to be held at  the  Stanbic
    Bank (Garborone branch).  I have carefully considered the  contents  of
    the bank statements relating to this account and observe that the  only
    unusually "large deposits" shown within the banks statements relate  to
    deposits made as long ago  as  December  2010  and  January  2011  i.e.
    approximately sixteen months before the date of decision under  appeal.
    Given the date of these deposits I do not share  the  ECO's  view  that
    they should be treated as an adverse matter when  ascertaining  whether
    the appellant meets the requirements of paragraphs 41(i)  and  (ii)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

27. I must weigh all of the evidence in the  round,  and  come  to  my  own
    conclusions on the issue of whether the appellant is a genuine  visitor
    and whether he intends to leave the United Kingdom as required.  Having
    done so, and also having taken into account all that  is  said  in  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal  decision  and  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review, I conclude that there  is  nothing  in  the  evidence
    before me that causes me to have any suspicions as to its reliability.

28. I find the documentary evidence as to appellant's financial and  family
    circumstances in Botswana to be perfectly plausible and  credible.  The
    evidence is consistent  in  its  terms,  and  is  consistent  with  the
    appellant's own assertions.

29. Looking at the evidence as a whole, I am prepared to  accept  that  the
    appellant is employed as claimed, earns the income he claims,  and  has
    the family members in Botswana as claimed.  Given  these  facts,  I  am
    prepared to find, on the balance of probabilities, that  the  appellant
    is a genuine visitor and that he intends to leave the United Kingdom in
    accordance with any statement he may have made in his Visa  Application
    Form and with the Immigration Rules.

30. Consequently, I find that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules. The Entry Clearance
    Officer has raised no other issues. I accordingly allow the appellant's
    appeal.



Decision

For  the  reasons  given  above  I  find  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
determination contains an error on a point of law such that it ought  to  be
set aside.  Upon remaking the decision I allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on
the basis that the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  in
accordance with the Immigration Rules.

Fees Award

No application has been made before me in this regard and I  consequently  I
do not make a fees award in the appellant's favour.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 25 June 2013
