
[pic]
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal                        |Appeal Number VA.22548.2012    |
|Immigration and Asylum Chamber        |                               |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at:   North Shields    Determination Promulgated
On:         Monday 21st October 2013


                                   Before

                                Judge Aitken
                       Deputy Chamber President (HESC)


                                   Between


                        Ms Elizabeth Adeola Odumuyiwa


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                        Entry Clearance Officer Lagos


                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:           Mrs C Soltani
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                               Decision Remade

1. I reheard this matter following a decision identifying an error of law
which read as follows:

   1. "This matter appeared before me following a  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  who  decided  as
      follows:

      "1. Permission is sought to appeal, in time,  the  decision  of  First
      Tier
      Tribunal Judge Holmes, dated 3rd December 2012, dismissing the
      appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant her
      entry to the United Kingdom as a family visitor.

      2. The grounds argue that the Judge made unsustainable findings,
      failed to have regard to the evidence, and failed to make findings
      on core issues. It is also argued that the Judge erred in failing to
      give adequate reasons for the negative credibility findings made
      and had misapplied paragraphs 320(7B) and 320(11). The
      respondent had never even produced the document which was
      claimed was false.

      3. It is arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  considering  that  the
   appellant
      bore the burden of proof in regard to the general grounds for
      refusal under paragraph 320 including the production of a false
      document (paragraph 4 refers). This ground is arguable.
      Whilst the remaining grounds are of less, immediately identifiable,
      arguable merit, the decision in Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi)
      [2012] UKUT 00304(IAC) is followed and permission granted on all
      grounds pleaded"


   2. Ms Soltani argued that there was ample evidence upon which  the  judge
      ought to have found that the appellant had a valid  return  ticket  to
      Nigeria.


   3. The Tribunal Judge at paragraph 7 of his determination indicated  that
      there was no evidence that  the  appellant  had  a  return  ticket  to
      Nigeria. This was important as it underpinned his finding that she had
      instead produced a forged one. However the notes  of  the  Immigration
      Officer at R8 of the Respondents bundle, reveal this:

      "They confirm pax has got a booking of MAN-FRA on 10/1/08"


   4. That itinerary was the first part of the booking produced as  evidence
      of a ticket back to Nigeria before the Tribunal.


   5. In addition Ms Soltani produced the appellant's boarding card  showing
      that the ticket she left the country on was a rebooking of a ticket to
      Nigeria used once she was denied entry. Whilst that  evidence  is  not
      admissible since it was not before the Tribunal Judge the evidence  of
      the Immigration Officers note was, and although it seems that  it  was
      suggested to the Tribunal Judge  that  there  was  a  physical  ticket
      plainly there was not and this was something of a  red  herring.  What
      there is on the papers which were before the judge  is  evidence  that
      the  appellant  had  a  return  Eticket.  Since  the  Tribunal   Judge
      misunderstood or was misled as to this important  piece  of  evidence,
      there is an error of law such that the decision must be remade.


   6. I find that there is an error of law within the decision of the  First
      Tier Tribunal in that there  was  evidence  upon  which  it  would  be
      reasonable to find that the appellant had a return ticket to  Nigeria.
      The decision will have to be remade by the Upper Tribunal."


2. The appellant is a Nigerian Citizen  born  on  4th  September  1946.  She
applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom for two  months  as  a  family
visitor on 25th April 2012, before the Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)
Regulations 2012 came into effect.

3. The Respondent refused entry clearance on 6th  June  2012  on  the  basis
that the appellant had been refused entry clearance  at  Manchester  Airport
on 30th December 2007 when she had used deception, presenting a  counterfeit
return ticket to an Immigration Officer. The application was  refused  under
rules 320 (7B) and 320(11) of the Immigration Rules. There were in  addition
to the counterfeit airline ticket other matters which  led  the  Immigration
Officer to suspect that her visit was not genuine.

4. Having been detained at Manchester the  appellant  agreed  to  return  to
Nigeria on a voluntary basis and did so. Those matters  are  largely  agreed
between the parties, however one matter of importance remains between  them.
Was the appellant seeking to deceive  when  she  presented  the  counterfeit
ticket or was it an innocent mistake.  The  importance  of  that  issue  was
emphasised in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773, because it  affects  whether
rule 320(7B) and 320(11) affect this appellant. At paragraph 76  of  AA  the
following was recorded:

"Whether as a matter of the interpretation solely of the relevant  rules  in
paragraphs  320(7A),  320(7B)  and  322(1A),   but   in   any   event   when
consideration is also given to the assurances given in the Lords  debate  as
supplemented by the minister's letter to ILPA dated 4  April  2008,  and  to
the public guidance issued on behalf of the executive,  the  answer  becomes
plain, and in essence is all of a piece. Dishonesty or deception is  needed,
albeit not necessarily that of the applicant himself,  to  render  a  "false
representation" a ground for mandatory refusal."

5. In those circumstances it is necessary to consider the state of  mind  of
the appellant at the time the ticket was produced, that is not  made  easier
by the time which  has  now  passed,  and  of  course  the  absence  of  the
appellant herself from these proceedings. I have  however  heard  in  person
from the appellant's daughter and read a number of documents many  of  which
were created at or very near to the time of the events in question.

6. It is common ground that the appellant approached immigration control  at
Manchester Airport on 30th December 2007 alone, her  daughter  has  said  in
evidence that she was to have been collected by her niece  at  the  airport.
Immigration Officers began to make enquiries, and were  not  satisfied  with
the answers she gave, this appears in the Immigration  Officer  notes  which
survive. The appellant  claimed she was coming to see her  sister,  but  the
visa was to visit her uncles whom she said was now back in Nigeria.  Fearing
that the appellant may not intend to leave the United Kingdom at the end  of
her visit the Immigration Officer asked about her travel.  "Pax  stated  she
had booked a R/T to Lagos but when asked what date  she  would  travel,  the
pax just  answered  'they  (the  airline)  will  ring  me'.  She  eventually
presented a Flight Coupon for Qatar Airways" it is agreed now that this  was
the counterfeit ticket.

7. It was established by  the  Immigration  Officers  that  the  ticket  was
counterfeit  (or  possibly  a  stolen  ticket  of  some   sort   issued   in
Guadalajara), it certainly want a genuine  document,   the  ticket  was  not
however to and from the United Kingdom it was  routed  Lagos-FRA-Washington.
"FRA" is the  airport  code  for  Frankfurt.  In  addition  the  Immigration
Officers discovered that the appellant had a genuine booking or E-ticket  as
they are sometimes styled with Lufthansa to fly Manchester to  Frankfurt  on
10th January 2008. A typed itinerary to that effect  was  found  within  her
luggage, the itinerary also ha a  second  leg  back  to  Lagos.  Ms  Soltani
places great reliance upon the document because it  is  the  itinerary  upon
which the appellant arrived, and she is now able  to  produce  the  boarding
card that the appellant had in her possession when she arrived.  She  points
also to the copy printed ticket  which  the  appellant  used  to  leave  the
United Kingdom on 31st  December  after  having  been  refused  entry.  That
ticket is endorsed with the  following  "INVOL  REBOOKED  DUE  TO  UK  IMMIG
INNAD" that seems to indicate that it is an  involuntary  rebooking  of  the
return ticket due to being refused admission.   Taken  together  Ms  Soltani
argues that it is perfectly clear that the appellant had, at  the  time  she
sought entry in December 2007, a perfectly valid return eticket or  booking.


8. Ms Soltani goes on to  argue  that  the  appellant  would  not  in  those
circumstances have produced a counterfeit ticket, and however it  came  into
the possession of the Immigration  Officer  it  was  not  in  any  sense  an
attempt at deception. Mr Dewison  disagreed,  he  suggested  that  for  some
reason as yet unknown it may be the appellant clearly  wished  to  keep  her
movements hidden from the  authorities.  The  evidence  of  the  Immigration
Officer at the time is that she presented the ticket as  her  return  method
and it was a clear attempt at deception.

9. As to the appellant herself, she claims not to speak English, and  claims
merely to have handed over the papers she had. Whilst there  is  a  note  of
questions asked and responses in English, I am prepared to accept  that  she
may not be fluent. The  sponsor  gave  an  explanation  for  the  ticket  as
follows: The appellant had visited earlier in 2007 (and  this  was  recorded
in her passport) but the flight had been very  expensive  when  the  sponsor
paid for it, for the second visit in 2007 the sponsor had asked her  younger
brother to find a travel agent in Lagos who could get a cheaper  flight.  He
did so and a Qatar airlines flight was arranged. However  the  travel  agent
despite having been paid by the sponsor became difficult to catch  and  only
after great effort did they deliver  the  ticket,  and  then  only  2  hours
before departure. By then it was too late to use  the  ticket.  The  Sponsor
wished to do  something  about  this,  but  the  Travel  Agent  was  clearly
unreliable and the sponsor felt that she would be best placed  to  get  some
form of refund by writing to Qatar airways herself so  when  another  ticket
was arranged, this time through Lufthansa a few weeks later  she  asked  the
appellant to bring the Qatar ticket to the  United  Kingdom  with  her.  The
Lufthansa ticket was always electronic, in other words  existed  only  as  a
booking, the Qatar ticket was physical.

10. Whilst it is little support, there is some consistency in the fact  that
it appears  that  this  ticket  although  expired  has  not  been  used,  or
attempted to be used, since there is a record  of  tickets  with  sequential
numbers being used in an attempt to board a flight in Lagos,  but  not  this
one.

11. I note from the notes made by the Immigration Officer at the  time  that
the appellant did not expressly claim that the ticket was to be used as  her
return ticket, what is recorded is this:

"Pax stated she had booked a R/T to Lagos  but  when  asked  what  date  she
would travel, the pax just answered 'they (the airline) will ring  me'.  She
eventually presented a Flight Coupon for Qatar Airways"

12. There is some separation in the account between  the  claim  to  have  a
return  flight  arranged  with  the  airline  and  the  production  of   the
counterfeit coupon. It seems to me that the most likely explanation is  that
the appellant's English is limited, that  as  the  Immigration  Officer  has
recorded she made it plain she had a return  (booking),  unsurprisingly  the
Immigration Officer pressed for evidence of this, the  appellant,  63  years
of age and flying by herself for  the  first  time,  with  limited  language
skills produced the only ticket she  had  (as  opposed  to  a  simple  typed
itinerary). Whilst one could understand it being put forward  to  show  that
the family in general had the means to return her to Lagos, in the sense  of
"Of course I can get back to Lagos here is another  ticket  which  has  been
bought for me". It does not seem likely to have  been  put  forward  as  the
return ticket firstly because  it  is  out  of  date  and  secondly  it  was
completely unnecessary to do so  since  she  has  a  valid  e-ticket.  I  am
reinforced in that view  by  the  Immigration  Officer  describing  how  the
appellant "eventually" presented the Qatar ticket. Whilst  of  course  those
who seek to deceive are often tripped  up  because  they  do  not  think  of
everything or are not as clever as they  would  like  to  believe,  it  does
rather defy all logic that the appellant would,  knowingly  put  forward  an
expired counterfeit ticket as evidence of something  which  already  existed
in legitimate form, and had to be pressed to  do  so.  A  much  more  likely
explanation on the facts is that  the  Qatar  ticket  was  not  produced  to
deceive as to her return arrangements but was produced as to  some  evidence
of her good standing. Again that is not likely if the sponsor knew it was  a
forgery.

13. It seems therefore clear that the appellant  in  producing  that  ticket
was not doing so with  intent  to  deceive,  I  find  that  as  a  fact  and
therefore she does not come within Rule 320(7)(b)  or  320(11),  both  rules
being subject to the interpretation of the word Deceive indicated above.

14 In those circumstances the decision to refuse her  application  on  those
grounds is not in accordance with the law since the Entry Clearance  Officer
describes the refusal in this way "Therefore  I  am  automatically  refusing
this  application  for  entry  clearance  under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
Immigration Rules"       it is also said to be  considered  under  Rule  41,
although  that  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  previous  automatic
refusal, and under Rule 320(11) on the basis of a deliberate deception.

                                  Decision


1. There is an error of law within the decision of the First Tier Tribunal
2. I remake the decision and the appeal is allowed to this extent:

The decision is not in accordance with the law and is remitted to the Entry
Clearance Officer to reconsider his decision in the light of the facts as
found.



                                                                       [pic]
                                                                Judge Aitken
                                             Deputy Chamber President (HESC)
                                                Wednesday 23rd October  2013
