

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/23745/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on:                     |
|On 26 June 2013                               |On 28 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                         MR MUHAMMAD HAROON AHMADZAI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICEFR, ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant: Sponsor, Mr Faridan Ahmadzhai
For the respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who resides in  Pakistan.
        On 31 May 2012 the respondent refused  his  application  for  entry
        clearance to undertake a family visit to his  brother,  Mr  Faridan
        Ahmadzhai. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Lingam on 19 March 2013 and she promulgated  a  determination
        dismissing it on 11 April.  Her  sole  reason  for  dismissing  the
        appeal was that she understood the sponsor in  the  course  of  his
        oral  testimony  to  have  said  that  he   was   the   appellant's
        cousin/brother in law, not  his  brother.  The  grounds  of  appeal
        contended that the sponsor had never said his relationship with the
        appellant was anything other than brother and that the  judge  must
        have confused the sponsor with another witness,  Mr  Ghazi  Hassan,
        who was the appellant's brother in law and cousin.


     2. At the hearing Mr Jarvis informed the Tribunal that the  note  left
        on file from the Presenting  Officer  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing, Ms Pleming, noted nothing to suggest the sponsor was other
        than the brother and also recorded that there  were  two  witnesses
        and that she considered the sponsor had given a credible account. I
        informed the parties that the judge's record of proceedings was not
        entirely clear as  to  whether  more  than  one  person  gave  oral
        evidence but it did appear  that  there  were  two  quite  separate
        testimonies although the first had no name by it and the second had
        the name of the sponsor.


     3. Having discussed the matter with the parties I am  satisfied  that:
        (i) at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  both  the  sponsor  and  Mr
        Hassan gave evidence  in  that  order;  (ii)  at  the  hearing  the
        respondent raised no issue as to the family relationship  and  that
        the Presenting Officer's note says  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
        family  relationship  was  other  than  brother-brother;   and(iii)
        (whether as a result of not writing the decision up soon after  the
        hearing or some other reason) the judge confused the record of  the
        sponsor's and  Mr  Hassan's  evidence.  That  being  the  case  her
        determination  was   vitiated   by   legal   error   based   on   a
        misapprehension of material fact and it  is  necessary  to  set  it
        aside.


     4. As to the decision I must now re-make, Mr Jarvis  said  that  given
        the note made by the Presenting Officer at the previous  hearing  -
        that she considered the sponsor had given credible  evidence  -  he
        did not seek to oppose the appellant's appeal being allowed.


     5. The principal reason given by the respondent for  considering  that
        the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules relating to family visitors was  that  the  evidence  he  had
        produced did not show that  his  financial  situation  was  viable.
        Particular concern was expressed about the appellant's reliance  on
        bank statements for an account in the name of his business partner.
        The Entry Clearance Manager said  that  in,  light  of  this  fact,
        "these funds cannot  be  considered  as  being  available  to  [the
        appellant]". The ECM also noted the lack of sufficient evidence  to
        show that the appellant had a monthly income of PKR 198,000  (which
        included income from property). In his grounds  of  appeal  it  was
        pointed out that because he was not  a  national  of  Pakistan  the
        appellant had not been able to open a business bank account in  his
        own name but had instead managed to get  his  business  partner  to
        swear an affidavit confirming the appellant's financial  viability.
        The affidavit dated 14 May 2012 from Muhammad Tariq,  his  business
        partner, written on Nirala  Enterprises  headed  notepaper,  stated
        that the appellant had deposited R650,000 into  his  business  bank
        account for his UK trip as trust money "and I  will  reimburse  the
        said amount instantly on his request". At the hearing,  when  asked
        about this, the sponsor had confirmed these details, observing that
        the appellant used Mr Mehmood's bank  account  to  move  his  money
        around. He said he would ensure the appellant departed the UK  upon
        completion of his family visit.


     6. In light of the respondent's concession regarding  the  credibility
        of  the  sponsor  and  taking  this  evidence  together  with   the
        documentary materials submitted, I am satisfied that at the date of
        decision the appellant had shown that he did have available the sum
        mentioned by Mr Tariq and had shown that  his  financial  situation
        was viable and that his visit to the UK would be self-financing.  I
        am  also satisfied that the appellant had shown he could  meet  the
        cost of his onward and return  journey  and  that  there  would  be
        adequate accommodation and maintenance for him whilst he was in the
        UK on a family visit. I consider that in the light of the sponsor's
        undertaking to ensure the appellant would leave at the end  of  the
        family visit there is no issue as to intention.


     7. For the above reasons:


        The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law and her decision  is  to
        be set aside.


        The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.




                               Signed


                               Date:




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
