
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/24934/2012
     VA/24935/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 3 September 2013                           |On 4 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                shahed ahmed
                                majida yasmin
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M A Choudhury, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   These are the conjoined appeals of Shahed Ahmed and Majida Yasmin,  his
    wife, who appealed against decisions of the Visa Officer,  Dhaka,  made
    on 20 June 2012 to refuse to grant them  entry  clearance  as  visitors
    under paragraph 41 of HC 395.

2.   Their appeals were heard on 26 April 2013 by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lucas.  He dismissed the appeals on the basis that  there  was
    no valid appeal before him.  That decision appears to have  been  based
    on his construction of the Visit Visa Regulations.  It may well be that
    his reasoning was that the sponsor  was  a  distant  relative  whereas,
    although it had been mentioned in the application form  that  relatives
    who came within the Visit Visa Regulations were to be visited they were
    not sponsors.  Judge Lucas did not go into the merits  of  the  appeal,
    merely stating that there was no valid appeal before him.

3.   The appellants  appealed  and  permission  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hemingway.

4.   In granting permission he referred to decisions of the Tribunal  in  RK
    (Bangladesh) [2006] UKAIT 45 and Ajakaiye  (Nigeria)  [2011]  UKUT  375
    (IAC) which dealt with the issues of the relevance of  those  whom  the
    appellant intended to visit.

5.     It was accepted by Miss Horsley of the Specialist Appeals Team  in  a
    Rule 24 statement dated 15 August 2013 who said  that  the  application
    was not opposed and that the appellants had a full right of  appeal  to
    the Tribunal.  That  is  a  correct  reading  of  the  Regulations.   I
    therefore set aside the determination of Judge Lucas and following  the
    provisions of the Senior President's  Practice  Direction  7.2,  direct
    that this appeal proceed to a fresh hearing before a  judge  at  Hatton
    Cross.  No interpreter is required; time estimate of two hours.

Decision.
        The decision of the First-tier judge is set aside and the appeal  is
    allowed to the limited extent that it is remitted to the First-tier for
    a hearing afresh.
Directions.
         This appeal will be heard at Hatton Cross with a time  estimate  of
    2 hours.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


