
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/24424/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment delivered orally at |
|On 21st February 2014                         |hearing                      |
|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|                                              |On 28th February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        JOAN OLUWASEYI ESUSA OYELADE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Adegboyega Oluyale Adekumle-sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant in these proceedings is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
      However, for convenience I refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. Thus, the appellant was born on 26th August 2002 and applied for entry
      clearance as a Family (Visitor).   The application for entry clearance
      was refused in a decision dated 25th June 2012.  The refusal was  both
      under paragraph 46A  of  HC  395  (as  amended)  and  under  paragraph
      320(7A).  The 320(7A) refusal was in relation to a question  that  had
      been answered  on  the  application  form  in  terms  of  whether  the
      appellant had ever have been  deported, removed or otherwise  required
      to leave any country including the UK.  The application form said that
      she had not but the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") said that  records
      revealed that she had been deported or required to  leave  Ireland  in
      April  2006.   It  is  said  that  that  was  a  misrepresentation  or
      concealing a material fact and it was on that basis that  the  refusal
      was made under paragraph 320(7A).

   3. The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore.   Having
      considered the evidence and hearing from the  sponsor,  Mr  Adegboyega
      Oluyale Adekumle, as I have done today, he concluded that the  refusal
      under paragraph 320(7A) was not made out by the ECO.  He was satisfied
      that the appellant had established that she met  the  requirements  of
      the Immigration Rules including in terms of intending only a visit for
      a limited period  not  exceeding  six  months  and  in  terms  of  the
      intention to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the period of  the
      visit. Thus, he allowed the appeal.

   4. There is however, a difficultly with the essence of the appeal which I
      shall explain.  A person who is refused entry clearance as  a  visitor
      can appeal to the Tribunal against that refusal only if the person  is
      intending to visit a specific class of  persons  as  set  out  in  the
      Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2003.   They  have
      subsequently been amended but those amended Regulations do  not  apply
      here.

   5. The specified class of persons included an uncle or  a  first  cousin.
      Mr Adekumle is the appellant's great uncle, being  the  uncle  of  the
      appellant's father. He explained  to  me  that  in  his  culture,  his
      relationship to the appellant  could  not  be  categorised  as  'great
      uncle' as it might be in  the  UK.   He  said,  as  I  understood  his
      evidence, that she would regard him as her father.  The family visitor
      regulations are quite specific about the  persons  who  are,  for  the
      purposes of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
      2002 Act"), to be regarded as a member of the applicant's family.   If
      the application for entry clearance as a visitor is refused there  can
      be no appeal unless it is  on  human  rights  or  race  discrimination
      grounds (section 88A of the 2002 Act).

   6. No race discrimination or human rights  grounds  were  raised  in  the
      notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. On  one  view  therefore,
      there was no valid  appeal  at  all  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      because the appeal was not brought on those specified grounds. Even if
      there was a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal there  was  no
      evidence from which the First-tier judge  could  have  concluded  that
      there was an infringement of  the  appellant's  human  rights  in  any
      respect,  in  particular  in  relation  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Similarly, there was no evidence before him of race discrimination.

   7. The judge had  no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules, whether  under  paragraph  46  or  under  paragraph
      320(7A) and in doing so I am satisfied  that  he  erred  in  law.  So,
      whilst I note the judge's conclusions in relation to paragraph 320(7A)
      and in relation to the appellant's intention to leave the UK, I am not
      satisfied that he had jurisdiction to consider those issues.

   8. It is unfortunate that the appeal was allowed to  proceed  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal on that basis.   There  was  a  representative  on
      behalf of the ECO.  The appellant herself was not legally  represented
      but the Home Office Presenting Officer should have pointed out to  the
      judge the issue with jurisdiction. The notice of decision itself  does
      indicate that the appeal was on limited grounds only, and  thus  there
      is no fault in the notice of decision. I set aside the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal and I re-make the decision, dismissing the appeal.



   9.  I  do  not  express  any  view  about  the  merits  of   the   appeal
      substantively,  in  particular  about  whether   the   appellant   was
      intending, or it was intended on her behalf,  that  she  should  visit
      only for a limited period.  I have no reason to doubt what I have been
      told  about  the  close  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the
      appellant. But the simple fact of the  matter  is  the  judge  had  no
      jurisdiction to consider the appeal under the Immigration Rules and it
      is for that reason that the outcome is as I have explained it to be
  10. .



  11.
  12.
  13. He had n o






Signed


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            27/02/14

