
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/25487/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2013                               |On 5 July 2013               |
|Oral Determination                            |                             |


                                   Before

                                 LORD BURNS

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               MUSARRAT ZAHIR
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Muzenda, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  22  October  1971.  She
    appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Telford promulgated on  13  January  2013  in  which  he
    dismissed her appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  her
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor to visit her husband
    who is a British citizen.

 2. The appellant's case is that she wished to come to the  United  Kingdom
    to visit her husband with her two children who are British citizens and
    that it is no longer possible for her husband to visit her in  Pakistan
    owing to his ill health.  He has had one previous heart bypass and as a
    result of a further heart attack, on 21 April 2012,  he  is  no  longer
    able to travel.  The respondent refused the application for reasons set
    out in the refusal notice.  In summary  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    intentions of the appellant were to return  to  Pakistan  or  that  she
    intended just a genuine visit.

 3. The appellant's notice of appeal averred that the respondent's decision
    was not in accordance with the immigration rules, and contrary  to  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 19 December. He dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds
    finding that he was not satisfied as to the appellant's intentions  and
    stating that there was  no  Article  8  claim.   Permission  to  appeal
    against that decision was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on  May
    2013 and the matter then came before us on 13 June 2013.

 5. We heard submissions from Mr Muzenda on behalf of the appellant and  Mr
    Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 6. In his determination the judge stated [16] that there was  no  evidence
    of the current bank account, land owned in the appellant's name or  her
    close family. There were, however, in the bundle of documents  attached
    to the notice of appeal, which was before the judge, evidence of  money
    transfers to the appellant from her husband, and evidence  of  property
    owned by the appellant [6-12], amongst other matters. We consider  that
    the judge did err in law in failing to give adequate  consideration  to
    the financial and other documents which were  set  out  in  the  bundle
    which was attached to the grounds of appeal and  e.  The  determination
    does not engage properly with the documentary evidence [16, 18].

 7. We consider that, had the judge  had  proper  regard  to  the  evidence
    before him, it is possible that  he  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion about the appellant's intentions.

 8.  We are satisfied also that in the  particular  circumstances  of  this
    case the judge erred in failing to give consideration to the Article  8
    claim. Not only was it a ground of appeal, it would have been  apparent
    to the judge that there are two children involved and this is a case of
    an appellant seeking to enter the United Kingdom to visit her  husband.



 9. We are satisfied that these errors are material in that they could have
    affected the outcome of the appeal given particularly the nature of the
    documents  which  are  in  the  bundle  and  also  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and her husband.

10. We are satisfied that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did involve the making of an error of law and we  set  it  aside.
    Given that there will have to be a substantial amount  of  fresh  fact-
    finding to be undertaken in relation to Article 8 and  in  relation  to
    the substantive matter under the Immigration Rules, in  line  with  the
    Presidential Statement of Practice, on 25th September 2012, we consider
    that this is a matter which should be sent back to the First-tier to be
    heard afresh.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law.  We set it aside.

 2. We remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

 3. None of the findings made by Judge Telford are preserved.


Signed                                  Date



Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


