

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/25181/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 17th July 2013                           |On : 18th July 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                             chuck obioma adibe

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Aghayere of Louis Ssekkono Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal comes to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  granted  by
    Judge  Macleman,  who  had  to  sort  out  a  number  of   errors   and
    misunderstandings.  Indeed, this whole business has been  fraught  with
    problems,  starting  with  the  original  decision  of  the  ECO.   The
    application for a visit visa was refused on three grounds, two of which
    were based on information not  disclosed  to  Mr  Adibe.   "Fingerprint
    records held in the United Kingdom" were said to confirm that Mr  Adibe
    had been convicted of an offence punishable with at  least  12  months'
    imprisonment, thus making him liable to refusal under paragraph 320(18)
    of the Immigration Rules.  "Records  available  to  us"  were  said  to
    indicate that Mr Adibe  had  previously  been  known  by  other  names,
    including Patrick Kelly, which were not disclosed in answer to  Q.3  on
    the Visa Application Form.  This attracted a  mandatory  refusal  under
    rule 320(7A), as allegedly constituting both false representations  and
    failure to disclose material facts.

2.   The records in question should have been open to inspection  as  Annexe
    E to the Respondent's Bundle, but were instead put into a  plain  brown
    envelope marked for the judge's eyes only.  Into the brown envelope was
    also popped a lengthy Appeal Statement by Mr Adibe, in which he insists
    that he has never been known by the name of Patrick Kelly, and explains
    that there has been a mix-up with somebody else.  As Judge Macleman has
    pointed out, it was wholly uncalled for to invoke section  108  of  the
    2002 Act as the justification for keeping both the police  records  and
    the Appeal Statement out of the public domain  -  and  as  far  as  the
    records are concerned, out of the purview  of  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives.  On 14th May this year, Judge Macleman  directed  that
    these documents be copied to  both  parties,  but  this  direction  was
    overlooked by the administrative staff.   At  today's  hearing,  copies
    were made, as indeed were copies of the Police National Computer Record
    concerning Mr Adibe, handed up by Miss Isherwood.

3.    Despite protests from Mr Aghayere, it was established  today  that  Mr
    Adibe has been convicted of at least one offence which  was  punishable
    by at least one year in prison, even though he has never been sentenced
    to such imprisonment.  The ECO  caused  confusion  by  misunderstanding
    when a conviction becomes spent.  This is based on the actual  sentence
    imposed, not on the sentence which could have been  imposed.   Although
    it seems that the total of nine  months'  imprisonment  imposed  on  Mr
    Adibe on 28th June 2002  required  a  ten-year  rehabilitation  period,
    which was not quite spent when he applied for entry clearance  on  20th
    June 2012, Mr Aghayere may wish to come back on that.   In  any  event,
    whether or not the conviction was spent is not  determinative.   It  is
    just a factor going to the exercise of discretion under rule 320(18).

4.   When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  'on  the  papers',
    Judge Juss thought it was clear that the appellant had gone by the name
    of Patrick Kelly.  No mention was made of the Appeal Statement or of Mr
    Adibe's insistence that he had never gone by the name of Patrick Kelly.
     It was an error of law for the judge to  overlook  material  evidence,
    such as the appellant's explanation for why the  wrong  name  had  been
    ascribed to him.  The judge went on to make two further errors of  law.
    Because  the  appellant  had  failed  to  disclose  a  material   fact,
    "Accordingly, the refusals under the relevant paragraphs stated by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer must be correct."  That does not follow at all.
     There is no logical connection between using the  name  Patrick  Kelly
    and being convicted of an offence punishable with 12  months  in  jail.
    Still less is there any connection  with  the  ECO's  third  ground  of
    refusal, namely that Mr  Adibe  would  not  be  able  to  maintain  and
    accommodate himself during his visit, or to pay for his onward journey.
     The third error is that Judge Juss thought that the appellant bore the
    burden of proof, and had not discharged that burden.  But with refusals
    under Part 9 of the Rules, such as paragraphs  320(7A)  and  (18),  the
    onus of proof falls on the respondent.

5.    Despite  these  errors,  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  did  not  grant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   He  partly  misunderstood
    the First-Tier determination, thinking that Judge Juss had  found  that
    the appellant "had sought to deceive the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  by
    failing to disclose a criminal conviction."  The  judge  made  no  such
    finding.  Judge Woodcraft was also led astray by  paragraph  5  of  the
    'Reconsideration Grounds' (the notion  of  'reconsideration'  has  been
    remarkably persistent) into thinking that Mr Adibe had received a third
    conviction, for which he was sentenced to six months' imprisonment -  a
    conviction which he had not disclosed.

6.   Only when the renewed application  came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Macleman, supported by rather better grounds from Louis Ssekkono,  were
    the misunderstandings sorted out.  Judge Macleman was of the view  that
    the Upper Tribunal should set aside  the  first-instance  determination
    and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both  representatives
    were in agreement with that  course  today.   As  well  as  giving  the
    appellant's  representatives  a  proper  opportunity  to  consider  the
    documents which had  previously  been  concealed  under  the  aegis  of
    section 108, and which were only disclosed today,  remittal  will  also
    give time to prepare submissions on the other ground of refusal,  under
    paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  has  faded  into  the
    background, but will have to be adjudicated upon if the appeal succeeds
    under Part 9 of the Rules.

7.   I did not canvass with the parties what Judge Macleman had  said  about
    the appeal being determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  'on  the
    papers', as the appellant has not paid for an oral hearing.  That is  a
    matter which is best left to the First-tier Tribunal itself.



     DECISION

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,  and  the  appeal
    is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for re-determination de novo.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              17th July 2013



