
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/27600/2012
     VA/27590/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2014                     |On 16th December 2014    |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                    ADEWALE MUTIU LAWAL (first Appellant)
                 BOBOLA BARNABAR AKINSEYE (second Appellant)
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malone promulgated on 25th April 2014.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian citizens born 1st September  1983  and  9th
    May 2000  respectively  who  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  family
    visitors.

 3. The Appellants applied for entry clearance for one week to enable  them
    to visit Olumuyiwa  Ogenewu  (the  Sponsor)  a  British  citizen.   The
    Sponsor indicated that he would be paying the cost of  the  visit,  and
    would be providing accommodation.

 4. The applications were made in January 2011  and  initially  refused  on
    31st January 2011.  Those refusals were appealed, which resulted in the
    appeals being dismissed by Judge Rimington of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    in a determination promulgated on 23rd August 2011.

 5. The Appellants were granted permission to appeal against that  decision
    which resulted in Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal  Philips  allowing
    the appeals by way of a determination promulgated on 13th  March  2012.
    The appeal of the second Appellant was  only  allowed  insofar  as  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

 6. Following the Upper Tribunal hearing further  up-to-date  evidence  was
    required by the Respondent from the Appellants and there then  followed
    a further refusal dated 28th  May  2012.   In  relation  to  the  first
    Appellant, the refusal was based upon paragraph 41(i) and (ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent not being satisfied  that  the  first
    Appellant was a genuine visitor or that he intended to leave the United
    Kingdom at the conclusion of the visit.

 7. The Respondent acknowledged that the Upper  Tribunal  had  allowed  the
    appeal, but contended that the first Appellant was required  to  submit
    up-to-date evidence of his employment and finances, and evidence of his
    relationship to the  second  Appellant  who  the  first  Appellant  had
    claimed was his nephew.

 8. The first Appellant submitted six pay slips from Cargowise Logistic  as
    evidence of his employment, but the  Respondent  noted  these  appeared
    identical and appeared to have been produced at the same time  and  the
    company stamp on each pay slip had been spelt wrongly.

 9. A representative of the Respondent attempted to contact the company  on
    28th May 2012 on the telephone number printed on the pay slips but  the
    telephone number did not work.

10. It was noted that the first Appellant had submitted no further evidence
    of his employment such  as  an  income  tax  clearance  certificate  or
    personal bank statement.  The Respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the
    first Appellant was employed as  claimed  or  that  he  had  sufficient
    social or financial ties to Nigeria.

11. Regarding the relationship to the second Appellant, it was  noted  that
    two photographs had been taken in a studio of the  Appellants  together
    but there was no further evidence of the claimed relationship.

12. A representative of the Respondent attempted to contact the Sponsor  in
    the United Kingdom on 28th May 2012 using the telephone number provided
    with the application but the line was dead.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Sponsor was on the electoral register for a different  address  in  the
    United Kingdom associated with numerous other visa applications.

13. The refusal notice for the second Appellant referred to  paragraph  46A
    of the Immigration Rules which sets out the requirements for  leave  to
    enter as a  child  visitor.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the  second
    Appellant was related as claimed to the first Appellant or that he  was
    genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period nor  that  he
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the visit.  The same
    point was made about the Sponsor in the United  Kingdom  being  on  the
    electoral register for a different address, and the Respondent was  not
    satisfied that it had been demonstrated that suitable arrangements  had
    been made for the second Appellant's travel to, and reception and  care
    in the United Kingdom, taking into account the second  Appellant  is  a
    minor.

14. The appeals were subsequently heard by Judge Malone on 15th April 2014.
     There was no attendance on behalf of  the  Appellants  and  the  judge
    dismissed both appeals under the Immigration Rules.

15. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Full details of the application for permission, together with the grant
    of permission are set out in my written decision  promulgated  on  17th
    October 2014, following a  hearing  on  10th  October  2014.   At  that
    hearing I found that the judge had erred in law in that evidence relied
    upon by the Appellants had  not  been  taken  into  account,  and  full
    reasons for this finding are set out  in  my  written  decision.   That
    hearing was adjourned at the  request  of  Mr  Parkinson  who  had  not
    received the Appellants' bundle which was on the Tribunal file.

Re-Making the Decision

16. The appeals were listed for hearing on 28th November 2014.   There  was
    no attendance on behalf  of  the  Appellants.   They  are  not  legally
    represented but I was satisfied that proper notice of the  hearing  had
    been given to them in  Nigeria,  and  to  the  Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I observed that there was on the Tribunal file an email  from
    a solicitor who had previously represented the Appellants,  dated  11th
    April 2014, which  was  sent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  which
    indicated that he was no longer instructed,  and  that  the  Appellants
    wished their present oral appeals to be determined on the papers.  This
    email was sent to the First-tier Tribunal in advance of the hearing  on
    15th April 2014, unfortunately it was not placed before the judge until
    after the hearing had taken had taken place.

17. I considered Rule 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and as I was satisfied that proper notification of the hearing had
    been given, I decided to proceed with the hearing as I believed this to
    be in the interests of justice, taking into account that there  was  no
    application for an adjournment, and that  the  applications  for  entry
    clearance had been made as long ago as January 2011.

Submissions

18. Mr Parkinson submitted that the appeals should  be  dismissed.   I  was
    asked to note the lack of attendance by the Sponsor and  to  find  that
    this was relevant.  Mr Parkinson submitted that there was  no  evidence
    of a relationship between the second Appellant and the Sponsor, or  the
    first Appellant, and no birth certificate had  been  produced  although
    the issue of relationship had been raised in the refusal.

19. In relation to the first Appellant Mr Parkinson submitted there was  no
    explanation as to why the pay slips issued by the employer had the name
    of  the  company  misspelt  nor  was  there  any  explanation  for  the
    employer's telephone not working.  Mr Parkinson asked that I note  that
    there was no appearance by the Sponsor to explain why he  was  prepared
    to fund the visit by both Appellants at  considerable  expense,  for  a
    period of one week.

20. I was asked to dismiss both appeals.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. In considering these appeals I have taken into account the Respondent's
    bundle of documents, which is not indexed or paginated,  but  which  is
    attached to an Entry Clearance Manager review dated  7th  August  2013.
    That review lists documents submitted with the application,  but  those
    documents are not contained within the  Respondent's  bundle  that  was
    submitted to the Tribunal.  I have also taken  into  account  a  bundle
    submitted on behalf of the Appellants comprising 74  pages.   It  would
    appear that this is the bundle that was submitted in  relation  to  the
    first appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  resulted  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23rd August 2011.

23. I have also taken into account a letter  from  the  Sponsor  dated  1st
    March 2014 addressed to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, and  a
    copy of the first Appellant's Electronic Tax Clearance certificate, and
    a letter from the first Appellant's employer Cargowise Logistic Nigeria
    Limited dated 1st October  2012  addressed  to  Visa  Section,  British
    Deputy High Commission, Lagos.  Finally I have taken into  account  the
    witness statement from the Sponsor dated 6th October 2014.

24. The burden of proof is on the Appellants and the standard a balance  of
    probability.  As these are appeals from refusal of entry  clearance,  I
    must consider the circumstances appertaining at the date of refusal  of
    entry clearance, that being 28th May 2012.

25. The issues to be decided are  whether  the  Appellants  intend  genuine
    visits, and whether they intend  to  return  to  Nigeria,  and  whether
    suitable arrangements have been made for the second Appellant's  travel
    to, and reception and care in the United Kingdom.

26.  I  have  to  take  into  account  that  there  has  been  a   previous
    determination  prepared  by  Deputy  Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Philips
    promulgated on 13th  March  2012.   I  have  therefore  considered  the
    principles set out in Devaseelan Sri Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702 and have
    taken into account guidelines set out therein at paragraphs 37  to  42.
    In brief summary the first determination should always be the  starting
    point and facts happening since the first determination can  always  be
    taken into account.  The first determination stands as an assessment of
    the claim that was made at that time,  and  generally  a  second  judge
    should not revisit findings of fact made by  the  first  judge  on  the
    basis of evidence that was available to the Appellant at  the  time  of
    the first hearing.

27. Judge Philips was dealing with the concern of the Respondent  that  the
    first Appellant did not have  sufficiently  strong  family,  social  or
    economic ties to show that he  intended  to  return  to  Nigeria.   The
    following findings were made in paragraph 17 of the determination;

         "17. In my finding the first Appellant has addressed and dealt with
             the Respondent's concerns.  He has provided a detailed written
             statement explaining that he has secure employment held  since
             3rd March 2008  with  the  same  employer.   He  has  provided
             evidence of this employment by way of an employer's letter,  a
             company ID card and six months' pay slips.  The Appellant says
             that he is engaged to be married and this is corroborated by a
             letter from his fianc�e.  He explains that he is paid in  cash
             and does not have a bank account so is unable to show evidence
             of savings.  There is in my finding no reason why any of  this
             evidence should be called into doubt and these  matters  taken
             together  are  sufficient  to   show   on   the   balance   of
             probabilities that the Appellant intends to return to  Nigeria
             at the end of his visit."

28. The Devaseelan principles apply to the first Appellant, but no findings
    were made in relation to the second Appellant, as  in  his  case  Judge
    Phillips found that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law,  because  no  written  reasons  had  been  provided,  and
    therefore the second Appellant's case remained outstanding  before  the
    Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.  In relation to the  first
    Appellant there is therefore a clear finding that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was  satisfied  that  he  had  given  an  accurate   account   of   his
    circumstances in Nigeria.  There was no application made to appeal  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal.

29. Following that decision  entry  clearance  was  not  granted,  but  the
    Respondent required further  up-to-date  information  and  evidence  of
    employment was provided in the form of six pay slips.  I have not  been
    provided with copies of those pay slips, which were clearly sent to the
    Respondent.

30. I have however seen a letter  addressed  to  the  British  Deputy  High
    Commission in Lagos, dated 1st October 2012, from the first Appellant's
    employer.

31. This letter  confirms  the  employment  of  the  first  Appellant,  and
    explains that pay  slips  submitted  by  him  for  the  months  between
    November 2011 and March 2012 are genuine and are not identical and were
    not produced at the same time.  The letter explains that the  company's
    rubber stamp was re-designed in January  2011  and  contained  a  minor
    error in the spelling of the company name which was not rectified.

32. There was more than one telephone number  on  the  pay  slips  and  the
    letter confirms that all save one were working and are  still  working,
    and that the company received a telephone call some time in April  2012
    from the Respondent  to  inform  the  first  Appellant  to  submit  his
    passport.  It is also confirmed that the first  Appellant  is  paid  in
    cash and does not have a bank account.

33. The letter written by Cargowise is on company headed notepaper with the
    company address printed upon the letter, and telephone numbers.  It was
    therefore open to the Respondent to make any  further  enquiry  thought
    appropriate.  I accept that the burden of proof is  on  the  Appellant,
    but in my view that letter explains the points raised in  the  refusal,
    and if there  were  any  further  doubts,  the  Respondent  could  have
    contacted the employer.  This letter was  received  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in April 2014.

34. The first Appellant, in answering the point raised in the refusal about
    his relationship to the  second  Appellant,  confirmed  that  he  never
    claimed that the second Appellant was his nephew.  I accept this.   The
    relationship is mentioned in the application forms and in a  number  of
    documents.  The first Appellant is the first  cousin  of  the  Sponsor.
    The second Appellant is said to be the nephew of the Sponsor,  not  the
    nephew of the first Appellant.

35. Dealing with the point made in the refusal about the Sponsor  being  on
    the electoral register in the UK for  a  different  address  associated
    with numerous other visa applications, I can find no evidence that  has
    been submitted by the Respondent to  prove  this  assertion,  which  is
    denied by the Sponsor in his letter and witness statement.

36. Therefore, following the findings made by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    first Appellant's case, and placing weight upon the  letter  dated  1st
    October 2012 from his employer, I am satisfied that the first Appellant
    has provided an accurate reflection of his circumstances in Nigeria.  I
    accept that he was employed as claimed and I therefore conclude that he
    has discharged the burden of proof, and the requirements  of  paragraph
    41(i) and (ii) are satisfied.  His appeal is therefore allowed.

37. Turning to the second Appellant who is a minor, and who was 11 years of
    age at the date of refusal,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that suitable arrangements have been made for  his  travel
    to, and reception and care in the United Kingdom.  I accept that  there
    is contained within the Appellants' bundle a  letter  said  to  emanate
    from his parents.  However this is not an  affidavit  or  any  form  of
    official document, and is dated January 2011, considerably  before  the
    refusal of entry clearance.  The signatures upon the  letter  have  not
    been witnessed.  I accept that the Sponsor in his witness statement has
    said adequate measures are in place to assure the safety and  wellbeing
    of the second  Appellant  but  without  giving  any  details  of  those
    measures.  I note that  the  Sponsor  has  never  attended  a  Tribunal
    hearing.

38. The First-tier Tribunal determination promulgated on 23rd  August  2011
    which was subsequently set aside, recorded that  the  Sponsor  did  not
    attend the hearing as he had stated he could not  get  time  off  work.
    The Sponsor did not attend before Judge Philips at the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, and did not attend before Judge Malone,  and  in  his  witness
    statement dated 6th October 2014, the Sponsor indicated that  he  could
    not attend the Upper Tribunal hearing which took place on 10th  October
    2014 because he did not have any annual leave left and his request  for
    time off work was not granted by his employer.

39. The Sponsor has therefore had the opportunity to attend  five  Tribunal
    hearings but  has  not  done  so,  and  therefore  there  has  been  no
    opportunity to question him and hear his evidence about  measures  that
    would be in place in relation to the second Appellant's  reception  and
    care.  Great care must be taken when making decisions  in  relation  to
    minors travelling without parents, and having carefully considered  all
    the evidence supplied in this case, I am not satisfied that the  burden
    of proof has been discharged in relation to paragraph 46A.  I therefore
    dismiss the second Appellant's appeal on that basis.

40. This is not a case where Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on
    Human Rights was raised and I  therefore  do  not  go  on  to  consider
    Article 8.



Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal of the first Appellant is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal of the  second  Appellant  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
Rules.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity  order.




Signed        Date 5th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

It is not appropriate to make a fee award.  There was insufficient  evidence
initially presented  before  the  decision  maker.   The  first  Appellant's
appeal has been allowed because of evidence subsequently submitted that  was
not before the initial decision maker.  The second  Appellant's  appeal  has
been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 5th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

