
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/28023/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2013                               |On 19 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                 RAHEL AHMED
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P Bryant  promulgated  on  21  February  2013
    upholding the respondent's decision to refuse his application for entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a visitor.

 2. The appellant's case is that he  is  self-employed  looking  after  the
    family farm, his total monthly income being 10,000 Taka per  month.  He
    wishes to come to the United Kingdom to visit his brother and sister-in-
    law ("the sponsors") and other relatives for two  weeks.  The  sponsors
    will accommodate and support the appellant while he is here.

 3. The respondent refused the application on 9 July 2012  as  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant is genuinely seeking entry  as  a  visitor
    for a limited period, intended to leave the United Kingdom at  the  end
    of his visit, or could meet the costs  of  his  onward  journey.   That
    latter point was conceded by the respondent  on  review  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager on the  basis  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    document adduced in support of those.

 4. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the  appellant
    had failed to provide evidence of his income, it being noted  that  the
    bank statement adduced disclosed deposits which  did  not  reflect  his
    stated income, and which covered a period of less than two  months.  In
    particular it was noted that the expenditure shown in the accounts  was
    greater than that claimed and that in May 2012 alone he  had  deposited
    306,300 Taka, some 77 times his claimed disposable monthly income.

 5. The appeal came before Judge P Bryant who dismissed the appeal  finding
    :

          i) That the appellant did farm land in Bangladesh [23], but  that
             he was not satisfied as to his income;

         ii) That it was not open to him to take into account crop receipts
             and bank statements produced at the hearing as they all  post-
             dated the date of decision, and no explanation had been  given
             for why crop receipts could not  have  been  produced  to  the
             respondent;

        iii) That the relevant financial documents of  the  appellant  were
             therefore those  produced  to  the  respondent  and  that  the
             respondent's clear concerns about these had not been addressed
             by further evidence before him;

         iv) That in light of the discrepancy  in  the  sponsor's  evidence
             about who would be paying for the  appellant's  flights,  that
             the respondent's concession on  this  issue  could  not  stand
             [24], and that this discrepancy goes to he credibility of  the
             application and sponsorship.

          v) That he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  personal
             circumstances in Bangladesh were as claimed.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal, submitting  that  the  judge
    had erred:

          i) By concluding that the additional evidence adduced  post-dated
             the date of decision when  it  did  not  [3.(a)]  ;  and,  had
             therefore wrongly excluded it [3.(b)]

         ii) In misunderstanding the sponsor's evidence as to who was going
             to bear the cost of the appellant's return airfare [3.(c)];

        iii) In misunderstanding the evidence as the  receipts  corroborate
             the appellant's evidence of deriving income from the  sale  of
             farm produce [3 (d)].

         iv) By failing to consider all the evidence  properly  and  making
             unlawful assumptions [4].

 7. On 7 May 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted permission to
    appeal, noting that the judge had arguably erred in not considering the
    crop receipts which pre-dated the date of decision, and that these  may
    have made a difference to the outcome. Permission was  granted  on  all
    grounds.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

 8. It is not disputed  that  the  judge  excluded  from  the  evidence  he
    considered crop receipts contained in the  supplementary  bundle  which
    had been produced at the hearing.  It  is  evident  that  five  of  the
    documents pre-date the decision, and that the judge therefore erred  in
    not considering them.

 9. Mr Khan submitted that the failure to take the documents  into  account
    was capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal as they  demonstrate
    that he has an income, and that the judge had not dismissed the  appeal
    on the basis of a failure to show a particular income, although he  did
    concede that the receipts did not correspond to specific bank deposits.



10. Ms Johnstone submitted that the outcome would not have  been  different
    as the judge had also concluded that there had been no explanation  for
    the large deposits into the appellant's bank account, well in excess of
    his income.

11. In reply, Mr Khan submitted that the judge had not based  his  decision
    on the failure to explain large deposits. He did, however, concede that
    there was nothing in the evidence to explain the deposits and that  the
    sponsor had perhaps not addressed this point.

12. The  respondent's  concerns  about  the  documentary  evidence  of  the
    appellant's financial circumstances were two-fold: first, the  lack  of
    evidence to confirm income and expenditure; and, second, a  failure  to
    explain the large deposits well in excess of claimed income.

13. As Mr Khan accepted, there was no evidence in respect  of  the  latter.
    The bank statement clearly shows large deposits totalling 303,600  Taka
    in May 2012. That is nearly three times his claimed annual income.  The
    respondent was entitled to raise concerns about this, and  clearly  did
    so  in  the  refusal  letter.  The  appellant  did  not   provide   any
    explanation, and while the judge should  have  taken  the  pre-decision
    crop receipts into account, it has  been  conceded  that  they  do  not
    correspond to deposits. There is therefore no evidential basis on which
    these large discrepancies in the  financial  position  as  put  forward
    could be explained.  The judge was entitled and did [23]  rely  on  the
    large unexplained deposits and considered, as it was open to him to do,
    that the appellant  had  not  proved  his  financial  circumstances  in
    Bangladesh.

14. As to the inconsistency identified [24] between  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor who said that the appellant would be paying  for  his  airfare,
    and the appellant saying that the sponsor would be meeting  that  cost,
    it was open to the judge to find that this was  a  discrepancy  casting
    doubt on credibility, and it was open to him for the reasons  given  to
    disregard the respondent's concession on that basis.

15. It was open to the judge to conclude [25] that the credibility  of  the
    sponsorship and the application was undermined, having found  that  the
    appellant had not proved his financial circumstances in Bangladesh, and
    he gave adequate reasons for doing so.

16. In conclusion, while the judge did err in failing to take into  account
    relevant documents put before him, these were not capable of  affecting
    the outcome, given that they did not address the issue  of  the  large,
    unexplained deposits well in excess of the appellant's  claimed  annual
    income.  The judge was entitled to draw the adverse conclusions he did,
    and to conclude that the appellant was not a genuine  visitor  and  did
    not intend to return to Bangladesh at the end of his visit. The reasons
    he gave  for  so  finding  were  permissible  and  open  to  him.   The
    determination did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  I
    uphold it

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
    of an error of law and I uphold it.



Signed                                  Date:  17 June 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
