
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/28489/2012
                                                               VA/28493/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2013                                |On 4 June 2013               |
|Prepared 30 May 2013                          |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

             MR RAMAKRISHNAN JOGHEE RAMALINGAM (first appellant)
                  MRS LEELA RAMAKRISHNAN (Second Appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Sharma
For the Respondent:    Miss Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The first appellant was born on 11 February 1946; the second  appellant
    was born on 9 January 1952.  Both are citizens of India and appeal with
    permission against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brenells, promulgated on 7 March 2013, dismissing their appeals against
    the respondent's decision to refuse them entry clearance to the  United
    Kingdom as visitors.

 2. The appellants, who are husband and wife, wish to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to visit their sons and their respective families, who live  in
    the United  Kingdom.   The  first  appellant  is  retired;  the  second
    appellant is dependent on him.  They live in a  house  owned  by  their
    youngest son and the first appellant receives a pension.  In  addition,
    they receive money sent to them by their sons in the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent refused the appellants' applications for entry clearance
    on the basis that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  either  of  them  was
    genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a  period  not  exceeding  six
    months or intended to leave the United Kingdom  at  the  end  of  their
    visit.  He reached these conclusions on the basis that  the  appellants
    had failed to provide evidence of the first appellant's income, failing
    to  submit  satisfactory  evidence  of  their  personal  and  financial
    circumstances.

 4. The appellants appealed against that decision in  that  it  is  averred
    that the appellants have close links to India and will return; that the
    first appellant has a pension; that the eldest son sends money  to  the
    appellants and that their youngest son has purchased a  home  in  India
    for his parents [8] and that the sons continue to send  the  appellants
    funds [10]; that  they  have  provided  sufficient  evidence  of  their
    personal and economic circumstances [11].

 5. The respondent was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    judge heard evidence from the appellants'  older  son  and  submissions
    from Miss S Aly of Counsel, instructed on  behalf  of  the  appellants.
    The judge concluded that:

      i) The principal reason for refusing the appellants'  application  was
         the failure to provide bank statements [7] and that he could not be
         certain that the bank statements have been submitted [8];

     ii) Although a bank statement had been submitted, its  dates  indicated
         that it had not been submitted with the application [10]; and,  the
         bank statement was in the name of the appellants' youngest son  and
         the first appellant;

    iii) The first appellant says his income consists of a  monthly  pension
         of 5,000 rupees; that there  are  credits  in  the  bank  statement
         confirming this; that the sons in  the  United  Kingdom  also  send
         gifts to the appellant but that the appellants said  that  they  do
         not need to rely on these;

     iv) The first appellant indicated his monthly living costs  are  10,000
         rupees [11]; that there are large credits  into  the  bank  account
         which are well in excess of the first appellant's income;  that  no
         commentary on the bank account fluctuations had been  provided  and
         no explanation given; that no explanation has been  given  for  the
         appellants living in a house owned by their youngest son [12];

      v) In considering the facts in the round and particularly the  failure
         to explain how someone with an income of 5,000 rupees could have  a
         regular monthly expenditure of twice that as  well  as  unexplained
         large credits in a jointly held account, that  the  appellants  had
         not provided a true picture of their finance and they had not shown
         that they are genuine visitors [16].

 6. The appellants sought permission to appeal against this decision on the
    grounds that:

      i) The judge had relied upon suspicion and speculation [4];

     ii) The appellants are genuine visitors  whose  sole  intention  is  to
         visit their sons and to return to their financially secured life in
         India [5] and that  the  judge  had  erred  in  drawing  inferences
         contrary to this;

    iii) The judge should have "exercised his  discretion"  by  taking  into
         consideration the bank statements [6];

     iv) The judge had raised issues in respect of bank account fluctuations
         and the appellants living in a house owned by their son which  were
         not issues raised by the Entry Clearance Officer and which  he  had
         failed to clarify with the sponsor [7] and that it was unreasonable
         to use these to dismiss the appeal;

      v) The judge had failed  to  attach  proper  weight  to  the  evidence
         provided by the appellants' sponsor [8]; that  the  appellants  had
         honestly disclosed all their personal and  financial  circumstances
         [9]; that the judge  had  erred  in  scrutinising  the  appellants'
         finances to such an extent as he did and to  dismiss  their  appeal
         [9].

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pooler on 4 April 2013.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

 8. Miss Sharma submitted that the judge had erred in failing to note  that
    there were two bank  statements  provided:  one  relating  to  a  joint
    account held by the first appellant and his  younger  son,  the  second
    being a joint account for the appellants.  She submitted that the first
    account showed that the transfers were from the United Kingdom and that
    some of the money transferred from the  United  Kingdom  was  from  the
    youngest son to pay the mortgage on the property he had bought for  his
    parents.  She submitted that this was clear with the fact that payments
    went out to HDFC.  The fact that the son had bought  the  property  was
    set out in a letter.  She submitted that the judge had failed  to  look
    at the documents properly or to ask questions of the sponsor.

 9. In reply Miss Tanner accepted that the  judge  had  not  differentiated
    between the two statements at pages 10 and 11 of  the  bundle  but  had
    noted that the statements, dated after the date of  application,  could
    not have been available to the respondent and  in  any  event  did  not
    adequately explain the appellants' circumstances prior to the  date  of
    application.  She submitted also that there were inconsistencies in the
    appellant's own evidence as to whether or not he needed to rely on  the
    gifts of money from his sons and the amount  of  these  gifts  was  not
    quantified.  She submitted that it was open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that  he  had  not  been  given  a  full  account  of  the  appellants'
    circumstances and thus to reach the conclusions  made.   She  submitted
    that any error was not material.

10. In reply Ms Sharma accepted that she could  not  assist  in  explaining
    whether any of the points she had made regarding the mortgage  and  the
    parents had been put to the judge or whether he had been taken  to  the
    relevant pages.

11. It is not disputed that the first appellant claims to  have  a  monthly
    expenditure of 10,000 rupees, twice his  pension  income.   It  is  not
    disputed either that the judge  accurately  recorded  his  evidence  as
    being that he and his wife did not need to rely upon the money or gifts
    transferred from their sons.  As  Miss  Sharma  accepted,  this  is  an
    inconsistency.

12. It was incumbent on the appellants to demonstrate, in the light of  the
    concerns raised, that their intentions were bona fide.   Whilst  it  is
    not a requirement of the Immigration Rules that an applicant provide  a
    full breakdown of his financial and other circumstances, it was open to
    the judge to make an assessment of that in considering the  appellant's
    intention.  The failure to provide  sufficient  evidence  of  financial
    circumstances was an  issue  raised  in  the  refusal  notice  yet  the
    evidence presented to the judge  contained  a  significant  discrepancy
    between the appellant's income and expenditure.

13. It is now said that the judge erred in  confusing  two  different  bank
    statements, but that did not form part of the grounds of appeal nor was
    any application made to amend them.  While  I  accept  that  the  joint
    account between the first appellant and his son does  show  remittances
    from the United Kingdom and regular payments out to HDFC, and there  is
    a letter at page 73 of the bundle from the younger son saying  that  he
    has remitted money as he has bought a house for his parents  and  there
    is evidence [pages 7 to 8] of a mortgage, it is not at all  clear  that
    these points were put to the judge, as Ms Sharma accepted.  It  is  for
    the appellants to put their case.

14. I consider that the  judge  did  err  in  failing  to  raise  with  the
    appellants or their representatives what he found to be inconsistencies
    in the bank statements, a matter properly  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal but I do not consider that this error was material,  given  that
    even had the judge accepted the explanations now given,  these  do  not
    explain the serious inconsistency in  the  first  appellant's  evidence
    about his  income  and  expenditure.   Further,  even  were  it  to  be
    suggested that the 10,000 rupees expenditure  included  housing  costs,
    this  makes  little  sense  given  that  the  mortgage  repayments  are
    themselves 19,320 rupees per month.

15. Accordingly, I am satisfied that even had there been no  error  whereby
    the judge failed to ask  for  an  explanation  or  put  points  to  the
    appellant that had not yet been taken, he would have reached  the  same
    conclusion given that nowhere in the evidence before him  is  there  an
    explanation for the serious  inconsistency  in  the  first  appellant's
    claims regarding his income and expenditure.

16. For these reasons, I consider that the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making an error of law and I uphold it.


SUMMARY OF DECISION

1    The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date:  3 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

