
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/29680/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2013                              |On 25 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            Muhammad Riaz Qureshi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Muhammad Riaz Qureshi, was born on 8 June 1993 and is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had applied for entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as a family visitor.  His application was refused by
    the Entry Clearance Officer Abu Dhabi in a decision dated 19 July 2012.
     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a
    determination which was promulgated on 27 February 2013, dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. By a letter dated 23 May 2013  subject  to  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the respondent  stated  that  she
    did not oppose the appellant's application noting that "the reasons for
    dismissing the evidence before [the judge]  appear  inadequate  on  the
    whole".  In the circumstances, I have set aside the  determination  and
    remade the decision.

 3. I had a number of documents which had been submitted by  the  appellant
    together with the application and subsequently  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I consider these documents carefully before determining  the
    appeal.  The sponsor did not attend and gave no reason for  failing  to
    do so.  I note that the sponsor did not attend on the last occasion.

 4. The appellant seeks a visa to visit the United Kingdom for a period  of
    four weeks in order to visit his uncle, Khalid Mahmood.  The  appellant
    estimated his total monthly income in the region of 65,000 rupees.  The
    appellant himself intended to meet the costs of travel  but  will  rely
    upon his sponsor for accommodation and other expenses.  As of  27  June
    2012, the appellant's bank account (Allied Bank) had a  credit  balance
    of 12,550 rupees.  The application was refused under  paragraphs  41(i)
    and (ii):

         "CNL insert paragraph 41(i) and (ii)"

 5.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  documents  were
    sufficient to show that he was self-employed as a movie maker.  It  was
    also noted that the appellant's passport indicated that  he  had  never
    left Pakistan before.  The ECO  "noted  that  you  have  not  indicated
    anyone being reliant on you [in Pakistan]".

 6. The appellant had, amongst other documents, included certificates  from
    the Assistant Collector and Secretary of the  Municipal  Committee  and
    also his bank manager.

 7. The decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was reviewed  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager (ECM) on 19 November 2012:

         "In the grounds of appeal the appellant asserted that  he  had  his
         own business as well as having an income  from  agricultural  land.
         He also stated the bank balance certificate was provided  as  proof
         of his savings and not his monthly income.  Furthermore, he  stated
         in support of his circumstances he was providing a letter from  the
         municipal community Kotli and  a  certificate  from  the  assistant
         collector.  However, he has not provided any details as to  how  he
         has collected his claimed income and I am unable to determine  this
         from the evidence provided.  Furthermore the documents  he  claimed
         to be providing with his grounds have not been received for  me  to
         review therefore I cannot comment on their merits and have to  rely
         on the documents previously submitted.  The letter from  Anjman-E-T
         ajran Bal Damas (A2) while confirming  the  appellant's  employment
         and approximate income does not  state  how  they  calculated  this
         amount or on what information they had based their  calculation  on
         (sic).  I note that the letter was dated 26/06/12  which  was  only
         nine  days  prior  to  the  date  of  his  application  [for  entry
         clearance].  I am satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities  that
         the letter was provided for the sole purpose of supporting his visa
         application.  I am also in agreement with the ECO assessment of the
         bank letter that it showed the funds that he held on a specific day
         only and does not give a detailed history of the  account  or  show
         individual transactions over a period of time.  It  is  of  limited
         value  in  evidencing  his  circumstances.   I  am  not   therefore
         satisfied the appellant has provided an accurate reflection of  his
         financial circumstances in Pakistan either in his grounds of appeal
         or application."

 8. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities.  It is for the  appellant  to
    establish  a  complete  and   accurate   picture   of   his   financial
    circumstances in Pakistan.  Having considered the  documents  submitted
    carefully, I am wholly in agreement with the comments made above by the
    ECM.  Letters or certificates  stating  balances  on  accounts  provide
    little indication as to how those balances  were  generated  and,  more
    particularly,  do  not,  in  the  absence  of  any  proper  information
    regarding the liabilities and outgoings of  the  individual  concerned,
    give any proper indication of a regular net income.  My examination  of
    the documents submitted in support of this application/appeal leave  me
    in the dark as to  the  exact  sums  which,  taking  into  account  any
    liabilities and outgoings, this appellant generates from  his  business
    activities.  Such a picture is of vital importance in  applications  of
    this kind in order to  show  the  extent  to  which  an  individual  is
    established financially in his home country which, in  turn,  gives  an
    indication as to whether  he  has  any  incentive  to  return.   If  an
    appellant gives  only  a  partial  picture  of  his  or  her  financial
    circumstances, he or she should not be surprised and a  decision  maker
    (or the Tribunal) finds that he has failed to discharge the  burden  of
    proof which rests upon him.  I find that to be the case in the  present
    appeal.

DECISION

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    27 February 2013 is set aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.   This
    appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

