
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA 29463 2012
                                                               VA 29468 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2013                                |On 10 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               KALEEM SIDDIQUE
                               NIKHAT NAMREEN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  They are married to  each  other.
    The first appellant was born in January 1947 and the second appellant in
    June 1958.

 2.  They  each  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions  of  the
    respondent to refuse them entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as
    family  visitors.   Their  appeals  were  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and came before me because it was arguable that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law.

 3. I begin by looking at the  immigration  decisions.   In  each  case  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant intended  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end  of  the  visit  or  that  the  appellant  was
    genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for  a  period  not  exceeding  six
    months.  The applications  were  therefore  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraphs 41(i) and (ii) of HC 395.

 4. Further the respondent asserted that the grounds of appeal were limited.
     The Refusal of Entry  Clearance stated:

         "Your right of appeal is limited to  the  grounds  referred  to  in
         Section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002".

 5. This is a statutory ground. It provides that:

         "The decision is unlawful under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
         1998 (c.42) (Public Authority not to act contrary to  Human  Rights
         Convention) as being incompatible with the  appellant's  Convention
         rights."

 6. It was clearly the respondent's case, although this is not explained  in
    the respondent's papers, that the rights of appeal were contained in the
    Immigration  Appeals   (Family   Visitor)   Regulations   2012.    These
    Regulations restrict the meaning of "family visitor" to persons who  are
    in a defined close  relationship  with  the  applicant  and,  for  these
    purposes, settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Although  the  person  the
    appellants said that they intended to visit was lawfully in  the  United
    Kingdom he was not settled there.

 7. The decisions are dated 24 July 2012.  Somewhat  disappointingly,  given
    what follows, the Notice of Immigration Decision did not state when  the
    application was made.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mayall  explained  in  his  determination  the
    limited circumstances in which a family visitor has a general  right  of
    appeal and said at paragraph 10 that in  his  judgment  the  appeal  was
    limited to human rights grounds.

 9. Mr Melvin suggested that Counsel for the appellants  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Mr Malik) had accepted  that  the  appeal  could  only  be
    brought on human rights grounds but I am not  persuaded  that  any  such
    concession was made.  Certainly Counsel confined himself to human rights
    grounds but that appears to be after the judge had given a ruling on the
    scope of the appeal and whilst the point may not have been  argued  with
    any great vigour it is wrong to  say  that  Counsel  conceded  that  the
    appeal could  only  succeed  on  human  rights  grounds.  In  any  event
    counsel's concessions do not decide the law.

10. Judge Mayall dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.  He  did  not
    consider private life to be engaged at all and said:

         "I do not consider that family life within the meaning of Article 8
         is engaged in this case.  The sponsor is  an  adult.  There  is  no
         evidence placed before me to suggest that the ties between him  and
         his parents go  beyond  those  which  would  normally  be  expected
         between adult dependents."

11. The application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    supported  by  three  grounds.   They  are  commendably  short  and  the
    supporting submissions are the appropriately brisk.  The grounds are  as
    follow:

         "Ground 1:    The FTT  erred  in  law  in  holding  that  the  2012
         Regulations apply to this appeal and  that  the  Appellant  has  no
         right to challenge the ECO's decision on the grounds  that  it  was
         not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

         Ground 2:     The ECO took no point as to the  jurisdiction  during
         the appeal proceedings and therefore it was not open to the FTT  to
         take it on its own motion.

         Ground 3:     The FTT erred in law in holding that Article 8 is not
         engaged."

12. Ground 2 is, I find, essentially misconceived.   Certainly  paragraph  9
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 prescribes
    a mechanism whereby the Tribunal may determine as  a  preliminary  issue
    whether or not to accept an appeal in a case where its  jurisdiction  is
    in doubt.  I do not accept that it follows from this that the point  can
    only be taken before the appeal is listed for a hearing. Mr  Malik  drew
    my attention to the case of Ajakaiye (Visitor appeals - right of appeal)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00375 (IAC) where the Tribunal (Blake  J  President,
    SIJ Gill) acknowledge that where  the  Tribunal  has  embarked  upon  an
    appeal without with any objection it may become too late  to  decide  it
    has no adjudicative jurisdiction.  This line of reasoning  is  supported
    by the judgment of Sedley LJ in Ngopengeyo & Others [2010] EWCA Civ 1275
    but any suggestion that the jurisdiction point could only  be  taken  by
    one of the parties was dispelled by the Court of Appeal in Nirula, R (on
    the application of) v First-Tier Tribunal (Asylum & Immigration Chamber)
    & Anor [2012] EWCA Civ 1436 at paragraph 31. Mr Malik very properly drew
    this to my attention.

13. I am satisfied that if a party (usually the respondent) does not  assert
    at the first opportunity that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction  to  hear
    an appeal there comes a point where the progress in the appeal  is  such
    that it is too late for anyone to take the point.  The right  to  object
    to  the  adjudicative  jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  does  not   last
    throughout the proceedings. Failure to take the point at an early  stage
    can lead to a fait accompli. This, I find, is the reasoning of Sedley LJ
    in Anwar v SSHD [2011] 1WLR 2552.

14. In the two appeals  that  I  have  to  decide  the  respondent  made  it
    absolutely  plain  that  it  was  the   respondent's   contention   that
    jurisdiction was limited to an appeal brought on human rights  which  is
    how the case proceeded. Indeed the respondent specifically asked for the
    matter to be listed as a preliminary issue.

15. I note that in the respondent's papers there is an  assertion  that  the
    appellant's cannot raise human rights  grounds  because  they  were  not
    raised in the Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. They  clearly
    were raised and the First-tier Tribunal was right to hear the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

16. It is not in doubt that the appellant's  son  was  not  settled  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   The  point  of  contention  is  whether  or  not  the
    application was made before or after  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
    Visits) Regulations 2012  came  into  force  on  9  July  2012.  If  the
    application was made before that date, the  appellants'  proposed  visit
    would be to a person in the wider class of relatives where  there  is  a
    full right of appeal but if the applications were made on or after  that
    date then the Regulations applied with the result  that  the  appellants
    application to visit a person not settled in the United Kingdom was  not
    appealable except on human rights grounds.

17. Given the extreme importance of  the  date  of  application  I  find  it
    regrettable that the Notices of Immigration  Decisions  referred  rather
    airily to the applicant  having  applied  for  entry  clearance  without
    identifying when the application was said to be made. It was refused  on
    24 July 2012 which is clearly after the date that the  more  restrictive
    rights of appeal came into law.

18. Extraordinarily, given the importance of this  point  to  both  parties'
    cases, I arrived  at  the  hearing  room  without  either  party  having
    produced any evidence concerning the date of  application.   Each  party
    purported to correct this deficiency at the hearing. Mr Melvin, for  the
    respondent, produced a print out of application details referring to the
    application being made on 11 July  2012,  which  is  clearly  after  the
    relevant date. I find it probable that the application was said to  have
    been made on 11 July 2012 because that is when the fee was paid and  any
    additional requirements were satisfied.

19. Mr Malik countered by producing a copy of  an  email  message  dated  14
    June 2012, that is before the critical date, bearing the subject heading
    "Visa   for   UK   -   Completed   Application".     It    comes    from
    "visa4uk@fco.gov.uk" which is clearly acting on behalf of the government
    of the United Kingdom. On  a  plain  reading  this  indicates  that  the
    application was made on 14 June 2012. The  message  includes  a  warning
    that supporting documents are required as well as "the  appropriate  fee
    (unless paid on-line with this application)" and that "Failure to submit
    documents will result in a delay and/or lead  to  the  refusal  of  your
    application". It does not strain language to find  that  an  application
    can be made before the fee was paid or other documents supplied. Such an
    application might not be processed until the other requirements are  met
    and if they  are  not  met  the  application  may  be  refused  but  the
    application can still have been made. Indeed it cannot be refused unless
    it was made and the email threatens to refuse  the  application  if  the
    "documents" are not submitted.

20. Mr Melvin submitted that  no  application  was  complete  without  these
    necessary extras but that is not what the rules say and it is  not  what
    the email says.

21. Rule 30 of the Immigration Rules states:

         "An application for an entry clearance is not made  until  any  fee
         required to be paid under the Consulate Fees  Act  1980  (including
         any Regulations or Orders made under that Act (has been paid)."

22. The Immigration and Nationality (Cost Recovery  Fees)  Regulations  2012
    set a fee of �78 from a visitor  intending  to  stay  for  less  than  6
    months. These regulations are made under sections 51(3) and  52(1),  (3)
    and (6) of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 and not  the
    Consulate Fees  Act  1980.  Clearly  there  is  no  basis  for  applying
    provisions dealing with  an  application  made  with  reference  to  the
    Consulate Fees Act to an application not concerned with  that  Act.  Far
    from supporting the contention that an application is never made until a
    fee is made the fact that the rules specify that an application  is  not
    made in cases where the Consulate Fees Act 1980 applies tends to suggest
    that an application can exist without a fee  where  that  Act  does  not
    apply.

23. Mr Malik referred me to paragraph 34G(iv) of HC  395.  This  is  a  Rule
    under the heading "Determination of the date of application or claim (or
    variation of an application or claim) in connection  with  immigration".
    Rule 34G(iv) provides

         "For the purposes of these Rules, the date on which an  application
         or claim ... is made is as follows:

         (i)-(iii) ...

         (iv) where the application  is  made  via  the  online  application
         process, on the date on which the online application is submitted"

24. This, Mr Malik submitted, was entirely clear.  The appellant  had  taken
    advantage of the online  process  and,  by  reason  of  definition,  the
    application was made when the online application form was submitted.  No
    contrary meaning could be given to this Rule.

25. Rule 34 clearly show that some applications can be made  when  they  are
    submitted on line but that is the  extent  to  which  it  informs  these
    appeals. Rule 34 is concerned with applications for leave to  remain  by
    certain categories of migrant. It is nothing to do with entry  clearance
    and, I find, is not particularly relevant to the application before me.

26. Thus I find that the rules do not show when  an  application  for  entry
    clearance is made.

27. It seems to me that there are two main contenders for deciding  when  an
    application is made. They are "when  the  application  is  sent  to  the
    decisions maker" and "when all  of  the  necessary  fees  and  documents
    supporting the application, together with the application form are  sent
    to the decision maker".

28.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  respondent  genuinely  believes  that  the
    application was made on 11 July  2012.  The  appellants  were  given  an
    appointment at the UK Visa Application Centre in Hyderabad 10 July  2012
    and, I assume, handed over payment that was recorded as being  made  the
    next day.

29. I am also satisfied that the respondent is wrong to hold  that  opinion.
    Whilst  I  see  the  attraction  of  Mr  Melvin's  submission  that   an
    application is not made until the fee is paid he could not point  me  to
    any statutory or regulatory basis for such a claim. As indicated  above,
    the fact that applications that must be supported by  fees  required  by
    the Consular Fees Act 1980 are not made until the fees are paid inclines
    me to the view that applications that must be supported by fees under  a
    different Act are not so restricted.

30.  Further  the  plain  meaning  of  the  "Completed  Application"  e-mail
    suggests that the respondent's agents clearly think that an  application
    can be made before the fee is paid. In ordinary language it can and,  in
    the absence of contrary provisions, I find that an  application  can  be
    made before a necessary fee is paid.

31. Neither party has provided much evidence about payment.  It  seems  that
    they have each relied solely on evidence about one appellant and  invite
    me to assume that the other appellant's circumstances are  similar,  and
    the appellants' evidence is not unequivocally relevant  to  the  instant
    cases at all. Neither representative  objected  to  my  relying  on  the
    evidence the other produced and in all the circumstances I am  satisfied
    (just) that the appellants probably did apply, together, on 14 June 2012
    and then present the appropriate fees and  additional  documents  on  10
    July  2012  which  is  why  the  respondent  says,  wrongly,  that   the
    applications were not made until 11 July 2012.

32. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal clearly erred  materially.  With
    respect to Judge Mayall (who, I suspect, had much  less  help  than  was
    given to me) there was no evidence before him capable of supporting  the
    conclusion that he reached. I  set  aside  his  decision  solely  as  it
    relates to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  immigration
    rules.

33. Ground 3 complains that the  appeal  was  determined  wrongly  on  human
    rights grounds.  I asked Mr Melvin, rhetorically, if there  could  be  a
    greater interference with an obligation to promote family life  than  to
    refuse entry clearance to a  person  who  wanted  to  visit  the  United
    Kingdom to attend his son's wedding.  I did not  have  to  be  persuaded
    that such interference might  be  proportionate  but  that  is  a  quite
    separate issue. Mr Malik contended that, following AG (Eritrea)  v  SSHD
    [2007] EWCA Civ 80 and VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5 it was plain
    beyond  argument  that  Article  8(1)  is  engaged  when  there  is  any
    interference that was not merely technical or inconsequential.

34. That much I accept and regard as trite  law.  I  also  accept  that  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 are not to be  confined  to
    refraining from interfering with a person's private and family life  but
    are to promote positively that person's private and  family  life.  This
    much has been clear since the ECO Dhaka v Box [[2002] UKIAT 02212 if  it
    was not clear before.  I  accept  just  as  readily  that  AAO  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 814 and  Pun  (Ghurkhas  -  Article  8
    Nepal [2011] UKUT 377 (IAC) are examples of the courts  recognising  the
    duty under Article 8 is to  promote  positively  a  person  private  and
    family life.  However these cases are all in the context of dependency.

35. Having reflected on the situation and without  being  referred  to  more
    helpful authority, I have concluded that there is no general  obligation
    to promote contact between independent adults even if they  are  closely
    related and particularly not  in  the  context  of  a  short  separation
    consequent on a decision to live in  the  United  Kingdom  with  limited
    permission. The situation might be different if that  migrant  became  a
    permanent resident but I am not inclined to assume that  the  obligation
    to promote a person's private  and  family  life  extends  to  promoting
    contact between independent adults even if they are  parent  and  child.
    The situation may well be different in the case of a husband and wife or
    longstanding close committed parties who are not married and parents and
    minor children but that is not the position here.

36. It follows that although I do not think I would  have  drawn  the  sharp
    distinction between "private life" and  "family  life"  shown  by  Judge
    Mayall, I am satisfied that he was entitled  to  say  that  he  did  not
    "consider that family life within the meaning of Article 8 is engaged in
    this case".

37. It follows therefore that I am  not  persuaded  there  is  any  material
    error of law in the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

38. Mr Malik contended that in the event of the appeal against the  decision
    to dismiss the appeal under the  immigration  rules  being  allowed  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as there  had  been
    no assessment of the inherent merits of the appeal. I  agree  with  that
    submission.

39. The decision to dismiss the appeal on human  rights  grounds  was  sound
    and I uphold that decision.

40. I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules. I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal
    has jurisdiction to entertain the appeal  and  I  order  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to determine again the appeals under the Immigration Rules.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2013                   |







