
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/29110/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 19 June 2013                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 27 June 2013            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 parul gupta

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this appeal is the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  New
    Delhi who appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J
    M Hollingworth, promulgated on 26 April 2013, in which he  allowed  the
    appeal of Miss Parul Gupta and allowed her appeal against the  decision
    made by the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance as  a
    visitor.  For the sake of continuity I shall refer  to  Miss  Gupta  as
    'the appellant', as she was in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  issue
    before the judge was whether or not the appellant had an  intention  to
    return at the conclusion of her visit.

 2. At the hearing before the judge the sponsor attended and gave evidence.
     He said that he was the appellant's father and that he  was  currently
    permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom  for  three  years  as  the
    manager  of  a  bank  and  that  he  treated  himself  as  having   the
    responsibility of ensuring that his daughter returned to India  at  the
    conclusion of the visit.  He gave evidence to the judge that until  she
    is married he considered that the appellant was his responsibility  and
    that he was in a position to determine that  she  would  go  back.   He
    described how she was living in India with  other  family  members  and
    that she was employed there although the employment had only  commenced
    on 1 June 2012.

 3. The representative for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  relied  on  the
    refusal  decision  and  that  on  18  May  2012,  when  she  made   the
    application, the appellant was unemployed.  She had started  work  only
    on the date of decision, that is, 1 June  2012.   Nevertheless  it  was
    accepted that the evidence that she was in  employment  was  admissible
    although it appears it  was  not  necessarily  a  long-term  job.   The
    appellant had previously applied to remain in the United Kingdom during
    a period when her parents had obtained leave and had been refused  that
    application.

 4. Those submissions were the subject of an  answer  by  the  sponsor  who
    repeated his assertion that his daughter, the appellant, was very  much
    his responsibility and he gave the judge an assurance that she would go
    back in circumstances where it was clearly implied that he, her father,
    exercised a degree of influence upon her such as to enable him  to  say
    with some certainty that she would return  at  the  conclusion  of  her
    visit.  He described how his wife would accompany his daughter  on  the
    visit and how his wife had previously come for a period of three weeks.

 5. At the conclusion of the evidence the judge accepted the evidence given
    by the sponsor.  He accepted that the appellant was then employed.   He
    accepted the explanation given  by  the  sponsor  in  relation  to  the
    intentions of both his daughter and his wife.  It  was  agreed  by  the
    respondent that the evidence of employment was  admissible.   In  those
    circumstances the application had to be assessed by  reference  to  the
    firm evidence given by the  sponsor  that  he  exercised  a  degree  of
    control over his daughter, the appellant, that she had a home in India,
    that she had a job in India and that her mother would accompany her and
    that there would be no cessation of ties with India by reason  of  this
    trip.  It is to be noted that the sponsor himself is only on  temporary
    leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  no  suggestion
    therefore that the family home and links with India will be permanently
    severed.  Be that as it may, at the conclusion of the hearing the judge
    accepted the evidence of the sponsor and  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    appellant would return on the basis of those factors identified by  the
    sponsor.

 6. That was a matter which was open to the judge as  the  one  responsible
    for making findings of fact.  The reasons that he gave were  clear  and
    precise.

 7. The grounds of appeal say that the judge should not have  reached  that
    decision  and  should  have  concentrated  on  the  intentions  of  the
    appellant herself.  However it was not the appellant who  was  able  to
    give evidence to the judge and in any event, in  the  circumstances  of
    this particular case, the judge accepted the evidence  of  the  sponsor
    that he was in a position to exercise influence upon the appellant.  If
    the judge accepted both that he was able to exercise influence and that
    it was his settled intention that she should return at the end  of  the
    visit, there was no reason why that intention should not be implied  to
    the appellant herself.

 8. There is no error of law in this determination.

DECISION


    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error on a point of law  and  the
    original determination of the appeal shall stand.








                                                              ANDREW JORDAN,
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
