



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/30883/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th June 2013                                |On 14th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                              mrs halima begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman of AK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this determination I shall refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  (on
    behalf of the ECO Dhaka) as the Respondent  and  Halima  Begum  as  the
    Appellant.

 2. This is the Respondent's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  who  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer Dhaka, not to grant
    her entry clearance for the purpose of a family visit to see her  uncle
    and UK Sponsor Mufasil Ali.

 3. Firstly let me set out one point.  The  only  Appellant  before  me  is
    Halima Begum. It is correct that she made an application  to  visit  at
    the same time as her  mother  Hazera  Begum.  Hazera  Begum's  original
    application was also refused by the Entry Clearance Officer and she too
    appealed  that  decision.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Wellesley-Cole
    allowed her appeal as well as that of Halima.

 4. So far as I am concerned however that decision stands.  The  Respondent
    has not sought  to  appeal  that  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and therefore the only matter before me is the case of  Halima
    Begum. Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent on 26th April
    2013 and thus the matter comes before me.

Consideration of Error of Law

 5. Mr Avery appeared on behalf of the Respondent and  Mr  Rahman  for  the
    Appellant. I heard submissions from both  representatives.  Mr  Avery's
    submissions followed the lines of the grounds seeking  permission.  Put
    quite simply, he submitted, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
    herself by failing to recognise that the Appellant had a limited  right
    of appeal; despite the Entry Clearance Officer pointing this out in the
    refusal notice. Mr Avery submitted that the Judge makes no reference to
    this in her determination and therefore she clearly falls  into  error.
    The appropriate course is for Halima Begum's appeal to be dismissed.

 6. Mr Rahman in response informed me that the Appellant's appeal should be
    allowed, since her mother needed the Appellant to accompany her to  the
    United Kingdom. He said that if Halima Begum's appeal were not allowed,
    it would mean that Hazera Begum would be  unable  to  travel.  He  then
    addressed me by trying to invoke  Article  8  ECHR  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant. He said that as her mother would not be able travel  without
    her this would be contrary to her Article 8 rights.

Consideration and Decision

 7. The Appellant's application to visit her uncle was  refused  under  the
    Immigration Rules with reference to  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
    Visitor) Regulations 2012. The application was made on 11th  July  2012
    and  these  Regulations  came  into  force  on  9th  July  2012.   This
    Appellant's application is, therefore, caught by the above Regulations.



 8. A proposed  visit  by  the  Appellant  to  her  uncle  is  outwith  the
    Regulations. Any right of appeal is limited  to  human  rights  grounds
    and/or race discrimination grounds. Neither ground was mentioned in the
    original grounds of appeal. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  clearly
    erred in this Appellant's case since she ought to  have  addressed  her
    mind to this point  which  was  quite  properly  raised  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer. That is a material error and one which requires  the
    decision so far as Halima Begum is  concerned,  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

 9. No further evidence or facts were put before me by either party.  As  I
    said above, Mr Rahman did try to invoke Article 8 ECHR on behalf of the
    Appellant. In my judgment this is a matter which does not  even  engage
    Article 8. What is proposed is a family visit for two months. There  is
    nothing  exceptional  about  the  visit,  the  purpose  being  for  the
    Appellant to accompany her mother to her uncle's house. I  do  not  see
    that family and/or private life is engaged for the purposes of  Article
    8. The issue of proportionality is therefore not engaged as the Article
    8 appeal fails at the first stage.

DECISION

10. There is an error of law so far as the decision in Halima Begum's  case
    is concerned. I remake the decision. The appeal by  Halima  Begum  (the
    Appellant) is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

