
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/30575/2012
     VA/30580/2012
     VA/30582/2012
     VA/30583/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th March 2014                              |On 27th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON



                                   Between

                                SUGHRA FATIMA
                                AKASHA PERVEZ
                             Ahmed SHOAIB PARVEZ
                             ANISA PERVEZ AKHTAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a family comprising a mother, Sughra Fatima born  on
    4th May 1967 and her three children, Akasha Pervez born on 20th January
    1995, Ahmed Shoaib Parvez born on 16th October 1998, and  Anisa  Pervez
    Akhtar born on 3rd December 2001.  They are all citizens  of  Pakistan.
    They applied for entry clearance to visit the Sponsor, Sohail Qaiser, a
    son of the First Appellant.  Those applications were  refused  for  the
    reasons given in  Notices  of  Decision  dated  24th  July  2012.   The
    Appellants appealed and their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal  Rose (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross  on  2nd  April
    2013.  He decided to dismiss the appeals for the reasons given  in  his
    Determination dated 14th April 2013.  The Appellants  sought  leave  to
    appeal  that  decision,  and  eventually  on  30th  January  2014  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  applications  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 41(i) and (ii) of HC 395  because  he  was  not
    satisfied that the First Appellant was a genuine visitor for a  limited
    period of time who intended to leave the UK at the end of her  proposed
    visit.  The applications of the remaining Appellants were refused under
    paragraph 46A(i), (ii), and (iii) of HC 395 for similar  reasons.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer came to those conclusions because  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants' financial circumstances in Pakistan were
    as claimed, and because there was no evidence as to the whereabouts and
    circumstances of the husband and father of the Appellants.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeals solely on the basis  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that a reliable  account  had  been  given  of  the  family's
    financial circumstances in Pakistan as stated at paragraph  36  of  the
    Determination.

 5. At the hearing, I heard submissions by both parties.  Mr  Nasim  argued
    that the Judge had erred in law by  failing  to  consider  all  of  the
    evidence.  He referred to the grounds of application and submitted that
    the Judge had failed to deal with other relevant evidence such  as  the
    First Appellant's employment, which  was  not  disputed  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, and her children's education.

 6. In response, Mr Wilding argued that it was apparent that the Judge  had
    considered all the relevant evidence.  For example, he had referred  to
    the First Appellant's employment at paragraph 25 of the  Determination.
    The Judge had carried out a detailed analysis of the family's claims as
    to their financial circumstances and the documents produced in  support
    and had come to the conclusion that the concerns of the Entry Clearance
    Officer had not been resolved.  In particular, there were discrepancies
    in the documentary evidence which the  Appellants  had  not  explained.
    Therefore it could not be said that  the  decision  of  the  Judge  was
    perverse, and the grounds of application could only be described  as  a
    disagreement with the decision of the Judge.

 7. I found myself in agreement with the arguments of Mr Nasim.  It is true
    that the Judge carried out  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  documentary
    evidence relating to the financial circumstances of the family  of  the
    Appellants in Pakistan, but it was an error of law for him to base  his
    decision purely upon that analysis.  The Judge made no  finding  as  to
    the credibility of the Sponsor, and did not deal with the  contents  of
    the Appellants' Bundle of Documents which included a statement  by  the
    Sponsor in which he asserted that the intention of  the  Appellant  and
    her children was no more than to pay him a short  visit.   I  therefore
    set aside the decision of the Judge.  I then proceeded  to  remake  the
    decision  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  the  Judge.   Both
    representatives declined the opportunity to make further submissions to
    me.

 8. The issue in this appeal is whether the Appellants are genuine visitors
    for the period as stated by them who will leave the UK  and  return  to
    Pakistan at the end of the proposed visit.  Both  the  First  Appellant
    and the Sponsor have stated that no more is intended by this visit than
    for the Sponsor to be visited by his mother and siblings for  a  period
    of four weeks on the basis that he would meet  all  the  costs  of  the
    visit.  I find no reason to doubt the  credibility  of  that  evidence.
    According to the Sponsor's statement, the family is close and there  is
    nothing on the face of it untoward in a mother and her children wishing
    to see, respectively, their son and brother.  I find no reason to doubt
    that the Appellants will return to Pakistan at the end of their  visit.
    They all live together in Pakistan in a family home with the  Sponsor's
    father.  There are other family members and  close  friends  living  in
    Pakistan.  The Sponsor's parents are both in work.  The First Appellant
    is a teacher at a Government primary school,  and  her  husband,  apart
    from his employment, owns  agricultural  land  from  which  the  family
    derives a significant income.  The minor Appellants are  in  education.
    Therefore all the Appellants have strong family,  social  and  economic
    ties with Pakistan.  The Sponsor has not seen his mother  and  siblings
    since February 2011, when he travelled to Pakistan to visit  them,  and
    it is understandable that he now wishes to see them again.

 9. In the Notice of  Decision,  the  credibility  of  the  Appellants  was
    disputed on the basis that the documentary evidence submitted  did  not
    establish the financial circumstances  of  the  Appellants'  family  in
    Pakistan, and that it appeared that a large deposit had been made in  a
    bank account just prior to the application.  The issue of  the  deposit
    has been explained to my satisfaction in paragraph 11 of the  statement
    of the Sponsor dated 25th March 2013.  Otherwise, there was  sufficient
    documentary evidence produced to the Judge to show that in addition  to
    the income from employment of the First Appellant, her husband also had
    an income from employment, and from the sale  of  crops  grown  on  his
    agricultural land.  Bearing in mind that  the  Sponsor  will  meet  the
    majority of the cost of this proposed visit, I therefore  do  not  find
    that the expense of the  visit  is  disproportionate  to  the  family's
    financial circumstances in Pakistan.

10. For these reasons I remake the decision by allowing all the appeals.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing them all.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

