
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/30455/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th September 2013                        |On 10th February 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                mr motin miah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  On 26 July  2012,  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("ECO") at Dhaka refused him  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  The appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge CMA Jones ("the judge") on 25 February  2013.
    The judge found that there was  no  valid  appeal  before  her  as  the
    appellant could not show that he fell within  the  Immigration  Appeals
    (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012  ("the  2012  Regulations").   The
    appellant sought entry clearance to make a visit of four weeks  to  see
    his cousin here but, as a first cousin is not a family member  for  the
    purposes of the 2012 Regulations, the appellant  was  not  entitled  to
    appeal against refusal, by virtue of Section 88A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  11  July  2013.   The   2012
    Regulations came into force on 9 July 2012 and, as the application  for
    entry clearance was made the day beforehand, on  8  July,  the  earlier
    Regulations, made in 2003, fell to be applied.

3.   Mr C Avery, for the Secretary of State,  said  that  the  Secretary  of
    State did not oppose the appeal.  The determination contained an  error
    of law as the judge considered that she  had  no  jurisdiction  in  the
    light of the 2012 Regulations.  However, the application was made on  8
    July 2012 and so the earlier Regulations applied.

4.   The Secretary of State's position was made clear in the  response  made
    on 23rd July 2013 under  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

5.   In the light of the Secretary of State's letter and  Mr  Avery's  brief
    submission, I concluded that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained a material error, such that it  fell  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

Remaking the Decision

6.   Mr Z Khan, for the appellant, said that reliance was  placed  upon  the
    bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal, which consisted  of
    50 pages.   Pages  2  to  4  were  a  witness  statement  made  by  the
    appellant's sponsor, Mr Mohammed Miah.

7.   Mr Miah gave evidence.  He adopted  his  witness  statement.   He  said
    that the appellant was his mother's sister's son and  he  has  land  in
    Bangladesh and a poultry  farm  where  he  grows  crops,  chickens  and
    harvests eggs.  His income is 22,000 to 24,000  taka  per  month.   The
    appellant wished to visit for four weeks.  He had two employees at  the
    farm and his wife would also help to look after it while he was present
    in the United Kingdom.

8.   Mr Miah said that his cousin's wife was a  teacher.   They  have  three
    daughters and a son.  The appellant's mother, two sisters and a brother
    are also present in Bangladesh.  His children's ages range from  16  to
    about 7 or 6 years.  They are studying.  The  appellant's  sisters  are
    married and live with their husbands.  His brother is younger and has a
    private job as a supervisor in a factory.  The appellant's  wife  earns
    about 5,000 taka per month.

9.   Mr Khan asked whether Mr Mohammed Miah  had  sponsored  anyone  before.
    He replied that he had; Mr Abdul Mohammed Ahad and Mr Hussein Miah.  He
    sponsored the first of these two years  ago  but  the  application  was
    refused.  Mr Miah was his wife's brother and he was given a visa  as  a
    working holidaymaker.  He stayed here for a time, with a part-time job.

10.  Mr Miah said that he last saw the appellant in  Bangladesh  about  four
    years ago.  He visited the family.  They were well-off and had  a  good
    standard  of  living.   The  appellant  had  incentives  to  return  to
    Bangladesh, to his farm and family.  He  had  his  children,  wife  and
    mother and they all relied upon him.

11.  In cross-examination by Mr Avery, Mr Miah said  that  he  travelled  to
    Bangladesh three or four years ago by himself.  The appellant told  him
    that he wished to visit the United Kingdom to see Mr  Miah,  Mr  Miah's
    brothers and Mr Miah's mother.  The appellant's children were  studying
    and his wife was working.  His mother was elderly.   Mr  Miah  saw  the
    appellant's farm and his chickens and crops.  The appellant  was  well-
    established.

12.  Mr Avery asked why the appellant had provided so little  evidence  with
    his application, if he were well-established.  Mr Miah replied that one
    of his cousins supported him and so he did not need  to  provide  much.
    The documents were sent to the solicitors.  Mr Avery  asked  about  the
    document at page 8, where "leaseholder" was  spelled  incorrectly.   Mr
    Miah said that he took the document  to  the  solicitors  once  he  had
    received it from his cousin.

13.  There was no re-examination.

14.  In submissions, Mr Avery said that reliance was placed upon the  notice
    of decision.  This showed that the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    account given by the appellant  of  his  circumstances  in  Bangladesh,
    although he accepted that the appellant's sponsor would meet the  costs
    of the visit in the United Kingdom.  The land deeds did not  show  what
    income the appellant derived from this  source  and  detailed  receipts
    were missing.  There were no accounts.  A personal bank statement in  a
    friend's name stood in isolation.  The ECO was entitled  to  find  that
    the requirements of paragraph 41(i), (ii) and (vii) were not  met.   If
    the  appellant  were  in  business,  one  would  have   expected   more
    documentary evidence to be provided.  Most  of  what  appeared  in  the
    appellant's bundle was post-decision and the bank  statements  did  not
    cover the date of application.  The provenance  of  the  documents  was
    difficult to establish although the item at page 8 appeared to be  from
    an official source.  In view of the notice of  decision,  the  evidence
    adduced by  the  appellant  was  not  sufficient  to  meet  the  doubts
    expressed by the ECO.  The appellant's  circumstances  were  vague  and
    there was no particular reason for him to visit at this time.

15.  Mr Khan said that there were four  relevant  factors:  the  appellant's
    finances in Bangladesh,  his  ties  to  that  country,  his  individual
    characteristics and his sponsor's support.

6.   So far as finances were  concerned,  the  appellant  provided  evidence
    with his VAF.  Evidence of his ownership of land  was  not  challenged,
    the ECO doubting instead the income derived from land.   It  was  clear
    from the notice of decision that the appellant had  provided  ownership
    documents.  The item at page 8 was a description of a document,  rather
    than an original item.   The  misspelling  was  not  significant.   The
    respondent's bundle included land valuation  certificates,  which  were
    before the ECO.  At  page  9  of  the  appellant's  bundle  were  sales
    receipts.  There were four on that page and they were all dated  before
    the notice of decision.  They could properly  be  taken  into  account.
    The receipts beyond that date showed the position all the way into 2013
    and bore on the circumstances "appertaining at" the date  of  decision.
    There was sufficient here to corroborate the claim to  an  income  from
    land.

7.   So  far  as  ties  to  Bangladesh  were  concerned,  there  were  birth
    certificates in the respondent's bundle showing that the appellant  has
    four children.  They were relatively young and in education,  save  for
    the very youngest.  The appellant was 45 years old,  married  and  with
    children.  His mother was dependent upon him as well.  He had a  family
    in Bangladesh.  His sponsor  gave  reasons  why  he  wished  to  visit;
    significant reasons  justifying  the  visit  were  not  required.   The
    appellant had every incentive  to  return.   Finally,  so  far  as  the
    appellant's sponsor was concerned, Mr Miah had  supported  two  earlier
    applications, one of them resulting in a person coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The picture which emerged was one where the  family  complied
    with the Immigration Rules.  The ECO accepted that  Mr  Miah  would  be
    able to meet the costs of the visit here and the Tribunal  should  find
    that Mr Miah could be trusted to meet his obligations as a sponsor.  If
    Mr Miah were found to be a credible witness, this would  tend  to  show
    that the appeal ought to be allowed.  There were  no  good  reasons  to
    suppose that the appellant would wish to remain beyond his visa  as  it
    was clear that he enjoyed a better life in Bangladesh.

Findings and Conclusions

8.   In this appeal, the burden lies with the appellant to prove  the  facts
    and matters he relies upon and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  a
    balance  of  probabilities.   By  section  85A  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, I may consider only the  circumstances
    "appertaining at" the time of the adverse decision, on 29 July 2012.

9.   As Mr Avery submitted, the thrust  of  the  ECO's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance was the paucity of documentary evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh.  Importantly, he did not doubt
    Mr Miah's ability to meet the costs of the appellant's expenses in  the
    United Kingdom and there was no challenge to the deeds showing that the
    appellant owned land.  Instead, the ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had shown that he derived an income from  this  source.   The
    ECO was also not satisfied that the appellant's circumstances  provided
    him with an incentive to leave the United Kingdom at  the  end  of  the
    short visit.

10.  In response, the appellant has adduced evidence of an income  from  his
    poultry farm.  This appears, for example, at page 9 of the  appellant's
    bundle.  As Mr Khan submitted, this is evidence which may  properly  be
    taken into account as the four sales receipts on that page all  predate
    the decision to refuse entry  clearance.   The  appellant's  case  also
    receives support from his sponsor, Mr  Miah.   Having  heard  him  give
    evidence, I find that he is a credible witness and  I  accept  what  he
    told me about the appellant's  circumstances.   Mr  Miah  was  last  in
    Bangladesh three or four years ago and saw the appellant and  his  farm
    at that time.  They discussed a possible visit by  the  appellant.   Mr
    Miah gave evidence that he has sponsored two people in the past, one of
    them his wife's brother, who came to the United Kingdom  as  a  working
    holidaymaker.   Importantly,  Mr  Miah  was  able   to   describe   the
    appellant's circumstances in Bangladesh and his  comfortable  lifestyle
    there.  He has four children, all but the youngest in  education.   His
    wife and elderly mother are dependent upon him.

11.  There is some force in Mr Avery's submission that a person  established
    as a successful farmer  in  Bangladesh  might  have  been  expected  to
    provide more documentary evidence than accompanied the application.  On
    the  other  hand,  what  has  emerged  since,  and   which   bears   on
    circumstances at the relevant  time,  does  support  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim that he owns land, derives an income from it and that
    he has family ties to Bangladesh.  There is nothing to  show  that  his
    family, or  Mr  Miah's  family,  have  ever  acted  in  breach  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Miah has, in  the  past,  successfully  met  his
    obligations as a sponsor.   Accepting  that  the  documentary  evidence
    remains rather modest, I find, nonetheless, that when weighed with  the
    oral evidence I heard, the appellant has  discharged  the  burden  upon
    him.  He has made out his case that the requirements  of  paragraph  41
    which were put in issue by  the  ECO  were  met,  as  at  the  date  of
    decision.  I find that a genuine visit was intended, that the appellant
    intended to return to Bangladesh at the end of the visit  and  that  he
    had access to sufficient resources, taking into  account  support  from
    his sponsor, to ensure that all the costs of the visit  would  be  met,
    including the cost of the return or onward journey.

12.  As the appellant has shown that the  requirements  of  the  rules  were
    met, the appeal is allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.

Fee Award

As the grounds of appeal have been made out and I have allowed  the  appeal,
I make a whole fee award in respect of any fee which has  been  paid  or  is
payable in these proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

