

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/31913/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 September 2013                          |On 13 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

            Lord Bannatyne sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                            Stella Ololade Olufon
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                    Lagos

                                                                  Respondent

                                   NOTICE

Representation
For the appellant:           Mr A O Modupe, Legal Representative
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1.       The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 10 October  1950.
      Her appeal against the refusal of entry clearance  as  a  visitor  was
      allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond on 17 July 2013. The  ECO
      (whom we continue to refer to as the respondent for ease of reference)
      challenged the determination only  on  maintenance  and  accommodation
      grounds and permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Nicholson on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  had
      erred in failing to consider those matters.
   2.       At the hearing of the appeal on 10 September, Mr Wilding  sought
      permission   to   withdraw   the   respondent's   challenge   to   the
      determination. He acknowledged that in the review by the  EC  Manager,
      maintenance and accommodation had been conceded and explained that his
      colleague who drafted the grounds had not  seen  that  concession.  Mr
      Modupe was content with the withdrawal which we agreed to.

   3.       As there is no longer any challenge to the decision of the First-
      tier  Tribunal,  the  determination  allowing   the   appeal   remains
      effective.






      Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
            Judge of the Upper Tribunal


        12 September 2013





