
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/31860/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 8 July 2013               |
|Prepared 24 June 2013                         |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                 M A Shahid

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Chowdhury of Messrs Kingdom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on  1  June  1984  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Hutchinson  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  20  March  2013
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Dhaka to refuse the appellant entry clearance to come
    to Britain as a family visitor.

2.    Judge  Hutchinson  noted  that  the  appellant  had  stated   in   the
    application form that he intended to visit a "blood related  aunt"  who
    was the sponsor and that he had listed  the  sponsor  and  three  other
    family members of her family as his close family members in the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge asked the sponsor for details of  her  relationship
    to the appellant.  She told  the  judge  that  the  appellant  was  her
    mother's brother's daughter's son confirming,  on  further  questioning
    that the appellant was in fact the son of her first cousin.

3.   The judge pointed out that therefore she was not the  appellant's  aunt
    (nor indeed the appellant's cousin).

4.    The  judge  went  on  to  enquire  of  the  sponsor  the   appellant's
    relationship to the other relatives he had mentioned in the application
    form.  The sponsor had said that she was his closest relative and  that
    the appellant intended to visit "my  household  and  extended  family".
    The judge concluded:-

         "Although therefore I note that the appellant has  stated  that  he
         also intends to visit a  'cousin'  and  two  further  aunts  and  a
         'cousin sister' on the basis of all the evidence before me I am not
         satisfied that it has been demonstrated that  these  relatives  are
         first  cousins,  or  aunts  or  sisters  as  understood  under  the
         Regulations."

5.   The judge went  on  to  note  that  the  appellant  had  made  previous
    unsuccessful applications for visit visas  and  had  had  two  previous
    unsuccessful visit appeals.  He concluded:-

         "Given the clear evidence from the sponsor me (sic)  that  he  does
         not have any relatives in the UK closer than the sponsor who  is  a
         second cousin, I am not satisfied the appellant has demonstrated on
         this occasion that he is  intending  to  visit  family  members  as
         defined within the relevant Regulations.  ...  The onus is  on  the
         appellant to demonstrate that he intends a family visit as  defined
         within the Regulations; despite  the  fact  the  appellant  was  on
         notice that the respondent was not satisfied in this case that  the
         appellant intended a family visit  as  defined  and  was  therefore
         entitled to a full right of appeal  the  appellant  has  failed  to
         discharge that burden."

6.   The judge therefore concluded that the appellant did not have  a  right
    of appeal and therefore did not  go  on  to  consider  the  substantive
    issues in the refusal.

7.   The grounds of appeal asserted that:

         "The sponsor stated that she was not asked any  specific  questions
         on the relationship with other  cousin  mentioned  in  question  at
         8.10.  However, the said cousin  Abdul  Kaium  is  the  appellant's
         first cousin.  Mr Kaium is the son of his  father's  brother.   The
         name of the appellant's  father  is  (late)  Md  Montaz  Miah.   Mr
         Kaium's father is (late) Moboshir Miah.  The relevant documents  as
         to the proof of their relationship are being provided herewith  for
         your consideration.  We herewith enclose the nikah  nama  (marriage
         contract) of the applicant's father Md Montaz Miah  and  the  nikah
         nama of his cousin's father Moboshir Miah.  Both  the  nikah  namas
         show (paragraph 2) the name of their father is the same (Md Mokhrom
         Ullah) and the same address.  Therefore; we submit the  appellant's
         father and his cousin's (Abdul Kaium) father are siblings.  As such
         the appellant and Mr  Abdul  Kaium  are  first  cousins.   In  this
         regard, we also enclose  the  relevant  pages  of  the  Bangladeshi
         passports of the appellant and his  cousin,  Mr  Kaium  which  show
         their respective fathers' name as well."

8.   A bundle of documents  was  served  very  shortly  before  the  hearing
    although it had not reached me on the date of hearing  which  contained
    the documents  referred  to  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  showing  the
    appellant's relationship to Md Kaium.

9.   The issue before me, is, however, whether or  not  the  judge,  on  the
    evidence before him, was entitled to find that the  appellant  was  not
    coming to Britain to visit a relative who fell  within  the  categories
    set out in the visit Regulations.

10.  The reality is that it is not an error of law for a judge not  to  take
    into account evidence which was not before him.  In this case the judge
    did consider the evidence and reached conclusions which  were  open  to
    him on the evidence.  He did make enquiries of  the  sponsor  regarding
    the other persons mentioned by the appellant in  the  application  form
    and placed proper weight on the evidence which she gave.  It is of note
    that the grounds of appeal against the refusal, which  are  detailed  -
    stretching to four pages - do not claim that the other  family  members
    mentioned in the application were the appellant's cousins.

11.  Therefore,  while I consider that the documentary  evidence  which  has
    now been put  forward  might  well,  had  it  been  placed  before  the
    Immigration Judge, have resulted in a different conclusion the  reality
    is that it cannot be said that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge.

12.  I therefore find that the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge  shall
    stand and this appeal is therefore dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

