
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/31577/2012
     VA/31615/2012
     VA/31593/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 January 2014                             |On 17 January 2014           |
|Prepared 9 January 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                              mrs HARDEEP KAUR
                           master GAGANDEEP SINGH
                             miss HARPREET KAUR

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Malik &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of India. The first appellant was  born  on
    20 March 1971 and the two further appellants, born on 30 June 2001  and
    4 October 2002, are her children.  They  applied  for  visit  visas  to
    enter Britain to visit the first appellant's sister,  Mrs  Bimala  Kaur
    and her husband, who are settled here.

2.   The first appellant's application was refused under the  provisions  of
    paragraph 320(7A) on the basis that the application form contained  the
    answer "No" in response to the question "Have you ever been  refused  a
    visa for any country including the UK?" whereas there was evidence that
    the first appellant had been refused a visa on 14 May 2003.

3.   The notice of refusal also noted that although the first appellant  had
    said she was a housewife and dependent on her husband "all  the  recent
    documents you have produced in the form of crop receipts, bank deposits
    and  life insurance policies are  in  your  name  not  his".   The  ECO
    therefore  considered  that  he  could  not  be  satisfied   that   the
    appellant's husband was in the village or in India as  stated  or  that
    the appellant  had  presented  an  accurate  picture  of  her  economic
    circumstances.  That led him to doubt her intentions in Britain and  he
    therefore stated that he was not satisfied that she "intends  to  visit
    for the period and purpose as  stated  by  you".  The  application  was
    therefore also refused under the provisions of paragraph 41(i) and (ii)
    of HC 395 as amended.

4.   The other appellants were refused on the basis  that  as  their  mother
    was not coming to Britain they had not shown that suitable arrangements
    had been made for their travel to reception  and  care  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

5.   The appellants appealed against  that  decision.   Their  appeals  were
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain after  a  hearing
    on 27 August 2013.  It was the first appellant's argument that the fact
    that "No" had been written in the application  form  in  reply  to  the
    question of whether or not she had ever been  refused  a  visa  was   a
    mistake made by the agent whom she had employed and  was  therefore  an
    innocent mistake.  Judge Hussain did not believe that explanation.

6.   However in reaching that conclusion  the  judge  had  stated  that  the
    burden of proof was on the appellant and the standard of proof was  the
    balance of probabilities. He had not stated on whom the burden of proof
    lay to prove the allegation made that  the  appellant  had  made  false
    representations or not disclosed material  facts  in  relation  to  the
    application.

7.   When the appellant appealed  to  the  Tribunal  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge S J Hall found, for that reason, that there was  a material error
    of law in the determination.  I annex to my determination a copy of his
    Decision and Directions.

8.   It was in these circumstances that, after a  transfer  order  had  been
    made, the appeal came before me for hearing afresh.

9.   The appellant's sister, Mrs Bimala Kaur, gave evidence,  relying  on  a
    statement which had been produced in which she stated that  her  sister
    and children were well settled in India and were financially stable and
    well off, that her sister's husband was "in agricultural business"  and
    handled all business affairs and that her sister was  a  housewife  who
    assisted her husband in agricultural work.

10.  It was stated that the appellant's husband had put  some  business  and
    family matters in her name "by personal choice".  It was, she asserted,
    that the appellant's husband  was in India and that he would stay there
    during the visit to Britain.

11.  She referred to other family members who had travelled  to  Britain  as
    family visitors and returned and asserted that her sister had told  her
    that she had not provided false information or practiced  deception  in
    her application.  The application form had been  completed  by  a  visa
    representative named Holiday Tours and Travels to whom her  sister  had
    "supplied the information and supplied all the  documents  to  them  to
    prepare". Her sister  had been told to sign the  application  form  and
    had done so.  The statement went on to say that the appellant  was  not
    well versed in English and had not checked the contents  of  the  form,
    trusting the representative. She added  that  her  sister  was  "really
    upset and angry at the visa representatives when I told her that due to
    this error she may be banned from applying to the United Kingdom for  a
    visit visa for a period of ten years".

12.  She referred to a letter from Holiday Tours and  Travels  stating  that
    they had not asked the appellant  the  particular  question  about  the
    refusal of a visa and had merely assumed  the  answer  and  apologised.
    Mrs Bimala Kaur statement stated that the appellant's previous passport
     details had been provided on the application form  which  showed  that
    she had not had the intention to provide any forms and information.

13.  The statement asserted that the appellant had merely made  an  innocent
    mistake.

14.  Mrs Bimala Kaur was asked by Mr Blundell where her brother-in-law  was.
     She replied that he was in India and she  went  on  to  say  that  her
    sister had said that the agent had made the  mistake  rather  than  her
    sister.  Her sister had very little knowledge of English.

15.  In cross-examination she confirmed  that  that  she  could  only  given
    answers which reflected what her sister had told her.   She  was  asked
    about relatives staying with her and she said initially that her guests
    had come and gone having stayed for a week.  Asked if here  was  anyone
    staying with her now, she said that she had her sister who would  leave
    on 15 January.

16.  Mr Saunders asked her about the documents to which  the  appellant  had
    referred in the grounds  of  appeal  and  pointed  out  that   all  the
    documents which the appellant now produced and were in joint names were
    dated after the refusal.   Mrs Ramala Kaur was unable  to  answer  that
    question.

17.  In summing up Mr Saunders relied on the reasons for refusal,  accepting
    that one issue raised in the refusal -  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor was not in issue.

18.  He referred me to the letter from Holiday Tours and Travels and  stated
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had been entitled to disbelieve what
    was stated therein. He asked that I should not  believe  what  was  now
    claimed either.  They were a company which dealt with visas  and  would
    have known that this was an important issue.  It was a perfectly proper
    inference for the Entry Clearance Officer to make  that  those  in  the
    travel  business  should  ensure  that  the  documents  were  completed
    correctly.  There  were  no  other  errors,  he  pointed  out,  in  the
    application form which would have indicated that the travel agency  had
    been  careless.  He referred to the case of Adedoyin v SSHD [2010] EWCA
    Civ 773 (AA (Nigeria)) which he stated indicated that an honest mistake
    was excusable but he argued that this was clearly not an honest mistake
    and stated that the witness could not be relied on.

19.  With regard to the substance of the refusal he argued  that  there  was
    no evidence in the affidavit from the sponsor to indicate that what was
    now being said was true.  There was nothing to dictate the presence  of
    the appellant's husband in India.  He asked me therefore to dismiss the
    appeal.

20.  Mr Blundell dealt first with the issue relating to  the  evidence  that
    the appellants would return to India.  He  referred  to  the  affidavit
    evidence and the documentary evidence which he  indicated  showed  that
    the  appellant's  husband  was  in  India  and  that  the  family  were
    prospering there.

21.  With regard to the refusal  under  Rule  320  he  referred  me  to  the
    application form, stating that full details were given of  the  address
    of the appellant and that  although,  in  answer  to  question  99,  an
    incorrect answer had been given when it was stated that  the  appellant
    had not been refused a visa in the past that should be taken within the
    context of the reply to question  21  where  details  of  the  previous
    passport were given. Clearly this indicated that an honest attempt  was
    being made to answer all questions. If  an  intention  to  deceive  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had been  made then surely those details  would
    not have been  submitted.

22.  The appellant, he argued, was not a lawyer nor indeed  was  the  travel
    company.   The  travel  company  were  really  there  to  book  travel.
    Moreover the travel company were somewhat slapdash in the way in  which
    they had completed the form - he referred to the answer to question 142
    which he stated was in "text speak".  It was not plausible to  conclude
    that the appellant had attempted  to  deceive.    He  argued  that  the
    burden on the Secretary of State was significant.  Moreover  there  was
    nothing to indicate that  this  appellant  and  her  family,  who  were
    relatively prosperous in India would wish to overstay.  He referred  to
    letters from the children's  schools  and  other  documentary  evidence
    showing a settled life in India.  He asked me to  find  the  respondent
    had not discharged the burden on her and emphasised the high  threshold
    in that burden given the consequences for the appellant.

Discussion

23.  It is clearly for the respondent to discharge the burden of proof  upon
    her to show that the  appellant  had  made  false  representations  and
    material facts had not been  disclosed in relation to the  application.
    However, with regard to the issues relating to the  intentions  of  the
    appellant the burden of course lies on her, the standard of proof being
    that of the balance of probabilities.

24.  On the face of it false representations were made  in  the  application
    form. The first appellant had been refused a visa but the  form  stated
    that she had not.  I note the terms of paragraph  320(7A)  which  state
    that entry clearance is to be refused where false representations  have
    been  made whether or not to the applicant's knowledge in  relation  to
    the application. The application form was submitted by the  appellant's
    agent.  They were acting on her behalf.  On the face of it therefore  I
    can only conclude that the respondent  has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof to show that the appellant's application should  fail  under  the
    provisions of Rule 320(7A).   However, of relevance is the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in AA (Nigeria).  That judgment held  that  as  the
    word "false" was capable of meaning both  "dishonest"  and  "incorrect"
    there was a genuine ambiguity in paragraph 320(7A)  and  "false"  could
    only therefore be applied to deliberate  lies  rather  than  statements
    which were not merely not in accordance with the true  facts  and  that
    accordingly for a false representation to  lead  to  mandatory  refusal
    dishonesty or deception was needed, albeit not necessarily that of  the
    appellant.

25.  The issue therefore before me is whether  or  not  such  dishonesty  or
    indeed dishonest intention was present in the actions of the appellant.
     The appellant's claim, in the application form, was that she had  lost
    the passport  which contained the refusal of the earlier visas.   There
    are no circumstances given as to how the passport   was  lost  or  that
    attempts were made to find it.   I  consider  that  that  claim  should
    surely have alerted any representative to ask  the  applicant  for  the
    visa if there  was  anything  in  the  passport  which  would  indicate
    difficulties for the appellant.

26.  While Mr Blundell argued that while  they  submitted  the  application,
    Holiday Tours and Travel, were not lawyers and  merely  travel  agents.
    The reality is surely that they  would  be  aware  of  the  potentially
    draconian nature of Rule 320 and the importance  therefore  of  telling
    the truth.

27.  I must consider the background to  this  application.   The  background
    was that the appellant had been refused the visa.  It is not likely,  I
    consider, that she would not have informed the travel agency  when  she
    made the further application that that had happened.  It was clearly an
    important event which had direct bearing on  an  application  to  enter
    Britain.

28.  It follows from this that I consider that I do not find the  assertions
    of the appellant in the grounds of appeal and made on  her  behalf  her
    sister to be credible. I consider that she knew  when  the  application
    was made that she had been  refused a visa  and  that  she  would  have
    communicated this to the agent she was using.   I  do  not  accept  the
    assertions made in the letter from Holiday Tours and Travel.


29.  I am fortified in my decision when I consider the grounds submitted  by
    the appellant.  In those she states that:

         "When you plan to visit the UK we need to show our income, just  to
         proof [sic], my husband asked  the  commission  agent  that  please
         issue all the crop receipts in the name of wife, just  for  embassy
         purpose.   Otherwise they were receipts in the name of  my  husband
         and other family members.  Last is LIC,  just  to  proof  [sic]  my
         financial circumstances I have attached LIC on my name only with my
         application, otherwise we have financial documents in joint  names.
         If I had attached all documents of my husband,  then  Visa  Officer
         may have raised  the  point  that  I  do  not  have  income  proof,
         financial documents on my name.  Just to avoid  such  objection  we
         attached all documents in my name, not on my husband."

30.  I consider  that  that  statement  indicates  that  the  appellant  was
    effectively  prepared  to  manipulate  evidence   to   strengthen   the
    application.  That does not indicate that she left  everything  in  the
    hands  of  the  agent  and  was  not  substantially  involved  in   the
    application.  It is also, of course, the case that in  the  grounds  of
    appeal she  said  that  she  had  told  the  agent  who  completed  the
    applications that she had been refused  but that he had gone on to give
    the answer "no" instead of "yes" to the question of whether or not  she
    had ever been refused a visa. Again, I do  not  consider  that  if  the
    express instructions had been that she had been refused a visa and that
    she had told the agent, the agent would, without more, have put  in  an
    answer that he knew to be false. I note  that in  any event  the  is  a
    mismatch between what the appellant states in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    about when she said that she told the  agent she had been  refused  and
    the   affidavit of Mrs Bimala Kaur where it is stated that  the   agent
    "simply assumed" the answer.

31.  I therefore find that the  respondent  has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof upon him and that therefore this appeal  falls  to  be  dismissed
    under the provision of Rule 320(7A).

32.   I would add that  given that the appellant was  prepared  to    submit
    evidence that  did not reflect the true situation in that it   did  not
    bear her husband's name I consider that the   Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was entitled to questions her intentions and therefore the   refuse the
     application under the provisions of paragraph 41 of the Rules.

 33.  The decision of the Judge of the First-tier having been  set  aside  I
    remake the decision and dismiss these appeals.

Decision.
These immigration appeals are dismissed.







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


