
[pic]


                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at: Field House
On: 23 July 2013
                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                        Bakhita Ahmed Mohamed Suliman


                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - Cairo
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Not represented
For the Respondent: Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Sudan and she was born on 1 January 1957.

This is an appeal against the  decision  dated  7  May  2013  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Woolley which dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision  of  26  July  2012  refusing  entry  clearance  as  a
visitor.

The sponsor, Mrs  Elzwin,  her  husband,  Mr  Ibrahim  and  the  appellant's
husband, Mr Elzwin, attended the hearing.  They  were  not  represented.  Mr
Ibrahim spoke for the family. I provided them with a copy  of  the  Tribunal
bundle, explained the nature of the hearing and  agreed  a  summary  of  the
history with them.

The background to this matter is that the appellant and her husband  applied
for entry  clearance  to  visit  the  sponsor,  their  daughter.  Both  were
refused. The appeals proceeded independently. At the  time  of  the  hearing
before Judge Woolley she had before her  only  documents  provided  for  the
appellant's appeal and no information about the husband's  appeal.  She  had
been asked to determine the appeal  on  the  papers.  She  had  very  little
evidence before her. The documents comprised the  application  form,  appeal
form, a bank statement of the appellant's husband,  a  letter  stating  that
accommodation in a rented flat was available in  London  and  a  sponsorship
declaration and short letter from the sponsor. As  in  the  refusal  letter,
there was no detail of the sponsor's situation in the  UK,  no  evidence  of
employment for the appellant's  husband  and  nothing  to  explain  a  large
deposit in the bank  account  of  the  husband.  Given  the  nature  of  the
evidence before her, it was clearly open to Judge Woolley to find  that  the
appellant had not shown that she  was  a  genuine  visitor  seeking  limited
leave who would return to Sudan at the end of her stay.

This is not to say that her decision was without error. It  appeared  to  me
to be perverse to suggest at [15] that the appellant and her  husband  could
not be adequately maintained in a one  bedroom  flat.  The  bank  statements
were endorsed with the name of the bank so were not "unnamed"  as  in  [16].
It remained the case that the large deposit in the bank  statement  was  not
explained, there was little information about the husband's  income  and  no
evidence of the property the couple claimed  to  own  in  Sudan  and  little
information about the sponsor who had claimed to  be  able  to  finance  the
visit. In short, I did not find that it could be  said  that  Judge  Woolley
had made a material error on a point of law.

 The presence of  the  appellant's  father  at  the  hearing  confirmed  the
indication in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that  he  had  won
his appeal and been granted entry clearance. Judge Woolley was not  informed
of that when she made her decision,  however.  The  sponsor  showed  me  the
determination of First-tier Tribunal Phull which allowed the appeal  of  the
appellant's husband  and  it  would  seem  that  additional  documents  were
provided in that matter that assisted the Judge in  reaching  his  decision.
Mr Parkinson agreed that if the appellant were to apply for entry  clearance
in future, that determination,  evidence  confirming  that  the  appellant's
husband had complied with the terms of  his  current  leave  and  additional
documents showing the situation of the family in Sudan and  the  sponsor  in
the UK might well assist in obtaining a grant  of  entry  clearance  without
need for another appeal.





DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal did not err and the decision of Judge Woolley  shall
stand.

Signed:                                 Date: 23 July 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
