
VA 32642 2012
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2013                               |On 26 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                            AHMAD FAISAL QURESHI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 October, 1977. On  6
      August, 2012 he was refused an entry clearance as a visitor. He wanted
      to visit his uncle in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was  said  that  the
      appellant was not seeking  to  visit  a  qualified  family  member  as
      defined in the Family Visitor Regulations. It was also  said  that  he
      had only produced limited evidence of his financial circumstances  and
      his passport did not show any previous  travel  outside  Pakistan  and
      there was little to  encourage  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom on completion of his visit. He had  not  accurately  presented
      his circumstances or intentions and the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
      not satisfied that he was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor or that
      he intended to leave the UK on completion of his visit.

   2. The appellant's appeal was heard  together  with  the  appeal  of  his
      father before a First-tier Judge on 7  March,  2013.  The  appellant's
      father's appeal was allowed. He was visiting his brother.

   3. However it was found by the First-tier Judge that the appellant had no
      right of appeal under the rules as he was not visiting a family member
      as defined in the Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
      2012. However he did have a right of appeal on human  rights  grounds.
      The appeal was dismissed.

   4. Grounds of appeal were settled by Mr Richardson (who  did  not  appear
      below). He pointed out that the application had been made on 4th  July
      2012 and the 2012 Regulations came into force after that  date,  on  9
      July 2012. The regulations only applied to an  application  for  entry
      clearance made on or after the day on which they came  into  force-see
      paragraph 4 of the regulations.

   5. In the  premises  the  applicable  regulations  were  the  Immigration
      Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003 (SI 518/2003).  Under  these
      regulations the appellant would  qualify  as  a  nephew  visiting  his
      uncle.

   6. The respondent filed a response on 29 May 2013 and accepted  that  the
      decision of the respondent in respect of the appeal right was  flawed.
      However it was not accepted that the appellant  must  succeed  in  his
      appeal and an oral hearing was considered to be appropriate.

   7. Mr Deller noted that the First-tier Judge had made favourable findings
      in relation to the appellant's father and it was very difficult to see
      that  had  the  judge  properly  directed  himself  on  the  issue  of
      jurisdiction that he would have found anything of concern  in  respect
      of the appellant. It was likely that he would have decided the  appeal
      of the appellant in the same way as his father and allowed it.

   8. Mr Richardson submitted that the appellant had strong ties to his home
      country and his father  was  affluent.  He  had  his  wife  and  three
      children in Pakistan. There was a strong incentive to  return.  Doubts
      had been raised because of the lack of documentary material. These had
      been addressed. There had been a visit in 2004 when  the  sponsor  had
      attended the wedding of the appellant and it was desired to repay  the
      hospitality.

   9. I note that the judge found that the appellant's father was  proposing
      to visit his brother and accordingly he considered  the  appeal  under
      the rules. While limited documentation  had  been  provided  with  his
      application, material had now been adduced which the judge was able to
      take into account as well as the oral evidence given  by  the  sponsor
      who was a GP in Kent. The judge  found  the  sponsor  was  a  credible
      witness. The judge  found  that  the  evidence  confirmed  the  family
      circumstances of the first appellant who had two adult sons and  three
      grandchildren. The appellant's father worked on a commission basis  in
      a private medical centre in Lahore. He accepted that  the  appellant's
      father had strong ties with Pakistan and that he was genuinely seeking
      entry as a visitor  to  the  UK.  He  intended  to  leave  the  UK  on
      completion of his visit.

  10. While the judge dismissed the appeal of this appellant on human rights
      grounds there were no concerns raised about  his  credibility  and  no
      indication that  his  appeal  would  have  been  dismissed  under  the
      immigration rules had the judge appreciated  that  in  fact  that  the
      appellant was a qualified family member.

      I remake the decision

      The appeal is allowed under the immigration rules

      Fee Award:
      It is appropriate to make a full fee award.





                               Signed




                               24 June 2013


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Warr

