
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/32256/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 21st August 2013                           |On 21st August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ABU DHABI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOHAMMAD FAYYAZ
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Spence - Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr Saleem of RKS Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Mensah promulgated on 11th April 2013 in which she allowed Mr
        Fayyaz's appeal against the refusal of entry clearance for a family
        visit.  The application was made on 10th July 2012 and the date  of
        decision is the 2nd August 2012.


     2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  the  Judge  had
        misdirected herself in law in failing to consider whether there was
        a valid appeal against the immigration decision.


     3. Although this point does not appear to have been raised  previously
        I have   jurisdiction  to  consider  it  as  confirmed  in  Virk  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  652  in
        which it was held that although the SSHD had failed to raise before
        the First-tier Tribunal the issue of that  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
        to entertain a family's application for leave to remain, the  Upper
        Tribunal was entitled to dismiss  the  family's  subsequent  appeal
        against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the  basis  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal had not had jurisdiction, notwithstanding  that
        the point had not  been  raised  below.   It  was  said  "Statutory
        jurisdiction cannot be conferred by waiver or agreement; or by  the
        failure of the parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point".


     4. The jurisdictional point arises because the application was made on
        10th July 2012 a day after the changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules
        which had effect from 9th  July  2012  and  which  applied  to  all
        applications made after that date. For applications submitted  from
        9th  July  2012,  but  before  25th  June  2103,   the   applicable
        regulations  are   the   Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor)
        Regulations 2012. These essentially define the family  relationship
        of the person the applicant must be visiting in  order  to  have  a
        right of appeal under the Immigration Rules. In relation to uncles,
        nephews or nieces, there is no longer a right of appeal  for  those
        visiting this category.


     5. Although the law set out in the application seeking  permission  to
        appeal is technically correct it appears to take no account of  the
        fact that in the application  form  the  appellant  stated  he  was
        visiting not only his uncle but also other relatives in the  United
        Kingdom  including  his  grandparents.  In  paragraph  15  of   her
        determination Judge Mensah states:


     15.  Taking all the evidence together including the evidence  from  the
     sponsor who is clearly very familiar with his responsibilities to  only
          sponsor genuine visitors to the United Kingdom who  abide  by  the
     conditions of entry and  return,  I  am  satisfied  the  appellant  has
     shown in the balance of probabilities that he is a genuine visitor  who
          has the sponsor and his grandparents in  the  United  Kingdom  and
     who wants to visit family and will return at the end of the trip.


     6. Although the sponsor falls within a class of relatives in  relation
        to whom full appeal rights are excluded by the amendments that came
        into force on 9th July 2012, grandparents are not. As a  result  of
        the fact the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations  2012
        confers a full right of appeal to those  visiting  grandfathers  or
        grandmother's there is no merit in  the  ECO's  challenge  to  this
        determination. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  jurisdiction  to
        consider the appeal on its merits and there is no challenge to  her
        findings on the facts.


Decision

     7. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.






   Anonymity.


     8. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application for anonymity was made and
   the need       for one is not established on the facts.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st August 2013












