
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/33465/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd August, 2013                          |On 30th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               Hleziphi Tshuma
                        (No order for anonymity made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Dewison, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  on  28th  January,
    1956 and who is the mother of the sponsor, Mr Khulekani Moyo.

2.   The appellant applied for entry clearance as a family visitor to  visit
    her son, the sponsor.  Her application was refused on 14th June,  2012.
    The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Traynor in a  determination  promulgated  on  12th  April,  2013,
    following a hearing at North Shields on 6th March, 2013.

3.   The judge set out at paragraph 3  of  the  determination,  the  reasons
    recorded by the respondent for refusing  the  appellant's  application.
    The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 41(1) and 41(2) of Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended ("the Immigration Rules").

4.   The judge concluded, after considering the  evidence  before  her  that
    the appellant had  failed  to  establish  her  personal  and  financial
    circumstances in Zimbabwe.  The evidence before the judge was that  the
    sponsor sent money to his brother, who in turn paid the money into  his
    mother's bank account.  Unfortunately, the sponsor  failed  to  provide
    any evidence to show that money was paid to his brother or  that  money
    was paid into the appellant's bank account.  The judge noted  that  the
    evidence was contradictory, because the sponsor had also given evidence
    that his mother rarely visited the town and, therefore, rarely  visited
    the bank.  If that was the case, the judge failed to understand how the
    appellant had access to funds held in the account.  The judge concluded
    that the evidence failed to  establish  the  appellant's  personal  and
    financial circumstances and concluded that the appellant  had  not  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted because the  appellant  believed  that
    the judge had made an arguable error of law in that documents on  which
    the appellant relied had been omitted from the  documents  set  to  and
    considered  by  the  judge.   She  believed  that  the   British   High
    Commission, visa section, had failed to forward  to  the  Tribunal  all
    documents on which she relied and which  she  had  submitted  with  her
    application.

6.   I clarified with both the sponsor and the Entry Clearance  Officer  the
    documents which had been submitted to the Tribunal by the appellant and
    which documents had been  submitted  by  the  appellant  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer with her application.   The  sponsor  and  Presenting
    Officer both confirmed to me  that  the  copy  "deed  of  transfer"  in
    respect  of  a  property  in  Cowdray  Park  Township  related  to  the
    appellant's home.

7.    The  Presenting  Officer  explained  that  at  part  9  of  the   Visa
    Application Form appeared a list of  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant to the Entry Clearance Officer in support of her application.
     Mr Dewison told me that he had spoken to the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    in Pretoria and there was no dispute that those documents were received
    by the Entry  Clearance  Officer.   There  is,  however,  a  difference
    between that list and the list of  documents  which  was  sent  to  the
    Tribunal, shown in paragraph 2 of the Entry Clearance Manager's  appeal
    review.  Mr Dewison confirmed that an affidavit had been submitted with
    the application to the Entry Clearance Officer.

8.   The Home Office Presenting Officer told me  that  the  reason  for  the
    discrepancy between the two lists of documents was  because  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer returned to the appellant those  documents  which  he
    believed were  irrelevant  to  the  application.   These  included  the
    Certificate of Occupancy, the Stock  Card,  the  bank  statements,  the
    letter of Recommendation from the Church, the letter of  Recommendation
    from the School, the letter of Recommendation from the  Council,  three
    birth certificates, an affidavit and letter  from  Mthulisi  Tshuma,  a
    copy of a death certificate of the appellant's late husband, and a copy
    of the title deed of transfer.

9.   The sponsor explained to me that the Certificate of  Occupancy  related
    to the appellant's rural home, which was the home where  she  lives  on
    the farm, as opposed to the home she has at Cowdray Park, which is let.
     He explained that the stock card was evidence that his  mother  farmed
    two cows, two heifers and two calves.

10.  The sponsor me that his mother received rental income from the  letting
    of the house at Cowdray Park.  I asked him if he had  any  evidence  of
    the rental income and he told me that he did not.  I asked  him  if  he
    knew what other income she  had  and  he  said  that  his  mother  also
    receives income from the grinding mill.  I asked  him  if  he  had  any
    accounts for the grinding mill and he told me he  did  not.   The  only
    money his mother pays is her rent.  She does not pay any income tax.

11.  I asked the sponsor if there was  any  evidence  anywhere  which  would
    help me to understand the appellant's finances.  He explained that  she
    did not keep accounts and he did not have any evidence.

12.  I am satisfied from my  perusal  of  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant that, while they were not all before the judge  at  the  time
    the judge prepared the determination, they  could  not  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome because none of them gave  any  insight  into
    the appellant's personal financial circumstances.

13.  The judge referred to the appellant having two dependent children.   No
    evidence was deduced to me in respect of them.  I did, however, receive
    birth certificates for the appellant's  grandchildren.   Reference  was
    made to the appellant enclosing with her application to the Tribunal, a
    copy of an affidavit and supporting letter from  Mthulisi  Tshulma.   I
    believe that this lady is the appellant's daughter, but  the  appellant
    did not supply me with a copy of the affidavit or any supporting letter
    to the Tribunal.

14.  I noted from the letter which  was  sent  to  the  Tribunal  dated  7th
    September, 2012  from  M  Mbuyazwe,  that  the  author  of  the  letter
    confirmed that the appellant owned six  cows,  but  the  appellant  had
    adduced no evidence to demonstrate what sums (if any) she earned  as  a
    result of her farming activities and there was no evidence before me as
    to either the level of income  she  was  receiving  from  the  rent  in
    respect of her house, or  of any profits (if any)  she  made  from  the
    grinding mill.

15.  I concluded that the judge's determination contained no material  error
    of law.  I uphold his decision.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
