


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: VA 33135-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   27.09.2013|
|on    01.08.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |02.08.2013                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                 irfan zafar
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                                  ABU DHABI

                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  no appearance
For the respondent: Mr C Avery


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mark Symes), sitting at Hatton Cross on 8 April, to   a
    family visit appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, born 15 March  1992.  The
    judge, who had no presenting officer before him, allowed the appeal  on
    its merits under the Rules; but the appellant had applied  on  12  July
    2012 for a visa to come here and see his  uncle  Mr  Khalid  Khan  (the
    sponsor). His application  was  refused  on  a  date  which  the  entry
    clearance officer has not bothered to fill in; but, even by the date of
    the application, the family visitor Rules had changed, on  9  July.  So
    the Home Office, who had not pointed out the change at all  clearly  in
    their refusal notice, or bothered to do so to the judge, got permission
    to appeal.



 2. On 9 July 2012, when the change took  place,  a  Home  Office  Internet
    posting misled the sponsor into thinking that, because he is a  British
    citizen, the appellant would have a full right of appeal. However,  the
    new Rules (the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor)  Regulations  2012)
    re-defined the categories of sponsor whose relations will have  a  full
    right of appeal, without including uncles;  so  this  appellant  has  a
    right of appeal on human rights grounds only.

 3. Understandably, none of these were pleaded in the  grounds  of  appeal;
    but, with the help of a family friend who  speaks  better  English  (Mr
    Khalid Sharif), the sponsor argued that

     a) the appellant is the only member of the  family  in  Pakistan  with
        enough understanding to discuss family business with  the  sponsor;
        but
     b) the sponsor is not fit to travel to Pakistan himself; and so
     c) the appellant needs to come here before September or October  next,
        when he needs to start college in Pakistan.

 4. So far as the medical evidence to support (b) goes, it  consists  in  a
    letter from the sponsor's GP since 1997, saying he "... has confided in
    me his inability to travel abroad to visit close relatives  on  account
    of his ill-health. He suffers from chronic kidney disease  and  remains
    under  regular  consultant  follow-up  at  the  Royal  London  Hospital
    Whitechapel". The sponsor himself told me he has to see his  consultant
    every two or three months; he also suffers from gout in his  foot.  The
    appellant has been here as a  visitor  before,  with  his  father,  and
    returned to Pakistan on time.

 5. I do not doubt that the sponsor's conditions are likely  to  make  long
    flights uncomfortable for him; but the GP does not express any  opinion
    of his own that they would be impossible, and I do not think that is at
    all likely to be  the  case.  Her  Majesty's  Government  is  under  no
    obligation under the Human  Rights  Convention  to  make  it  easy  for
    nephews to visit uncles, and this appellant is not excluded from  doing
    so if he can meet the usual criteria under the Immigration Rules.

 6. Those criteria represent a system which  Her  Majesty's  Government  is
    entitled to have in place and enforce: whatever might be thought of the
    merits of this  application  on  those  terms,  its  refusal  does  not
    represent a significant invasion of the appellant's  or  the  sponsor's
    rights  to  family  life;  and,  if  it  did,  would  not   have   been
    disproportionate to the legitimate purpose of .

Home Office appeal allowed
Appellant's appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


