
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/34070/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 April 2014                            |On 9 April 2014            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                           MRS SOPHIE NTALA KIMENA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: the appellant was not
           legally represented
          For the Respondent: Mr C Avery a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC who was born  on  25  November
       1946. She has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin ("the FTTJ")  who  dismissed
       her appeal against the respondent's decision of 22  August  2012  to
       refuse to grant her a visit visa to come  to  the  UK  as  a  family
       visitor under the provisions of  paragraph  41  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.


    2. In the refusal of the  application  the  respondent  said  that  the
       appellant had stated that she was retired and  had  no  income  from
       employment. She had no assets such as property or savings.  She  had
       no family dependent on her in the DRC. She was reliant on funds from
       her family in the UK where her son daughter  and  grandchildren  all
       lived. There was little to encourage her to leave the UK at the  end
       of the  proposed  visit.  The  application  was  refused  under  the
       provisions of paragraphs 41 (i) and (ii).


    3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal  on  2  January
       2014.  The  appellant  was  not  represented.  The  respondent   was
       represented. The appellant's son and daughter attended  the  hearing
       and the FTTJ heard oral evidence from the daughter. The  FTTJ  found
       that the information given by the appellant and  the  oral  evidence
       given by her daughter were highly inconsistent.  The  appellant  had
       said that she was retired and had no  income  from  any  employment,
       savings or property and that she was reliant on  money  provided  by
       family and friends. The sponsor said that her  mother  had  a  total
       income of $1000 per month from all sources. She still ran a bar  and
       rented out three properties. The FTTJ found that  the  position  was
       probably  as  stated  by  the  appellant.  He  concluded  that   the
       appellant's daughter was  not  a  credible  witness  who  "gave  the
       appearance of simply making  things  up  as  she  went  along".  The
       appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  her
       intentions were genuine and that she would return to the DRC at  the
       end of her visit. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal.


    4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was refused  by
       a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, permission was  granted
       on  the  renewal  of  the  application  to   the   Upper   Tribunal.
       Regrettably, the grounds of appeal which are  likely  to  have  been
       prepared without legal help are not at all clear. The Upper Tribunal
       Judge showed considerable insight when deducing; "Although a  little
       difficult  to  understand,  it  appears  that  the  grounds  seeking
       permission to appeal  are  alleging  that  one  of  the  appellant's
       witnesses was prevented from giving oral  evidence.  The  assertions
       with regard to the inconsistencies in the evidence are  unclear  but
       had oral evidence from both witnesses been given this may  not  have
       been the case. It may be that the final outcome of the appeal  would
       not have been any different but permission is granted."


    5. The appellant's son and daughter attended the hearing before me. Her
       command of English was not good but his was better.  I  had  to  ask
       them a number of  questions  to  find  out  what  they  were  saying
       happened at the hearing. This was that at the start of  the  hearing
       they were sitting together. The FTTJ asked which  of  them  was  the
       sponsor. They replied that it was both of them. The FTTJ  looked  at
       the papers which showed that the daughter was the sponsor, asked her
       to remain in place and invited the son to sit at  the  back  of  the
       hearing room. The daughter gave evidence and was cross examined.  At
       some stage during her evidence the son put his hand  up  because  he
       wished to say something. It  is  not  clear  whether  this  was  not
       noticed or ignored but he did not speak. Both of them accepted  that
       at no stage did they say that the son wished to  give  evidence.  He
       told me that he expected to be asked to  give  evidence.  They  said
       that in the original letter to the respondent  they  made  it  clear
       that they were both sponsoring the appellant. I was shown a copy  of
       the letter which the daughter wrote to the  respondent  on  20  July
       2012 which says that both of them wished to invite their  mother  to
       visit the UK. On the other  hand,  the  letters  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal were written by the daughter and her name  appears  as  the
       sponsor on Tribunal notices and documents.


    6. The sister told me that she gave evidence in English which  was  her
       third language. Her  first  language  was  Lingala  and  her  second
       language French. With hindsight she should have asked for a  Lingala
       speaking interpreter. She did not think that she understood all  the
       questions adequately. Some of the  questions  in  cross  examination
       were put to her more than once and she asked for some of them to  be
       repeated.


    7. Mr Avery submitted that there  were  major  inconsistencies  between
       what the appellant said and what her daughter said  in  writing  and
       oral evidence. The FTTJ reached conclusions open to him on  all  the
       evidence and there was no error of law. I was asked  to  uphold  the
       determination.


    8. On the face of all the documents before me I would, in  the  absence
       of anything more, have concluded that the FTTJ  reached  conclusions
       clearly open to him  on  all  the  evidence  including  the  adverse
       credibility finding in relation to the evidence of  the  appellant's
       daughter. There are serious inconsistencies between the evidence  of
       the appellant and that given by her daughter in writing and  at  the
       hearing. I have also considered whether what happened at the hearing
       amounted to procedural unfairness, whether or not this was  apparent
       to the FTTJ. I accept that at least in lay rather than  legal  terms
       both  the  daughter  and  son  wanted  to  support  their   mother's
       application to visit the UK. This is sufficiently  clear  from  what
       they said to me and a letter which they  wrote  to  the  respondent.
       However, my attention  has  not  been  directed  to  any  letter  or
       documents which make it clear that they wished to be joint  sponsors
       in the proceedings before the Tribunal. Correspondence  was  written
       by the daughter who gave her name as the sole sponsor on the form of
       appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal. Thereafter, and in the absence of
       any application to change this,  the  Tribunal  and  the  FTTJ  were
       entitled to treat the daughter as the sponsor.


    9. In any event the question of whether the son, the daughter  or  both
       of them was the sponsor is not at the core of the appeal to be Upper
       Tribunal. The issue is whether the son  was  prevented  from  giving
       evidence and if so whether this would have made  any  difference  to
       the outcome. I find that even if the son might have wished  to  give
       evidence he was not prevented from doing so. Putting his hand up  at
       some point during the daughter's evidence was not a clear indication
       that he wished to give  evidence.  Crucially,  neither  he  nor  the
       daughter told the FTTJ that he wished to give evidence. Whilst  they
       might have thought that the invitation to give evidence  would  have
       come from  the  FTTJ,  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  make  any
       invitation or enquiry at least in the  absence  of  some  indication
       that there was a wish to give further evidence.


   10. I can find nothing in the grounds of appeal or in what was  said  to
       me at the hearing by the son or  the  daughter  which  provides  any
       understandable  explanation  for  the  inconsistencies  between  the
       evidence of the appellant and her daughter or indicates why any oral
       evidence from the son would have are shed any light on this or  made
       any difference.


   11. I have studied the record of proceedings  made  by  the  FTTJ  which
       contains no indication that the daughter  had  any  difficulties  in
       giving evidence. Whilst I accept  that  the  daughter's  command  of
       English is not good I am not persuaded that she did  not  understand
       the questions put to her or that she was unable to give sufficiently
       coherent answers.


   12. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and can see  no
       good reason to do so.


   13. I find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
       determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 4 April
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

