
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/34753/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th July 2013                               |On 15th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                       oluwayemisola rachael Shobande
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - abuja
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Nigeria born on 3rd January  2001.
    She and her grandmother, Roseline Oluwmimo  Shobande,  applied  to  the
    British High Commission, Abuja, for entry clearance to the UK to  visit
    the Appellant's  uncle,  Anthony  Shobande.   Those  applications  were
    refused for the reasons given  in  a  Notice  of  Decision  dated  13th
    September 2012.  They both appealed, and their appeals  were  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on
    4th April 2013.  The appeal of Roseline Shobande was allowed  and  that
    decision is not  the  subject  of  this  appeal.   The  appeal  of  the
    Appellant was dismissed for want of jurisdiction.  The Appellant sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 6th June 2013 such permission was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  The Judge found that he
    did not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal of the  Appellant  because
    she proposed to visit her uncle and his  family  who  were  not  family
    members  as  defined  by  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family   Visitor)
    Regulations 2012.  Therefore the Appellant did  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal according to Section 88A Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.  I find this decision to amount to an error of law.  Section  88A
    of the Act does not say that there is no jurisdiction to hear  such  an
    appeal.  In effect by Section 88A(3) it  only  limits  the  grounds  on
    which such an appeal can be brought to those given in Section  84(1)(b)
    and (c) of the 2002 Act.  In this case the Appellant appealed on  human
    rights grounds and therefore she does have the right of appeal on those
    grounds.  The Judge did not deal with those grounds at all.

 3. I therefore set aside the decision of the Judge.

Remade Decision

 4. At the hearing the Sponsor Anthony Oladapo Shobande  was  unrepresented
    but did not object to me proceeding  to  remake  the  decision  of  the
    Judge.

 5. In evidence, the Sponsor told me that his niece, the  Appellant,  lived
    in Nigeria with the Sponsor's mother.  There was  no  other  family  in
    Nigeria, and the Appellant had not visited the UK before.  The  Sponsor
    had visited his family in Nigeria for periods of two  weeks  and  three
    weeks in 2008 and 2011.  During those visits he  had  stayed  with  his
    mother and had therefore seen his niece.  Apart from those visits,  the
    Sponsor kept in  contact  with  his  family  in  Nigeria  by  telephone
    conversations once per week.  The Appellant's father was deceased,  and
    therefore the Sponsor sent money for her upkeep.

 6. Finally, the Sponsor said that he  wanted  to  see  the  Appellant  who
    proposed to visit for just two  weeks.   The  Sponsor's  mother,  whose
    appeal had been allowed, could not visit alone as there would be no-one
    in Nigeria to care for the Appellant.  The Sponsor wanted them to visit
    together.

 7. On the basis of that evidence, I find that  there  is  no  family  life
    between the Appellant and her uncle, the  Sponsor.   The  Sponsor  said
    that he contributed to the cost of the Appellant's maintenance, but  no
    details have been  given,  and  therefore  I  find  that  there  is  no
    dependency between the Appellant and the Sponsor  over  and  above  the
    normal emotional ties which  might  exist  between  relatives  of  that
    consanguinity.  In the alternative, I find that the  interference  with
    the Appellant's family life caused by the Respondent's decision is  not
    of such a degree of gravity as to  engage  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights.  The Appellant and the Sponsor can remain in contact by regular
    telephone conversations and the Sponsor's occasional visits to Nigeria.
      Again  in  the  alternative,  I  find  that   any   interference   is
    proportionate.  The public interest of maintaining immigration  control
    for the benefit of the economic wellbeing of the country  carries  most
    weight.   The  appeal  of  the  Appellant's  grandmother  was   allowed
    indicating  that  the  concerns  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    originally  refusing  the  applications  for  leave   to   enter   were
    groundless.  However, on the other side of  the  equation,  the  family
    life of the Appellant and the Sponsor, such as  it  was,  can  continue
    regardless of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, and  therefore  I
    find that decision proportionate.  I remake the decision of  the  Judge
    by dismissing the appeal.

Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
    although the Appellant is a minor, I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

