
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: VA/34714/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 11th December, 2013             |On 6th January, 2014          |
|                                   |                              |


                                   Before

                    Upper Tribunal Judge Richard Chalkley

                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           FATEMA BEGUM CHOWDHURY


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant:       Ms C Johnstone a Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Mr C Timson of counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant and I she  refer  to  her
      as the "claimant" in this determination.  The respondent is female,  a
      citizen of Bangladesh and  was  born  on  15th  June  1978.   She  had
      appealed to the First  Tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
      claimant to refuse to grant her entry clearance as  a  family  visitor
      under Paragraph 41 of Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules,  HC
      395, as amended ("the immigration rules").

2.    The First Tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the  respondent's  appeal,  but
      the claimant challenged the decision on the basis that the refusal did
      not carry a right of appeal, because the respondent was not related to
      the sponsor as required by the Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)
      Regulations, 2012

3.    Ms Johnstone, very properly and fairly pointed out that that  was  the
      only challenge to the determination, but that it appeared that it  had
      been conceded by the Home Office Presenting Officer  appearing  before
      the First Tier Tribunal Judge that the respondent did come within  the
      category of family members at Regulation 2(3)(4).  She  was  happy  to
      concede  that  the  respondent  did  fall  within  that  category  and
      suggested that the respondent's appeal should be  allowed  since  that
      was the only challenge.

4.    Having carefully read the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and the grounds of application, I am satisfied that the making of  the
      previous decision by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert   does  not
      involve the making of an error on a point of law. My decision is  that
      the determination shall stand, the respondent's appeal be allowed.

      [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley               11th December, 2013


