
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/34836/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6 March 2014                               |On 7 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 FOUZIA ASIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ECO, PAKISTAN
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:       Mr O Mullan, Advocate, instructed by Sandhill,
Solicitors,
        Manchester

For the Respondent:      Ms Gough, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  27  November  1985.   By
   application submitted on 17 September  2012  she  sought  a  visit  visa,
   stating her purpose as "access to her child" for 5 months.  She said that
   her son, born on 25 September 2006 was  living  with  his  father,  a  UK
   citizen, at an  address  in  Rochdale.   She  proposed  to  stay  with  a
   "sponsor" in Glasgow, who would pay her living  costs.   An  accompanying
   letter from her solicitors, dated 19 July 2012, explained  that  she  had
   been duped into returning to Pakistan in February 2008, and although  she
   had seen the child when he was taken on visits to Pakistan since then, he
   had in effect been snatched away from her.

2) The ECO refused the application by notice dated 27 September  2012.   The
   ECO was not satisfied as to maintenance and accommodation requirements or
   as to the appellant's alleged personal and financial  circumstances,  did
   not entirely accept the history given by her, and was not satisfied  that
   she genuinely planned only a visit.  The ECO considered that her right of
   appeal was limited by section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act  to  human  rights
   grounds.

3) The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,  contending  that  her
   case attracted "full" not limited rights of appeal, and that she  was  in
   any event entitled to succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Judge J S Law
   heard the appeal at Stoke on Trent on 3 June 2013.  Parties do not appear
   to have focused clearly on the extent of the grounds available,  but  the
   judge accepted that this was a "family visit" case  in  relation  to  the
   appellant's son, and so found at paragraph 19 that  there  was  a  "valid
   right of appeal", not a limited one.

4) The judge did not find the "sponsor" a credible  witness,  in  particular
   being sceptical that he had carried out an act of charity re-uniting  the
   appellant's cousin, another spurned wife from Pakistan, with  her  child.
   It  now  appeared  that  the  appellant  would  have  to  ascertain   the
   whereabouts of her child and commence legal proceedings.  The  judge  did
   not think that these hurdles could be overcome within the time  available
   and did not accept that the appellant's  intentions  were  to  return  to
   Pakistan within 6 months.  The appeal was dismissed under the  Rules  and
   under Article 8.

5) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the  view  that
   the judge's assessment of Article 8 was arguably inadequate  for  failure
   to take into account the best interests of the child.

6) In a Rule 24 response, the respondent submitted that Article 8 needed  to
   be viewed "through the prism  of  the  application  to  come  here  as  a
   visitor.  It is clear that the judge took the view that this was not  the
   appropriate application ... and that the appellant should have  [applied]
   as the parent of a resident child".

7) Mr Mullan accepted the following matters at  the  outset.   Although  the
   appellant hoped to contact her son, that  would  firstly  involve  making
   enquiries about his present whereabouts.  If and when her son and  former
   husband were traced, there might be informal agreement, but on the  other
   hand the background suggested that there  might  be  no  contact  without
   judicial intervention.  This is not the typical family visit case,  where
   the family member to be visited is the proposed host.

8) Mr Mullan said that although it was unclear whether the  appellant  would
   be able to see her son at all, that remained the primary purpose  of  her
   proposed visit.  The  judge  erred  in  three  ways.   Firstly  and  most
   significantly, the judge failed to address  the  best  interests  of  the
   child and the Article 8 interests of  the  parties  concerned.   Even  if
   there had been no specific evidence  before  the  FtT  of  how  the  best
   interests of the child might be  served,  there  was  evidence  from  the
   appellant of her past relationship with her son.  The child had lived for
   some years in family with both parents, before the  appellant  was  duped
   into being left out of the country apart from her son.   There  had  been
   contact in Pakistan when the appellant's  mother-in-law  took  the  child
   there, and there appeared to have been some telephone contact up to about
   the date of application.  The latest evidence before the FtT was that the
   appellant's solicitors had become aware that the husband  and  child  had
   moved from the address in Rochdale.  It therefore could not be said  that
   there was evidence that the child was still in the UK.  However, it was a
   reasonable inference that the best interests of the child would be served
   by having contact with his mother, and there  was  a  duty  on  a  public
   authority to consider human rights.

9) Secondly, Mr Mullan argued that there was error in  the  conclusion  that
   it was likely the appellant would not leave after 6 months.  Although she
   previously overstayed, she explained that she  had  been  misled  by  her
   husband's family.  The FtT Judge thought that proceedings  could  not  be
   concluded within 6 months, but  there  had  been  no  evidence  how  long
   proceedings might take.  The judge was not an expert in family law.   The
   judge did not know whether contact with the child  might  be  reached  by
   agreement or mediation rather than through contested proceedings.

10) Thirdly, Mr Mullan  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to
   maintenance.  The sponsor was shown to be of substantial means.  He has 5
   properties  producing  rental  income.    The   judge's   findings   were
   speculative.  There was no reason to think that  the  sponsor  could  not
   maintain the appellant as he said.

11) We reserved our determination.

12) The second and third points go to the outcome under  the  Rules,  rather
   than under Article 8.

13) The desire of a mother to resume contact with a son from  whom  she  has
   been unjustly separated would be entirely natural.  However, on  her  own
   account and on the latest information from her solicitors, the  appellant
   does not know where her son lives.  Her obvious first steps would be  (1)
   to find out where he is; (2) to try to arrange  contact  informally;  and
   (3) failing agreement, to seek  contact  through  the  court.   She  says
   blandly in her statement that she cannot initiate matters from  Pakistan,
   but we see no reason for that.  Her former husband  is  the  son  of  her
   paternal aunt.  Family sources may be available.   Failing  results  from
   informal investigation, enquiry agents  might  be  instructed.   Even  to
   begin court proceedings, if matters came  to  that,  does  not  need  her
   presence.  It would make obvious sense to apply for entry only when  that
   becomes necessary or  (on  the  most  favourable  outcome)  once  contact
   arrangements are in place.  There are provisions in the Immigration Rules
   for parents to come to the UK to seek or exercise contact.

14) The appellant's relationship with her son puts her in  the  category  of
   relationship for a family visitor, but this is not the appropriate  route
   for tracing a child or for taking proceedings.

15) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  not  granted  about  the
   judge's adverse findings on the evidence regarding  financial  and  other
   assistance to be provided by the "sponsor".  Those conclusions were  open
   to the judge, and adequate reasons were given.  We also think that it was
   open to the judge to conclude that if the appellant did come  to  the  UK
   matters it was likely that matters would not be fully resolved  within  6
   months, and that she would not leave within the period permitted.

16) We see no error requiring correction in the judge dismissing the  appeal
   under the Immigration Rules.   Under  the  circumstances,  including  the
   absence of evidence of the whereabouts of the person to be visited, it is
   difficult to see that another outcome might reasonably have been reached.



17) It is also difficult to see how another outcome  might  reasonably  have
   been reached under Article 8.  There are provisions in  the  Rules  which
   the appellant can be expected to use to exercise contact with her son, if
   and when the time comes.  Her entry to the UK, as matters stand, was  not
   shown to have more than a nebulous and distant relationship to  advancing
   her child's best interests.  There  was,  for  example,  no  report  from
   social services on the family circumstances.

18) There is no error of law in the determination such as might  require  it
   to be set aside, and it shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                3 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal




