
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/35767/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd May, 2014                              |On 15th May, 2014            |
|Signed 15th May, 2014                         |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               RUKHSANA SIRAJ

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwyncz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer and in this  determination
    I refer to her as "the claimant".  The respondent is female, a  citizen
    of Pakistan and was born on 10th September, 1975.

2.   The claimant appeals against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge JDL Edwards, promulgated on 20th  November,  2013,  allowing  the
    appeal of the respondent against the decision of the claimant, taken on
    16th September, 2012, to refuse to grant a visa to the  respondent  who
    made  application  under  paragraph  41  of  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395 as amended ("the Immigration Rules").

3.   One of the issues for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  resolve  was
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction.  At  paragraph
    2 of the judge's determination he said this:

         "The [respondent], who is a female citizen of Pakistan, resident in
         Faisalabad, now aged 38 years, on the date of  application  applied
         to the [claimant] for leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         period of five weeks, for the purpose of a family  visit  to  visit
         the sponsor.  There is some confusion as to the exact relationship.
          In the notice of appeal, he is referred to  as  a  brother-in-law,
         and that is the case in a statement made by him.  However,  in  the
         same statement, it is suggested that the appellant is the widow  of
         the sponsor's nephew.  In the VAF, they are described  as  cousins.
         The sponsor's evidence on this issue did not help, but I decided to
         give the benefit of the doubt to the appellant to allow the  appeal
         to proceed."


5.   The claimant sought to challenge the decision on  the  basis  that  the
    judge  failed  to  apply  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family   Visitor)
    Regulations, 2012 ("the Regulations") an extract of which are  set  out
    below:

         "Citation and commencement


         1.   These Regulations may be  cited  as  the  Immigration  Appeals
             (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012 and shall come into force on
             9th July 2012.


         Class or description of person to be visited


         2.-(1)   A person ("P") is of a class or description prescribed for
                the  purposes  of  section  88A(1)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (entry clearance), if -


                (a)    the applicant for entry clearance ("A") is  a  member
                    of the family of P; and


                (b)    P's circumstances match those specified in regulation
                    3.


             (2)  For the purposes of paragraph (1), A is a  member  of  the
                family or P if A is the -


                (a)    spouse, civil partner, father, mother, son, daughter,
                    grandfather,   grandmother,   grandson,   granddaughter,
                    brother or sister;


                (b)     father-in-law,  mother-in-law,   brother-in-law   or
                    sister-in-law;


                (c)    son-in-law or daughter-in-law; or


                (d)     stepfather,   stepmother,   stepson,   stepdaughter,
                    stepbrother or stepsister;


                    of P.


              (3) For the purposes of paragraph (1), A is also a  member  of
                the family of P if A is the partner of P.


              (4) In this Regulation, A is the partner of P if -


                (a)    A and P have been in a relationship that is akin to a
                    marriage or civil partnership for at least the two years
                    before the  day  on  which  A's  application  for  entry
                    clearance was made; and


                (b)    such relationship is genuine and subsisting.


             (5)  In this regulation -


                (a)    'father-in-law of P' includes the father of P's civil
                    partner;


                (b)    'mother-in-law of P' includes the mother of P's civil
                    partner;


                (c)    'brother-in-law of P' includes  the  brother  of  P's
                    civil partner;


                (d)    'sister-in-law of P' includes the sister of P's civil
                    partner;


                (e)    'son-in-law of P'  includes  the  son  of  P's  civil
                    partner.


                (f)    'daughter-in-law of P' includes the daughter  of  P's
                    civil partner;


                (g)    'stepfather of P' includes  the  person  who  is  the
                    civil partner of A's father (but is not A's parent);


                (h)    'stepmother of P' includes  the  person  who  is  the
                    civil partner of A's mother (but is not A's parent);


                (i)    'stepson of P' includes the person who is the son  of
                    A's civil partner (but is not A's son);


                (j)    'stepdaughter of P' includes the person  who  is  the
                    daughter of A's civil partner (but is not A's daughter;


                (k)    'stepbrother of P' includes the person who is the son
                    of the civil parent of A's parent (but is not the son of
                    either A's parents); and


                (l)    'stepsister of P' includes  the  person  who  is  the
                    daughter of the civil partner of A's parent (but is  not
                    the daughter of either of A's parents).


         Circumstances of the person to be visited


         3.   The circumstances of P mentioned  in  regulation  2(1)(b)  are
             that P -


             (a)  is settled in the United Kingdom as defined in  paragraph
                  6(2) of the immigration rules;


             (b)  has been granted  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
                  paragraph 334(3) of the immigration rules; or


             (c)  has been granted humanitarian protection  in  the  United
                  Kingdom under paragraph 339C(4) of the immigration rules.
         Transitional provision


         4.   These Regulations apply  only  to  an  application  for  entry
             clearance made on or after the day on  which  they  come  into
             force."


6.   The claimant's challenge pointed out that as a cousin of  the  sponsor,
    the respondent has no right of appeal against the claimant's decision.

7.   When the appeal was called on for hearing before me today, the  sponsor
    did not appear.  I waited until  10.30  am  and  then  considered  Rule
    19(2).  I was satisfied that the respondent and sponsor have both  been
    served by Notice, giving the date, time and place fixed for the hearing
    and had offered no explanation for their absence.  I proceeded  in  the
    absence of the sponsor or a representative employed by the respondent.

8.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in  law.   He
    had no business giving "the benefit of the doubt" to the respondent  in
    deciding what her relationship to the sponsor was.  The respondent  was
    required to prove the relationship on the balance of probability.   She
    was required to demonstrate that she was related to the sponsor in  one
    of the ways permitted in Regulation 2 or 3  of  the  Regulations.   She
    failed to do so.  There was no jurisdiction for the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge to hear the appeal.

9.   I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge JDL Edwards.   It
    contains an error on a point of law.  I  remake  the  decision  myself.
    The appeal by the claimant is allowed.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
    have jurisdiction to hear the appeal because the respondent had  failed
    to establish her relationship with the sponsor.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal JDL Edwards is set aside.
This appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer is allowed.



[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

