

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/35826/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 March 2014 and 12 May 2014              |On 20 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               Md JAFOR KIBRIA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman of A R Immigration Services (on 21 March
2014)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on  30  November
      1976.  On 29 May 2012, he applied for entry  clearance  to  visit  his
      family in  the  UK.   On  12  September  2013,  the  ECO  refused  the
      appellant's application for entry clearance under paras 320(7A) and 41
      of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

   2. As regards para 320(7A) the ECO stated that:

           "Our records indicate that on 4 October 2011 you made a No  Time
           Limit transfer of conditions application to the Home  Office  in
           the UK, in the name of  Pabel  Hussain  with  a  date  of  birth
           27/05/1976 and passport number F0413615.   You  stated  on  your
           application form at question 6.7  that  you  have  not  made  an
           application to the Home Office to remain in the UK in  the  last
           10 years.  You have applied to remain permanently in the UK  and
           used a different  identity  to  do  so.  Therefore,  given  this
           information that has come to light since the decision  was  made
           on your application, I am satisfied that  false  representations
           have been made and material facts have  not  been  disclosed  in
           this application.  As false representations have been  made  and
           material facts have  not  been  disclosed  your  application  is
           refused under paragraph 320(7A). "

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  Initially, permission  was
      refused by the First-tier Tribunal but was subsequently granted by the
      Upper Tribunal on 14 October 2013.

   4. The appeal initially came before this Tribunal on 21 March 2014 (Mr  C
      M G Ockelton, Vice President and UTJ  Grubb).   Following  submissions
      from both representatives, the Tribunal indicated orally that  it  was
      satisfied that the Judge's decision contained  an  error  of  law  and
      should be set aside.  The Tribunal's reasons were as follows.

   5. The appellant's  representatives  had  sought  information  about  the
      alleged deception by the appellant and how  it  had  been  discovered.
      Although the means of discovery was not something that  the  appellant
      was entitled to know, the appellant was  entitled  to  copies  of  the
      documents relied upon by the Entry Clearance Officer  to  support  the
      claim that the appellant had engaged in a deception.

   6. Rule 30(1) of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
      2005 provides, so far as relevant, as follows:

           "30(1)      When the respondent is served with  a  copy  of  the
                 notice of appeal, it must...file with the Tribunal  a  copy
                 of -

                 (a)        the notice of the decision to which  the  notice
                       of appeal relates, and any other documents served  on
                       the appellant giving reasons for that decision;

                 ....

                 (c)   any other unpublished document which is  referred  to
                       in a  document  mentioned  in  sub-paragraph  (a)  or
                       relied upon by the respondent;...."

   7. In the notice of decision, the ECO as we have already set  out  above,
      stated that:

           "Our records indicate that on 4 October 2011 you made a No  Time
           Limit transfer of conditions application to the Home  Office  in
           the UK, in the name of  Pabel  Hussain  with  a  date  of  birth
           27.05.1976 and passport number F0413615."

   8. The document or documents which comprise  "our  records"  should  have
      been served upon the First-tier Tribunal (and therefore made available
      to the appellant)  in  accordance  with  rule  13(1)(c)  of  the  2005
      Procedure Rules.   The  importance  for  an  appellant  of  access  to
      documents relied upon by a respondent is  clearly  recognised  by  the
      disclosure  requirement  in  the  Rules.   In  reaching  his   adverse
      decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have taken into account
      the non-compliance with rule 13 in reaching his decision: the  absence
      of the  documents  was  relevant  to  the  Judge's  consideration  and
      findings in respect  of  the  respondent's  allegation  of  deception.
      Consequently, the Judge erred in law in reaching his adverse  decision
      and that decision cannot stand.

   9. As the Tribunal indicated at the hearing on 21 March  2014,  that  did
      not necessarily mean that the appellant's appeal  should  be  allowed.
      The ECO should  be  given  an  opportunity  to  provide  the  relevant
      documentation as required under rule 13.   Consequently,  we  directed
      that the ECO should within 28 days of 21 March 2014 complete his  duty
      under rule 13(1)(c) and provide  the  Tribunal  with  any  unpublished
      documents relied on or referred to in the decision.  If  the  ECO  was
      unable to do so, then reasons should be provided.

  10. As a consequence, the appeal was listed 'for mention' before UTJ Grubb
      on 12 May 2014.

  11. The appellant's representatives indicated by facsimile that  they  did
      not wish to attend that hearing and had not been required  to  by  the
      Tribunal's previous directions.  Mr Richards, who represented the  ECO
      indicated that the ECO was not in a position to produce  the  relevant
      documents as the file had been  mislaid.   He  acknowledged  that  the
      proper disposal of the appeal  was  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal which would have to reach a decision in the light of the fact
      that the ECO was unable to provide  the  documents  referred  to  (and
      relied upon) in the decision letter.

Decision

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under the Immigration Rule (para 320(7A) and 41)  involved  the
      making of an error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
      aside.

  13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  by  a
      Judge other than Judge Powell.

  14. In remitting the appeal, I direct that within 6 weeks of this decision
      being sent the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  file  with  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and serve upon the appellant a witness statement setting  out
      the evidential basis upon which the refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
      based and explaining why any documents then relied upon  are  not  now
      available.

  15. The appeal should be relisted for hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal
      not earlier than 10 weeks from the date that this decision is sent.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
