
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/36111/2012
     VA/36112/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 4 December 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Maqsood bibi
                               Shabana Kousar
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Aziz
For the Respondent:    Mr Spence


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants Maqsood Bibi and Shabana Kousar were  born  respectively
    on 1 January 1941 and 1 January 1981.  By decisions dated 16 September
    2012, they were refused  entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as
    visitors.  The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Sarsfield) which, in a determination  promulgated  on  1 August  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellants now appeal, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In granting permission, Judge Shaerf wrote:

    The grounds  of  appeal  address  individually  each  of  the  findings
    contained in paragraph 6 of the determination and also  the  conclusion
    in paragraph 7.  The judge made no finding whether the evidence for the
    appellants was credible or reliable.  The judge gave insufficient or no
    reasons to support his conclusion.  These are arguable  errors  of  law
    and permission to appeal is granted.

 3. Judge Sarsfield concluded his determination as follows:

    I find the following:

    (a)  The respondent accepted the sponsor can maintain  and  accommodate
         the appellants and pay the travel costs.
    (b)  The appellants are  reliant  on  other  family  for  their  income
         according to the applications, but there was no supporting evidence
         of any amounts or regularity.
    (c)  Only on appeal was any reference made to rental income  and  there
         is no supporting evidence.
    (d)  The sponsor said  there  was  income  from  crop  sales  to  local
         villages - a new fact without supporting evidence.
    (e)  The ECO had been unaware of the two new incomes claimed.
    (f)  There was no provenance for the bank deposits.
    (g)  The appellants have not given a full account of their finances and
         circumstances; they are not credible.
    (h)  I am not satisfied that they  have  answered  the  ECO's  concerns
         despite ample time and opportunity to do so.




    I am not satisfied the appellants are  genuine  visitors  intending  to
    leave at the end of any stay in the UK.  I am not  satisfied  that  all
    the requirements of paragraph 41 have been met.

 4. The judge's conclusions are somewhat brusque.  The question is  whether
    his reasons are adequate.  The position was elucidated by Mr Aziz  who,
    in his submissions, told me that the appellants had not  considered  it
    necessary to give documentary support for their financial circumstances
    in Pakistan "in any detail" because they "thought they would get a visa
    on the  same  facts  as  last  time."   If  anything,  that  submission
    reinforces the reasoning behind Judge Sarsfield's determination.  It is
    clear from what I have set out above that the judge was concerned  that
    there was little or no supporting evidence for  the  claimed  financial
    circumstances of these appellants who rely on other family members  for
    their income.  The judge noted that the burden of proof in the  appeals
    rested on the appellants and, although he does not say so in terms,  it
    is clear that he has concluded that they had failed to  discharge  that
    burden.  I consider that was  a  finding  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence available.  The mere fact that an  applicant  has  obtained  a
    visa in the past  does  not  remove  the  obligation  to  provide  full
    documentary support for any subsequent application.  In the light of Mr
    Aziz's submission, the appellants have, in effect, admitted that  their
    applications lacked  the  supporting  documentary  evidence  which  was
    necessary.  The judge's conclusion that the appellants  had  failed  to
    give  "a  full  account  of  their  finances  and   circumstances"   is
    incontrovertible.  The Tribunal should have been provided with  a  full
    picture of those circumstances to include income,  expenditure,  assets
    and liabilities.  Bare assertions as to assets owned supported by a few
    receipts and other documents are highly unlikely to constitute evidence
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof.  They did  not  do  so  in
    this instance and I  find  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  by
    dismissing the appeals.

DECISION

 5. These appeals are dismissed.






Signed                              Date 21 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

