
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/37814/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th July 2014                             |On 07th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                   MA GUL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox promulgated on  6  February  2014  in
    which he dismissed her appeal against a decision to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  She is married to Abdul Hai
    Pirzadeh who is also married to Momtaz Pirzadeh.  Both  marriages  took
    place in Afghanistan when the sponsor was living  there  and  are  both
    lawful according to the law of Afghanistan.  Momtaz fled to the  United
    Kingdom where she successfully sought asylum; where the sponsor and his
    three children by the appellant  were  later  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom under family reunion.

 3. Having thought that Ma Gul had died, it  was  only  in  2011  that  the
    sponsor found out that she was still alive.  By this point the  sponsor
    and the children had acquired British citizenship. With the  assistance
    of legal representatives in the United Kingdom, Duncan Lewis & Co.,  an
    application was  prepared  whereby  the  applicant  should  seek  entry
    clearance to the United  Kingdom  so  she  had  access  rights  to  her
    children.   Documentation  and  a  covering  letter  was  prepared  and
    forwarded to the appellant with a view to  an  application  being  made
    online.

 4. The application, as prepared by Duncan Lewis & Co. was framed in  terms
    of paragraph 246 of the Immigration Rules which was  in  force  at  the
    time, March 2012. Although the materials were sent to the appellant  in
    good time, there were delays in the submission of the application owing
    to the intervening loss of the appellant's passport.   The  application
    was not submitted until 16 October 2012  by  which  time  the  covering
    letter was out of date, and paragraph 246 of the Immigration Rules  had
    been superseded.

 5. The application, made online, was for  a  family  visit  visa  and  was
    supported by the documentation  prepared  by  Duncan  Lewis  &  Co.  in
    respect of an application pursuant to paragraph 246 of the  Immigration
    Rules. The application indicated that a visit  of  about  a  month  was
    envisaged.

 6. The respondent refused the application pursuant to paragraph 41 on  the
    grounds that:-

      a) he was not satisfied that they  were  related  as  claimed  to  the
         sponsors in the United Kingdom;

      b) there was no evidence to show how she was supported in  Afghanistan
         and, on the basis of the evidence supplied, was not satisfied  that
         she would be adequately maintained in the  United  Kingdom  without
         recourse to work or public funds.

 7.  The  refusal  notice  also  noted  a  request  to  consider  that  the
    application be considered under paragraph 246 of the Immigration  Rules
    whereas it had expressly stated that as the application form  was  that
    from a family visit visa it would be considered under paragraph  41  of
    the Immigration Rules only.

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds that:-

      a) the Entry Clearance Officer should have  examined  the  application
         under paragraph 246 of the Immigration Rules instead  of  paragraph
         41 as specifically mentioned in the cover letter;

      b) the decision is unlawful because it is incompatible with her rights
         under Article 8 of the European Convention as her right to see her
         children has been denied;

      c) the application was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 9. The respondent maintained the decision in the review.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox concluded:-

      a)  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirement  of   the
         Immigration Rules as the sponsor's evidence was that  he  would  be
         grateful if the appellant could be given permanent  residence  here
         [7];

      b)  that  having  directed  himself  with  regard  to  SZ  (Applicable
         immigration rules) Bangladesh [2007] UKAIT 00037, given  the  time-
         lapse between the solicitors'  letter  of  2  March  2012  and  the
         application of 16 October 2012 and the  terms  of  the  application
         which were entirely consistent with a single one month family visit
         that the respondent was entirely justified in taking the view  that
         the appellant was now seeking no more than a visit [11];

      c) that whilst the delay was now explained by the  need  to  obtain  a
         passport and that the form was completed by  agents  that  was  not
         necessarily known to the respondent and the respondent did not need
         to consider the case outside paragraph 41 [11];

      d) that he could not and should not  consider  the  application  under
         Appendix FM-E.C.P.T. (the successor to paragraph  246)  given  that
         there was no obvious link or connection between the two [12];  that
         it would not be in the requirements  of  fairness  if  he  were  to
         determine the issues under Appendix FM at first  instance  himself;
         and, that there are some very difficulties issues  around  Appendix
         FM-E.C.P.T. given that the sponsor has another wife  here  who  was
         apparently the means by which he and  the  children  were  able  to
         enter the United Kingdom and because the  ECO  would  not  normally
         countenance admission of more than one wife of a sponsor [12].

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      a)  the  reasons  identified  by  the  judge  when   considering   the
         respondent's refusal to look at the parental contact visit were not
         those given by the respondent [8], [9];

      b) the judge overlooked the additional documents;

      c) in considering the requirements of fairness the judge had erred  in
         concluding that there would be difficult issues under Appendix  FM-
         E.C.P.T. and that  a  definition  of  partner  excluded  polygamous
         marriage and thus there was no issue; and

      d) the judge had erred in concluding that there was  no  obvious  link
         and connection between a parental contact visa  and  a  visit  visa
         given that both were to facilitate visits to children.

12. On 13 May 2014 I gave permission for appeal asserting that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in his application of SZ (Bangladesh) and  in
    concluding he should not consider whether the requirements of  Appendix
    FM-E.C.P.T. were met.  I also gave further directions that  a  skeleton
    argument was to be produced.

13. When the matter came before us on 18 July 2014,  we  heard  submissions
    from both parties and were assisted by  a  detailed  skeleton  argument
    prepared by Mr Pretzell.

14. There are two principal issues in this appeal: 1)  did  the  respondent
    err in law in refusing to consider the application  as  an  application
    for entry clearance as the parent of a child settled here; and, 2)  did
    Judge Cox err in law in refusing to consider whether the appellant  met
    the requirements of paragraph Appendix FM-E.C.P.T.?

15. The respondent's reason for refusing to consider the application except
    under paragraph 41, as set out in the  decision  notice,  is  that  the
    application  form  for  family  visitor  had  been  completed.   Unlike
    applications for leave to remain from within the United Kingdom,  there
    are no  prescribed  application  forms  for  Entry  Clearance,  but  in
    practice, applications made online generate specific electronic  forms,
    as the specific questions asked are governed by the initial  choice  of
    the type of application it is sought to be made.  We have no reason  to
    doubt that, here, Family Visit was the purpose of the visit chosen  and
    so the questions and form generated relate to that.

16. The current situation is now, thus, in effect more structured than  was
    the case when SZ (Bangladesh) was decided but nonetheless it  is  still
    good law, and is still relevant to the facts of this case.  We consider
    that it is in the circumstances appropriate to quote in full paragraphs
    8, 9, 10 and 11:-

    8.   The correct starting point must, in our view, be  the  appellant's
        application for entry clearance or leave.  It  is  the  basis  upon
        which that is made which must inform  the  decision-maker  (and  on
        appeal the Tribunal) of the appropriate immigration rule  or  rules
        which should be considered and applied.  This is not  to  say  that
        the applicant must identify and specify the rules upon which he  or
        she relies.  That would often be to expect too much in practice and
        would be uncalled for on any legal basis.  Nevertheless, it is  the
        applicant's  duty  to  set  out  the  factual  matrix   for   their
        application to enter the UK  as  a  spouse,  an  adopted  child,  a
        dependent relative, a student, a visitor and so on.  The  decision-
        maker must then make an assessment  of  what  immigration  rule  or
        rules that application engages and respond accordingly.  Thus,  not
        only must the correct rule be identified and applied  (CP  Dominica
        [2006] UKAIT 00040), but also  if  an  application  (as  presented)
        could be considered under alternative parts of a relevant  rule  it
        will be the decision-maker's duty to do so (see, IAT  v  Tohur  Ali
        [1988] Imm AR 237 (CA) and Mohammed Fazor Ali v SSHD [1988] Imm  AR
        274 (CA)).  An example of this might arise in an application  by  a
        dependent child under paragraph 297 or a dependent  adult  relative
        under paragraph 317.  More than one part of the relevant rule might
        be applicable or become applicable when the decision-maker examines
        the evidence and determines the facts.

    9.    Although,  the  authorities  recognise  that  the  decision-maker
        (including the Tribunal) must consider all the relevant parts of an
        applicable rule, the duty to consider the applicable rules  is  not
        an all-embracing obligation to seek out and  find  any  (or  every)
        potentially applicable rule.  In Mohammed Fazor Ali v SSHD Mann  LJ
        pointed out (at p. 282) it was not  'any  part  of  an  immigration
        officer's duty to conduct  a  roving  expedition  through  all  the
        paragraphs to see whether a person before him is eligible under any
        of them.'

    10.  Without deciding the issue, the  Court  of  Appeal  has  expressed
        scepticism as to whether the Tribunal is required to  consider  the
        application of immigration rules not directly relied  upon  by  the
        appellant (see Tohur Ali, especially per Balcombe LJ at p. 247  and
        Woolf LJ at p. 255).

    11.  It is important to bear in mind  that  the  Tribunal  is  not  the
        primary decision-maker  in  immigration  cases.  It  hears  appeals
        against decisions taken (see, EA Nigeria  [2007]  UKAIT  00013,  at
        para [7] clarifying the relevance in appeals of post-decision facts
        and the application of s.85(4) of the 2002 Act).  Consequently, the
        focus of enquiry by the Tribunal must  always  be  the  basis  upon
        which the application was made.  It is that application which leads
        to the decision which is the  subject  of  any  appeal  before  the
        Tribunal.  If an appellant seeks to assert a different  basis  from
        that put forward in his application upon which he should have  been
        granted entry clearance or leave under the immigration rules,  that
        is properly  a  matter  for  a  fresh  application  or  possibly  a
        variation of the existing application. It is not a matter  for  the
        Tribunal to consider on an appeal against the decision made on  the
        existing application. "

17. The starting point is that, whether  through  her  fault  or  not,  the
    applicant applied under the wrong  provision.   Further,  there  is  no
    evidence that the higher application fee  payable  for  an  application
    pursuant to Appendix FM for access to a child has been paid.   We  note
    in this context that, as was noted in Kaur (Entry Clearance -  date  of
    application) India [2013] UKUT 381, Article 3 of  the  Immigration  and
    Nationality (Fees Order) 2011 requires applications for entry clearance
    to be accompanied by the fee specified in  the  Fees  Regulations;  the
    effect of a failure to pay the correct fee  for  an  application  means
    that it is not a valid application; it is a nullity.

18. Further, it is thus difficult to understand how, where  an  application
    has been made expressly on the basis of a family visit and the  correct
    fee for that application has been paid, that it was not correct for the
    Entry Clearance Officer to proceed on the basis that that it  what  was
    intended.   As was said in SZ (Bangladesh) at [14]:

    14.  It follows that in the generality of cases it will be obvious from
         the  application  which  immigration  rule  (or  rules)   must   be
         considered.  The nature of the application, the  statements  within
         it and the boxes ticked will indicate that the appellant is seeking
         entry clearance or leave, for example on the basis of marriage,  as
         a family visitor, a dependent relative or as a student.  (This will
         be particularly so for in-country  applications  where  a  specific
         prescribed form must be used  depending  upon  the  basis  for  the
         application: see the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed
         Forms and Procedures)  Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/1421).)   As  a
         result, the Tribunal's scope of enquiry will be  circumscribed  and
         focussed upon a clearly applicable rule (or rules).

19. We accept that there was evidence within the application form that  the
    appellant had been unable to sign her name and had never  travelled  to
    the UK before and had applied for exemption from the  English  language
    requirements, as well as the fact that she had used an agent.  We  note
    Mr Pretzell's  submission  that  it  was  evident  from  the  appellant
    "signing" with a thumbprint that she was illiterate, and so  could  not
    have understood the form as prepared by the agent; that the  respondent
    should have made enquiries of  her,  given  that  the  application  was
    accompanied by additional documentation evincing an intention to  apply
    on an entirely different basis.

20. We do not accept that submission. It is for an  applicant  to  complete
    forms correctly, to pay the correct fee, and  to  submit  the  relevant
    documentation. It cannot properly be argued  that  an  Entry  Clearance
    Office or his agents are  under  a  duty  to  examine  applications  to
    determine if they are, in fact, what was intended;  that  would  be  to
    impose a wholly unreasonable burden. Further, it is even more difficult
    to understand why  such  a  duty  should  apply  where,  as  here,  the
    appellant had used an agent. Such an argument is,  in  effect,  to  put
    Entry Clearance Officers under a duty to make sure  applicants  do  not
    make mistakes, rather than applicants having to face  the  consequences
    of making mistakes.

21. Further, while the respondent  here  noted  the  material  relating  to
    paragraph 246, it was dated many months before the date of application.
    Whilst we accept that Judge Cox did in his analysis [10], [11] refer to
    other matters, the points made - that the visit had been stated  to  be
    for a month to visit children and giving  intended  travel  dates,  the
    judge is simply illustrating in more detail reasons  which  would  been
    open to the Entry Clearance Officer and which were patent on  the  face
    of the application.

22. We are not satisfied that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  erred  in  not
    treating this as an application under Appendix FM-E.C.P.T.  We consider
    also that Judge Cox did not err in concluding that the  respondent  had
    not been compelled to consider the application under that or an earlier
    provision.

23. Turning to the issue of whether Judge Cox erred in refusing to consider
    whether the appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM-E.C.P.T.,  we
    consider that the starting point in assessing his conclusions is  again
    SZ (Bangladesh) with particular reference to what was said at [11].

24. We consider that, for the reasons set out above, it cannot be  said  on
    the facts of this case as known to the Entry Clearance Officer that  he
    acted unfairly in not considering the application  under  Appendix  FM-
    E.C.P.T. nor in the circumstances, absent any proper reason being given
    why a fresh application should not have been made  accompanied  by  the
    explanations which are now given.

25. On reflection, we do not accept that Judge Cox erred in concluding that
    there was a difficulty with respect  to  Appendix  FM-E.C.P.T.  flowing
    from the appellant's polygamous marriage.  The definition of  "partner"
    for the purposes of Appendix FM set out at Gen 1.2 does  not  expressly
    exclude a party to a polygamous marriage and  includes  "spouse".   The
    Immigration Rules do not define  spouse  per  se.  For  most  purposes,
    English law treats a polygamous marriage as valid if the  parties  had,
    through their domicile at the  time,  the  capacity  to  enter  into  a
    polygamous marriage, and the marriage was valid according to the law of
    where it was contracted (see Dicey and Morris, Conflict of Laws  Vol  2
    at page 850). Were "spouse" not to include a party to such a  marriage,
    it is difficult to understand why  paragraph  278  of  the  Immigration
    Rules would be necessary but this is not an issue  on  which  we  heard
    argument, nor did we hear submissions as to whether the sponsor  would,
    under Afghan law at the relevant time, have been able to enter  into  a
    polygamous marriage.

26. In any event, Judge Cox gave substantial other reasons why it would not
    be appropriate for him to consider the application under  Appendix  FM,
    not least of which is the fact that there were no primary  findings  of
    fact with respect to that Immigration Rule.  The reality is that  there
    was no valid application for Entry Clearance  under  Appendix  FM;  the
    appellant could and should have made a fresh application in the correct
    form, and it is not properly arguable that the Judge erred in  refusing
    to consider whether the appellant met the requirements of Appendix  FM-
    E.C.P.T.

27. Accordingly, for these reasons we consider that  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve making an  error  of  law
    and we uphold it.



Signed                                  Date:  7 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
