
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/37295/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2013                            |On 30th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                             MRS AMAL MISSIOURI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PARIS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr D Sills of counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mrs S Vidyadharan, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. The appellant, a national of Algeria born on 29 July  1980,  appeals  to
    the Upper Tribunal against the determination of Immigration  Judge  Aziz
    dated 30 April 2013 dismissing her appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 October 2012 refusing to grant her  entry  clearance
    to visit her husband for 2 months under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted the appellant permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, finding it to be arguable that  there  had
    been procedural unfairness before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Thus  the
    appeal came before us.

Error of Law

 3. The appellant's representatives assert that they first found  out  about
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on the  day  of  the  hearing
    itself.  They  faxed  the  Tribunal  on  the  same  date  requesting  an
    adjournment, explaining (i) that they had not  received  notice  of  the
    hearing and (ii) that the sponsor, who wished to give evidence,  was  in
    hospital. Coincidentally they had written to the  Tribunal  on  the  day
    prior to the hearing, enquiring as to  when  a  hearing  date  would  be
    fixed.

 4. A printout from the Tribunal Service computer system confirms receipt by
    the Tribunal of the aforementioned documents.

 5. Despite this the First-tier Tribunal proceeded to determine the  appeal,
    noting when doing so that no  explanation  had  been  provided  for  the
    absence from  the  hearing  of  the  appellant  or  her  representatives
    (paragraph 11).

 6. At the hearing before us Mrs Vidyadharan did not seek to dispute between
    the fact that the notice  of  hearing  had  not  been  received  by  the
    appellant's representatives and she  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    thereby been deprived of  a  fair  hearing.  She  was  content  for  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 7. We find that there  was  procedural  unfairness  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and we set aside its determination.

 Re-making of decision

 8. Mr Sills requested that the Upper Tribunal proceed directly  to  re-make
    the decision for itself, rather than remit the matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal. We acceded to such request.

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the appellant's application for  the
    following reasons:

       "You have stated that you will visit your spouse to  whom  you  were
       married on 15 November 2011  for  the  given  period  and  you  have
       provided evidence of sponsorship for your stay. I have taken note of
       the document from  Hillingdon  Hospitals  regarding  your  sponsor's
       health. The sponsor  is  currently  unemployed  and  in  receipt  of
       benefits in the UK. You have  stated  that  you  are  unemployed  in
       Algeria and that you rely on support from your spouse. You  have  no
       resources of your own at present. You have not provided evidence  of
       your  own  funding  in  Algeria.  In  the  absence  of  evidence  of
       sufficiently strong social or economic ties to  Algeria,  I  am  not
       satisfied that you are a genuine visitor for a  limited  period,  or
       that you intend to leave the UK at the end of your visit.  Paragraph
       41 (i) and (ii) of HC 395."

10. The sponsor gave evidence before us. We  observed  that  an  interpreter
    had been requested, albeit not in accordance with the timescales set out
    in the Tribunal's directions, but that one  was  not  available.  Rather
    than seek an adjournment of the proceedings, Mr Sills indicated that the
    sponsor wished to proceed and that he  would  provide  his  evidence  in
    English.

11. The sponsor  adopted  his  written  statement  and  gave  the  following
    evidence.  He was diagnosed with cancer at the end of August  2012.   He
    is still undergoing treatment but has delayed his  chemotherapy  because
    he wants his wife's support during the treatment.  The chemotherapy will
    be for 4 to 5 sessions every two weeks.  The doctors have not  indicated
    how long the treatment will last and the first 4 sessions will be only a
    start.  After his 4-5  treatment  sessions,  his  wife  will  definitely
    return to Algeria. The sponsor has delayed the start  of  his  treatment
    and will only start it when his wife is by his side.  The cancer is  now
    "in the hands of God".  If he gets better things will change and he will
    carry on with his life "like the beginning".

12. His wife is dependent on him and does not work.  She has not  been  able
    to join him here because he cannot support her  application  because  he
    had to stop working due to his cancer.

13. Mr Sills indicated that he would not be calling the appellant's  brother
    who was in attendance at the hearing centre.

14.  We  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.  Ms  Vidyadharan  in   her
    submissions said the following.  She  has  tremendous  empathy  for  the
    sponsor but the appellant's appeal cannot succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules because the appellant has not demonstrated that she will return to
    Algeria after her visit.  The sponsor has not started  chemotherapy  and
    there is no timeframe for the length of treatment that the sponsor  will
    require. The appellant will not leave her husband and return to  Algeria
    if her husband is still unwell.   The  appellant  has  no  incentive  to
    return to Algeria because she is not working and her husband is in  this
    country.

15. Mr Sills in his submissions said the following.  The only issue in  this
    appeal is the appellant's intention  to  return  to  Algeria  after  her
    visit.  It is a very sad case as the appellant and her  sponsor  married
    before the sponsor was diagnosed with cancer and he cannot  support  her
    application for entry clearance as a spouse.  The sponsor's condition is
    very serious.  The sponsor visited  the  appellant  in  Algeria  on  two
    occasions last year. The sponsor wants the appellant's support while  he
    is undergoing chemotherapy.  The medical evidence demonstrates  that  he
    is delaying chemotherapy until his wife comes to this country to support
    him.  He requires 4 to 5 sessions at three week intervals which will  be
    within the timeframe of her entry clearance as a visitor.  The appellant
    is only seeking entry clearance for a limited period of time.  Once  the
    treatment is over she  will  return  to  Algeria  and  the  sponsor  can
    continue to visit her there or the appellant can visit him in the United
    Kingdom again.   The  appellant  stopped  working  but  she  can  resume
    employment.

Discussion

16. The burden is on the appellant to prove on a  balance  of  probabilities
    that she satisfies the requirements of paragraph 41 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The respondent takes issue with only two of the requirements  of
    paragraph 41, that being whether  the  appellant  is  genuinely  seeking
    entry clearance as a visitor for the period stated by  her  and  whether
    she will leave the United Kingdom after her visit  here,  as  stated  by
    her.

17. The appellant married her sponsor, a British  citizen,  on  15  November
    2011 in Algeria.  We  accept  that  it  was  their  intention  that  the
    appellant would apply for entry clearance to join him in this country as
    his spouse. Unfortunately, the sponsor was diagnosed with cancer and  as
    a result had  to  stop  working  and  could  not  meet  the  maintenance
    requirement of the Immigration Rules as he is became reliant  on  public
    funds.

18. A letter from Hillingdon hospitals dated 16 November  2012  states  that
    the sponsor's chemotherapy sessions will take place  every  three  weeks
    for 12 weeks in total. It  is  asserted  therefore  that  they  will  be
    completed within the time frame of a visitor's visa of six months. It is
    to be observed at this stage that the appellant in facts seeks entry for
    only 2 months [Q12 of her VAF]. The sponsor in his evidence stated  that
    these sessions would be a start and that he is in "God's  hands"  as  to
    the prognosis of his cancer.

19.  The  sponsor  has  refused  to  start  chemotherapy  until  his  wife's
    application is resolved because he wishes her moral and physical support
    whilst the treatment is going. He has  been  receiving  other  forms  of
    medical treatment since his cancer was diagnosed in 2012 as evidenced by
    his medical records. It is  difficult  to  predict  when  the  sponsor's
    treatment for his cancer is likely to be completed or whether additional
    chemotherapy sessions will be required.  The  evidence  before  us  does
    little to assist in this regard.

20. There is no doubt that the appellant and  sponsor  are  in  a  committed
    marital relationship and in such circumstances the wish of the appellant
    to be in the United Kingdom to support her husband through  chemotherapy
    treatment is only natural. The question raised by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is, what incentive is there for her to thereafter leave her sick
    husband to return to a country where she has  little  or  no  social  or
    economic ties?

21. One would have anticipated, in the face of the  matters  raised  in  the
    refusal decision,  that  the  appellant  would  have  provided  evidence
    seeking to rebut the doubts raised therein. Whilst  we  have  heard  the
    sponsor's evidence, somewhat surprisingly the appellant has not provided
    any evidence engaging with the matters raised in the  refusal  decision.
    It is for the appellant to make her case and it is her  intentions  that
    are the relevant consideration. There is no evidence before us from  the
    appellant as to what incentive she has to return to  Algeria  after  her
    visit. We observe that her sister lives in the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst
    the appellant provides the details  of  her  parents  in  her  VAF,  she
    provides no evidence as to her connections to them.    The  evidence  is
    that the appellant does not work in Algeria  and  is  supported  by  her
    sponsor  from  this  country.   She  has  not  drawn  attention  to  any
    particular matter which would provide her with an incentive to return to
    Algeria, but there is an undoubted incentive for her to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, so that she can care, and provide support, for her  sick
    husband; whose long, or even medium,  tern  prognosis  is,  for  obvious
    reasons, as yet unknown.

22. We have carefully considered all  of  the  evidence  before  us  in  the
    round, including that contained within the appellant's Visa  Application
    Form. We do not accept that  the  appellant  has  demonstrated,  to  the
    balance of probabilities, that she meets the requirements of  paragraphs
    41(i) and (ii) of the Immigration Rules.

23. We feel a great deal of compassion for the  appellant  and  her  sponsor
    given the circumstances in which  they  find  themselves.  However,  our
    legal  task  is  to  consider  whether  the  appellant   satisfies   the
    requirements of paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  We find  on  the
    evidence that she does not. No other grounds were pursued before us  and
    consequently we must dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Decision

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside.

Having re-made the decision on appeal for ourselves, we dismiss it.



      Dated this 23rd day of October 2013

Signed


.............................................
Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





