
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:VA/37730/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2013                          |On 25 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-CAIRO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             BAHY HUSSIN MOHAMED
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R. S. Hopkin
For the Respondent: Not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The respondent is a citizen of Egypt born on 4 July 1988. His appeal
       against a refusal of entry  clearance  as  a  (family)  visitor  was
       allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page who considered the  appeal
       'on the papers' on 17 May 2013.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give
       adequate  reasons  for  deciding  that  the   respondent   met   the
       requirements of paragraph 41 of HC 395 (as amended).

    3. The  refusal  of  entry  clearance,  in  summary,  stated  that  the
       respondent had not established that he was  a  genuine  visitor  who
       intended to visit the UK for a  limited  period  not  exceeding  six
       months,  that  he  intended  to  leave  the  UK,  that  he  met  the
       maintenance and accommodation requirements of the Rules, or that  he
       could meet the cost of the return journey.

    4. It was noted  that  he  had  only  been  in  his  employment  as  an
       accountant  for  two  months.  He  had  submitted  an   untranslated
       document. The current circumstances in Egypt were said to cast doubt
       on his intentions in coming to the UK and he  had  not  demonstrated
       sufficient ties to Egypt. In relation to the sponsor, the notice  of
       decision stated that the Entry Clearance Officer  ("ECO")  had  been
       "unable to assess the documents" that had been submitted  and  there
       was no evidence of the sponsor's ability to fund the trip.

    5. First-tier judge Page had before him a number of documents that were
       submitted with the notice of appeal. He noted that the ECO  had  not
       complied with  rule  13  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
       (Procedure) Rules 2005 relating  to  the  filing  of  documents.  He
       pointed out that therefore, all of the evidence before him  emanated
       from the respondent.

    6. At [5] he referred to a bank statement in relation to the respondent
       which had been translated into English,  evidence  of  his  previous
       employment history (there was a certificate  in  that  regard),  the
       sponsor's P60 and wage slips for the sponsor.  He  referred  to  the
       respondent having said that if allowed to come to the UK to see  his
       wife and her family he would obtain a return ticket. This appears to
       be a reference to what was said in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal. Drafted in the way that the  grounds  are,  the
       judge was entitled to view this as a statement of evidence from  the
       respondent which in turn he was fully entitled  to  accept.  I  also
       note that the respondent stated that he would return to Egypt and he
       disagreed with the ECO's suggestion to the contrary. The  respondent
       had also referred in the notice of appeal to the  documents  he  was
       submitting in support of the appeal.

    7. Mr Hopkin accepted that the respondent  had  referred  to  documents
       submitted in support of the appeal. He also conceded  that  the  ECO
       had not provided a 'rule 13' bundle.

    8. I announced at the hearing that I was not satisfied  that  there  is
       any error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  do
       not accept the contention in the grounds that the judge had not made
       findings on the issues raised in the notice of decision.  The  judge
       identified the evidence that the respondent had submitted. There was
       evidence of his past employment, a  translated  bank  statement  and
       some evidence of his sponsor's financial  circumstances.  The  judge
       was entitled to conclude  that  the  evidence  put  before  him  did
       address the concerns raised by the ECO.

    9. The determination would have  benefited  from  a  more  detailed  an
       analysis of the evidence with reference to the points in contention,
       but I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude that  the
       evidence established that the respondent had met the requirements of
       the Rules that were said to be in issue.

Decision

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal therefore stands.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 24/09/13
