
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/38434/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th May 2014                                 |On 6th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                   MR SHIRIN (AKA SHIRIN SON OF NAIMULLAH)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor attended
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Shirin, date of birth 1st January 1952, is a  citizen
    of Afghanistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated  on  4th  November  2013.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the decision of the
    respondent dated 7th  November  2012  to  refuse  the  appellant  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  family  visitor.  The  appellant
    wished to visit his son and the son's family.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  by  a  decision  dated  17th January  2014
    granted permission to  appeal.   The  substance  of  the  grant  is  in
    paragraph 2 and provides as follows:-

         "2.   The grounds challenge the judge's finding that the  appellant
             had not established that he would return to Afghanistan at the
             end of his visit.  The judge's  reasoning  is  based  upon  an
             assessment  of  the  documents  relating  to  the  appellant's
             (claimed) car sales business in Kabul.   The  judge,  however,
             makes no  reference  to  the  oral  evidence  or  the  written
             statement of the sponsor which, in part, addressed some of the
             judge's concerns about the documentary  evidence.   The  judge
             makes no finding in respect of the sponsor's evidence nor does
             he engage with its substance.  In failing to do so, the  judge
             arguably erred in law  in  reaching  his  adverse  finding  in
             respect of return to  Afghanistan  based  exclusively  on  the
             documents."

 5. The sole  issue  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herwald  was  the
    intention of the appellant to come to the United Kingdom for a  holiday
    of less than six months and to return to his home  country  within  the
    terms of any visa granted.

 6. In assessing that the judge had concentrated upon  the  claims  by  the
    appellant that he was a self-employed car salesman and that  he  had  a
    business.  The findings with regard to those  claims  are  set  out  in
    paragraph 12.

 7. However it has to be noted that the appellant as confirmed by  evidence
    by the sponsor has a wife and two daughters in Afghanistan; that he had
    a family home; and that he had  a  settled  lifestyle  in  Afghanistan.
    There appears to be no findings with regard to  whether  the  appellant
    did have a wife and two daughters  or  whether  or  not  he  had  other
    family, social or property commitments within Afghanistan, which  would
    cause him to return there.   There was evidence before  the  judge  but
    the judge appears not to have made any findings with regard to such.

 8. In paragraph 12  of  the  determination  the  judge  has  assessed  the
    evidence with regard to the appellant's claim  to  have  been  a  self-
    employed car salesman.  The judge examines  documentation  produced  on
    behalf of the appellant to substantiate that he has a car business with
    care.  He noted that the  documents  appeared  to  be  translated  into
    English but that the originals were not in the documentation.  He noted
    that whilst some documents describe the appellant as the outright owner
    of the business others suggested that he was a partner or that  he  was
    not the owner.  Whilst there was  a  licence  suggesting  that  it  was
    granted in September 2005, elsewhere the same  licence  appears  to  be
    dated 2nd October 2013.  The judge  finds  that  he  can  place  little
    reliance upon the documentation  submitted  to  substantiate  that  the
    appellant is a self-employed car salesman.

 9. The judge went on to find that the bank accounts  do  not  reflect  the
    transactions that one would expect from such a  business.   Whilst  the
    sponsor  had  sought  to  give  an  explanation  for   parts   of   the
    discrepancies in the accounts and other documents the judge rejects the
    explanation given by the sponsor specifically at paragraph 12(e).

10. Within paragraph 12(e) the judge has considered  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and does not  find  that  that  is  consistent  with  the  bank
    accounts that had been submitted.  The judge goes on to  make  findings
    with regard to the lack of other documentation such as  tax  documents,
    documents from trade  associations,  documents  by  way  of  bills  for
    purchase and sales of vehicles, rental notices  from  the  landlord  or
    other documentation to substantiate that the appellant had a  business.



11. The conclusions by the judge are that he  is  not  persuaded  that  the
    appellant is in business  as  claimed  and  the  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence led him to doubt the credibility  of  the  appellant  and  his
    intention to return to his homeland.

12. Whilst the judge has limited himself to considering the evidence of the
    sponsor  directly  relevant  to  the  business  and  the  documentation
    produced, the judge has in point  of  fact  considered  that  evidence.
    Whilst there was other evidence about the family circumstances  of  the
    appellant in Afghanistan the judge was concentrating upon the financial
    circumstances of the appellant and was not satisfied on  the  basis  of
    the evidence  presented  as  to  the  financial  circumstances  of  the
    appellant or that the appellant had a genuine business.  The  appellant
    had made that a significant part of his application to  claim  that  he
    would be returning home.  Whilst there was other evidence that  he  had
    family and other commitments the judge was  entitled  to  look  at  the
    evidence presented and determine  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    satisfy him that he did genuinely  have  a  business  and  therefore  a
    financial interest to return to.  In the light of that  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had failed to show that  he  had  a
    business.  In coming to that conclusion the judge did take into account
    the evidence of the sponsor.

13. The issue then is whether  or  not  the  judge  was  required  to  make
    specific findings with regard to the remaining evidence.  It  is  clear
    that the judge did not accept the explanation given by the sponsor with
    regard to the documentation.  Whilst there was other evidence as to the
    family commitments of the appellant in Afghanistan the  judge  was  not
    satisfied on the basis of the evidence presented that  the  appellant's
    account was credible and was therefore not satisfied that the appellant
    was coming to the United Kingdom for a limited period of less than  six
    months and that he would return to Afghanistan.

14. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to come to  the  conclusion
    that he was not satisfied as to  the  financial  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and the fact that the appellant had a claimed business.   The
    judge was therefore entitled to conclude from that he was not satisfied
    with the intention of the  appellant  and  therefore  to  dismiss  this
    appeal.

15. The consequence of the decision is that the appellant can make  another
    application.  I appreciate that this may cause  some  difficulty.   The
    appellant appears to have travelled to New Delhi in order to make  this
    application to enter the United Kingdom.  That is not an inconsiderable
    journey.  However it is for the appellant to submit the  documentation.
    There must be other documentation to substantiate  that  the  appellant
    has a business and accurately reflect his interest  in  that  business.
    The appellant needs to give a coherent and credible explanation for the
    discrepancies in the documentation and how his business is run and  why
    payments into the bank seemed not to be on  a  consistent  basis.   The
    appellant can obtain documentation and can then  substantiate  that  he
    does have a business and does have a  car  sales  business.   Once  the
    appellant manages  to  obtain  further  evidence  to  substantiate  his
    business interest he can make a further application.

16. However that does  not  alter  the  fact  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    documentation and on the  basis  of  an  assessment  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence the judge has given valid reasons for finding that he was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had a car sales business and was therefore
    not satisfied as to the intentions of the appellant.

17. In the  circumstances  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to dismiss  this  matter  on  all
    grounds.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


