
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: VA/38227/2012
     VA/38228/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th September 2014                       |On 31st October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

    TOHEED ZAFRAN                                        First Appellant

   IRAJ NOOR                                             Second Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    The sponsor Azeem Hanif
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion I shall continue to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
Error on a point of law

 2. On 13th February 2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    French  gave  permission  to  the  appellants  to  appeal  against  the
    determination of Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coates who
    allowed the appeals (along  with  those  of  the  appellants'  parents)
    against the decisions of the respondent to refuse  entry  clearance  as
    visitors in accordance with the provisions  of  paragraph  46A  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  decision  to  allow  the  appeals   by   the
    appellants' parents stands.

 3. In granting permission Designated Judge French  identified  the  single
    point at issue namely that,  as  the  applications  were  made  on  3rd
    September  2012  after  the  Immigration   Appeals   (Family   Visitor)
    Regulations 2012 came into effect, the appellants did not enjoy a right
    of appeal save on race relations or human rights grounds.

 4. At the hearing the sponsor was unrepresented but I explained the nature
    of the proceedings and the issue in the grounds of application.   After
    I had done so the sponsor agreed that the judge had made  an  error  by
    failing to deal with the appeal by the  two  minor  appellants  on  the
    limited grounds.  I therefore announced that I was satisfied  that  the
    determination showed an error on a point of law  for  that  reason  and
    also having noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  for  each  appellant
    acknowledged the limited rights of  appeal  and  claimed  a  breach  of
    Article 8 human rights.

Re-making the determination

 5. I proceeded to re-make the decision hearing  brief  evidence  from  the
    sponsor who continued to rely  upon  his  original  statement  of  22nd
    August 2013.  In this he explains that the appellants are the dependent
    children of  their  parents  and  the  purpose  of  the  visit  was  to
    reciprocate the hospitality that the appellants' parents had shown when
    the sponsor visited Pakistan in 2012.   It  is  also  stated  that  the
    parties have had regular contact over the telephone and there have been
    frequent visits to Pakistan over the last ten years.   The  grounds  of
    appeal state that the failure to grant a visa for the appellants  is  a
    "clear violation of human rights" although no further  detail  of  that
    assertion is  provided.   At  the  hearing  the  sponsor  said  it  was
    important for him to have family visit him and the  parents  would  not
    leave their children behind on the visit.

 6. The sponsor was not cross-examined on his evidence.

 7. Ms Johnstone submitted that  there  was  no  evidence  of  family  life
    between the parties.  Article 8 did  not  give  the  right  to  holiday
    visits.  The existing relationship could be maintained  by  the  modern
    methods of communication which are already used.  Further, only a short
    visit was proposed.

 8. The sponsor said that the visit was to be at least a month  and  was  a
    lifetime opportunity for the appellants.  Not only was it a holiday but
    the maintenance of the family life between all the parties.  They  were
    to be shown this country.  Further, the parents could not come  without
    their children.





Decision and Reasons

 9. In human rights appeals it is for the appellant to show that his or her
    human rights will be infringed.  If that is shown then it  is  for  the
    respondent to prove that the refusal decision is proportionate.

10. This is not an appeal which is covered by any human  rights  provisions
    in the Immigration Rules so I move to  consideration  of  human  rights
    issues outside the Rules.  In doing so I apply the five stage  approach
    recommended in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

11. Although the sponsor has claimed that there is a  family  life  between
    him and the appellants who are his nephew and niece, I am not satisfied
    that there are strong enough ties between those parties to establish  a
    family life for the purpose of Article 8.  In Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ
    31 the Court of Appeal adopted a fact-based approach to  the  existence
    of family life with attention on whether there were additional ties  of
    dependency beyond the normal emotional ties between adults.  I  am  not
    satisfied that any such dependency has been shown in  this  case.   The
    proposed visit was simply for  the  purpose  of  wider  family  members
    visiting each other.

12. The fact that the appellants' parents, whose appeal has  been  allowed,
    cannot visit without their children is not a factor  which  affects  my
    conclusion.  The parents are at liberty to make  arrangements  for  the
    care of their children if they wish but even  if  they  choose  not  to
    visit they can continue to exercise the family connections with a visit
    of the uncle to Pakistan and other modern methods of  communication  as
    they have done in the past.

13. Thus, the first stage in the Razgar test is not passed.  But even if  I
    am wrong in that conclusion and were to proceed to consider whether  or
    not the  respondent's  decision  was  proportionate  I  would  have  to
    conclude that it is because, for reasons already given, the  nature  of
    the relationship between the parties is not such that  family  life  is
    affected to such an extent that the decision causes a serious breach of
    Article 8 rights.  The family life between the parties can continue the
    same way as it has in the past by visits and communication.




NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law such that it should be re-made.  I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing
the appeals.




Anonymity

Although the appeal relates to minor children, they are not present  in  the
United Kingdom and, further, no anonymity direction  was  requested.   I  do
not consider it appropriate in this appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt          30th October 2014




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal there can be no fees award.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt          30th October 2014

