
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/38825/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th October 2014                           |On 22nd October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

                              MRS SHAHIDA LATIF

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Price, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance as a visitor, brought on the limited grounds of  appeal,  was
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gordon  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 20th August  2013.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer ("ECO") refused the application under paragraph 320(7B) of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules").  This  decision  followed  an  earlier
    one, some months beforehand, in which entry clearance was refused under
    paragraph 320(7A), the ECO finding on that earlier occasion  that  bank
    statements from Santander provided in support were not genuine.

2.   In the present  appeal,  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  notice  of
    decision but provided no supporting evidence in relation to the earlier
    adverse finding regarding the bank statements.   The  appellant's  case
    was advanced before the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  more
    evidence was required and that the respondent could not  discharge  the
    burden of proof simply by relying upon the notice  of  decision,  which
    referred to the earlier decision.  The judge found, however,  that  the
    appellant could not rely upon what she described  as  "the  absence  of
    proof in this appeal" as the issue of the   false  documents  ought  to
    have been addressed in an appeal against the earlier decision to refuse
    entry clearance.  The judge concluded that  the  respondent's  decision
    regarding the  documents  stood  unchallenged  and  that  the  ECO  was
    entitled to rely upon the earlier finding in refusing  the  application
    under paragraph 320(7B) of the rules.

3.   The judge dismissed the appeal.

4.   In an application for permission to appeal, it  was  contended  on  the
    appellant's behalf that evidence was required in support of the finding
    that the ground of refusal under paragraph 320(7B) was  made  out.   No
    document verification report or other evidence was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the judge erred in  dismissing  the  appeal  for  the
    reasons  given.   Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but,
    following a renewed application, granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge  on
    16th January 20134.  In a brief rule 24 response from the Secretary  of
    State, made on 5th February 2014, the appeal was opposed.   The  author
    of the response stated that the judge was entitled to conclude that the
    respondent had discharged the burden of proof.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mrs Price  said  that  the  judge  acknowledged,  correctly,  that  the
    respondent bore the burden of proof. She  went  on  to  find  that  the
    appellant could not rely on an "absence of proof" and  that  an  appeal
    ought to have  been  brought  against  the  earlier  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.  There was, however,  no  evidence  regarding  deception  or
    false documents before her and only a bare assertion in the  notice  of
    decision, which referred to the earlier decision. The  judge  erred  in
    concluding that no evidence was required to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof falling on the  respondent.   The  issue  was  critical  for  the
    appellant because if paragraph 320(7B) were  made  out,  she  would  be
    prevented from applying for entry clearance for a period  of  some  ten
    years.

6.   Ms Vidyadharan  said  that  in  relation  to  the  appeal  itself,  the
    Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2012  fell  to  be
    applied.  The appellant's sponsor was  unable  to  show  that  he  fell
    within regulation 3 as he was not settled here and had not been granted
    asylum or humanitarian protection. The sponsor only had limited  leave.
    It followed that there was no valid appeal, substantively,  before  the
    judge.  So far as the  adverse  finding  under  paragraph  320(7B)  was
    concerned, guidance had been given by the Upper Tribunal in SD  (India)
    [2010]  UKUT  276.   This  decision  put  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    difficulties, in relation to  the judge's finding  that  the  mandatory
    ground of refusal was made out.

7.   In a brief response, Mrs Price said that she  was  only  instructed  in
    relation  to  paragraph  320(7B).   She  did  not  disagree   with   Ms
    Vidyadharan's submission regarding the validity of the appeal.

Conclusion on Error of Law

8.   The Upper Tribunal's decision in SD [2010]  UKUT  276  is  directly  on
    point, in relation to the adverse decision made on 7th  October  20112.
    No  appeal  was  brought   following  the  earlier  refusal  of   entry
    clearance, on 12th  March  that  year,  when  the  ECO  concluded  that
    paragraph 320(7A) of the rules applied.  The notice of decision  giving
    rise to the present appeal merely recorded the earlier refusal in March
    2012 and, as noted by the judge, no supporting evidence  regarding  the
    bank statements from Santander was adduced by  the  respondent  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Paragraph 10 of the determination in SD reads as follows:

         "If it is to  be  asserted  in  an  appeal  relating  to  a  second
         application that documents in relation to  a  previous  application
         were forged, the burden of proof remains  on  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer.  Of course,  if  there  has  previously  been  a  judicial
         decision, or an admission, of forgery, the burden  may  be  readily
         discharged.  But in  the  present  case  there  was,  as  has  been
         accepted, no direct evidence that the documents  were  forged.  All
         that there was before the Immigration Judge was the Entry Clearance
         Officer's assertion that a previous application had  been   refused
         for that reason.  In these circumstances,  that  is  to  say  where
         there is no evidence, the person with the burden of proof loses  on
         that point.  It is thus clear that the Immigration  Judge  was  not
         lawfully in a position to find that there had been forged documents
         submitted on the previous application."

10.  Applying that guidance, I conclude that  the  judge  erred  in  finding
    that the ground of refusal under paragraph 320(7B) was made out on  the
    basis of the earlier adverse decision, in  the  absence  of  supporting
    evidence sufficient to show that the burden of  proof  falling  on  the
    respondent was discharged.  The error of law is plainly  material,  not
    least because of the consequences for the appellant herself.

11.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  must  be
    remade.

Remaking the Decision

12.  Ms Vidyadharan drew  attention  to  regulation  3  of  the  Immigration
    Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2012.  The regulations  came  into
    force on 9th July 2012, some weeks before the decision giving  rise  to
    the appeal.  Mrs Price did  not  seek  to  challenge  Ms  Vidyadharan's
    submission regarding the appellant's sponsor.  He does not fall  within
    the scope of regulation 3 ("circumstances of the person to be visited")
    and so the appellant was not entitled to appeal under section 82(1)  of
    the 2002 Act, by virtue of section 88A(1)(a) of the same Act.

13.  In these circumstances, having made a clear finding of  fact  that  the
    ground of refusal under paragraph 320(7B) was not made out, there being
    no supporting evidence regarding the earlier finding in March 2012 that
    bank statements relied upon on  that  occasion  were  false,  there  is
    before me no valid or subsisting appeal as the appellant's sponsor does
    not fall  within  regulation  3  of  the  Immigration  Appeals  (Family
    Visitor) Regulations 2012.

DECISION

14.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  been  set  aside  by
    reason of material error of law, the decision  is  remade  as  follows:
    there is no valid or subsisting appeal.



Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell     21/10/2014


ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
    occasion.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell     21/10/2014


FEE AWARD

As there is no valid or subsisting appeal, no fee award may be made.


Signed                                  Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell     21/10/2014


