
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA 38034 2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2013                               |On 7 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON




                                   Between

                               ECO (Istanbul)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NADIA AlNAHAS

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Directions dated  15 July 2013 were  sent  to  the  parties   in  these
    terms:

         The respondent has been granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
         Tribunal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Archer who
         by  a  determination  promulgated  on  29  May  2013  allowed   the
         appellant's  appeal  brought  against  the  ECO's  decision  of  14
         November 2012 refusing her application for entry clearance.

         The Upper Tribunal has received a letter by fax dated 11 July  2013
         from the appellant's sponsor (her son) in which he states  that  he
         would like to withdraw the appeal and ' close the case '.

         Paragraph 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
         provides for a  party  to  withdraw  this  case  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal, only with the consent of the Tribunal.  If  the  Tribunal
         does so consent this would amount to a final disposal of the appeal
         before the Upper Tribunal.

         Subject to consideration being given to any request  received  from
         either party to the contrary by 4 PM on 22nd July 2013,  the  Upper
         Tribunal proposes to consent to the respondent withdrawing her case
         for the Upper Tribunal and allow the appeal by the ECO.

 2. There has been no response from either party.

 3. In the light all the indication by the appellant's son of his  wish  to
    withdraw the appeal and ' close the case  '  there  is  no  longer  any
    opposition up by the appellant to the appeal by the ECO  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and as indicated in my directions that appeal  is  allowed.  I
    reach this conclusion without any assessment of the merits of  Are  you
    the appeal and do so simply because the appeal initiated in the  First-
    tier Tribunal has been has been withdrawn.



Signed                                  Date 31 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
