

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/38124/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 March 2014                              |On 30 April 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TASHKENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               OLIYA YUSUPOVA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Girenock, Sponsor

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Knowles) which allowed Oliya Yusupova's
      appeal against a refusal to grant her entry  clearance  as  a  visitor
      under para 41 of the Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as  amended).   For
      convenience, we will refer to the parties as they appeared before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan who was born on  13  December
      1928.  On 10 October 2012, the appellant applied for  entry  clearance
      to visit her daughter Galina Girenok, the sponsor, who is married to a
      British citizen and lives in the UK.

   3.  On  22  October  2012,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused   the
      appellant's application on the basis that he was  not  satisfied  that
      she was genuinely seeking entry for a limited period not  exceeding  6
      months and that she intended to  leave  the  UK  at  the  end  of  her
      proposed visit.  Consequently, she failed to meet the requirements  in
      paras 41(i) and (ii) of the Rules.   That  decision  was  subsequently
      affirmed by the Entry Clearance Manager on 8 March 2013.

   4.  In the notice of decision dated 22 October  2012  under  the  heading
      "Your right of appeal" it was stated that:

           "You are entitled to appeal this decision under Section 82(1) of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

   5. The appellant duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  sponsor
      appeared at that hearing and gave oral evidence. The Judge  found  the
      sponsor to be:

            "...an honest and credible witness who answered  the  questions
           put to her in an open and straightforward manner"  (para  30  of
           his determination).

      On the basis of the evidence before him, Judge Knowles  accepted  that
      the appellant's intention was not, as the ECO and ECM  had  concluded,
      to stay in the UK for 12 months but rather, as he found at para 31  of
      his determination:

           "she is a bone fide visitor who does not intend to remain in the
           UK for any period exceeding 6 months."

   6.  As  a  consequence,  Judge  Knowles  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules, namely para 41.

   7. The Entry Clearance Office sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis
      that the appellant did not have a full right of appeal  by  virtue  of
      s.88(2)(c ) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which
      provides as follows:

           2) A person may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an
              immigration decision which is taken on the grounds that he or
              a person of whom he is a dependent -


              ....(c)  is seeking to be in the United Kingdom for a  period
                       greater than  that  permitted  in  his  case  by  the
                       Immigration Rules."

   8. The maximum period of time for which a person  may  seek  entry  as  a
      general visitor under para 41 of the  Rules  is  6  months  (see  para
      41(i)).  The Entry Clearance Officer contends  in  the  grounds  that,
      therefore, the appellant only had an appeal, by virtue of  s.88(4)  on
      race  relations,  human  rights  or  asylum  grounds.   Section  88(4)
      provides:

           "Subsection (2) does not prevent the brining of an appeal on any
           otr all of the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b), (c)  and
           (g)."

   9. Section 84(1)(b), (c) and (g) set out  the  grounds  based  upon  race
      relations, human rights and removal in breach of the ECHR  or  Refugee
      Convention respectively.

  10. The ECO was initially refused permission to appeal by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 5 July 2013 but on 9 August 2013 UTJ Reeds granted the ECO
      permission to appeal.   Thus, the appeal came before us.

Discussion

  11. Before us, the sponsor pointed out  that  the  ECO's  decision  of  22
      October 2012 stated that the appellant had a right of appeal.  That is
      undoubtedly correct but it is trite law to  state  that  the  Tribunal
      cannot by consent obtain a jurisdiction to hear an appeal which is not
      granted by statute or other legislative provision.  It does not appear
      that the ECO's representative took  the  jurisdictional  point  before
      Judge Knowles.  There is no reference to it  in  the  summary  of  the
      Presenting Officer's submissions at paras 21-22 of the  determination.
      Nevertheless, if Judge Knowles did not have jurisdiction then the  ECO
      is entitled to raise it as a ground of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      even though the point was not taken  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (see Virk and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 652).

  12. It would appear, however, that Judge Knowles perfectly  properly  took
      the point for himself only to decide it in the appellant's favour.  At
      para 27 he said this:

           "27.   The  respondent  contends  that,  given  the  appellant's
                 statement that she wished to stay in the UK for a period of
                 1 year, she cannot prove  that  she  is  genuinely  seeking
                 entry as  a  general  visitor  for  a  limited  period  not
                 exceeding 6 months.  In my view, this appeal also raises  a
                 more fundamental jurisdictional issue.  Section 88(2)(c) of
                 the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides
                 that a  person  may  not  appeal  against,  inter  alia,  a
                 decision to refuse entry  clearance  if  that  decision  is
                 taken on the round that the applicant is seeking to  be  in
                 the UK for a period greater  than  that  permitted  by  the
                 Immigration Rules.  It follows that, if I were to find that
                 it is the appellant's intention to remain in the UK  beyond
                 6 months,  there  would  be  no  valid  appeal  before  the
                 Tribunal, let alone the question whether  or  not  she  had
                 proved compliance with the requirements of Paragraph 42  of
                 the Rules."

  13. As we have already noted, he found that the appellant's intention  was
      not to stay in the UK for a period exceeding 6 months, and, therefore,
      on the basis of what he said in para  27  he  concluded  that  he  had
      jurisdiction to deal with the appeal and allowed it under the Rules.

  14. Was the ECO's decision "taken on the ground" that  the  appellant  was
      "seeking to be in the United Kingdom for a period  greater  than  that
      permitted" under para 41 of the Rules?

  15. In the refusal decision the ECO states:

           "The above leads me to doubt  that  you  are  genuinely  seeking
           entry for a limited period not exceeding six months or that  you
           intend to leave the UK  at  the  end  of  your  proposed  visit.
           Therefore, on the balance of probabilities, I am  not  satisfied
           that you meet the requirements (sic) paragraph 42(i) and (ii) of
           HC 395".

  16. The ECO did not specifically rely upon s.88(2)(c) of the 2002 Act.  As
      we have already noted, the decision recognised on its face,  that  the
      appellant was entitled to appeal under s.82(1) of the 2002 Act without
      reference to any limitation on that right of appeal.

  17. One view might be that s.88(2) only applies where the  decision  maker
      both identified a ground falling within sub-paragraphs (a)-(d) of sub-
      section (2) and then recognised  the  effect  of  s.88(2)  before  the
      decision can be said to  have  been  "taken"  on  that  ground.   That
      interpretation is not, in our view,  wholly  without  merit.   If  the
      decision maker wishes to invoke the effect  of  s.82(2)  it  might  be
      considered  entirely  reasonable  that  the  decision   maker   should
      unequivocally state that the relevant ground is being  invoked.   That
      is, however, not the wording of s.88(2) which merely requires that the
      decision be "taken" on the relevant ground and  it  is  not  necessary
      that it be "stated to have been taken" on that ground.

  18. In AM (s.82(2): Restriction on Grounds) Ghana [2009] UK AIT 0002,  the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal considered a case where  the  decision
      maker had relied upon a ground falling within s.88(2) but  which  bore
      no relationship to the application.  There, the Secretary of State had
      refused the appellant's application on the basis that he  was  seeking
      to enter or remain in the UK for a purpose  other  than  one  admitted
      under the Immigration Rules.  That is the ground in  s.88(2)(d).   The
      purpose was stated to be in order to seek medical treatment  but  that
      had been no part of the individual's application.  The  AIT  concluded
      that a mistaken ground such as this, which bore  no  relation  to  the
      application being considered, could not have the effect under  s.88(2)
      of restricting an individual's right of appeal to human rights, asylum
      and race relations grounds.

  19. At [12], the AIT dealt with the Secretary of State's  submission  that
      s.88(2) applied in the following terms:

           "12.  ...If it is correct, it has the effect that the  Secretary
                 of State can deprive an applicant  of  a  right  of  appeal
                 against an adverse decision by asserting that the  decision
                 is made on a ground which has, as in the present  case,  no
                 bearing at all on the application.  We would  be  unwilling
                 to accede to that view  in  the  absence  of  the  clearest
                 statutory provisions. We recognise  of  course  that  if  s
                 88(2) on its true construction deprived the appellant of  a
                 right of appeal in  these  circumstances,  we  are  without
                 jurisdiction to consider any grounds other than  those  set
                 out in s 88(4), however obvious  the  mistake  and  however
                 unjust the  respondent's decision appears to be."

  20. At [14], reflecting in part what we have said above about the  statute
      excluding an appeal where a decision has been "taken" rather  than  is
      "stated to have been taken" on a relevant ground, the AIT continued as
      follows:

           "14.  ...One would normally expect the notice of decision to be,
                 or to include, the authoritive indication  of  the  grounds
                 upon which a decision has been taken.  Whilst  not  wishing
                 to depart from  that  principle  as  a  general  rule,  the
                 wording of the statue does not in our view  require  us  to
                 treat the notice of decision as authoritive in every  case.
                 In the present case, although the reason is  given  in  the
                 notice of decision, that is a reason which appears to  bear
                 no relation to the application.  Despite the wording of the
                 notice of decision, the reason is not one  upon  which  the
                 decision could properly have been taken.  The reason  given
                 must be a mistake.  In the (we hope)  unusual  circumstance
                 of this case, we have decided that we can safely ignore the
                 assertion in the notice of decision that the ground for  it
                 was that the application was being made for a  purpose  not
                 covered by the Immigration Rules.  Instead, we can look  at
                 the realities of the case."

  21. The AIT went on, however, to distinguish between two situations.   The
      first is where the mistaken ground was lawfully open to  the  decision
      maker (where only limited right of appeal would therefore  exist)  and
      one which was unlawful as in AM itself (when s.82(2) did not have that
      effect):

           "15.  This is an usual case, because the ground  stated  is  one
                 which does not appear to have been  open  to  the  decision
                 maker as arising from the application that was made.  Where
                 the  ground  cited  is  one  which  could  arise  from  the
                 application, we think it very unlikely indeed that it  will
                 be right for the ground given in the notice of decision  to
                 be ignored.  That is not the position here.  In so  far  as
                 the refusal  was  an  appropriate  -  and  hence  lawful  -
                 response to the application, it is  a  refusal  which  must
                 have been on grounds other than those alleged.

           16.   To put that  another  way,  in  our  judgment  s  88(4)(d)
                 restricts the grounds of appeal if the reason  cited  is  a
                 lawful (albeit perhaps wrong) response to the  application.
                 If  the  reason  cited  has  nothing   to   do   with   the
                 applications, s 88(2) (d) is of no effect.  In  the  result
                 we have concluded that the appellant's right of  appeal  is
                 not restricted by s 88(2), and  accordingly  that  we  have
                 jurisdiction to deal with all grounds."

  22. In our judgment, Judge Knowles was wrong to conclude  that  s.88(2)(c)
      did not apply on the basis that  he  found  that  the  respondent  had
      wrongly (albeit lawfully) come to the conclusion  that  the  appellant
      intended to stay in the UK for longer than 6 months.  In this  appeal,
      we are satisfied that the ECO did take the decision, at least in part,
      on the ground that the appellant was "seeking" to be in the UK  for  a
      period greater than that allowed by the Rules.  Section 88(2)  applied
      even though Judge Knowles considered that, on the evidence before him,
      the appellant was not seeking to visit the UK for a period longer than
      6 months.  Consequently, the appellant only had  a  limited  right  of
      appeal by virtue of s.88(4) which, for the purposes  of  this  appeal,
      meant that her appeal was limited to human rights grounds.

  23. The question then is whether  the  appellant  had  relied  upon  human
      rights grounds? The notice of appeal refers to a  supporting  document
      which is attached and dated 17 November  2012.   In  that  letter  the
      sponsor (on behalf of the appellant)  puts  forward  inter  alia,  the
      circumstances of the appellant including her intention not to come  to
      the UK for longer than permitted under the visitor rule.   The  letter
      described the appellant as being 83 years of age and that the  sponsor
      provides $200 per month to her mother out of rental income of  a  flat
      inherited by the sponsor in Tashkent.  It also  points  out  that  the
      appellant's other daughter is her only other  relative  in  Uzbekistan
      but she is now visiting her husband in Moscow for a time.  The  letter
      goes on to contend that the appellant's family home and roots  are  in
      Uzbekistan.  However, she is old and lonely and currently without  the
      support of her other daughter. The sponsor points out that it  is  the
      sponsor's intention to bring the appellant to the  UK,  in  part,  "to
      provide her with the temporary safe protection of family".

  24. At the hearing, we explored with Mr Richards who represented  the  ECO
      whether it could properly be said that the  appellant  had,  in  fact,
      appealed relying upon Article 8 of the ECHR.  It seems to us that  the
      sponsor in this letter is asserting the  right  of  the  appellant  to
      enjoy, albeit temporarily, family life with the sponsor in the UK.  It
      is not necessary for an individual, in order to rely upon human rights
      grounds, to refer explicitly to a particular right or provision in the
      European   Convention.    Where   grounds   are   drafted   by   legal
      representatives, it  would  be  usual  to  expect  such  reference  if
      reliance is put upon the European Convention but  when,  as  here,  an
      appellant's case is drafted by a lay person without legal help  it  is
      the substance rather than the  form  of  the  grounds  which  is  more
      significant.  In our judgment, in the particular circumstances of this
      appeal, it is entirely proper  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  was
      (through the statement of the sponsor) relying implicitly upon Article
      8 of the ECHR.

  25. Consequently, we are satisfied that there was a  valid  appeal  before
      the First-tier Tribunal limited to Article 8 grounds.

Re-Making the Decision

  26. Judge Knowles did not, of course, consider Article 8 and it  falls  to
      us to determine the appeal under  Article  8.   The  appellant  cannot
      raise the Immigration Rules as a ground because of s.88(2)(c)  of  the
      2002 Act.

  27. The burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish on a balance of
      probabilities that Art 8.1 is engaged in that the decision  interferes
      with her private and family life.  Thereafter, it  is  for  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer to establish that any such interference is justified
      under Art 8.2.

  28. Has the appellant established that the decision  interferes  with  her
      private and family life?

  29. In addition to the evidence that was before  Judge  Knowles,  we  also
      have a further letter from the sponsor dated 28 May 2013.  There,  the
      sponsor gives a little more information concerning her sister who left
      to support her husband in Moscow in September 2012.  The letter states
      that the appellant's sister lived about 50 yards from the  appellant's
      home.  The sponsor and her sister agreed to look after their mother in
      turn depending on who was available to support her at any  time.   The
      sponsor explains that that was why she and her husband applied  for  a
      one year multiple entry visit visa so that they could look  after  the
      appellant as the need arose.  The sponsor has been employed in the  UK
      for 9 years working as a carer for elderly people.

  30. Given all the circumstances of the appellant including her  age,  that
      she is  currently  living  alone  though  normally  supported  by  her
      daughter in Uzbekistan and  is  receiving  $200  per  month  from  the
      appellant (which supplements  her  pension),  we  are  satisfied  that
      family life exists between the appellant and sponsor and further  that
      the ECO's decision interferes with that family life so  as  to  engage
      Article 8.

  31. Turning to the justification of any such  interference  under  Article
      8.2, the interference is clearly "in accordance with  the  law".   The
      central question is whether it is proportionate in  furtherance  of  a
      legitimate aim and that involves balancing the public interest against
      the interests of the individuals.  In that regard, Judge Knowles  made
      a number of clear findings including that the appellant is a bone fide
      visitor and will not remain in the  UK  for  any  period  exceeding  6
      months.  He concluded that the appellant met the requirements of  para
      41 of the Rules.  Given that, there is, in our  judgment,  nothing  of
      substance to weigh against the interference with the  family  life  of
      the appellant and sponsor in the furtherance of effective  immigration
      control as an aspect of the legitimate aim of furthering the  economic
      well being of the country.

  32. In these  circumstances,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  ECO  has
      established that the public interest outweighs the  interference  with
      the family life of the appellant and sponsor.  Thus, we are  satisfied
      on a balance of probabilities that the decision breaches Article 8  of
      the ECHR.

Decision

  33. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an error  of
      law and we set it aside.

  34. We remake the decision allowing the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We make no fee  award.   We  agree  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision and reasons that no fee award should be made on the basis  that  it
accepted in the grounds of appeal  that  the  application  could  have  been
clearer, in which case, the  respondent's  decision  might  well  have  been
different and the costs of bringing the appeal  should  therefore  lie  with
the appellant.


                               Signed








                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
