

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: VA/45985/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2013                               |On 24 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between


                                 ATIF MUNIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a homosexual Pakistani citizen,  appeals  with  permission
   against the First-tier Tribunal decision dismissing  his  appeal  against
   refusal of entry clearance as a general visitor under paragraphs 56D  and
   41 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and  Articles  8  and  12
   ECHR. Since the proposed visit was not a family  visit,  the  grounds  of
   appeal available to the  appellant  were  limited  to  section  19B  Race
   Relations Act 1976 and/or human rights  grounds  pursuant  to  s.6  Human
   Rights Act 1998.

2. The stated  purpose  of  the  appellant's  visit  was  to  give  him  the
   opportunity to enter into a civil partnership  with  his  partner,  Nadir
   Khan, present but not settled in the United Kingdom.  Mr Khan was a  Tier
   1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant under the  Points-Based  System  pursuant  to
   paragraph 245Z of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

3. Despite his stated intention to return to Saudi Arabia at the end of  his
   visit, if the appellant and Mr Khan entered into a civil partnership,  he
   would then be entitled to remain in the United Kingdom as  his  partner's
   dependant pursuant to paragraph 245C of the Rules.  Mr Khan's evidence to
   the First-tier Tribunal was that he regarded himself as on  a  settlement
   route, via his studies, and intended in due  course  to  seek  indefinite
   leave to remain.

4. When I granted permission to appeal on 25 July 2011, Mr Khan had been  in
   the United Kingdom with leave since 2006. The appellant  was  living  and
   working in Saudi Arabia.  Neither Pakistan nor Saudi Arabia offers  civil
   partnership  ceremonies  or  status  for  homosexual  couples.    In   my
   permission decision, I set out the  basis  of  the  application  and  the
   contended error of law as follows:

       "5.  The appellant renewed his application to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       The proposed grounds of appeal on the  second  application  were  as
       follows:

       (a)   that he met all the  requirements  of  paragraph  56D  of  the
       Rules, and that if all the requirements of that rule  were  met  and
       there was 'a clear Article 8 context' it would be strikingly odd for
       the appellant not to be entitled to succeed under Article 8;

       (b)  ground 2 of the original grounds 'simply seeks to give detailed
       reasons' why the Immigration Judge erred in finding that  Article  8
       was not engaged and/or that there was no interference;

       (c)   Article 12 was capable of encompassing same-sex relationships,
       as the First-tier Tribunal judge acknowledged, but that he had erred
       in  finding  that  the  reference  therein  to  'the  national  laws
       governing the exercise of this right' referred to the laws of  Saudi
       Arabia and Pakistan, rather than to the law of the United Kingdom.

       6.   As regards ground (a), the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
       Immigration  Judge  were  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   met
       paragraphs 41(i) (ii) or (vi) of  the  Rules.   In  particular,  the
       Entry Clearance Officer was concerned that the appellant  would  not
       return to either Saudi Arabia or Pakistan at the end of his marriage
       visit.  There were also concerns regarding  accommodation.    It  is
       clear from the statements of both the appellant and his partner that
       he does intend to join his partner in  the  United  Kingdom  as  his
       dependant, once the civil partnership has been registered,  pursuant
       to the provisions of the points-based system.  Both parties say that
       he will return to Saudi Arabia to do that but, following   Chikwamba
       v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  40,   that
       might be unnecessary if the appellant and sponsor  could  then  show
       that the appellant met all the requirements of the Rule.

       7.    As  regards  ground  (c)  which  concerns  Article   12,   the
       Immigration Judge erred in law in regarding  the  relevant  national
       laws governing the exercise of the right to marry and found a family
       as those of the country of origin.  The appellant  rightly  observes
       that it is the laws of the United Kingdom which are  relevant  here.
       The effect of  the  present  application  would  be  to  enable  the
       appellant to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his  homosexual
       partner who is said to be lawfully present as  a  Tier  1  (General)
       migrant pursuant to paragraph 245C of the Rules.    The  partner  is
       not settled though he considers himself 'en route' to settlement."

5. On 17 November 2011, I set  aside  the  determination  on  the  following
   basis:

    "6.    The appellant  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    (Immigration Judge Doyle) erred in law in  his  determination  in  that
    when considering the right to marry, if it existed in relation to same-
    sex partners, pursuant to Article 12 ECHR, he did so (paragraph 7(m) of
    his determination) in the context of the relevant national laws of  the
    appellant's country of origin (Pakistan) or habitual  residence  (Saudi
    Arabia).   The  appellant  challenged  that  on  the  basis  that   the
    Immigration Judge should have considered his application in relation to
    the laws of the United Kingdom, not of the foreign jurisdictions.

    6.      I  am  satisfied  that  in  so  doing  the  Immigration   Judge
    misdirected himself in law.  The  United  Kingdom's  obligation  is  to
    consider the right to marry in the context of the national laws of this
    jurisdiction, not the foreign jurisdictions.  I am also satisfied  that
    such misdirection affected his consideration of Articles 8, 12  and  14
    and that had he not so misdirected himself he  might  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion."

6. I directed the parties to make any further  submissions  within  28  days
   and indicated that as there was no new evidence from  the  appellant,  no
   oral hearing or evidence was required.

7. Nothing was received.  On 18 May 2012, the appellant's  solicitors  wrote
   enquiring about the outcome and asking for an oral hearing.  The Tribunal
   responded as follows:

    "The appeal will be considered on the papers as indicated in the  Upper
    Tribunal directions of 17 November 2011.  Either party may prepare  and
    file a written submission to be received no  later  than  the  15  June
    2012."

8. No submissions were ever received.  It is unclear to me why the case  was
   not listed as a paper  case  thereafter.   I  now  consider  it,  on  the
   documents and matters before me.

9. The facts set out in the original determination are as follows:

    (a)    Mr Khan is a senior web designer for Education  First.   He  has
    been in the United Kingdom since 2006 and has had his leave extended on
    several occasions during that time.  He considers himself to  be  on  a
    settlement route.

    (b)    Mr Munir works in Saudi Arabia.

    (c)    They have been living apart since 2006 (seven years now).

    (d)    Mr Munir sought four weeks' leave as a general visitor, to  come
    to the United Kingdom to enter into a civil partnership with  Mr  Khan,
    and then return to Saudi Arabia.

    (e)    Neither Pakistan nor Saudi Arabia has civil marriage  ceremonies
    or status.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that family life  had  not  yet
   come into existence between these parties and that, by  reason  of  their
   long separation, the private life which the United Kingdom  must  respect
   was, in their case, conducted at  a  distance.  Failure  to  grant  entry
   clearance would not change the situation they themselves had chosen,  nor
   would it end their relationship.  He relied on SS (Malaysia) v  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2004] UKIAT 00091*.

11. The question therefore whether the decision to  refuse  entry  clearance
   is unlawful, having regard to the  provisions  of  Article  12,  possibly
   considered with Article 14, of the ECHR.  Article 12 provides that

      "Men and women of marriageable age have the  right  to  marry  and  to
      found a family, according to the national laws governing the  exercise
      of this right".

12. The question is whether that extends to civil partnerships, and  if  so,
   whether it should override the Immigration Rules and require  the  United
   Kingdom  to  admit  persons  for  the  purpose  of  entering  into  civil
   partnership appellant has not put forward any written arguments  at  all,
   despite the regrettable delay of almost two years in  the  appeal  coming
   back before me.  He was given two separate opportunities to do so.

13. The leading decision on the right to marry between persons of  the  same
   sex remains that of Schalk and Kopf v Austria 30141/04 [2010] ECHR  1996,
   in which the court held that, taking  Article  8  with  14,  family  life
   applied between a homosexual couple. The case  concerns  the  distinction
   between the  rights  available  in  a  registered  partnership  (a  civil
   partnership in the United Kingdom) as opposed to  marriage.    The  court
   held that:

    "105.  The Court cannot but note that there  is  an  emerging  European
    consensus towards legal recognition of same-sex couples. Moreover, this
    tendency has developed rapidly  over  the  past  decade.  Nevertheless,
    there is not yet a majority of States providing for  legal  recognition
    of same-sex couples. The area  in  question  must  therefore  still  be
    regarded as one of evolving rights with no established consensus, where
    States must also enjoy a margin of appreciation in the  timing  of  the
    introduction of legislative changes (see Courten, cited above; see also
    M.W. v. the United Kingdom (dec.), no. 11313/02,  23  June  2009,  both
    relating to the introduction of the Civil Partnership Act in the United
    Kingdom). ...

    108.   The Court starts from its findings above, that States are  still
    free, under Article 12 of the Convention as well as  under  Article  14
    taken in conjunction with Article 8, to restrict access to marriage  to
    different-sex couples."

14. The findings of fact in the present case show  an  attenuated  level  of
   family and/or private life between this  couple,  who  have  been  living
   apart since 2006.  The United Kingdom has civil partnership laws but  the
   appellant's partner is not settled here and it is clear  that,  at  least
   for the time being, the unqualified right in Article 12,  even  bolstered
   by Article 14, applies only to marriage and that states have a margin  of
   appreciation as to whether they apply it to marriage between  persons  of
   the same sex.  There is no requirement to promote  civil  partnership  by
   permitting entry clearance for that purpose.  Accordingly,  although  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself as to the  applicable  laws
   in relation to Article 12, the appellants are not entitled to the benefit
   of Article 12 in these proceedings.

15. The appellant's challenge to  the  Article  8  part  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge's reasoning is erroneous.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's
   reasons for reaching the conclusions which he did on private  and  family
   life are proper, intelligible and adequate to support his conclusions.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remake it by dismissing the appeal.




|                                      |                                     |
|Date:  24 June 2013                   |Signed:                              |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |Judith Gleeson                       |
|                                      |Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |







