
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: VA/49511/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st August 2013                              |On 5th August 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                Safwan Patel

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed on behalf of Khan & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Mr Safwan Patel, born on 21st June 1992 is a citizen  of
    Zambia.  The Appellant applied to the Respondent for entry clearance to
    enter the United Kingdom as a family visitor under paragraph 41  of  HC
    395 (as amended).  In a notice of immigration decision dated  17th  May
    2012, it was refused by the Respondent who was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a limited period
    as stated by him not exceeding six months, nor was he satisfied that he
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of the  period  of  the
    visit (paragraph 41(i) and (ii)).  Further,  it  was  stated  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that he would  be  maintained
    and accommodated whilst in the UK  or  meet  the  cost  of  the  onward
    journey (paragraph 41(vi) and (vii)).   Additionally,  it  was  refused
    under paragraph 320(7A).

 2. The  basis  for  that  decision  is  as  follows.   The  Appellant  had
    previously made an application  for  settlement  which  led  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to doubt that his intentions were  to  stay  for  one
    week to attend a wedding.  It is now stated that his father was funding
    the proposed visit and previously stated that a  different  person  was
    his father and that they were deceased.  The discrepancies called  into
    question the Appellant's credibility and therefore the Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  he
    intended to stay the period that  he  had  stated  or  that  given  the
    circumstances outlined above he would comply  with  the  conditions  of
    visitor entry clearance.  It was also stated in the refusal letter that
    the Appellant's father was funding the visit and  he  had  submitted  a
    letter of support and a bank statement in support of  the  application.
    However as he previously stated  that  his  father  was  deceased  that
    called into question who the Sponsor actually was.  The Entry Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that he was related as claimed and that there
    was a genuine offer of sponsorship.  Therefore  he  was  not  satisfied
    that he would be maintained and accommodated whilst in the UK  or  able
    to meet the costs of the onward journey.

 3. In respect of the refusal under paragraph 320(7A) it was asserted  that
    the Appellant had made a false representation  and  failed  to  declare
    facts that were material to his application which related to a previous
    application for settlement and the details that were contained in it.

 4. Following notification of  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    appeal, the Appellant exercised his right of appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He provided a  number  of  documents  before  the  Tribunal.
    Those documents were considered by the Entry  Clearance  Manager  in  a
    review and it was noted by him that the application was refused as  the
    Appellant had named parents that differed to his stated  parents  in  a
    previous application.  It transpired that his birth parents were killed
    in a car accident and that he and his  siblings  were  adopted  by  his
    uncle and aunt which he now calls his  parents.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer noted that he was prepared to accept that explanation given the
    documentation that had  been  provided  and  therefore  set  aside  the
    element of refusal under paragraph 320(7A) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The remaining part of the refusal was maintained.

 5. The appeal was listed as a paper hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Landes).  In a determination promulgated on 22nd  February  2012
    the judge dismissed the appeal.

 6.   An application was made to appeal that decision and on 28th  February
    2012 First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant granted permission to  appeal  for
    the following reasons:-

         "The grounds, which were in time, submit that the judge has made an
         irrational finding and considered immaterial matters including  the
         previous settlement application withdrawn in 2009, made a  material
         misdirection  of  law  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  previous
         settlement application which  was  not  judicially  determined  but
         withdrawn, and made findings contrary to the principle of  fairness
         by taking notice of a  previous  application  which  had  not  been
         disclosed as part of the appeal bundle and which had not  been  the
         subject of a judicial  determination  and  gave  the  Appellant  no
         opportunity to comment upon the same.

         It is arguable that in  making  findings  upon  a  prior  withdrawn
         application without enabling the Appellant to comment upon the same
         (paragraph 17), that the judge may have acted in a manner which  is
         procedurally unfair amounting to an arguable  error  of  law.   The
         grounds may all be argued."

 7. On 18th June 2012  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  gave  the  following
    decision and directions:-

         "Having regard to all the circumstances, including the  failure  of
         the Respondent to serve within the permitted time a response, which
         adequately explains why the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         does not contain an error of law and should not be set  aside,  the
         Upper Tribunal, pursuant to Rule 34, has decided without a  hearing
         that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an  error
         of law, as identified in the grant of  permission,  read  with  the
         grounds of application, and should be set aside and remade  by  the
         Upper Tribunal.

         The grounds argued that there should be an oral  hearing,  although
         the previous determination was decided on the basis of  the  papers
         in the file, since there has been a previous settlement application
         the circumstances of which will need to be explained.   The  appeal
         will  accordingly  proceed  to  a  hearing  for  the   purpose   of
         considering evidence relevant to the remaking of the  decision  and
         the following directions are hereby given:-

         The parties shall prepare for the hearing on the basis that none of
         the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  shall  stand.   No
         later than seven days before the hearing the parties must serve  on
         the  Upper  Tribunal  and  each  other  all  documentary   evidence
         (including witness statements) upon which they intend  to  rely  at
         the hearing."

 8. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal initially on 6th  June  2013.
    At that hearing Mr Pipe appeared on behalf of the Appellant and it  was
    clear that he had not been served  with  the   information  and  bundle
    relating to the settlement application.  Whilst they were  provided  to
    him, with the Sponsor currently out of the jurisdiction he was not able
    to take any instructions on this point.  Thus the matter was  adjourned
    part heard to be resumed.

 9. The hearing resumed with Mr Pipe in attendance.   At  this  hearing  Mr
    Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer appeared on behalf  of
    the Respondent.

10. The Appellant had provided a bundle of documentation numbering 43 pages
    which included documentary  evidence  relating  to  the  death  of  his
    parents and his subsequent adoption by the Sponsor  and  also  included
    witness statements of both the Appellant and the  Sponsor.   A  further
    supplemental bundle of documents was also served upon the Tribunal  and
    the Respondent under cover of a  letter  dated  15th  July  2013  which
    contained a letter from the Appellant's school dated July 12th 2013 and
    a supplemental witness  statement  from  the  Appellant  and  from  the
    Sponsor.

11. The Tribunal heard no oral evidence as the Sponsor was currently out of
    the jurisdiction in Zambia caring for his mother who  was  unwell.   In
    those circumstances I heard submissions from the parties.

12.  Mr Pipe relied upon the skeleton argument that he had produced  before
    the  Tribunal  in  June  and  in  addition  made  the  following   oral
    submissions.  He submitted  that  this  was  a  genuine  visit  by  the
    Appellant.  He invited the Tribunal to consider the  explanation  given
    by the Sponsor in the witness statement concerning the circumstances of
    the settlement application that had been made in 2009.  He also invited
    the Tribunal to consider the statement of the Appellant at page 8 which
    is consistent with that statement.  His circumstances at  the  date  of
    decision were that he remained in Zambia as a student  at  the  Islamic
    Institution and was in education.  As to the matters  set  out  in  the
    letter dated 20th July 2009 which was sent by  the  Appellant's  former
    solicitors in relation to the settlement application, he submitted that
    the circumstances  surrounding  that  application  had  been  explained
    further by the Appellant in his  statement.   At  paragraph  3  of  the
    statement he set out that at the time he was still a minor resident  in
    Zambia and that it was his cousin and adopted  brother,  Maksud  Patel,
    who was based in the United Kingdom and Sponsor for the application who
    instructed ASK Solicitors which had led to that letter  being  written.
    He believed that Maksud Patel may have been mistaken  about  the  dates
    but in any event he did not believe there to be  any  real  discrepancy
    because this was a case in which he lived amongst a very close extended
    family.  Mr Pipe submitted that it was  clear  from  the  documentation
    that the application had been driven  by  Maksud  Patel  based  in  the
    United Kingdom and had in effect, reduced the carers of  the  Appellant
    to a chronology rather than taking into account what was a fluid  state
    of affairs of care for this particular Appellant.   He  submitted  that
    there was corroborative evidence of this  in  the  supplemental  bundle
    including the ECM decision referring to the  taking  of  a  brother  to
    Australia.  The fact that Khalil was listed as a  guardian  in  his  OA
    settlement application (see question 7.1) and also page 9  of  the  VAF
    stated that the Appellant was  supported  by  his  uncle  Khalil.   The
    letter, whilst it gave a strict chronology did not pay regard  to  what
    was in reality a close-knit family and that Khalil had  been  the  lead
    person and the one who had been named in the adoption order.   Thus  he
    submitted that there was no inconsistency in that  information  and  it
    had been fully and properly explained by the Appellant and the Sponsor.



13. Dealing with the real issue which related to intention to  return,  the
    Appellant had visited the United Kingdom on other occasions in 1998 and
    2005 and also  he  had  visited  Australia  and  had  returned  at  the
    conclusion of the visits.  He was a student at  the  Islamic  Institute
    having previously attended at the LICEF  School.   He  lives  with  his
    guardian  Khalil  Ahmed  Patel  and  aunt  and  has  a  sister   living
    separately.  He also has brother Ibrahim in Zambia  thus  there  was  a
    wide family network and had a very good immigration  history.   He  was
    now an  adult  involved  in  vocational  studies  and  considering  the
    evidence as a whole, the previous application, which was withdrawn  did
    not undermine the current one.

14. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the Secretary of State, noted  that  there  had
    indeed been an agent used in 2009 to complete the form and that  rather
    than  it  being  a  direct  conflict  of  evidence  in  the  settlement
    application it was really a matter of nuance  rather  than  matters  of
    substance and that he accepted that there had not been any  attempt  to
    mislead the authorities.  He did not seek to resist the application any
    further noting that his circumstances were different and  that  he  was
    now an adult applying in his own right.

15. I reserved my determination.

16.   The issue in the case relates to the intention of  the  Appellant  to
    return to Zambia at the conclusion of the visit and  whether  he  is  a
    genuine visitor.  As Mr Pipe states, the issue of paragraph 320(7A) and
    the refusal on that ground was withdrawn by the Entry Clearance Manager
    following a review as it was  accepted  that  the  documents  disclosed
    demonstrated  that  there  had  been  a  misunderstanding  as  to   the
    Appellant's parents and their subsequent deaths and who had  maintained
    the care of the Appellant and his siblings since that time.   Similarly
    it is common ground between the parties that the issue  of  maintenance
    and accommodation falls away as it is accepted that the Appellant  does
    have a Sponsor in the UK who can maintain and accommodate him.

17. The issue relates to the intention.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    not satisfied about the Appellant's intention relying on  the  previous
    application for settlement which it is  said  demonstrates  a  wish  to
    remain in the UK rather than to simply visit.

18.   I have therefore considered the evidence before the Tribunal and  the
    submissions that have been made on behalf of both parties.  Having done
    so, I find the following facts from  that  evidence.   The  Appellant's
    biological parents died in a car accident in 1995 (I refer to the death
    certificates in the bundle).  The Appellant was  3  years  old  at  the
    time.  Following the death of his parents, the care  of  the  Appellant
    and his siblings (Ibrahim and Summaya Patel) was shared by two  uncles,
    Rashid Patel and Khalil Patel but as he spent more time with his  uncle
    Khalil it was he who submitted an application for  his  adoption.   The
    documentation before  me  demonstrates  that  on  3rd  March  1998,  an
    adoption order was made in respect of the Appellant in  favour  of  his
    uncle Khalil Patel in Zambia (he was also the Appellant's  uncle).   It
    appears from the evidence that the Appellant's full time care and  that
    of his siblings was assumed by Khalil Patel who had six children of his
    own, three in the United Kingdom, two in Australia and one  in  Zambia.
    It is also clear from the documents that between the years 1996 to 2008
    the Appellant studied at the LICEF School and the document demonstrates
    that it was his uncle Khalil who was the guardian and paid the fees for
    that education.

19. The circumstances which led to the settlement application are also  set
    out in the documents before me.  In 2009, Ibrahim went to Australia and
    his sister at that time was living independently in Zambia.  Given  the
    age and ill health of the adoptive parents, Makshud Patel in the United
    Kingdom took steps to Sponsor the  Appellant  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However  before  the  application  could  be  considered  any
    further, Mr Mohammed Patel who had previously  emigrated  to  Australia
    moved back to Zambia and was thus  able  to  care  for  the  Appellant.
    Given the change of circumstances a decision was taken to withdraw  the
    settlement application as it was no longer necessary.

20. I have carefully considered the documents and the submissions  made  by
    the respective advocates.   I  am  satisfied  that  when  the  previous
    application for settlement was made  the  Appellant  was  a  minor  and
    therefore others had taken  the  decision  for  him.   The  Appellant's
    Sponsor Maksud Patel had made the application and I am  satisfied  that
    that application  was  withdrawn  as  the  Sponsor's  brother  Mohammed
    returned to Zambia and  was  able  to  look  after  the  Appellant  and
    therefore no reason existed for the settlement application.

21. There is an  issue which relates to the contents of the letter sent  by
    ASK Solicitors which set out a chronology of carers  of  the  Appellant
    which contrasts with the account given for the  visit  application.   I
    had the opportunity of considering the evidence further  and  in  doing
    so, I am satisfied that there is no real conflict  in  the  ASK  letter
    concerning the circumstances at the time of the settlement application.
     It is clear that the Appellant had a close extended family  in  Zambia
    who had attempted to care for the Appellant and his siblings  following
    the death of their parents in a road accident.  It is natural that  one
    person would be named on the adoption order which was Khalil, but I  am
    satisfied that other family members had  responsibility  for  his  care
    during that time this being the cultural norm in Asian families.  There
    is support in the documents to show Khalil Patel as the main carer.  He
    was named as the guardian in the OA application (paragraph 7.1) and  at
    page 9 was named as the person supporting the Appellant.   He  is  also
    named between the years of 1996 to 2008 as the person  paying  for  the
    Appellant's  school  fees.   I  am  satisfied   on   the   balance   of
    probabilities that the letter  from  ASK  solicitors  setting  out  the
    chronology may have misunderstood what the position was in  respect  of
    the Appellant and I am satisfied that there was no conflict  concerning
    who were his carers.

22. Therefore I consider the circumstances relating  to  this  application.
    The Appellant is now over 18 and is a full-time student and  is  at  an
    Islamic  institution.   He  has  demonstrated  in  the  past   a   good
    immigration history having made visits to  the  UK  previously  and  to
    Australia.  On all occasions  he  has  returned  back  to  Zambia,  his
    country of nationality.  In addition,  he  has  close  family  members,
    indeed they are his only family and those who are the  closest  to  him
    given the circumstances of his parents' death.  Thus he retains all his
    real familial links in Zambia.  He was a  minor  at  the  time  of  the
    application for settlement and it was made on his behalf rather than by
    him.  I do not find that this reflects  upon  his  credibility  or  his
    intention in the application currently before the Tribunal to visit the
    UK.  Thus I am satisfied that he has no  intention  to  settle  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  indeed  there  is  no  evidence  before  me  that
    demonstrates that there are any such circumstances to  support  such  a
    claim.

23. Therefore having taken into  account  all  the  evidence  and  for  the
    reasons that I have given, I am satisfied that he has demonstrated that
    he intends to return at the conclusion of the visit, which is  intended
    to be a short family visit and that he is  a  genuine  visitor  to  the
    United Kingdom.  In those circumstances, the appeal is allowed.

Decision

The appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date 1/8/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
