
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

         KL (Student: IDI "warning" about progress) India [2007] UKAIT 00005


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House                             Promulgated on: 12
January 2007
Date of Hearing:  13 December 2006

                                   Before


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

A person seeking an extension of stay as a  student  must  satisfy  all  the
requirements of paragraph  60  of  HC  395,  including  paragraph  60(v)  by
showing 'satisfactory progress' in his course of study.  The  obligation  in
IDI paragraph 3.16.3 that the Secretary of State should warn a student  when
granting an extension of leave where he has doubts  about  her  satisfactory
progress does not detract from  the  need  to  satisfy  the  requirement  in
paragraph 60(v).  Thus, the  obligation  to  warn  only  applies  where  the
Secretary of State resolves his  doubts  in  the  student's  favour  and  so
grants leave.  The purpose of  the  warning  is  to  alert  the  student  to
potential difficulties should a future application for leave  be  made.   It
follows that a  student  who  does  not  meet  the  'satisfactory  progress'
requirement in paragraph 60(v) is not entitled to leave or a warning.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 8  December  1981.
     She appeals against a decision of the respondent taken on 17 May  2006
     refusing to vary her leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
     student under paragraph  62  with  reference  to  paragraph  60(v)  of
     Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395.  Her appeal against
     that  decision  was  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  Jhirad  in   a
     determination notified on 25 August 2006.  The  appellant  sought  and
     was granted reconsideration of that  decision  by  Senior  Immigration
     Judge Allen on 8 September 2006.  As a result of that, the matter  now
     comes before us.

  2. The appellant was granted leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
     student on 15 January 2003 for a period  of  two  years  in  order  to
     undertake an accountancy course at  the  College  of  Central  London.
     Shortly after she arrived, the  appellant  switched  colleges  to  the
     Financial Training Company (FTC) in London where  she  again  followed
     accountancy  courses  and  examinations  under  the  auspices  of  the
     Chartered Institute of Management Accountancy (CIMA).  On application,
     she was granted further leave to remain as a student  until  30  April
     2006.  On 4 April 2006 she applied for an extension of that leave  but
     was refused on 17 May 2006.

  3. The reasons for the decision are set out in the  Reasons  for  Refusal
     Letter dated 17 May 2006 as follows:

        "On 21 April 2006 you applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom as a student.

        An official has  considered  your  application  on  behalf  of  the
        Secretary of State.

        In view of the fact that  you  failed  examinations  in  May  2004,
        November 2004 and November 2005 and have only passed 3 subjects  in
        3 years it has been decided that you have not produced satisfactory
        evidence that you have made satisfactory progress in your course of
        study,  including  the  taking  and   passing   of   any   relevant
        examinations.

        Therefore, you do not satisfy the requirements of the I R for  this
        category and it has been decided to  refuse  your  application  for
        leave to remain as a student under the published immigration  rules
        paragraph 62 with reference to 60(v) of HC 393 (as amended).

        In making the decision to refuse  your  application,  consideration
        has been given to the following:

        1. On 15 January 2003 you were granted leave to  enter  the  United
           Kingdom as a student until 30 January 2005.

        2. On 08 March 2005 you were granted further leave to remain  as  a
           student until 30 April 2006.

        3. On 21 April 2006 you applied for further leave to remain in  the
           United Kingdom as a student.

        4. On 21 April 2006 you produced examination results  for  November
           2003, May 2004,  November  2004,  May  2005  and  November  2005
           showing you had passed 3 examinations out of a total of 11 taken
           during that time."

  4. In dismissing the appellant's appeal, Immigration Judge Jhirad in  her
     determination set  out  a  summary  of  the  appellant's  progress  as
     follows:

        "9.      The summary of this is that in November 2003 she  sat  two
             papers and failed one.  In May 2004  she  sat  two  papers  and
             failed both.  In November 2004 she sat  two  papers  and  again
             failed both.  In May 2005 she sat two papers and  passed  both.
             In November 2005 she sat four papers and failed  all.   In  May
             2006 she again sat four papers, passed one and failed  three  -
             these being the papers she had taken and failed previously.

        10.      The enrolment letter from FTC dated 7  March  2005  stated
             that attendance is compulsory each day and involves  18  to  24
             hours of formal tuition each week.  In addition,  students  are
             required to attend tutorial sessions and are given work  to  be
             completed on their own.  It  goes  on  to  say:  students  must
             attend a minimum of three subjects each term  to  satisfy  visa
             requirements. The examinations are modular and are  held  every
             six months.  That does not indicate to me, as the appellant has
             stated in her statement that whether one takes examinations  or
             not is a matter of discretion for the student.  I find from the
             FTC letter that there are relevant examinations  to  be  taken.
             Furthermore, there is nothing in the FTC letter to suggest that
             the number of examinations a student sits per term or per annum
             is a matter for them."

  5. In the light of this, the Immigration  Judge  concluded  at  paragraph
     [11] of her determination:

        "From the evidence before me, I  do  not  find  the  appellant  has
        fulfilled the  requirements  of  paragraph  60(v)  of  HC  395,  as
        amended.  She has not shown evidence of  satisfactory  progress  in
        the course of  study  including  the  taking  and  passing  of  any
        relevant examinations."

  6. In addition, it was argued  before  the  Immigration  Judge  that  the
     respondent's refusal was not in accordance with an IDI because she had
     not been  warned  about  her  unsatisfactory  progress  prior  to  the
     refusal.  The Immigration Judge's reasons are  set  out  at  paragraph
     [12] of her determination as follows:

        "The  appellant  produced   credible   evidence   of   satisfactory
        attendance.  Mr Bhatoo submitted that the respondent failed to give
        the  appellant  a  warning  under  its  IDI  before  refusing   the
        application.  Paragraph 3.16.3 of  the  IDI  states:   As  a  rule.
        Information is provided on student's  attendance  and  progress  on
        each application for an extension  of  stay.   The  student  should
        provide evidence of all  examinations  he  has  attempted  and  the
        results as required by  the  application  form.   Where  there  are
        doubts as to progress, but attendance is satisfactory and all other
        requirements are met, leave may be granted but with a warning  that
        failure to provide satisfactory progress could result in a  refusal
        to grant a further extension of stay in that capacity.  I find that
        the giving of a warning is a matter of the exercise of a discretion
        on the part of the respondent's caseworker and is not mandatory."

  7. Reconsideration was ordered on the sole ground that the  Secretary  of
     State may have acted unlawfully by departing from his published policy
     before refusing to grant the appellant further leave to remain.

  8.  At  the  hearing  before  us,   neither   the   appellant   nor   her
     representatives, AKL Solicitors appeared.  It is clear from the  court
     file that notice of  the  reconsideration  hearing  was  sent  to  the
     appellant's representatives and the  appellant  herself  in  a  notice
     dated 23 November 2006.  No satisfactory explanation for their absence
     has been given and so we proceeded to hear the appeal in  the  absence
     of the appellant and her representative under rule 19(1) of the Asylum
     and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005 No 230).

  9. The relevant Immigration Rule is paragraph 60 of HC 395 which provides
     as follows:

         "60.     The requirements for an extension of stay as a student are
             that the applicant:

             ...

              (v)      can show evidence of satisfactory  progress  in  his
                   course of study including the taking and passing  of  any
                   relevant examinations; ...."




 10. The grounds of review do not assert that the Immigration  Judge  erred
     in his application of paragraph 60.  It is clear to us  that  she  did
     not err.  In SW and Others (paragraph 60(v): meaning  of  "including")
     Jamaica [2006] UKAIT 00054, the Tribunal concluded that the meaning of
     paragraph 60(v) is as follows:

        "7.       The  phraseology  of  the  rule  is  slightly   peculiar.
             Whatever may be its precise effect in the course of an  appeal,
             on the face it does not require the appellant to establish that
             she has made satisfactory progress by  producing  evidence:  it
             requires her to  produce  evidence  of  certain  matters.   The
             evidence is  required  to  be  of  "satisfactory  progress  ...
             including the taking and passing of any relevant examinations".
              It does not appear to us that it  is  possible  to  read  that
             phrase  as  meaning  that  evidence  of  passing  any  relevant
             examinations is an optional extra.  The clear  meaning  of  the
             words is that whatever other evidence  is  also  provided,  the
             applicant is required to show  that  she  has  both  taken  and
             passed any "relevant examinations"."

 11. Thus, the appellant was required  to  show  that  she  had  taken  all
     relevant examinations in her course of study and had passed them.   As
     is clear from paragraph [9] of the Immigration  Judge's  determination
     which we set out earlier, in the period November 2003 until May  2006,
     the appellant sat sixteen examinations and only passed four  of  them.
     It has not been suggested that these examinations were not part of her
     "course of study" and the Immigration Judge's conclusion that she  has
     failed to meet the requirement in paragraph 60(v) is unassailable.

 12. We turn now to consider the relevance of the IDI relied upon.   It  is
     contained in Chapter 3, Section 3 -  "Leave  to  Remain  for  Students
     (General)".  Paragraph 3.16.3 is in the following terms:

        "3.16.3  Unsuccessful Students

                 As a rule, information is provided on student's  attendance
                 and progress on each application for an extension of  stay.
                 The student should provide evidence of all examinations  he
                 has  attempted  and  the  results  as   required   by   the
                 application form.  Where there are doubts  as  to  progress
                 but attendance is satisfactory and all  other  requirements
                 are met, leave may be  granted  but  with  a  warning  that
                 failure to produce evidence of satisfactory progress  could
                 result in the refusal to grant a further extension of  stay
                 in that capacity."

 13. It is this that is relied upon by the appellant.  It is  said  on  her
     behalf that the Secretary of State failed to apply this policy because
     he did not warn her before refusing  to  grant  an  extension  of  her
     leave.  In the grounds, it is said on behalf of the appellant that the
     Immigration Judge should have allowed her appeal on that basis.

 14. Mr Deller, who represented the respondent, submitted that  the  policy
     only applied on its face to situations where the  Secretary  of  State
     considers that "there are doubts as to progress".  He  submitted  that
     in the case of the appellant the Secretary of State had no  doubts  as
     to her lack of progress and therefore the policy did  not  apply.   He
     submitted that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  previous
     grant of leave on 8 March 2005 was one which fell within the terms  of
     the policy giving rise to, as he put it, a warnable issue.

 15. The correct effect of paragraph 3.16.3 of the IDI is  not  immediately
     obvious.  It might be  said  to  contemplate  a  situation  where  the
     Secretary of State is not satisfied about the 'satisfactory  progress'
     requirement  in  paragraph  60(v)  of  the   Immigration   Rules   but
     nevertheless is prepared to grant an extension of stay with a  warning
     to the applicant that a further grant of leave may  be  refused  where
     there is a "failure to produce evidence of satisfactory progress" next
     time around.  Put in this way, it seems to us that  the  Secretary  of
     State would, if he were to grant leave to remain  in  accordance  with
     this paragraph, be exercising his discretion outside  the  Immigration
     Rules since he would not be satisfied of  a  specific  requirement  of
     them, namely paragraph 60(v).

 16. There is, however,  an  alternative  understanding  of  how  paragraph
     3.16.3  operates.   It  is  as  follows.   When   deciding   upon   an
     application,  the  Secretary  of  State  may,  when  considering   the
     evidence,  have  doubts  about  the  satisfactory  progress   of   the
     appellant.  Nevertheless,  having  considered  the  evidence,  he  may
     conclude on balance that  satisfactory  progress  is  shown.   In  the
     circumstances, he is satisfied that the requirement in paragraph 60(v)
     is met and grants leave under the  Rules.   However,  because  of  the
     doubts raised in the process of his deliberation he warns  or  advises
     the appellant of those doubts  to  assist  the  applicant  should  any
     future application for an extension of leave be contemplated.

 17. The obvious attraction of this interpretation is that the Secretary of
     State always makes a decision under the Rules.  He decides to grant an
     extension of leave because the Rules are satisfied either patently  or
     after  due  deliberation  resolving  any  doubts  in  favour  of   the
     appellant.  Alternatively, the Secretary of State refuses to grant the
     extension of leave because he is not satisfied on  the  evidence  that
     satisfactory progress has been demonstrated.

 18. We consider that this  latter  explanation  of  how  paragraph  3.16.3
     operates to be preferable.  There is no reason to believe that the IDI
     is concerned with the exercise of discretion outside the Rules, i.e. a
     departure from  them.    Rather,  the  IDI  is  better  understood  as
     indicating how - in one particular instance  where  there  is  initial
     doubt about the strength of the applicant's case - he will act  having
     decided that the Immigration Rules are in fact met.   The IDI is  not,
     in our judgment, dealing with the situation where the appellant fails,
     whether obviously or after some contemplation, on the evidence to  met
     the 'satisfactory progress' requirement.

 19. In our view, therefore, Mr Deller's submission is a complete answer to
     the appellant's argument in this appeal.   The  IDI  only  applies  in
     situations where the Secretary of  State  has  (a)  doubts  about  the
     appellant's progress and (b) resolves those doubts in the  applicant's
     favour.     Here,  given  the  appellant's  poor  success  record   in
     examinations, it is clear that the Secretary of State  had  no  doubts
     and concluded that her progress was not satisfactory and as  a  result
     he refused to extend her leave.  The IDI simply does not apply in such
     a case where the applicant fails under  the  Rules.    Therefore,  the
     Immigration Judge was correct to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

 20. For the foregoing reasons we do  not  consider  that  the  Immigration
     Judge materially erred in law in dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal.
     The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  in  accordance  with   the
     Immigration Rules and in accordance with the  law.   The  decision  to
     dismiss the appeal stands.











                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                        Date:


