

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

   RT (medical reports - causation of scarring) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00009

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |
|On  7 December 2007                             |
|                                                |


                                   Before


                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between


                                     RT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


   Where a medical report is tendered in support of a claim that injuries or
   scarring were caused by actors of  persecution  or  serious  harm,  close
   attention should be paid to the guidance set out by the Court  of  Appeal
   in SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.  Where the  doctor  makes  findings
   that there is a degree of consistency between the  injuries/scarring  and
   the appellant's claimed causes which admit of there being other  possible
   causes (whether  many,  few  or  unusually  few),  it  is  of  particular
   importance that the report  specifically  examines  those  to  gauge  how
   likely they are, bearing in mind what is  known  about  the  individual's
   life history and experiences.

Representation
For the appellant: Mr J Martin of Counsel instructed by Nag & Co
For the respondent: Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and is a  Tamil.  This  is  a
      reconsideration of a determination  by Immigration  Judge  D  J  Baker
      notified  following  a  hearing  on  24  July  2007   dismissing   the
      appellant's appeal against a decision dated 21 May  2007  refusing  to
      grant asylum and a decision of the same date refusing leave  to  enter
      the United Kingdom. To avoid confusion we should  mention  that  there
      are two "Martins" referred to in our decision:  one  Mr  J  Martin  of
      Counsel; the other, Mr A Martin who is a Consultant  in  Accident  and
      Emergency medicine. They are not related.

   2. The basis of the appellant's account was that his brother  had  joined
      the LTTE after his father had been killed in 1991 and he  himself  had
      joined the LTTE in 1995 and had military training. The LTTE  sent  him
      to Mullaithivu to gather information on the army, to Vanni to  recruit
      for them and to Jaffna to gather intelligence. In August 2000  he  was
      arrested by the army, detained  and  tortured.  He  escaped  from  the
      hospital (where he had been transferred) and went back  to  Vanni.  He
      subsequently left the LTTE and went to Colombo from where he  arranged
      his departure from Sri Lanka with the help of an agent.

   3. Upon  this  account  the  immigration  judge  made  mixed  credibility
      findings. She found that the appellant was  a  Tamil  who  had  (shop)
      employment in Jaffna, that his father was  killed  in  1991  during  a
      bombing incident and that his brother had joined the LTTE and had been
      in the UK since before the  appellant's  arrival.  She  also  accepted
      that:

         "... the appellant had become involved with the LTTE  and  assisted
         them at a low level by  providing  some  information  to  them  and
         putting up posters whilst working in a shop  in  Jaffna.  Prior  to
         that he helped the movement  and  was  involved  in  publicity  and
         publicising the movement for school children."


   4. However she found that his claim to have  been  arrested  by  the  Sri
      Lankan army and tortured and to  have  escaped  from  hospital  was  a
      fabrication. She stated:

         "62. I have considered the risk factors to this  Appellant  on  the
         basis of my findings of fact. I have found that he has not been  of
         previous interest to the authorities and has not been  detained  so
         there will be no records held which would place him at risk. He did
         not escape.


         63. He has been a low level member of the LTTE  but  a  significant
         period of time has elapsed since he was in Sri Lanka.  His  brother
         was a member of the  LTTE  but  had  come  to  the  UK  before  the
         Appellant left Sri Lanka. He is not  extensively  scarred  and  the
         objective evidence suggests the scars would not put him at risk per
         se. No recent evidence was  placed  before  me  as  to  the  likely
         situation at the airport. Paragraph  32.13 of the May  [2007]  COIR
         indicates that most are questioned briefly and are not asked  about
         asylum claims.


         64. In the light of the objective evidence, I find as a  fact  that
         he would not be at risk of persecution or a  breach  of  his  human
         rights on arrival at the airport.


         65. As a Tamil in Colombo he is more likely  to  attract  attention
         from the authorities  than  a  Sinhalese,  as  is  clear  from  the
         objective evidence. However, he is not known by the authorities  to
         have been a member of the LTTE previously and has not been involved
         in fighting. Clearly the situation has changed  since  Jeyachandran
         was decided but there is insufficient evidence before me  that  the
         Appellant is more at risk than any other Tamil  in  Colombo  and  I
         find that he has not discharged the burden of proving even  to  the
         low standard required that he faces a real risk of persecution or a
         breach of his human rights under Article 3 if returned to Colombo.


         66. As I do not find that he escaped from the LTTE or that he spent
         time in the custody of the army, I do not find  that  he  would  be
         targeted by the LTTE, in Colombo or elsewhere."


   5. The grounds for review were twofold. It was  submitted  first  of  all
      that the immigration judge  had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  give
      considerable weight to Mr A Martin's opinion in his medical report  on
      the appellant that one of his scars was "highly consistent  with"  the
      account he gave of ill treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan  army:
      in paragraph 48 of the determination she stated that  the  report  did
      not preclude the possibility that the injuries were  caused  by  other
      means. But,  the  grounds  stated,  "to  establish  his  case  on  the
      reasonable likeliness (sic) test the appellant does  not  need  to  go
      that far." Given  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  "scars  which  are
      consistent are capable of being probative and scars which  are  highly
      consistent will be probative unless there is  good  reason  to  reject
      them".  In support of this submission  the  grounds  cited  Mibanga  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and  SA
      (Somalia)  v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA
      Civ 1302.  In the latter case the  Court  noted  that  the  difference
      between findings of "consistent with" and "highly consistent with" was
      elaborated by the Istanbul Protocol as follows:
               "(b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been  caused  by
               the trauma described, but it is non-specific and  there  are
               many other possible causes;
               (c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused  by
               the trauma described,  and  there  are  few  other  possible
               causes;"
   6. It was significant in the appellant's case, added the grounds, that he
      had had some LTTE training but following that had been engaged in work
      where he was not likely to sustain the injuries which he had.


   7. The second ground for review complained that the  immigration  judge's
      findings were incomplete and irrational.

   8. The grounds  also  made  reference  to  the  recent  Tribunal  country
      guidance case of LP (LTTE Area-Tamils-Colombo)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2007]
      UKAIT 00076, but as Mr Martin conceded,  the  guidance  in  this  case
      would only came into play  if  we  found  errors  in  the  immigration
      judge's findings of fact,  in  particular  in  the  finding  that  the
      appellant had not been detained.

   9. Dealing with the second ground first, we find that its contents amount
      to no more than a series of disagreements with the immigration judge's
      findings of fact. We see no flaw in the immigration judge treating  as
      adverse to the appellant the fact that whereas at interview he  failed
      to give dates for when he was detained and when he was transferred  to
      hospital, he was able in subsequent statements to give  precise  dates
      for both events. It  was  also  open  to  her  to  count  against  the
      appellant that the dates for his detention and  transfer  to  hospital
      which he gave at the hearing (as being 23 August and end of  September
      2000 respectively) were different from  those  that  he  gave  in  the
      "history" section of his medical  report,  where  he  is  recorded  as
      stating  that  he  escaped  from  hospital  on  23  August  2000.  The
      immigration judge considered  the  appellant's  explanation  for  this
      discrepancy - that he only gave an approximate date to the doctor  who
      fixed on that particular date - and was  quite  entitled  to  find  it
      unsatisfactory. We see nothing wrong  with  the  further  findings  of
      implausibility which the immigration judge made  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's account of how he was identified to the army in  his  shop
      as an LTTE member. Again the immigration judge did not find  plausible
      that having identified the appellant as an LTTE member  and  subjected
      him to torture, the army should  transfer  him  to  hospital  but  not
      bother to guard him. There is no reason to think in this context  that
      the immigration judge overlooked the appellant's claim at paragraph 14
      of his witness statement that there were soldiers at the hospital. The
      appellant had clearly stated at the hearing that he was unguarded.  We
      also find unexceptionable the immigration judge's assessment  that  it
      would have been a remarkable coincidence if there had been someone  at
      the hospital who was, as the appellant had  claimed,  at  once  (1)  a
      friend of his father (who had died  in  1991),  (2)  someone  able  to
      recognise the appellant and (3) someone prepared  to  put  himself  at
      risk to assist the appellant's  escape.  The  immigration  judge  also
      found implausible the appellant's claims not to have had contact  with
      his mother since 1995, not to  know that he was travelling to  the  UK
      and (despite having accepted that  he  travelled  on  two  planes  and
      caught a train) not to know which countries he had  travelled  through
      before arriving in the UK.

  10. The grounds pointed out, as a criticism of these  findings,  that  the
      fact that something is highly unlikely or a coincidence does not  mean
      that it is untrue. But there is no  basis  for  considering  that  the
      immigration judge was unaware of such distinctions: she simply did not
      find, viewing the evidence in the round, that key  difficulties  which
      had been identified in the appellant's evidence  had  been  adequately
      explained.

  11. The point made in the grounds at paragraph 9 appears to  assert  that,
      since the immigration judge had accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
      brother who had been a member of  the  LTTE  and  that  the  appellant
      himself had been involved with the LTTE, these facts,  taken  together
      with the medical evidence that he bore some scars  which  were  highly
      consistent with having been tortured, should have led  her  to  accept
      that he  had  been  arrested  and  tortured.  But  there  was  nothing
      irrational or inadequately reasoned as to  why  she  was  prepared  to
      accept some parts of the appellant's account but to reject others.

  12. The second ground for review also incorporated a submission  that  the
      immigration judge failed to make a finding on the appellant's claim to
      have  been  assisting  the  LTTE's  intelligence  by  observing   army
      movements and passing that information on: this was said to be a  core
      part of the appellant's claim. However, whilst the  immigration  judge
      may be criticised  for  failing  to  make  specific  findings  on  the
      intelligence-gathering  claim,  it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  she
      considered it undermined by deficiencies in his overall account.   The
      immigration judge's finding at paragraph 45  that  the  appellant  was
      only involved with the LTTE at a  low  level  properly  reflected  her
      overall assessment of the  appellant's  account  of  his  LTTE-related
      activities.

  13. We have left the first ground (which concerns  the  treatment  of  the
      medical evidence) until last because it seems  to  us  that  the  main
      argument raised therein merits more  careful  attention.  This  ground
      also asserts that in coming to her conclusion  the  immigration  judge
      did not mention the medical evidence at all, but that was rightly  not
      pursued by Mr Martin, since the section of her  determination  setting
      out findings plainly includes para 48 which does mention  the  medical
      report. The main argument raised,  therefore,  concerned  whether  the
      immigration judge had given due weight to the medical report.

  14. The doctor who wrote the report was  Mr  A  Martin,  a  Consultant  in
      Accident and Emergency Medicine at the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead,
      London. He interviewed and examined the appellant on 13 July 2007.  In
      a subsection headed "History" he noted that the appellant had said  he
      was a member of the LTTE who after training had been assigned  to  the
      Intelligence Division and had to gather information from army  places.
      His report then records the appellant's description of his  arrest  in
      July 2000, his ill-treatment whilst in detention and his escape  (said
      in the report to be 23 August 2000). His stated that  his  examination
      revealed that the appellant had scars on his  head,  upper  limbs  and
      lower limbs. Having described these one by one he continued:

         "Mr R said that the injury on the scalp was caused by being hit  by
         the butt of a rifle. The scar is consistent with an  injury  caused
         by  blunt  trauma  and  as  such  consistent  with   the   client's
         description of events.


         Mr R's  scars  on  the  right  eyebrow,  nose  and  upper  lip  are
         consistent  with  injuries  caused  by  blunt  trauma  and   though
         impossible to be precise the instrument/weapon/surface  they  could
         have been caused by being pushed against a wall,  punched  and  hit
         will (sic) sticks as described by the client.


         The hyper-pigmented area on the right forearm is typical  of  post-
         inflammatory changes after  blunt  trauma  and  the  appearance  is
         highly consistent with the events described by the client of  being
         beaten with batons or sticks.


         The indented scar on the thigh is  consistent  with  a  penetrating
         injury and it could have been caused by being stabbed with  a  hard
         pipe and this would also be consistent with the shape of the scar.


         The patient's scars do not result in any functional limitation  and
         do not require any treatment on clinical grounds. The appearance of
         the scars is consistent wit the time span described by the client.


         CONCLUSION:


         The scars present on Mr R's body, although not  possible  to  [sic]
         precise as to whether the injuries were caused accidentally or not,
         are highly consistent with the events described by the client.


         ..."


  15. In submissions before the immigration judge Counsel  had  pointed  out
      that it was obvious from the appellant's appearance that his nose  had
      been broken and that this report detailed the injuries found and then,
      importantly, differentiated between scars which  were  consistent  and
      those which were highly consistent with the appellant's given history.



  16. The immigration judge set out her findings on the  medical  report  as
      follows:

         "43. The history section of the medical report is based  purely  on
         the information provided by the Appellant and cannot be regarded as
         corroboration. The scars identified are said to be  in  some  cases
         consistent with his description of events  and  "could"  have  been
         caused in the manner described. The scar on the  right  forearm  is
         said to be "highly consistent" with being  beaten  with  batons  or
         sticks. The scars are said to be  consistent  with  the  time  span
         described. In the conclusion, however, Dr Martin states "the  scars
         present on Mr R's body, although not possible to be precise  as  to
         whether the injuries were caused accidentally or  not,  are  highly
         consistent with the events described by  the  client".  The  report
         does not undermine the Appellant's claim but neither does it  prove
         that his account is true and there could have been other causes  of
         the scars identified."

  17. At para 48 she returned to the same subject, stating:

         "48. The medical report does not preclude the possibility that  his
         scars were accidental or prove that they were not caused  by  other
         means".

  18. (Later on (at para 63) she also dealt with the issue  of  whether  the
      appellant's scarring would cause the Sri Lankan  authorities  to  view
      him adversely on return: she decided that it would not. But it is  not
      this aspect of the scarring issue which is in question here.)

  19. As already noted, the grounds  submitted  that  the  above  assessment
      betrayed an error of law since it failed to give  an  adequate  reason
      for not taking into account the doctor's  opinion  that  some  of  the
      scarring was "highly consistent with" the  appellant's  given  history
      and effectively failed to apply the lower standard of proof.

  20. We turn first to analyse the doctor's  report.  Several  features  are
      noteworthy.

  21. First, faced as he was with having  to  assess  scars  stated  by  the
      appellant in his history as arising from injuries  inflicted  as  long
      ago as 2000, he properly took their age into account,  stating  "[t]he
      appearance of the scars is consistent with the time span described  by
      the client."

  22. Secondly, of the scars he assessed  the  doctor  found  five  of  them
      (those on his scalp, his right eyebrow, nose and upper lip and  thigh)
      "consistent with" the appellant's attribution and one (the scar on the
      appellant's right forearm) "highly consistent"  with  the  appellant's
      attribution. Given this distribution of findings, we find it extremely
      odd that in his "Conclusion" the doctor should state that "[t]he scars
      [plural] present on Mr  R's  body...are  highly  consistent  with  the
      events described by the client." On his own specific findings only one
      out of five was "highly consistent".

  23. Thirdly, although finding  the  scar  on  the  right  forearm  "highly
      consistent " with being beaten with batons or sticks, the  doctor  did
      not venture any clear opinion about other possible causes,  let  alone
      about whether any other possible causes were  likely or more  or  less
      likely. To the extent that any opinion of his on this question can  be
      gleaned from his report it would appear that he simply considered that
      it was "not possible to be precise as to  whether  the  injuries  were
      caused accidentally or not".

  24. Fourthly, there is nothing in the "History" section of the  report  to
      indicate that the appellant had  given  any  details  about  his  life
      history prior to his arrest and detention  and  ill  treatment  beyond
      outlining his time with the LTTE,  first  doing  training  then  being
      assigned to the Intelligence Division to gather information from  army
      places. There was no record of the appellant  telling  him  about  his
      work in a shop in Jaffna.

  25. Bearing  in  mind  these  features  of  the  doctor's  report,  it  is
      instructive to see how it measures up to the  guidance  given  in   SA
      (Somalia) which was one of the cases cited in the appellant's  grounds
      for review. At paras 28-32 Sir Mark Potter P stated:


         " 28. In any case where the medical report relied on by  an  asylum
         seeker is not contemporaneous, or nearly contemporaneous, with  the
         injuries  said  to  have  been  suffered,  and   thus   potentially
         corroborative for that very reason, but is a report made long after
         the events relied on as evidence  of  persecution,  then,  if  such
         report is to have  any  corroborative  weight  at  all,  it  should
         contain  a  clear  statement  of  the  doctor's   opinion   as   to
         consistency, directed to  the  particular  injuries  said  to  have
         occurred as a result of the torture or other ill  treatment  relied
         on as evidence of persecution. It is also desirable  that,  in  the
         case of marks of injury  which  are  inherently  susceptible  of  a
         number of alternative or "everyday" explanations, reference  should
         be made to such  fact,  together  with  any  physical  features  or
         "pointers" found which may make the particular explanation for  the
         injury advanced by the complainant more or less likely.
         29. In cases where the account of torture is, or is likely  to  be,
         the subject of  challenge,  Chapter  Five  of  the  United  Nations
         Document, known as the Istanbul Protocol, submitted to  the  United
         Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 9 August 1999 (Manual
         on the Effective Investigation and  Documentation  of  Torture  and
         Other Cruel, Inhuman  or  Degrading  Treatment  or  Punishment)  is
         particularly instructive. At paras 186-7,  under  the  heading  "D.
         Examination and Evaluation following specific forms of Torture"  it
         states:
          "186... For each lesion and for the overall pattern  of  lesions,
          the physician should indicate the degree of  consistency  between
          it and the attribution
              a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been  caused  by
                 the trauma described;
              b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by  the
                 trauma described, but it is  non-specific  and  there  are
                 many other possible causes;
              c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have  been  caused  by
                 the trauma described, and there  are  few  other  possible
                 causes;
              d) Typical of: this is an appearance that  is  usually  found
                 with this type of trauma, but  there  are  other  possible
                 causes;
              e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been  caused
                 in anyway other than that described.
          187. Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions  and
          not the consistency of each lesion  with  a  particular  form  of
          torture that is important in assessing  the  torture  story  (see
          Chapter IV.G for a list of torture methods)."
         30.  Those  requested  to   supply   medical   reports   supporting
         allegations of torture by asylum claimants would be well advised to
         bear those passages in mind, as well as to pay close  attention  to
         the guidance concerning objectivity and  impartiality  set  out  at
         paragraph 161 of the Istanbul Protocol.
         31. Briefly continuing comparison of the instant case with the case
         of Mibanga, in  that  case  the  factors  relevant  to  credibility
         plainly included Dr Norman's express  medical  opinion  as  to  the
         causation  of  the  injuries  and  it  was  thus  impermissible  to
         determine the central question of credibility without having regard
         to that  opinion  expressed.  In  the  present  case  there  is  no
         comparable  opinion.  The  adjudicator  and   the   Tribunal   both
         considered, rightly in my  view,  that  the  explanations  for  the
         injuries which I have highlighted in paragraph 22 above  came  from
         the appellant and not from Dr Madan. He, like the adjudicator,  was
         dependent entirely upon the explanations given by the appellant and
         there is nothing in his report to indicate that he stood  back  and
         considered them objectively for the purpose of his report.  Because
         the explanations came directly from the appellant and were not  the
         subject of separate, critical  consideration  by  the  doctor,  the
         adjudicator was entitled not to regard them as medical  opinion  of
         the kind being dealt with in Mibanga.
         32. Having said that, it does not detract in any way from the force
         of the decision in Mibanga to  the  effect  that,  where  there  is
         medical evidence corroborative of an appellant's account of torture
         or mistreatment, it should be  considered  as  part  of  the  whole
         package of evidence going to the question of  credibility  and  not
         simply treated as an "add-on" or separate exercise  for  subsequent
         assessment only after a decision on credibility has been reached on
         the basis of  the  content  of  the  appellant's  evidence  or  his
         performance as a witness."
  26. We do not know if the doctor (Mr  A  Martin)  was  familiar  with  the
      Istanbul Protocol guidelines, but his report does show an appreciation
      of the difference between  two  degrees  of  consistency:  "consistent
      with" and "highly consistent with"; in that respect his  report  might
      be said at first sight to reflect a  good  working  knowledge  of  the
      Protocol  guidelines  or  at   least   the   thinking   (widely-shared
      internationally)  behind  them.  As  already   noted,   however,   his
      "Conclusion" that the appellant's scars were "highly consistent"  with
      the appellant's account of causation went significantly beyond his own
      specific findings on the individual scars.

  27. Be that as it may, his findings did still identify one scar as "highly
      consistent with" the appellant's account of being beaten  with  batons
      and sticks. The appellant's submission is that the  immigration  judge
      erred in failing to attach due weight to that particular finding;  she
      should, it is submitted, have found them presumptively probative.

  28. In this regard, however, it is important to recall what  SA  (Somalia)
      has to say about the issue of causation. At  the end of para 28 it  is
      stated that:

         "It is also desirable that, in the case of marks  or  injury  which
         are inherently susceptible of a number of alternative or "everyday"
         explanations, reference should be made to such fact, together  with
         any physical features  or  "pointers"  found  which  may  make  the
         particular explanation for the injury advanced by  the  complainant
         more or less likely."

  29. The medical report in this case failed to attempt any such  reference.
      Given that the doctor  did  at  least  recognise  the  possibility  of
      "accidental" causes, this failure was all the more marked.

  30. Having analysed the medical report we must next turn back to look more
      closely at what the immigration judge made of it.

  31. We agree with Counsel that the immigration  judge's  approach  to  the
      report is open to criticism.  To say merely  that  "there  could  have
      been other causes of the scars identified"  and that the report  "does
      not preclude the possibility that his scars were accidental  or  prove
      that they were not caused by other means" did not show that she  fully
      appreciated the potential significance of the one finding  of  "highly
      consistent with". Applying  Istanbul  Protocol  criteria,  the  latter
      finding was not one which left open there being "many" other  possible
      causes; it confined it to "few" other possible causes. However, we  do
      not consider that this failing on the part of  the  immigration  judge
      amounted to an error of law because, the particular medical report  in
      question failed to say anything about other possible  causes,  whether
      understood as many or few. It did not even begin to  engage  with  the
      issue of the relative likelihood of (the few) other  possible  causes.
      Put simply, as to causes it was simply agnostic.

  32. It will be apparent from  what  we  have  just  said  that  we  reject
      Counsel's contention that given the lower standard of proof a  finding
      that scars which are found "highly consistent" with the claimed  cause
      should be regarded as probative "unless there is good reason to reject
      them". If the result of a finding of "highly consistent with" is  that
      there are few other possible causes, that in itself says nothing about
      which of these few is more or the most  likely.  There  is  no  basis,
      without more, for saying one is to be preferred. There  is  no  basis,
      without more, for saying that the one cause found  "highly  consistent
      with" is to be accepted, "unless there is a good reason to  reject..."
      it. It would have been different if Mr A Martin's report had  gone  on
      to evaluate the relative likelihood of (the few) other possible causes
      and had concluded the appellant's attribution  was  the  most  likely.
      But, as already noted, it failed to do this.

  33. This shortcoming of the report was accentuated by the  fact  that  the
      scarring concerned was to the appellant's right forearm, which  was  a
      part of the body which a person would use in an  active  way  in  many
      everyday work and home situations; and, on the account  given  by  the
      appellant, there were at least two alternative  explanations  for  the
      scarring which merited consideration: one was his claim  that  he  had
      trained with the LTTE for two months, using weapons (an AK 47) and the
      other was that he had worked in a shop. The doctor had been made aware
      of the former, but not, it seems, the latter. Whilst the appellant did
      not assist the doctor by failing to volunteer as part of his "history"
      his work experience in a shop, in our view a medical report seeking to
      assess the causation of scarring should always seek to  establish,  as
      part of an appellant's history, whether there are any home, social  or
      work-related activities which may cast light on other possible  causes
      of the injury/scarring.

  34. We note  that  the  grounds  for  review  sought  to  argue  that  the
      appellant's shop work was "work where he was  not  likely  to  sustain
      such injuries".  But the issue here is not how we  should  assess  the
      shop work in terms of it being or not being  a  likely  cause;  it  is
      simply about the immigration judge's assessment of  a  medical  report
      that contained no examination or evaluation of such matters.

  35.  In the absence of any evaluation by the doctor of whether such causes
      were more or less  likely,  the  assessment  that  such  scarring  was
      "highly  consistent"  did  not,  as  the  immigration  judge   rightly
      concluded, prove the appellant's claim as to how it was caused.

  36. Hence  it  can  be  seen  that  SA  (Somalia)  does  not  advance  the
      appellant's case in the way argued for in the grounds for review.

  37. We would emphasise,  however,  that  in  cases  that  feature  medical
      reports as evidence of  injuries  having  been  caused  by  actors  of
      persecution or serious harm, SA  (Somalia)  should  be  treated  as  a
      landmark case, giving guidance on a number of matters.

  38. First, it reconfirms the validity of the IAT's proposition in HE (DRC-
      Credibility  and  psychiatric   reports)   [2004]   UKIAT   00321   as
      reformulated in Mibanga and in MO (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ 1276  that
      a decision-maker or immigration judge must deal with a medical  report
      as an integral part of  the  findings  on  credibility  and  must  not
      artificially separate that evidence from the rest of the evidence  and
      reach conclusions as to credibility without reference to that  medical
      evidence (para 32).

  39. Secondly, it clarifies that the principal purpose of a medical  report
      in asylum-related cases is "to corroborate and/or lend weight  to  the
      account of an asylum seeker by a clear statement as to the consistency
      of old scars found with the history given" (para 27).

  40. Thirdly, it establishes (at paras 29-30)  that  chapter  five  of  the
      Istanbul Protocol is to be seen as a particularly  instructive  source
      of guidance, in particular what it said in the Protocol at paras 186-7
      under the heading "D. Examination and  Evaluation  following  specific
      forms of Torture" as follows:
        "186... For each lesion and for the overall pattern of lesions, the
        physician should indicate the degree of consistency between it and
        the attribution
                 a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been caused by
                    the trauma described;
                 b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by
                    the trauma described, but it is non-specific and there
                    are many other possible causes;
                 c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have been caused by
                    the trauma described, and there are few other possible
                    causes;
                 d) Typical of: this is an appearance that is usually found
                    with this type of trauma, but there are other possible
                    causes;
                 e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been
                    caused in any way other than that described.
          187. Ultimately, it is the overall evaluation of all lesions and
          not the consistency of each lesion with a particular form of
          torture that is important in assessing the torture story (see
          Chapter IV.G for a list of torture methods)."
  41. Commenting on this the Court stated at para 30:
         "Those requested to supply medical reports  supporting  allegations
         of torture by asylum claimants would be well advised to bear  those
         passages in mind, as well as to pay close attention to the guidance
         concerning objectivity and impartiality set out at paragraph 161 of
         the Istanbul Protocol."
  42. Fourthly, SA (Somalia) emphasises the importance of a  medical  report
      whose findings on consistency express the fact that  there  are  other
      possible causes (whether many, few  or  unusually  few),  specifically
      examining those to gauge how likely they are, bearing in mind what  is
      known about the individual's life history and experiences.


  43. The last-mentioned point is of particular  importance  in  this  case.
      From para 186 of the Istanbul Protocol it can be seen that in the five-
      fold hierarchy of degrees of consistency between the injury  and  "the
      attribution", that of "highly consistent  with"  ranks  third  and  is
      specified as meaning that "the lesion [injury] could have been  caused
      by the trauma described, and there are few other possible causes". The
      reference to "few other possible causes" is clearly to  be  contrasted
      with the specification given of a simple finding of "consistent  with"
      (the second degree of consistency listed) where it is  specified  that
      "there are many other possible causes". However, precisely because  in
      the case of a  finding  of  "highly  consistent  with"  the  range  of
      possible causes is described as being much more  limited  ("there  are
      few other possible causes"), it is  all  the  more  important  that  a
      doctor who makes such a finding goes on to assess  whether  those  few
      other possible causes could adequately explain the scarring and  gives
      an assessment of whether they are more or less likely. A failure to do
      so will considerably weaken the report as corroborative or  supportive
      of an appellant's case.

  44. From Counsel's submissions we glean that he would object to the  above
      summary of the guidance approved by SA (Somalia) on the basis that the
      Court only characterised this last point as "desirable" rather than as
      essential. However, we do not  think  by  the  use  of  the  adjective
      "desirable" the Court meant in any way to suggest that it was  not  an
      extremely important consideration -  when assessing the relevance of a
      medical report to the question of causation of injuries or scarring  -
      to address matters in the way set out in paragraph 28. If all  that  a
      doctor does is say that the  scarring/injury  is  "highly  consistent"
      with  the  claimed  history,  without  also  addressing  the  relative
      likelihood of the few other possible causes, the report  will  clearly
      be of less potential value than if it  does.  As  illustrated  by  the
      evidence in this case, it may properly lead an  immigration  judge  to
      find that a finding of "highly consistent" has very limited value.

  45. For the above reasons the immigration judge did not materially err  in
      law and accordingly her decision to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
      must stand.

Signed:



Dr H H Storey


