

      AM (Section 88 (2): "Immigration Document") Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00008

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Stoke on Trent
Date of Hearing:  19 December 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Martin

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KAMPALA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:       Mr A Mahmood, instructed by Immigration Advisory
Service
For the Respondent:      Mr M Corden, Home Office Presenting Officer

The failure (in the decision-maker's view) to  produce  a  document  proving
identity leads to mandatory refusal under para 320(3).  There  is,  however,
a right of appeal against that refusal unless the  document  sought  by  the
decision-maker falls within the  definition  of  "immigration  document"  in
Section 88(3).

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia. At all  relevant  times  he  has
    claimed to be the husband of the sponsor who is a refugee recognised in
    the United Kingdom. He  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as her  husband.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  that
    application on 19 September 2007. The  Appellant  lodged  a  notice  of
    appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and  in  due  course  his
    appeal  was  heard  by  an  Immigration  Judge,  who  allowed  it.  The
    Respondent Entry Clearance Officer sought and  obtained  an  order  for
    reconsideration. Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. It is right that we should say at  the  outset  that  the  Respondent's
    conduct of the issues relating to this appeal causes us  some  concern.
    There was no appearance by or on behalf of the  Respondent  before  the
    Immigration Judge. Instead the Immigration Judge was given  a  document
    which appears to be in standard form, setting  out  some  of  what  are
    apparently the Respondent's  favourite  determinations  and  judgements
    with no comment or indication of which  of  them  are  said  to  be  of
    relevance to the appeal in question. That is particularly a  matter  of
    concern in this appeal  because  it  is  now  said  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that  the  two  most  important  arguments  on  which  alone
    reconsideration  was  sought  should  have  been  dealt  with  by   the
    Immigration Judge; that is the content of a submission that  she  erred
    in law.  Neither of the arguments was put to her in the lengthy written
    submissions to which we have referred.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision is on two separate  bases.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  352A  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395. He reached that conclusion  because,  having
    conducted a short interview with the Appellant, he concluded  that  the
    Appellant's apparent lack of knowledge of his wife's circumstances  and
    in particular the process by which, and why, she had come to the United
    Kingdom were unknown to the Appellant. He regarded that as  the  reason
    to suppose that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were  not  related  as
    claimed.

 4. But there was  another  reason  for  the  refusal.  The  Appellant  had
    produced, apparently as evidence of his  nationality  and  identity,  a
    document issued by the Republic of Uganda and containing  a  photograph
    of him with an official stamp, setting out his name and recording  that
    he is a Somali asylum seeker in Uganda.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    decided that that document was not such as satisfactorily to  establish
    the Appellant's identity and nationality.  He  therefore  also  refused
    under paragraph 320(3) of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  requires  an
    application to be refused on the grounds  of  "failure  by  the  person
    seeking entry to the United  Kingdom  to  produce  to  the  Immigration
    Officer a valid national  passport  or  other  document  satisfactorily
    establishing his identity and nationality." Although those words  refer
    specifically to an Immigration Officer, there are  two  headings  above
    them which indicate that they are to  be  read  as  applying  to  Entry
    Clearance Officers as well.

 5. The Immigration Judge heard evidence from the Sponsor whom she regarded
    as entirely credible. The Sponsor gave direct evidence relating to  the
    identity of the Appellant and in addition indicated why it  might  well
    be that the Appellant either did not know or was unwilling to say  very
    much about the reasons why the Sponsor had come to this country.

 6. In the result the Immigration Judge concluded that she was satisfied as
    to the Appellant's identity and nationality and his relationship to the
    Sponsor and she accordingly allowed the appeal.

 7.  The  grounds  upon  which   the   Entry   Clearance   Officer   sought
    reconsideration are as follows:

        "The Entry Clearance Officer asserts that the Immigration Judge has
        materially  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  in  that  he
        [presumably meaning she] had no jurisdiction to allow the appeal on
        the Rule 320 aspect of the refusal and in any event did not address
        the primary issue in Rule 320(3) that the Appellant's documentation
        was inadequate.
        Section 88 of the Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act, 2002 sets
        out exemptions from Section 82 Rights of Appeal;  Section  88  2(b)
        establishes that a person may not appeal where they do not have  an
        immigration document  of  particular  kind.   The  Entry  Clearance
        Officer therefore maintains  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  no
        jurisdiction on this issue.
        Rule 320(3) states in essence that entry clearance is to be refused
        if the person seeking entry fails to produce to the Entry Clearance
        Officer  a  valid  national  passport  or  document  satisfactorily
        establishing his identity and nationality. Although the Immigration
        Judge states that he  is  satisfied  as  to  the  identity  of  the
        Appellant, he remains  silent  on  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
        documentation."

 8. Reconsideration was ordered in somewhat discursive terms. We  have  not
    found it necessary in order to determine this reconsideration  to  deal
    with all the issues raised in the order for reconsideration.

 9. We deal first as we must with jurisdiction. The  Respondent  claims  at
    this late stage - having been content, as we have said, to deal on  the
    merits with the appeal to the Immigration Judge -  that  there  was  no
    right of appeal on the grounds upon which the Immigration Judge allowed
    the appeal.  Reference is made as we have indicated to s 88 of the 2002
    Act. Section 88 reads as follows:-

        "88.     Ineligibility
        (1)      This section applies to an immigration decision of a  kind
             referred to in section 82(2) (a), (b), (d)  or  (e).  [In  the
             present case the immigration decision is under section 88  (2)
             b.]
        (2)      A person may not appeal under  section  82(1)  against  an
             immigration decision which is taken on the grounds that he  or
             a person of whom he is a dependant-
              (a) does not satisfy a requirement as to age, nationality  or
              citizenship specified in immigration rules,
              (b) does not have an immigration  document  of  a  particular
              kind (or any immigration document),
        (3)      In subsection 2(b) "immigration document" means:
              (a) entry clearance
              (b) a passport
              (c) a work permit or other immigration  employment  document,
              within the meaning of section 122, and
              (d) a document which relates to a national of a country other
              than the United Kingdom and which is designed  to  serve  the
              same purpose as a passport.
         (4)      Subsection (2) does not prevent the bringing of an  appeal
             on any or all of the grounds referred to in section 84(1) (b),
             (c) and (g)."

10. The ineligibility to which the title  of  the  section  refers  applies
    where the ground of refusal is that person does not have  the  document
    of a particular kind set out in subsection (3).  The ground of  refusal
    in the present case was that the Appellant  had  failed  to  produce  a
    valid national passport or other document  satisfactorily  establishing
    his identity and nationality. That is a refusal  by  reference  to  the
    wording of  paragraph  320(3),  as  we  have  indicated.  There  is  no
    indication in the notice of decision that a ground for refusal was that
    the Appellant did not have any of the documents set  out  in  s  88(3).
    Obviously he did not have entry clearance as he was  applying  for  it.
    He is not said to have  needed  a  passport;  indeed  paragraph  320(3)
    clearly indicates that documentation other  than  a  passport  will  be
    adequate  in  appropriate  circumstances  to  establish  identity   and
    nationality. Work permits do not come into it, and the  document  which
    was produced was not a document designed to serve the same purpose as a
    passport, the purpose of which is enable passage from  one  country  to
    another rather than to record status in an individual country.  In  the
    circumstances we find that the claim that this appeal is one  which  is
    restricted by s 88 of the 2002 Act is not made out. The refusal was not
    on any of the grounds set out in subsection (2) of that section.



11. We turn then to the second ground for reconsideration, that is  to  say
    that Immigration Judge erred in her treatment of the issue relating  to
    documentation.  It is right to say that paragraph 320(3) makes  refusal
    of an application mandatory  if  the  circumstances  set  out  in  that
    paragraph apply. But the fact that refusal is  mandatory  does  not  of
    course mean that it is not subject to appeal. On appeal it  is  for  an
    Immigration Judge to decide whether the  circumstances  said  to  cause
    paragraph 320(3) to apply did in fact apply to the case. Mr Mahmood has
    addressed us in some detail on the burden of proof in such a case,  but
    we do not think that in this case the decision turns on  the  incidence
    of the burden of proof or  indeed  on  the  standard  of  proof  to  be
    applied.


12. The Immigration Judge had before her a document issued by  the  Ugandan
    government, as we have  indicated.  She  had  oral  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor, which she believed. She was entitled to  take  the  view  that
    there was nothing in the document or in the  evidence  that  she  heard
    which threw any  doubt  upon  the  statement  made  (no  doubt  on  the
    Appellant's instance,  but)  by  a  governmental  authority.  In  those
    circumstances it seems to us right that she should regard the  document
    as having satisfactorily established identity. We do  not  say  that  a
    document of this sort is always to be taken in that way. Documents  are
    produced in various countries in various ways and  other  circumstances
    may from time to time give  cause  to  doubt  their  accuracy  or  even
    genuineness.  The evidence before the  Immigration  Judge  taken  as  a
    whole in this case simply showed that there was  no  doubt.  There  was
    therefore no reason to read the document in any other way than the  way
    in which it reads on its face. The consequence of that is  that,  as  a
    governmental document apparently attesting identity and nationality, it
    satisfactorily established identity and nationality, that is to say  to
    the satisfaction of the Immigration Judge.


13. Nothing else is in issue in this reconsideration. It appears to us that
    the Immigration Judge did not err  in  law  in  her  reasoning  or  her
    conclusions and we accordingly order that her  determinations  allowing
    this appeal shall stand.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                                  Date:

