

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|SO and SO (KhaD - members and family) Afghanistan CG [2006]       |
|UKAIT 00003                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Bradford              |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2005              |                                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey  (Senior Immigration Judge)                         |
|Mr I F Macdonald (Immigration Judge)                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellants                                                        |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the appellants:  Ms S Khan  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Barry  Clarke
Solicitors
For the respondent: Mrs R Aslam, Home Office Presenting Officer

Given recent evidence, which includes evidence  about  significant  numbers
of former KhaD officers working in  the  present  Afghanistan  Intelligence
Service, it cannot be said that  past service in KhaD suffices to establish
a risk on return.   Cases have to be considered by weighing up a number  of
factors, including some personal to the appellant. In  this  regard  it  is
important to bear in mind that past or present personal conflicts are  more
important than political conflicts. In assessing whether family  members of
a PDPA and/or KhaD member would be at risk, it must be borne in  mind  that
there may be factors reducing or removing risk such as  the  death  of  the
PDPA/KhaD member, and the amount of time that has elapsed since his death.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants are  brothers.   Both  are  nationals  of  Afghanistan.
      Both were the subject of decisions refusing to grant them  asylum  and
      to remove them as illegal entrants, made on 22  January  2004  and  14
      December 2004 respectively.  The appeal of the first appellant, who is
      the older brother, was heard before an Adjudicator, Mr J.H. Bryan,  on
      24 November 2004 and was dismissed by him on 17 December  2004.    The
      appeal of the second appellant was heard on 15 March  2005  before  an
      Adjudicator, Miss L. Thornton. In a determination notified on 7  April
      2005 she dismissed his appeal.

2.    The basis of the brothers' claim was  as  follows.  Their  father  had
      been a prominent member of the Communist People's Democratic Party  of
      Afghanistan  (PDPA)  who  had  acted  as  an  Adviser   to   President
      Najibullah. He was also a senior officer for  KhaD, the secret service
      wing of  the   communist  regime  (Khadimat-e-Atalat-e  Dawlati).   He
      worked for  the  Soviet  police  in  Riagor  5   branch.    The  first
      appellant believed that his father had recruited many young  men  into
      the army. His father was known as a PDPA commander both  in   Kuhdaman
      (where fighting had taken place between the PDPA and  the  Mujahadeen)
      and in Kabul city. Their  father's   brother  had  also  been  a  PDPA
      commander. Following the fall of the communists, whilst the Mujahadeen
      were in power, their father ran a business in Kabul.  When the Taliban
      came to power in 1996 they almost immediately  detained  him  and  the
      first appellant. Both were tortured. The first appellant was forced to
      give the names and addresses of Mujahadeen.  Their father  was  beaten
      to death in custody. Some months later the first  appellant's  release
      was secured by paying a bribe,  although it  took  place  without  the
      knowledge of  a certain Soofi Naeem,  one of the  Taliban  commanders,
      whose men had first pursued the family in Kabul. He came  looking  for
      the first appellant. In 1997 the family fled to  Mazar-i-Sharif.  They
      managed to live in hiding there from 1996/7 until the Taliban captured
      the city in 2001.  Fearing the Taliban would track them down, the  two
      brothers fled Afghanistan in 2001.

3.    Following a grant of permission to appeal, the  appeal  of  the  first
      appellant came before  a  panel  constituted  under  the   Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal as a reconsideration hearing on 25 May 2005. This
      was chaired by  Mr P. King,  Senior  Immigration  Judge.   This  panel
      found that there was a material error  of  law  which  was  stated  as
      follows.

             'No  proper  findings  or  consideration  as  (sic)  issue  of
             father's membership of KhaD.  Such was  material issue  as  to
             return  [CIPU 6.280, 6.283.  Expert evidence Marsden  p.27  of
             bundle and Dr Giustozzi page 169-173 of bundle].'


      Mr King directed:


             '1.       Oral evidence of the appellant limited to issues  of
                 (i) whether father in  Khad , (ii) if  so  what  risk  does
                 that present for the appellant upon return.
             2.        Afghan-Dari interpreter.
             3.  Expert evidence to be served no later than  fourteen  days
                 before hearing (if not agreed - oral evidence  only  to  be
                 given).
             4.  Any further applications to be made no later than fourteen
                 days from today.'

4.     At  the  time  the  second  appellant  applied  for  review  of   the
      determination  of Miss Thornton, it was already known that his brother
      had been granted permission to appeal.  Mindful of  this  fact  Mr  J.
      Freeman, Senior Immigration Judge, in a  decision  of  26  April  2004
      ordered reconsideration in the following terms:


             'If the grounds of appeal filed for the claimant's  brother SZ
             (case HX.10838/2004, to be reconsidered  by the Tribunal on 25
             May) were to succeed, then  it  might  be  arguable  that  two
             inconsistent decisions in  what  is  suggested  are  identical
             cases could not  be allowed to stand (for similar  reasons  to
             those identified by the Court of Appeal in Shirazi [2003] EWCA
             Civ 1562). On that basis only, reconsideration is directed  in
             this case also to be carried out together with reconsideration
             of Shahzad's; but, whether they  represented   Shahzad  before
             the Adjudicator or not, the solicitors will have a  good  deal
             of explaining to do as to why they did not take steps  to  get
             the cases linked at first instance. They have laid  themselves
             open  to  the  charge  that  they  were  trying  to  secure  a
             favourable result in one case to exert leverage on the  other,
             and there may be costs or disciplinary implications,  so  they
             had better instruct counsel on their own behalf,  as  well  as
             the appellant's.'

5.    Thus we  have  before  us  two  cases  which  have  been  joined,  one
      presenting as a second-stage reconsideration,  the other as  a  first-
      stage reconsideration.

6.    We should say at the outset that having looked more closely  into  the
      history of  the proceedings in both  cases, we did not  consider  that
      any blame for the failure to seek an  early  joindering can be laid at
      the door of the current solicitors.

7.    We asked the parties to address us first on the appeal of the   second
      appellant.  Ms S. Khan asked us to find  that  the  determination   of
      Miss Thornton (dealing with the second appellant) was  legally  flawed
      because she had  not  engaged  with  the  determination  of  Mr  Bryan
      (dealing with the  first appellant) or with his  different  assessment
      of the first appellant (who gave evidence before Mr  Bryan as well  as
      Miss Thornton).  Mrs Aslam contended that the  determination  of  Miss
      Thornton  was  legally  sound  as  she  had  considered   Mr   Bryan's
      determination and properly stated that she would  reach  her  decision
      independently. The Court of Appeal in Otshudi [2004] EWCA Civ 893  had
      made clear that  discrepant  outcomes  of  appeals  by  two  brothers,
      founded on much the same evidence, did not  import  any  legal  error.
      She also submitted that neither the grounds of appeal nor Mr Freeman's
      order in fact identified an error of law.

8.    Having considered the  submissions  we  concluded  that  there  was  a
      material error of law, which we set out in the following terms:

             'The Immigration Judge (IJ), Miss Thornton,  materially  erred
             in  law  in  failing  to  take  into  account  as  a  relevant
             consideration the evaluation and assessment made by a previous
             Adjudicator (Mr Bryan) in respect of the appellant's  brother.
             Whilst the evidence of the two brothers was not  in  identical
             terms, their position so far as the claim to  risk  on  return
             was concerned was  near  identical  and  they  were  similarly
             situated.  The IJ was perfectly correct in  paragraph   47  to
             make clear that  she  would  reach  an  independent  decision.
             However, what she was not entitled to do was  fail  to  engage
             with the findings made by Mr Bryan and the reasons he gave for
             those findings.   This failure was all  the  more  glaring  in
             this case since she heard evidence from the brother which  had
             been the subject of assessment by Mr Bryan (see paragraph 11).
              She was in no way bound by Mr Bryan's findings, but  she  was
             obliged to give reasons why she took  a  different  view.  She
             failed to do so.

             Neither the case of Shirazi nor Otshudi address  the  specific
             issue arising  in this case, namely the relevance  of  another
             Adjudicator's determination as a  piece  of  evidence,  to  be
             weighed and evaluated along with other pieces.


             Whilst we accept that the grounds forming the application  for
             review did not in terms identify the legal error  as  we  have
             above, their underlying concern regarding the two cases  being
             decided  differently  on  virtually  identical   factors   was
             directed at Miss Thornton's determination and the evident fact
             that she had Mr Bryan's before her.   In  our  view  logically
             implicit in that concern was the way in  which  Miss  Thornton
             had approached Mr Bryan's determination  as  a   part  of  the
             overall evidence.'

9.    Having decided  there  was  no  reason  to  adjourn  the  second-stage
      reconsideration of the second appellant's appeal,  we  thus  proceeded
      with the two appeals, now both at the second-stage of reconsideration.

10.   We  informed the parties that before going ahead with the  hearing  in
      accordance with Mr King's  Directions, we wished them to address us as
      to whether the appellants could succeed, even  assuming  the  accounts
      they gave of their past experiences were accepted as  fully  credible.
      We explained that there would be no point in proceeding to examine the
      factual issue identified by Mr King - whether the father was in KhaD -
      if the appellants  could not  succeed even accepting that he was.

11.   Miss Khan submitted that both appellants should be able to succeed  on
      this basis. She identified a number  of  risk  factors.  Firstly,  the
      appellants' father had been a high-ranking member of the  PDPA, having
      been an  Advisor to President Najibujllah, having  visited  Russia  on
      government business and having appeared on  TV at  least  twice.   She
      relied on the  April 2005 CIPU Report paragraphs 6.289  and  6.290  in
      particular:


           'Former Members of  the   PDPA  (People's  Democratic  Party  of
           Afghanistan)


           6.289 In a paper dated July 2003, UNHCR stated that


           "Even though the Interim Administration issued a "Decree on  the
           dignified return of Afghan refugees", valid as  of  22  December
           2003, the situation  is  yet  unclear  with  regard  to  persons
           affiliated or associated with the  former  communist  regime  in
           Afghanistan, through  membership  of  the   People's  Democratic
           Party of  Afghanistan (PDPA) or as a result  of  their  previous
           professional or other functions.  Although not targeted  by  the
           central authorities, they may continue to face  risks  of  human
           rights abuses if they do not  benefit  from  the  protection  of
           influential factions or tribal protection. The  degree  of  risk
           depends on a variety of factors, including the following: a) the
           degree of identification with the  communist  ideology,  b)  the
           rank or position previously held,  c) family and extended family
           links".


           6.290 The UNHCR paper also noted that


           "Members of the following groups,  if  without  any  links  with
           existing Islamic/political parties or tribal  protection,  would
           require a careful assessment.


           - High ranking members  of  the  People's  Democratic  Party  of
           Afghanistan (PDPA), irrespective of whether they belonged to the
            Parcham or Khalq faction of the party.  Most PDPA members lived
           in Kabul or other cities during the communist regimes. They will
           be at risk only if they are known by armed factions as such  and
           this includes:


           (i)   Members  of  Central,  Provincial  Cities  and   Districts
              Committees of the PDPA and their family members;


           (ii)  Some of the  heads  and  high-ranking  members  of  social
              organisations such as the Democratic Youth  Organisation  and
              the Democratic Women Organisation at the  level  of  country,
              province, city and districts.'


12.   Secondly, he was also (on the appellants' accounts) a member of  KhaD,
      which had been the secret service wing of the   Communist  government.
      The April 2005 CIPU Report in relevant paragraphs stated:


           'Persons with links to the former Communist  Regime


           KhaD (KHAD) (former State Security Services)


           6.280  In  April  2001  a  situation  report  by  a  Netherlands
           delegation to the  European Union on the   security  service  in
           Afghanistan between 1978 and 1992  was  published.   The  report
           noted that  the   Khadimat-e-Atal'at-e-Dowlati  (meaning  "State
           Intelligence  Service"  in   Dari)  was  set  up  in  1980   and
           transformed into a ministry in 1986.   The secret service became
           notorious and feared under its acronym "KhaD" and soon  came  to
           embody the highly repressive communist regime. The first head of
           the  KhaD was Dr Najibullah, one of the former  leaders  of  the
           Parcham faction of the  Communist People's Democratic  Party  of
           Afghanistan (PDPA).  As a result of his post as head of KhaD  he
           rose rapidly in the hierarchy of  PDPA.  In  November  1987,  he
           became President of the country, a post he retained until  1982.
            On 9 January 1986 the KhaD  was  transformed  into  a  separate
           ministry under  the  name  of  Wazarat-e-Amaniate-e  Dowlati  or
           "Ministry of State Security".   The  report  also  advised  that
           "Although the official abbreviation was henceforth  to  be  WAD,
           the secret service continued to be popularly referred to as  the
           KhaD."


           6.281 The Netherlands delegation reported that


           "It was the task of the KhaD  and  of  the  WAD  to  ensure  the
           continued  short  and  long-term  existence  of  the   Communist
           regime, which  had  already  been  exposed  to  strong  pressure
           shortly after the Great  Saur   Revolution.  In  practice,  this
           meant that the KhaD and the WAD had a licence to track down  and
           fight the regime's external and internal enemies as they saw fit
           ... In practice, the slightest sign of disloyalty or  opposition
           provided a pretext for  being  branded  an  enemy  ...   Persons
           branded enemies of the  PDPA could be eliminated in  many  ways.
           Thus, KhaD leaders could instruct their  subordinates  to  carry
           out arrest,  detention,  judicial  sentencing,  exile,  torture,
           attempted murder and extra-judicial execution of real or alleged
           opponents of the  Communist regime.  If required, KhaD  and  WAD
           agents also attempted to murder  persons  outside   Afghanistan,
           especially in  Pakistan.   Through  their  ruthless  and  mostly
           arbitrary behaviour the KhaD  and  WAD  deliberately  created  a
           climate of terror aimed at  nipping  any  opposition  among  the
           civil population to the  Communist  regime  in  the  bud."   The
           reporter noted that "There was precious little support  for  the
           Communist Party among the population."


           6.282 The Netherlands's report stated  that  all  KhaD  and  WAD
           NCO's and officers  were  guilty  of  human  rights  violations.
           However, NCOs and officers could not operate within KhaD and WAD
           unless they  had  proved  their  unconditional  loyalty  to  the
           Communist regime.  During their trial period (Azmajchi) officers
           had to pass a severe loyalty test. On first  assignment NCOs and
           officers were transferred to  KhaD  and  WAD  sections  actively
           engaged in tracking down "subversive elements". Only  those  who
           proved their worth were promoted or transferred to sections with
           more administrative or technical activities.  In  practice  this
           meant that all KhaD and WAD NCOs and officers took part  in  the
           arrest, interrogation, torture and even execution  of  real  and
           alleged opponents of the Communist regime. The report considered
           that it was inconceivable that anyone  working  for  the  Afghan
           security services, regardless of the level at  which  they  were
           working, was unaware of the serious human rights violations that
           were taking place, which were well known both within and outside
           Afghanistan.


           Treatment of former KhaD members


           6.283  The Netherlands' report of April 2001 stated  that  after
           the  fall of the  Communist regime in 1992  many  KhaD  and  WAD
           agents went to work for the  new  rulers'  intelligence  series.
           The  Taliban intelligence service [Estikhabarat] too was  partly
           manned by former KhaD and WAD agents [but  see  paragraph  6.284
           below].    Despite  their  reputation,  former  members  of  the
           Communist  security  services  and  their  relatives  were   not
           automatically at risk of Taliban persecution.   Their  attitudes
           towards the Taliban combined with what was known about them  and
           the extent to which they made enemies, was considered to be more
           important than the position  they previously occupied.


           6.284 In comments prepared for the  Advisory  Panel  on  Country
           Information meeting on 8  March  2005,  UNHCR  stated  that  the
           Taliban intelligence service [Estikhabarat] was partly manned by
           Pakistani ISI (Inter-Services Intelligence), and not  by  former
           KhaD and WAD agents.


           6.285 In a paper issued in July 2003, UNHCR stated that "Some of
           the former military officials, members of the police  force  and
           KhaD (security service) of the communist regime also continue to
           be generally at risk, not only from  the  authorities  but  even
           more so from the population (families of victims),  given  their
           identification with human rights  abuses  during  the  communist
           regime." UNHCR advised that such people, if  without  any  links
           with existing Islamic/ political parties or  tribal  protection,
           would require a careful risk assessment.  The  applicability  of
           exclusion clause of Article 1F of the  Geneva Convention must be
           considered.


      286.  A Danish Fact Finding mission  to  Kabul  in  March/April  2004
           reported the views of several sources on the position of  former
           members of KhaD and the PDPA.  According  to  the  report  UNHCR
           said "Regarding the question as to whether  a  person  from  the
           former PDPA  or  KhaD  [sic]  runs  the  risk  of  any  form  of
           persecution  depends  on  whether  he,  in  the  course  of  his
           activities for the PDPA or KhaD, has had concrete conflicts with
           or has come in opposition to people who  are  in  power  at  the
           present time ... The UNHCR did not know of any former members of
           the KhaD who had returned."


      287. The same Danish report also noted the views of UNAMA.


           "The source  [UNAMA]  had  the  impression  that  the  political
           environment  in  Afghanistan  currently  is  not  open  to   all
           political viewpoints. The source stated that in this  connection
           personal conflicts are more important than political  conflicts.
           The source mentioned a case in which a former  employee  of  the
           KhaD had returned to Afghanistan and was  now  working  for  the
           security  forces.  The  person  has  complained  that   powerful
           individuals have threatened him,  persons  he  in  his  previous
           position had been investigating. He had allegedly  been  stopped
           in the street and threatened into silence.


           6.288 The Danish report noted that the CCA (Co-operation  Centre
           for Afghanistan) said that about half of the officers working in
           the   present   Afghanistan  Intelligence  Services  are  former
           officers of the KhaD.  The  report  stated  that  "It  has  been
           necessary to introduce them into intelligence work, as there  is
           a lack of qualified personnel in this field.   The  organisation
           gave as an example that the director in the  7th  department  of
           the  present  intelligence  services  earlier  served  the  same
           position in the KhaD."

  13. Thirdly, submitted Miss  Khan,  there  was  clear  evidence  that  the
      appellants' family was well known  in  Afghanistan  and  in  Kabul  in
      particular. She  drew our attention to statements  of  the  appellants
      and the first appellant's wife to  this  effect  as  well  as  to  the
      opinion of country expert Mr Peter Marsden who in an  opinion  written
      on 7 January  2004 for another case (but with his  permission  adduced
      here) at paragraphs 22 and 24 stated:

             '22. The Soviet invasion caused a significant backlash against
                  the liberal values that the  Soviet-backed government  was
                 espousing and has brought about a more  conservative  moral
                 environment  than  existed  before.   Those  with   liberal
                 attitudes are perceived as a  threat  to  the  survival  of
                 Islam within Afghanistan  and  also  as  a  threat  to  the
                 political ambitions of  the  radical  Islamic  parties.  It
                 should be stressed, therefore, that those  associated  with
                 the  former  Soviet-backed  government  will  be  regarded,
                 generally, as having  abandoned  their  Islamic  values  in
                 favour of western value systems. It is important  to  note,
                 in this regard, that the war between the Mujahadeen and the
                 Soviet  Union  had  enormous  consequences  in   terms   of
                 fatalities, refugee movements,  destructions  and  economic
                 decline.  Feelings thus run understandably high. The Jamiat-
                 i-Islami forces which have effective control of Kabul have,
                 as noted  above,  their  origins  in  the  radical  Islamic
                 circles of Kabul University in the  1960s and 70s and  will
                 view very  negatively  those  associated  with  the  former
                 Soviet-backed government, to  the  point  of,  potentially,
                 being prepared to commit acts of violence against them.  In
                 a situation in which summary justice is the  norm  and  the
                 perpetrator has no fear that he will be called to  account,
                 the risk to such individuals is significant  and  this  has
                 been recognised by the UNHCR.


             24. It should be noted that there has been, for many  decades,
                 a pronounced labelling  process  in   Afghanistan  so  that
                 people have been  identified  with   prominent  members  of
                 their  families  who  have   taken   particular   political
                 positions or brought harm to others by virtue of the  power
                 they  wielded.  The  individual  is  thus   identified   by
                 association with his relatives and it  is  normal  practice
                 for revenge attacks to be undertaken against male relatives
                 if the original perpetrator of the action is no  longer  to
                 be found.'

      Miss Khan emphasised the  importance  in  Afghanistan  of  family  and
      tribal identity: the appellants would be perceived in the same way  as
      their father.

14.   Lastly, she relied on the  still-current  Country  Guideline  case  of
      Nos. 8, 3, 6 (Risk - PDPA Member) Afghanistan CG  [2002]  UKIAT  06506
      which found that in respect of  'appellant  30'  that  his  relatively
      senior or high level position in  the  former  PDPA  government  would
      result in a real risk of persecution to him from  Jamiat-e-Islami  and
      other fundamental Islamic groups, including  remnants  of  the  former
      Taliban.

15.   Asked by us to clarify what  the sources of  harm  to  the  appellants
      were she stated that they were: (1) Mujahadeen working for the current
      government; (2) Jamiat commanders who would know he had reported  them
      to the   Taliban  (background  evidence  indicated  that  it  was  the
      practice of the Taliban to tell their captives  who  had  informed  on
      them); and (3) the  general  populace  of  Kabul.     So  far  as  the
      appellants' time in Mazar-e-Sharif was concerned, their evidence  was,
      she emphasised, that they had to keep a low profile.

16.   Mrs Aslam urged us to read the CIPU Report paragraphs with care.  They
      dwelt largely, she said,  on  risk   to  the  former  members  of  the
      PDPA/KhaD, not their relatives. Similarly the focus  of  the   Marsden
      report was on risk to former members, not their  relatives.  This  was
      especially important in this case since the father had been dead since
      1996 and even during the  1992-1996 period, when his  father  and  his
      family  lived  in   Kabul,  albeit  they  experienced  some  level  of
      harassment  from  the  local  population,  they  were  not   targeted.
      Furthermore, when the appellants went to Mazar-e-Sharif  in   1997  to
      flee the  Taliban, they were able to live there in relative peace  for
      four years and only left because they thought they would have to serve
      in the army.  Neither of the appellants had any political profile  and
      the first appellant had held no rank or position.

17.   Having heard the above submissions we informed the  parties  we  would
      reserve our determination and would only take steps to reconvene if we
      decided we could not reach a decision on both appeals on the basis  of
      an  assumption  of  full  acceptance  of  credibility   as   to   past
      experiences.

18.   In the event we have concluded that we are able to  reach  conclusions
      on the appeals without the need for a further hearing.

19.   We note that the Tribunal in  30, 27,  28  (Risk  -  PDPA  member)  CG
      [2002] UKIAT 06500 found that the issue of risk to  persons  having  a
      connection with the former PDPA had to be considered by weighing up  a
      number of factors including some personal to the individual.   In  our
      view, although time has moved on, the same approach to  assessment  of
      risk is called for.

20.   We would accept that the appellants' father being a senior  member  of
      the PDPA government as well as a member of KhaD is an important factor
      to be taken into account when assessing risk on return.  There  is  no
      doubt that KhaD was  a  ruthless  security  service  organisation  who
      between  1978-1992 was responsible  for grave human rights violations.
      However, as regards the treatment of former KhaD members, whilst UNHCR
       advice of July 2003 refers to KhaD members continuing to be generally
      at risk both from the authorities and the population '... given  their
      identification with human rights abuses during the communist  regime',
      this advice significantly qualifies its description of  the   category
      with the word  "[s]ome"  ("Some  of  the  former  military  officials,
      members of the police force ....  (security service) of the  communist
      regime also continue to be generally at risk ...').   Furthermore, the
      more recent Danish fact-finding mission to Kabul in  March/April  2004
      reports the view of several sources on the position of former  members
      of KhaD and the PDPA, including UNHCR. It recorded UNHCR's more recent
      position as seeing the issue  of  risk  as  dependent  on  whether   a
      person, in  the course of his activities for the PDPA  or  KhaD,  "has
      had concrete conflict with  or has come in[to]  opposition  to  people
      who are in power at the present time...'.  The Danish report added the
      view of UNAMA was that in this connection personal conflicts were more
      important than political conflicts: the example was given of a  former
      employee of KhaD who had been confronted by  powerful  people  he  had
      previously investigated. Furthermore, the Danish  report  goes  on  to
      note  that  the  evidence  of  the  CCA   (Co-operative   Centre   for
      Afghanistan) was that "about half  of  the  officers  working  in  the
      present Afghanistan Intelligence Services are former officers  of  the
      KhaD" (our emphasis).   This in our view is a very important piece  of
      evidence and was not one which was before Mr  Marsden (all his sources
      were from 2003 save for a UNAMA statement of January 2004).   Nor  was
      it before Dr Giustozzi in his report of 8  November  2004.  Previously
      there had been disagreement amongst background sources as  to  whether
      any former KhaD and WAD agents were taken on by  the  Taliban  or  the
      Kharzai regime.

21.   What we glean from the background evidence before us, when  considered
      in the  round,  is  that,  so  far  as  the  current  authorities  are
      concerned, a former KhaD member will not be viewed  adversely,  unless
      he has personally crossed people who are now in power.

22.   In this regard we consider that it is particularly relevant  to  focus
      on the conduct of the appellants' father and on what happened  to  him
      and them and the rest of his family in the  four year period following
      the overthrow of the communist regime in 1992.  During this period, as
      Mr Marsden notes, there was a struggle for power within Kabul  between
      different elements of the Mujahadeen, with fluctuating levels of armed
      conflict between different  groups.  This  was  at  a  time  when  the
      memories of all concerning KhaD and  PDPA  misdeeds  would  have  been
      freshest. Yet on the evidence of the appellants  his  father  and  his
      family stayed put in Kabul. His father  did not flee.   They  did  not
      flee. Nor is there any  evidence  that  his  father  involved  himself
      actively in  any of the political realignments taking place,  some  of
      which involved former PDPA members.  Instead he  started  a  business.
      Furthermore this was not a discreet  business  hidden  away  from  the
      public eye. It was a garage and car showroom  and  one  at  which  the
      father had sold a number of cars to Mujahadeen commanders personally.

23.   It was the  first  appellant's  evidence  on  this   point  that  "The
      Mujahadeen probably would have persecuted us too but at the time  they
      were too busy fighting each other and we were running our business  as
      quietly as possible so as not to draw attention to  ourselves...   The
      Mujahadeen did not even have time to  try  Dr  Najib  ...".   However,
      whilst  this is a subjective piece of  evidence  which  we  take  into
      account, we do not consider that their evidence considered as a  whole
      objectively demonstrates that the family was at risk of  serious  harm
      of persecution during that four year period. In our  view,   the  four
      years in Kabul, objectively considered, are  a strong   indication  of
      two things.  Firstly that the appellants' father, notwithstanding  his
      known PDPA and KhaD  background  and  profile,  had  not  seen  it  as
      necessary to flee or to avoid conducting  a  business  with  a  public
      face.  We do not think, if he feared revenge  attacks  that  he  would
      have gambled on the   Mujahadeen being too busy fighting  each  other.
      That in our view strongly suggested that he did not think his own KhaD
      activities  would have led to any persons or families identifying  him
      as their persecutor. In the second place, it  indicates  that  despite
      people in Kabul clearly knowing about  his  KhaD  background,  no  one
      sought to target him for a revenge attack in the course of  some  four
      years. We come back here to the UNAMA  evidence  that  in  Afghanistan
      personal conflicts are more important than political conflicts. On the
      first appellant's evidence, despite trying  to  run  the  business  as
      quietly as possible, the  father's  background  and  whereabouts  were
      clearly known about: indeed he detailed  how  neighbours  'started  to
      hate us'  and  he  and  his  family  encountered  different  kinds  of
      harassment (windows being smashed etc).

24.   In our view this demonstrates that the father had  no  fear  of  being
      targeted either by any individuals involved in the  Mujahadeen  groups
      jostling for power during this period or by any other individuals.

25.   This brings us to the significance of the fact that in any event  what
      we have to assess in this case is not risk to the late father, but  to
      two of his family members.

26.   We accept, as Miss Khan  has rightly highlighted, that both  the  CIPU
      Report, in respect of PDPA  members and  the  expert  report  from  Dr
      Marsden, in respect of KhaD members, include  family  members  in  the
      category of persons who may  [or, in the case of Dr Marsden, would] be
      at risk. However, given that the appellants'  father's  activities  on
      behalf of the  PDPA and KhaD had not resulted in any targeting of  him
      and his family in Kabul between 1992 and 1996, we do not consider that
      members of his family would now be targeted either. Indeed we consider
      that in respect of these two appellants there is  one  very  important
      additional reason why they would not be targeted, namely the lapse  of
      time since their father died  in 1996.  Since then there have  been  a
      host of major political changes in  Afghanistan.  We do  not  consider
      that Mr Marsden's report demonstrates that family  members  of  former
      PDPA and KhaD males continue to face the same level of risk of revenge
      attacks even after the  members themselves have died  or  been  killed
      and we think that, given the  many  shifts  in  tribal  and  political
      allegiances which  have taken place in Afghanistan over the past  five
      years especially, that the  passage of time must be a  factor  further
      reducing risk.

27.   Miss Khan  has  asked  us  to  consider  the  issue  of  risk  to  the
      appellants arising out of the events of  1996 and thereafter. We agree
      with her that it would be wrong to confine the issue of  risk  to  the
      events of  1992-1996,  since  on  the  appellants'  account  something
      happened  in  1996  which  added  an  additional  dimension  to  their
      problems.  The first appellant (perhaps his father also, but  we  have
      no evidence about this)  gave  intelligence  and  information  to  the
      Taliban concerning Mujahadeen commanders. In his written statement  of
      29 July 2004 the first appellant stated:


             "I did not tell the Taliban the address of my father's friends
             but I did tell them the addresses of Mujahadeen I knew. I knew
             where they lived because they used to come and buy  cars  from
             us when they were in power from 1992-1996.   ... I knew a  lot
             of commanders, not necessarily by  name  but  well  enough  to
             describe them and tell  the  Taliban  where  they  lived.  ...
             Normally when the Taliban arrest somebody they tell  them  who
             has informed on them ... Now of course any of those commanders
             and their relatives who are  still  in  Kabul  will  know  who
             informed against them.'

28.   Miss Khan pointed out that the appellants'  claim  that  the   Taliban
      told those they arrested who had informed on them was borne out by the
      expert and other evidence before us.   We accept that.

29.   The question remains whether this fact would be sufficient to put  the
      appellants at risk. We are not persuaded that it  would.  Firstly,  we
      note that the first appellant's evidence did not extend to  saying  he
      had been told by the Taliban that they had acted on the information he
      gave them.  Secondly, on the first appellant's account  he  had  given
      information about Mujahadeen commanders soon after he was arrested; he
      did not claim that it was only after a  significant  period  of  time.
      That is highly significant in our view because on his evidence he  was
      detained for  nine months. If any action was taken by the  Taliban  on
      this information about Mujahadeen  commanders  it  was  reasonable  to
      assume that it would have been taken quickly as otherwise  information
      of this kind would risk being out of date. But if it  was  acted  upon
      quickly then any Mujahadeen  commanders  rounded  up  or  detained  in
      consequence would have learned  about  the  appellant's  role  in  the
      affair   while   his   family   was    still    living    in    Kabul.



30.   We recognise that there is inevitably a degree  of  speculation  about
      this. But so there is about the claimed fear of  the  appellants  that
      there would be Mujahadeen today who would hold  them  responsible  for
      what happened to them or their colleagues in  1996.   We consider that
      if the information given  by the first appellant  at the beginning  of
      his detention  had  been  acted  on  by  the   Taliban,  then  it  was
      reasonably likely his family would have been the subject  of  targeted
      attacks by Mujahadeen in Kabul  during  the  nine  month  period  they
      remained there after his detention began.  But they were not.

31.   Thirdly, there is no strong reason for thinking that  the  information
      given by the first appellant was information that  would  not  already
      have been known to the  Taliban. The first appellant did not claim  to
      be privy to any of his father's secrets or details of his PDPA or KhaD
      activities.  Moreover such evidence  as we have about the  1996 period
      and events in Kabul does not indicate that Mujahadeen commanders  were
      conducting themselves clandestinely;  rather it  seems most if not all
      were seeking to draw support  to  themselves  publicly  from  as  many
      groups and individuals as could be persuaded to back  them.  Certainly
      such leaders had armed men whose job it was to protect them and  their
      families, but the evidence does not suggest that their addresses  were
      unknown to their rivals and enemies.

32.   For these reasons we do not consider that the appellants would  be  at
      risk of serious harm or treatment contrary to  the  Article  3  either
      from the current government or from Mujahadeen who are now  within  or
      outside the government.

33.   That brings us to the only other claimed source of harm, namely,  that
      posed by the local populace. As we have already indicated, we consider
      in this  regard  that  the  family's  experiences  between   1992-1996
      provide a strong indication that any difficulties the  appellants  may
      face on return are likely to be limited to forms of harassment falling
      short of serious harm.  Even in  1992-1996,  on  the  appellants'  own
      evidence the problems they encountered in  different  areas  in  Kabul
      were confined to incidents of  harassment  such  as  the  smashing  of
      windows at night. Such  actions,  although  unpleasant  were  not  the
      actions to be  expected  of  individuals  or  their  families  seeking
      revenge, nor did such   actions   lead  them  to  move  elsewhere.  In
      addition,  we  think  it  reasonably  likely  that  any  hostility  or
      suspicion on the part of neighbours or of the  local populace of Kabul
      will now be considerably lessened, due to the passage of time. We  re-
      emphasise here the fact that in this case there is  no  suggestion  of
      there being any attempts of revenge attacks during 1992-1996.

34.   For completeness we  should  address  one  further  point,  which  was
      raised in the grounds but which Miss Khan did not pursue at all before
      us.  This was the specific threat said to be posed by the  remnants of
      the  Taliban, in particular by  Soofi Naeem and his followers. It  was
      the  appellants' evidence that it was Soofi Naeem who had  spearheaded
      the move made against the appellants'  father  in  1996  and  who  had
      played a leading role in the interrogation and  ill-treatment  of  him
      and his father  and  in  the  subsequent  search  for  the  appellants
      following the first appellant's return from custody on  payment  of  a
      bribe, which appears not to have had the approval  of  Naeem.  It  has
      been contended earlier that Naeem has survived  as  a  local  warlord,
      notwithstanding his  Taliban involvement. We are bound to say we think
      Miss Khan was prudent not to pursue this contention, since  there  was
      no concrete evidence to indicate that Soofi Naeem,  even  assuming  he
      had somehow managed  to  continue  as  a  local  warlord  in  Khadomor
      Shromali, a district north of Kabul, would have  any continuing  post-
      Taliban interest in pursuing or visiting harm  on  the  appellants  or
      their family.

35.    For  the  above  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  decisions  to   be
      substituted for that of the Adjudicator, Mr J.H. Bryan (in respect  of
      the first appellant) and Miss L. Thornton (in respect  of  the  second
      appellant) should be to dismiss the appeal.

General Conclusions
36.       (a)    Assessment of the appellants' appeals has  required  us  to
           consider the general position in relation to   former  PDPA  and
           KhaD members and their families and we deem  it  appropriate  to
           set out our principal conclusions on such categories as follows.


             (b)   The  Tribunal  in  30,  27,  28  (Risk  -  PDPA   member)
           Afghanistan UKIAT 6500 found that the issue of risk  to  persons
           having a connection with the former PDPA has to be considered by
           weighing up a number of factors including some personal  to  the
           individual. Although time has moved on,  we  consider  that  the
           same approach to assessment of risk is called for.

         (c)      We consider  that  the  recent  evidence,  which  includes
           reference to  a  significant  number  of  former  KhaD  officers
           working for  the  present   Afghanistan  Intelligence  Services,
           indicates that former membership  of  KhaD  will  not  generally
           place a person  at risk of persecution or treatment contrary  to
           Article 3 on return unless they have had concrete conflicts with
            people who are now in power. In this context  past  or  present
           personal conflicts are more important than political conflicts.


        (d)    Cases involving family members of a former PDPA and/or former
           KhaD member will require consideration in much the same  way  as
           in (a), (b) and (c), although there may  be  additional  factors
           reducing or removing the risk family members face  such  as  the
           fact that the PDPA/KhaD member has died or been killed  and  the
           amount of time that has elapsed since his death.


                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE

                                 APPENDIX A:


APPENDIX: BACKGROUND MATERIALS AND EXPERT REPORTS

Human Rights Watch Backgrounder, 5 October 2001

Eurasia Insight, 2 Jan 2003

UNHCR Report, July 2003

"Killing You is a Very Easy Thing for US", Human Rights Watch, July 2003

ICG Report, 5 August 2003

Eurasia Insight, 9 August 2003

British Agencies Afghanistan Group (BAAG) Monthly Review, November 2003

RFE/RL Afghanistan Report undated

"Warlords Still Call the Shots", Human Rights Watch: 24 December 2003

"Flawed Charter for a Land Ruled by Fear", Human  Rights  Watch,  6  January
2004

Danish Immigration Service:  The  political  conditions,  the  security  and
human rights situation in Afghanistan: Report  on  fact-finding  mission  to
Kabul, Afghanistan: 20 March-2 April 2004 (English version Nov 2004)

ECRE: Guidelines for the Treatment of Afghan Asylum Seekers and Refugees  in
Europe: May 2004

Report of the independent expert of the Commission of Human  Rights  to  the
UN General Assembly, 21 September 2004

"The Rule of the Gun", Human Rights Watch Briefing Paper, September 2004

CIPU Afghanistan Country Report, October 2004

US State Department Report 2004 (Feb 2005)

CIPU Afghanistan Country Report, April 2005


Expert report of Peter Marsden, 4 January 2004 (with permission for  use  in
this case)

Expert report by Dr Antonio Giustozzi, 8 November 2004


