
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AMA (Article 1C(5) - proviso - internal relocation) Somalia [2019] UKUT
00011 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2018                           |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AMA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Broudie, Jackson & Cantor


   1) The compelling reasons proviso in article 1C(5) of  the  1951  Refugee
      Convention, as amended, applies in  the  UK  only  to  refugees  under
      article 1A(1) of the Convention.


   2) Changes in a refugee's country of origin affecting only  part  of  the
      country may, in principle, lead to cessation of refugee status, albeit
      it is difficult to see how in practice protection could be said to  be
      sufficiently fundamental and durable in such circumstances.


   3) The SSHD's guidance regarding the role of past persecution can not  in
      itself form a lawful basis for finding that removal would  lead  to  a
      breach of the Refugee Convention, given the limited appeal  rights  at
      section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
      amended and SF and others (Guidance - post-2014  Act)  Albania  [2017]
      UKUT 120 (IAC) 10 when read in its proper context.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

Introduction

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of First-
         tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Ennals dated 20 November 2017, in which
         he allowed AMA's appeal against a decision dated 13  June  2017  to
         make a deportation order.

Background

      2. AMA is a citizen of Somalia.  He entered the UK in  2006,  when  he
         was 14, with  his  father  and  siblings,  having  been  granted  a
         settlement visa to join his mother  ('M'),  who  had  been  granted
         asylum in the UK on 17 May 2005.   AMA was recognised as a  refugee
         when he entered the UK, as evident  from  the  SSHD's  more  recent
         decision to cease his refugee status.  In  his  decision  dated  13
         June 2017, the SSHD expressly acknowledged  that  AMA  derived  his
         refugee status from his mother.


      3. M's 2005 asylum statement provided the following  information:  she
         was born in Qoryoley, Somalia  and  this  was  her  last  permanent
         address in Somalia before she left in February 2005;  she  and  her
         family members are from the Ashraf minority clan; M, her  immediate
         family members and her extended  family  members  were  subject  to
         sustained persecution by the Hawiye majority clan during the  civil
         war from 1996; this led to the killings of some family members  and
         the capture of the remaining family members who were used as forced
         labour and ill-treated at a camp in Qoryoley; female relatives were
         raped including M's two sisters  and  many  relatives  were  killed
         either trying to escape  or  in  attempting  to  defend  themselves
         including M's two brothers, M's mother, M's nephew and  M's  uncle;
         M's husband and the older children escaped from the  camp  in  2004
         during a period of Hawiye in-fighting; M escaped from the  camp  in
         March 2005 with the help of her uncle in Saudi Arabia who  arranged
         for an agent to use bribery to facilitate this; M was able to leave
         the camp but without the younger children and arrived in the UK  on
         22 March 2015, after travelling via Ethiopia.


      4. M was interviewed regarding her asylum claim on 28 April  2005  and
         recognised as a refugee in a 'grant of asylum' letter dated 17  May
         2005.  Following this, M's husband  and  children,  including  AMA,
         were granted visas to join M on 3 March 2006,  and  arrived  on  10
         April 2006.


      5. Between 2009 and 2015, AMA was convicted on five occasions but  was
         not sentenced to a period of imprisonment until 7 March 2012,  when
         he was convicted of production of a controlled drug of Class B  and
         commission of an offence during  a  suspended  sentence  order  and
         sentenced to nine months imprisonment.

      6. On 1 April 2016 AMA was notified of a decision to deport him  under
         section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.  There  then  followed  a
         period in which representations were sought regarding the cessation
         of AMA's refugee status.  On 18 January 2017  the  UNHCR  submitted
         detailed representations on the proposed cessation of AMA's refugee
         status.   The  UNHCR  submitted  that   there   were   insufficient
         fundamental changes  in  Somalia  to  warrant  the  application  of
         article 1C(5) of the 1951 Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of
         Refugees  ('the   Refugee   Convention')   given   the   individual
         circumstances of AMA's case.  The UNHCR drew specific attention to:
         the SSHD's failure to address the safety of  the  route  of  return
         from  Mogadishu  to  Qoryoley,  AMA's  home  area;   the   internal
         relocation alternative  to  Mogadishu  should  not  be  a  relevant
         consideration when making a decision on the application of  article
         1C(5); country background reports post-dating the country  guidance
         in MOJ and others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  v  SSHD  [2014]
         UKUT 00442 (IAC) demonstrating  that  clan  tensions  continue  and
         members of minority clans remain at a particular disadvantage, such
         that any improvements in Somalia cannot be  considered  fundamental
         and durable.


      7. On 26 April 2017 AMA was convicted of using  threatening  words  or
         behaviour, in relation to which he was fined and made  the  subject
         of a restraining order.


      8. On 13 June 2017 a decision was made to cease AMA's  refugee  status
         and refuse his human rights claim.  The SSHD  expressly  considered
         the UNHCR submissions and accepted "that travel  between  Mogadishu
         and Qoryoley may expose [AMA] to risk" but  that  he  could  safely
         reside in Mogadishu.  The SSHD did not address the submission  made
         by the UNHCR that this would in effect require AMA to make  use  of
         the internal relocation alternative and was inappropriate  for  the
         purposes of the cessation of refugee status.

Appeal to FTT


      9. AMA's appeal to the FTT was successful.  The FTT concluded that the
         family history of sustained and  egregious  persecution  over  many
         years was such that article 1C(6) of the Refugee Convention and the
         SSHD's policy pursuant to this as contained in  the  Asylum  Policy
         Instruction on Revocation of Refugee Status dated 19  January  2016
         ('the Revocation API'),  applied in AMA's favour.


     10. At [15] to [16] of its decision the FTT rehearsed a summary of  the
         persecution endured by M and her family members from 1996  to  2015
         and noted that this account had never been disputed  by  the  SSHD.
         M's asylum claim was granted without the necessity of an appeal and
         her statement must have been broadly accepted to be true.  The  FTT
         also noted an absence of any evidence  from  the  SSHD  to  suggest
         otherwise.  On that basis at  [17],  the  FTT  found  it  "hard  to
         imagine a scenario that better fits the provision in Art  1(C)(6)".
         The FTT adopted the language of the Revocation API in reaching  the
         following conclusion:


             "Both [AMA] as  a  young  child,  and  his  immediate  family,
             suffered 'truly atrocious forms of  persecution',  while  they
             were  in  a  camp,   where   they   survived   and   witnessed
             'particularly  traumatic  violence  against  family   members,
             including sexual violence'".

     11. The FTT therefore found at [18] "that the provisions of Article  1C
         and para 339A of the Immigration Rules did not apply to  [AMA]  and
         so his protection cannot be revoked".


     12. Given this finding, the FTT made it clear at [20] that he  did  not
         need to address the submission, based  upon  MOJ,  that  AMA  could
         return to Mogadishu, but in any event found "for what it  is  worth
         and without further argument" that AMA could not safely  return  to
         Mogadishu in light of the guidance in MOJ.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

     13. At the hearing before me, Mr Tan confirmed that the SSHD wished  to
         rely upon the grounds of appeal dated 20 November 2017 and did  not
         place reliance upon the later grounds dated 5  January  2018.   The
         2017 grounds of appeal are three-fold:


           1) As a dependent on his mother's  refugee  claim  AMA  has  not
              demonstrated that he endured the traumatic  experiences  that
              she did in Somalia.


           2) Article 1C(6)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  cannot  override
              paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules.

           3) The FTT failed to properly apply MOJ.

     14. Permission was initially refused by the FTT, but granted by the  UT
         in a decision dated 23 March 2018.  UT Judge Macleman observed that
         "if the judge was right about the facts, it would be hard to  argue
         that the judge went wrong at [17]  in  finding  that  the  scenario
         fitted Article 1C(6) of  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the  SSHD's
         guidance".  Judge Macleman considered that since article  1C(6)  is
         not  replicated  within  339A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,   their
         interaction was not dealt with by the FTT and "qualifies for debate
         and answer".


     15. In a Rule 24 notice dated 18 May 2018, it was  submitted  on  AMA's
         behalf that the FTT did not err in law in applying article 1C(5) of
         the Refugee Convention, when that is mirrored in article 11 of  the
         Qualification Directive and the SSHD's own policy.   Pausing there,
         although the FTT decision and the SSHD's grounds of appeal refer to
         article 1C(6), as will be seen from the discussion below, this  was
         a mistake and both must have  meant  to  refer  to  article  1C(5),
         because article 1C(6) applies to those who are stateless.   No  one
         has ever suggested this regarding AMA.


     16. AMA's solicitors also provided the UT with a copy of MS (Art 1C(5)-
         Mogadishu) Somalia [2018] UKUT 00196 (IAC) (promulgated on 22 March
         2018) and placed reliance on this in a covering letter  dated  July
         2018.


     17. At the beginning of the hearing before  me,  Mr  Tan  realistically
         acknowledged that the first  ground  of  appeal  in  which  AMA  is
         described as a dependent on his mother's refugee claim and a person
         who  has  not  necessarily  experienced  very   similar   traumatic
         experiences to her, is difficult to follow.  AMA  may  have  gained
         his refugee status in line with his mother and pursuant  to  family
         reunification but he was nonetheless recognised as a refugee in the
         UK, hence the decision to cease his refugee status.  That  approach
         is consistent with 3.7.1 of the Revocation API, which  states  that
         the previous policy on family reunion was to grant  refugee  status
         and leave in line under the family reunion provisions as  a  matter
         of course.  Mr Tan also acknowledged  that  there  was  no  dispute
         before the FTT that AMA spent much of  his  childhood  with  M  and
         other family members, living and working, in effective slavery  and
         in atrocious conditions.  The reasons for the principal  applicant,
         M being granted asylum, were therefore very similar to the  reasons
         why AMA was granted refugee status in line with her.  In  light  of
         this, Mr Tan focused his attention on the second ground  of  appeal
         and invited me to find that the FTT erred  in  law  in  failing  to
         apply 339A of the Immigration Rules,  albeit  he  appreciated  that
         339A did not sit comfortably with the SSHD's own policy, as set out
         in the Revocation API.

     18. Mr Tan acknowledged that the third ground of appeal placed reliance
         on the FTT's failure to properly apply MOJ  but  this  only  became
         material if the second ground was not made out.


     19. Finally, I invited Mr Tan to make submissions on the  applicability
         of MS, as this was effectively raised  by  AMA  as  an  alternative
         basis for the FTT reaching the decision  it  did,  albeit  not  one
         articulated by the FTT.  Mr Tam invited  me  to  find  that  MS  is
         inconsistent with SSHD v MA (Somalia) [2018] EWCA Civ  994  (handed
         down on 2 May 2018 and unavailable to the Tribunal in MS).  Mr  Tam
         however acknowledged that unlike the position in  MA,  the  instant
         case is definitely an 'internal relocation case'.  In other  words,
         the SSHD accepted that AMA could not return to  his  home  area  in
         Qoroyley and he was being expected to relocate to Mogadishu.


     20. I then heard from Mr Hussain who invited me to dismiss  the  SSHD's
         appeal for three reasons.  First, the FTT was entitled to allow the
         appeal on Refuge Convention  grounds,  having  found  that  article
         1C(5) applied, and such an approach was consistent with policy  and
         EU law.  Secondly and in any event following MS, the SSHD  was  not
         entitled to cease AMA's refugee status pursuant  to  article  1C(5)
         solely on the basis of a change in circumstances in one part of the
         country of proposed return.  Thirdly and in the alternative, as the
         FTT concluded, the proper application of MOJ was such that  AMA  is
         at prospective risk.

     21. I reserved my decision which I now provide with reasons.


Discussion

Issue 1 - Application of article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention

Applicable law

     22. The Refugee Convention as supplemented by the Protocol relating  to
         the Status of Refugees of 31 January 1967 ('the Protocol')  refers
         to 'statutory' refugees or pre-1951 refugees at article  1A(1)  and
         then provides the definition of the  'modern'  refugee  at  article
         1A(2)


             "the term 'refugee' is to apply to any person  who  'owing  to
             well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons  of  race,
             religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group
             or  political  opinion,  is  outside  the   country   of   his
             nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
             to avail himself of the protection of that  country;  or  who,
             not having a nationality and being outside the country of  his
             former habitual residence as  a  result  of  such  events,  is
             unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it".


     23. Article 1C then states as follows:


             "C. This Convention shall cease to apply to any person falling
             under the terms of section A if:
             ...
             5) He can no longer, because the circumstances  in  connection
                with which he has been recognized as a refugee have  ceased
                to exist, continue  to  refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
                protection of the country of his nationality;
                Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to  a  refugee
                falling under section A(1) of this article who is  able  to
                invoke  compelling  reasons   arising   out   of   previous
                persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection
                of the country of nationality;

             6) Being a person who has no nationality he  is,  because  the
                circumstances  in  connection  with  which  he   has   been
                recognized as a refugee  have  ceased  to  exist,  able  to
                return to the country of his former habitual residence;
                Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to  a  refugee
                falling under section A(1) of this article who is  able  to
                invoke  compelling  reasons   arising   out   of   previous
                persecution for refusing to return to the  country  of  his
                former habitual residence."

     24. Sub-paragraphs  (5)  and  (6)  of  article  1C  draw  the  reader's
         attention to a "refugee falling  under"  section  A(1)  or  article
         A(1). The second sub-paragraphs of articles 1C(5) and (6) (which  I
         shall  refer  to  as  the  'compelling  reasons  proviso')  do  not
         therefore cover all refugees and is limited in its  application  to
         refugees falling under article A(1), otherwise known as  'statutory
         refugees'.


     25. Paragraph 136 of the UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and Criteria  for
         Determining Refugee Status (Geneva, 1979) states with reference  to
         article 1C(5):


             "The second paragraph of this clause contains an exception  to
             the cessation provision contained in the first  paragraph.  It
             deals with the special situation where a person may have  been
             subjected to very serious persecution in the past and will not
             therefore cease to be a refugee, even if  fundamental  changes
             have occurred in his  country  of  origin.  The  reference  to
             article  1A(1)  indicates  that  the  exception   applies   to
             'statutory refugees'. At the time when the 1951 Convention was
             elaborated,  these  formed  the  majority  of  refugees.   The
             exception,  however,  reflects  a  more  general  humanitarian
             principle, which could also be applied to refugees other  than
             statutory refugees. It is frequently recognized that a  person
             who - or whose family - has suffered under atrocious forms  of
             persecution should not be expected to repatriate. Even  though
             there may have been a change of regime in  his  country,  this
             may not always produce a complete change in  the  attitude  of
             the population, nor, in view of his past experiences,  in  the
             mind of the refugee."


     26. The reasoning in this passage reflects a long-standing  concern  on
         the part of the UNHCR that the cessation  clauses  in  the  Refugee
         Convention were being  taken  too  literally.   A  similar  concern
         predicated the appellant's submissions in the House of Lords, in  R
         v Special Adjudicator ex parte Hoxha [2005] 1 WLR 1063, [2015] UKHL
         19.  The House of Lords considered the cessation  clauses,  and  in
         particular the compelling reasons proviso albeit not in a cessation
         case.  Rather, the case concerned asylum applicants who  no  longer
         had a well-founded fear of persecution prior to  the  determination
         of their asylum claims, which were in principle well-founded at the
         time that they fled their country of origin. Nonetheless, the claim
         that the compelling reasons proviso  applied  to  non-statutory  or
         'modern' refugees was rejected.


     27. Lord Hope drew attention to the drafting history of  article  1C(5)
         and concluded that the state parties were not willing either at the
         time the Refugee Convention was entered into or when it was amended
         pursuant to the Protocol, to extend the benefit of  the  compelling
         reasons proviso to non-statutory refugees - see [16] to [20] of his
         judgment.  The Protocol recognised that new situations  had  arisen
         since  the  Refugee  Convention  was  adopted  and   that   further
         provisions were needed as persons who had become refugees  since  1
         January 1951 might not fall within its scope, and it was  desirable
         that equal status should be enjoyed by all refugees.  Although  the
         Protocol effectively amended aspects  of  the  Refugee  Convention,
         such that these two instruments  provide  the  cornerstone  of  the
         international legal regime for  the  protection  of  refugees,  the
         preamble to article 1C(5) was  left  untouched  because,  "although
         they were aware that events had moved  on  since  1951,  the  state
         parties were still not willing to agree  to  a  relaxation  of  the
         limitation that had  been  expressly  written  into  the  proviso".
         Having traced the relevant drafting history,  Lord  Hope  concluded
         that,  while  the  framers  of  the  Refugee  Convention  had   the
         opportunity to extend the benefit of the compelling reasons proviso
         to all refugees, a deliberate decision was  taken  to  confine  its
         application to the statutory refugees who had  been  identified  in
         article 1A(1). A distinction was  thus  created  between  them  and
         those identified in article 1A(2).

     28. At [21] Lord Hope observed that a further  opportunity  to  address
         the issue arose  when  the  European  Commission  was  framing  its
         proposal for a Council  Directive  on  minimum  standards  for  the
         qualification and status of third country nationals  and  stateless
         persons as refugees.  The proposal, which was in the same terms  as
         Article 11 of Council Directive 2004/83/EC ('the QD'), repeated the
         language of articles  1C(5)  and  (6)  but  omitted  the  provisos.
         Article 11 of the QD therefore states:


             "1.   A third-country national or a  stateless  person  shall
             cease to  be  eligible  for  subsidiary  protection  when  the
             circumstances  which  led  to  the  granting   of   subsidiary
             protection status have ceased to exist or have changed to such
             a degree that protection is no longer required.


             2.   In applying paragraph 1, Member States shall have regard
             to  whether  the  change  in  circumstances  is  of   such   a
             significant and non-temporary nature that the person  eligible
             for subsidiary protection no  longer  faces  a  real  risk  of
             serious harm."
|                                                                          |


     29. The QD has been superseded for EU members states other than the UK,
         Ireland  and  Denmark  by  the   recast   Qualification   Directive
         2011/95/EU ('the recast QD').  Article 11 in the recast QD provides
         an additional sub-paragraph (3) as follows:


             "3.   Paragraph  1  shall  not  apply  to  a  beneficiary  of
             subsidiary protection status who is able to invoke  compelling
             reasons arising out of previous serious harm for  refusing  to
             avail himself or herself of the protection of the  country  of
             nationality or, being a stateless person, of  the  country  of
             former habitual residence."

     30. The EU has therefore explicitly amended its law in the form of  the
         recast QD to extend the benefit of the compelling  reasons  proviso
         to modern refugees.  That does not however  assist  in  the  proper
         interpretation of the Refugee Convention or the  QD  applicable  to
         the UK.  It is clear from the text of these  two  instruments  that
         there is no legal duty to  apply  the  compelling  reasons  proviso
         exception to refugees other  than  the  very  limited  category  of
         statutory refugees.  This analysis was accepted  by  the  House  of
         Lords in Hoxha but has also been  accepted  by  respected  academic
         commentators in the field - see for example,  The  Law  of  Refugee
         Status, Second Edition by James Hathaway  and  Michelle  Foster  at
         6.1.4.

     31. Paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules reflects the wording of the
         Refugee Convention and the QD and states that a person's  grant  of
         asylum will be revoked or not renewed if the Secretary of State  is
         satisfied that:

             "(v) he can no longer, because the circumstances in connection
             with which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased  to
             exist, continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
             of the country of nationality".

     32. Paragraph 339A goes on to state that:

             "In considering (v) and (vi), the  Secretary  of  State  shall
             have regard to whether the change of circumstances is of  such
             a significant and non-temporary nature that the refugee's fear
             of persecution can no longer be regarded as well-founded".

     33. It follows that I reject Mr Hussain's submission that the  FTT  was
         entitled to apply  the  compelling  reasons  proviso  contained  in
         article 1C(5) (mistakenly referred to as article  1C(6)),  to  AMA.
         Such an approach is inconsistent with  the  terms  of  the  Refugee
         Convention itself, the applicable QD and paragraph 339A.   The  FTT
         therefore erred in law in allowing the appeal on the basis that the
         SSHD could not rely upon article 1(C) and paragraph 339A, by reason
         of the application of the proviso.
|                                                                          |
|Applicable policy                                                         |


     34. As Lord Hope noted in Hoxha at [22], the Commission's commentary at
         the time of the drafting of the QD, contains the following:


             "The Member State invoking this cessation clause should ensure
             that an appropriate  status,  preserving  previously  acquired
             rights, is granted to persons who are unwilling to  leave  the
             country  for  compelling  reasons  arising  out  of   previous
             persecution or experiences of serious and unjustified harm, as
             well as to persons who cannot be expected to leave the  Member
             State due to a long stay resulting in  strong  family,  social
             and economic links in that country."

     35. That approach is consistent with the SSHD's current  position  that
         the proviso vis � vis the Refugee Convention does not  apply  to  a
         non-statutory refugee but  is interpreted as reflecting  a  general
         humanitarian principle. At 4.5 of  the  Revocation  API  under  the
         heading 'Compelling reasons arising out  of  previous  persecution'
         the following is stated:


             "Article 1C(5) and (6) of the Refugee  Convention  contain  an
             exception to the cessation provisions, allowing a  refugee  to
             invoke   'compelling   reasons   arising   out   of   previous
             persecution' for refusing to re-avail himself  or  herself  of
             the protection of their country of origin.
             This exception applies  to  cases  where  refugees,  or  their
             family  members,  have  suffered  truly  atrocious  forms   of
             persecution and it is unreasonable to expect them to return to
             their country of origin or  former  habitual  residence.  This
             might, for example, include:
             . ex-camp or prison detainees
             . survivors or witnesses of  particularly  traumatic  violence
             against family members, including sexual violence
             . those who are severely traumatised


             The presumption is that such persons have suffered grave  acts
             of persecution, including at the  hands  of  elements  of  the
             local population, and therefore cannot reasonably be  expected
             to return. Application of the 'compelling  reasons'  exception
             is interpreted to  extend  beyond  the  actual  words  of  the
             provision to apply to Article 1A(2) refugees  and  reflects  a
             general humanitarian principle.
             As this provision is  expected  to  apply  only  in  the  most
             exceptional  of  cases,  any  decision  not  to  proceed  with
             revocation  on  this  basis  must  be  taken   by   a   senior
             caseworker."


     36. The FTT was entitled to note that the SSHD's policy  was  relevant,
         in so far as the "truly atrocious" past persecution suffered by AMA
         and his family members, was undisputed and might be relevant if the
         need to consider internal relocation arose.  However, that  finding
         in itself could not form a lawful  basis  for  finding  that  AMA's
         removal from the UK would breach its obligations under the  Refugee
         Convention - see the limited appeal rights at  section  82  of  the
         Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended.   Any
         challenge to the failure to apply a policy can no longer  form  the
         basis of a ground of appeal to the FTT -  see  ES  (s82  NIA  2002;
         negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 335 (IAC) at [27] and [28].   The
         only issue before the FTT in this case was whether AMA continued to
         qualify  for  protection  under  the  Refugee  Convention.   It  is
         important to read the headnote in SF and others (Guidance  -  post-
         2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) 10 to the effect that  even
         in the absence of a 'not in accordance  with  the  law'  ground  of
         appeal, the Tribunal ought to take the SSHD's guidance into account
         if it points  clearly  to  a  particular  outcome,  in  its  proper
         context.   SF involved  an  assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of
         expecting a child to leave the UK, and the SSHD's own guidance  was
         relevant to assisting the Tribunal to  make  judgments,  consistent
         with the approach that would be taken by the SSHD  -  see  [10]  to
         [12].


     37. In any event, the FTT did not allow the appeal because of a  breach
         of policy but used the wording of the policy to  support  the  view
         that article 1(C)(5) applied.  For the reasons provided  above  the
         compelling circumstances proviso could not be lawfully  applied  so
         as to underpin a decision to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.


Issue 2 - Internal relocation and cessation

     38. In MS, UT Judge Kopieczek concluded that the SSHD is  not  entitled
         to cease a person's refugee status pursuant to article 1C(5) solely
         on the basis of a change  of  circumstances  in  one  part  of  the
         country of proposed return.  The nub of  his  reasoning  is  to  be
         found at [51] to [57].

             "51.          The Secretary of State's position as set  out in
             the decision letter dated 15 September 2015 states at [53] and
             [54] that the circumstances  under  which  the  appellant  was
             granted refugee status have now changed, because  although  it
             was accepted he was from Kismayo, "you  were  granted  refugee
             status due to the situation in Mogadishu". However, relying on
             MOJ & Ors, the Secretary of State says  that  "there  has  now
             been a significant and enduring change  in  Mogadishu".  Quite
             clearly therefore, the Secretary of State puts  the  situation
             in Mogadishu at  the  heart  of  the  decision  to  cease  the
             appellant's refugee status.

             52.          However, in my judgement the Secretary of State's
             approach in this respect is fundamentally flawed. The basis of
             the appellant's refugee claim (or more accurately the basis of
             his mother's claim upon which he was a dependant) is  that  he
             had a well-founded fear of persecution in the country  of  his
             nationality, Somalia. That well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             arose in his home area of Kismayo.  Naturally,  the  issue  of
             internal  relocation  would  have  been  a  factor  that   was
             considered at the time of the decision to grant refugee status
             to the family. Presumably, although the  information  has  not
             been  provided,  internal  relocation  to  Mogadishu  was  not
             considered a viable option at the  time.  In  my  view  it  is
             contrary to the humanitarian principle of surrogate protection
             under the Refugee Convention for the Secretary of State to  be
             able to seek to identify an area of a country where  it  could
             be said that an individual no longer has a  well-founded  fear
             of persecution, and to which he  could  now  relocate  if  the
             claim were now made.

             53.          The UNHCR's Cessation Guidelines  make  the point
             that not being able to move or to establish oneself freely  in
             the country of origin would indicate that the changes have not
             been fundamental. The Secretary of State does not suggest that
             the appellant's claim to refugee status in terms of  the  risk
             to him in his home area has been  extinguished  by  reason  of
             fundamental and durable changes in the country as a whole.

             54.           Although  it  was  suggested  on  behalf  of the
             respondent in submissions that  there  was  no  difference  in
             principle between  the  grant  or  the  cessation  of  refugee
             status, because a person is only a refugee so long as there is
             no safe area of return, I  do  not  agree.  There  is,  in  my
             judgement,  a  very  significant  philosophical   and   indeed
             practical difference between the grant and  the  cessation  of
             refugee status, illustrated by the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines,
             but also reflected in the two  authorities  to  which  I  have
             referred.

             55.          If the Secretary of State's position was  to hold
             good, it would mean that a person claiming asylum would be  in
             a more advantageous position than a  person  who  already  has
             refugee status and whose status the Secretary of  State  seeks
             to rescind. Thus, if the person whose claim for asylum depends
             on an assessment of an internal flight option, that individual
             would have that issue assessed on the basis of undue harshness
             and the reasonableness of internal relocation. However, in the
             case of a person whose refugee status is  to  be  taken  away,
             once it is decided that there is a  part  of  the  country  in
             which the change of circumstances is of such a significant and
             non-temporary nature that  the  person's  fear  is  no  longer
             regarded as well-founded (in that area), that  individual  may
             be returned without the sort of examination of the  issues  of
             undue  harshness  and  reasonableness  of   return   to   that
             particular area which would occur in considering  a  grant  of
             refugee status. That is so  notwithstanding  the  respondent's
             Asylum Policy Instruction  on  revocation  of  refugee  status
             which I have set out at [42],  which  does  not  provide  full
             coverage of the issue of internal relocation.

             56.          Thus, what was recognised in Hoxha  as  being the
             need for a "strict" and "restrictive"  approach  to  cessation
             clauses would be significantly undermined. Put another way, it
             would make it easier to cease a person's refugee  status  than
             to make a  grant  of  refugee  status;  a  position  which  is
             contrary both to logic and principle.

             57.          In those circumstances, I am  satisfied  that the
             FtJ was correct  to  conclude  that  the  respondent  was  not
             entitled to cease the appellant's refugee status on the  basis
             only of the change in circumstances  in  Mogadishu  since  his
             claim was made. That is not  to  afford  the  UNHCR  Cessation
             Guidelines a status of being determinative  of  the  issue  in
             question, but in my view it does mean  that  those  Guidelines
             are correct in what they say in this respect."

     39. The relevant UNHCR Cessation Guidelines (10 February 2003) state at
         [6] that when interpreting the cessation clauses, it  is  important
         to bear in mind the broad  durable  solutions  context  of  refugee
         protection informing the object and purpose of these clauses.   The
         changes need to be of a fundamental nature and durable.  The  UNHCR
         Cessation Guidelines also emphasise at [15] that a crucial question
         is whether the refugee can effectively re-avail himself or  herself
         of the protection of his or her own country, and at [17] say this:


             "In contrast, changes  in  the  refugee's  country  of  origin
             affecting only part of the territory should not, in principle,
             lead to cessation of refugee status. Refugee status  can  only
             come to an end if the basis for persecution is removed without
             the precondition that the refugee has to  return  to  specific
             safe  parts  of  the  country  in  order  to  be   free   from
             persecution. Also, not being able  to  move  or  to  establish
             oneself freely in the country of origin  would  indicate  that
             the changes have not been fundamental."


     40. Mr Tan submitted that the conclusion at [57] in MS that [17] of the
         UNHCR Guidelines is correct, was reached without the benefit of the
         Court of Appeal's judgment in MA, which applied the  CJEU  decision
         in Joined Cases Abdulla and others v Bundesrepublik Deutschland,  2
         March 2010 (C-175/08 - C179/08).  It should  be  noted  that  Judge
         Kopieczek  made  it  clear  that  he  was  only  referred  to   two
         authorities.  These did not include Abdulla - see [45] of  MS.   MA
         was handed down after MS was promulgated.  In addition, MA was  not
         an 'internal relocation case' and neither was Abdulla.   MA  was  a
         Somali national whose home area was in Mogadishu,  where  the  SSHD
         proposed to remove him.  Abdulla involved Iraqi nationals who  were
         granted refugee status on the basis of persecution suffered at  the
         hands of Saddam Hussain.  The German authorities wished  to  revoke
         their refugee status relying upon the QD on the basis that although
         the conditions in Iraq remained generally unsettled, there had been
         the requisite change of circumstances  such  that  there  could  no
         longer be said to be  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.   The
         judgments in MA and Abdulla therefore  say  little  about  internal
         relocation in the context of cessation.


     41. In MA, judgment was given by Arden LJ, with whom Peter  Jackson  LJ
         agreed.  Extensive references were made to the  country  background
         evidence as set out in MOJ at [9] and the reasons  for  the  CJEU's
         conclusion in Abdulla, that cessation of refugee status  under  the
         QD involves an individualised and not a generalised  evaluation  of
         the changed conditions in the country of origin at  [47]  to  [60].
         Arden LJ accepted that lacking  a  well-founded  fear  of  specific
         persecution, refugee status ceases even  if  the  general  security
         situation in the country of  nationality  is  not  stable  and  the
         general living conditions do  not  ensure  a  minimum  standard  of
         living.   In short, Arden LJ found that it was necessary to  simply
         determine whether any fear for a Refugee Convention  reason  ceased
         to exist such that it could be described as "significant  and  non-
         temporary" within the  terms  of  article  11(2)  of  the  QD.   In
         reaching that conclusion, Arden LJ accepted at [47] that  it  would
         be inconsistent with the purposes of refugee status  if  protection
         could be ceased "too easily" but equally  "there  is  no  necessary
         reason why refugee status should be continued beyond the time" when
         the refugee is subject  to  persecution.   Arden  LJ  rejected  the
         submission that the grounds  for  cessation  could  go  beyond  the
         grounds  for  recognition  of  refugee  status  so  as  to  include
         "humanitarian standards" or the  protection  of  "human  rights  in
         general", and observed that "there should be  the  requirement  for
         symmetry between the grant and the cessation of refugee  status"  -
         see [47], [51], [56] of the judgment.


     42. I appreciate that at first glance this  might  appear  inconsistent
         with Judge Kopieczek's observation in MS  that  there  is  a  "very
         significant and practical difference  between  the  grant  and  the
         cessation of refugee status".  However, upon closer  scrutiny,  any
         difference in approach between MA and  MS  is  more  apparent  than
         real.  At no stage in his reasoning  did  Judge  Kopieczek  suggest
         that the cessation enquiry is a wider or more generalised one  that
         includes the consideration of humanitarian standards  unrelated  to
         the requirements within  the  Refugee  Convention.   Indeed,  Judge
         Kopieczek appears to agree with the need for symmetry  between  the
         grant and cessation of  refugee  status,  when  he  deprecates  any
         differences in approach to the consideration of internal relocation
         at [55].  Similarly, Arden LJ's approval of  symmetry  between  the
         grant and the cessation of refugee status,  does  not  obviate  the
         obvious differences that exist.  First, the burden of proof  is  on
         the applicant to establish that he is entitled to  refugee  status,
         but the burden of proof is  upon  the  state  to  demonstrate  that
         refugee status should cease.   Secondly,  there  is  a  strict  and
         restrictive approach to cessation for  reasons  explained  by  Lord
         Brown in Hoxha at [65-66] and the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines.  That
         is reflected in the high  and  exacting  test  that  must  be  met.
         Contrast this with  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  given  to  asylum
         claimants.  Thirdly, whilst the same lower standard of  proof  must
         be applied when deciding whether the person meets the  requirements
         of the Refugee Convention at both stages (see [88] of Abdulla), for
         there  to  be  cessation  there  is  the  discrete  and  additional
         requirement  that  any  change  in  circumstances  must  be  of   a
         "significant and non-temporary" nature, such that the factors which
         formed the basis of  the  refugee's  fear  of  persecution  may  be
         regarded as having  been  "permanently  eradicated"  (see  [73]  of
         Abdulla).


     43. Notwithstanding the differences  set  out  above,  I  accept  there
         remains a symmetry between the grant and the cessation  of  refugee
         status. As the CJEU observed in Abdulla at [89]:


            "At both of those stages of  the  examination,  the  assessment
            relates to the same question of whether or not the  established
            circumstances  constitute  such  a  threat  that   the   person
            concerned may reasonably fear, in the light of  his  individual
            situation, that he  will  in  fact  be  subjected  to  acts  of
            persecution."


     44. In addition, the  individual  approach  to  determining  whether  a
         person is entitled  to  refugee  status  remains  when  considering
         whether to revoke that status.  As the CJEU in Abdulla indicates at
         [76], for the purposes of  assessing  a  change  of  circumstances,
         regard must be had to "refugee's  individual  situation".   In  MA,
         Arden LJ approved of the "individualised approach" in this respect,
         at [49].


     45. All the ingredients in article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention must
         therefore  be  met  at  both  stages  of  the   examination:   when
         determining status and whether to cease that status.  This commonly
         requires the following: (i) a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution;
         (ii) for reasons relating to a Convention Reason; (iii) making  the
         person unable or unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of
         the country.  The final ingredient is based upon the  principle  of
         surrogacy and necessarily includes an enquiry  as  to  whether  the
         person can be expected to seek protection in another  part  of  his
         country of origin.  The widely accepted test is whether the  person
         can be reasonably expected to internally relocate -  see  Januzi  v
         SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 at [7-8] and [48-49].


     46. The  wording  of  article  1C(5)  also  supports  this  symmetrical
         approach.  It clearly refers not  just  to  "the  circumstances  in
         connection with which he has been recognised as a  refugee"  having
         "ceased to exist" but also to the person not being  able  to  avail
         himself "of the protection of the country of his nationality".  The
         principle of surrogacy is therefore found in both article 1C(5) and
         article 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention.   There  is  therefore  a
         prima facie argument that if a person is able to avail  himself  of
         protection in one part of the country then (unless that  protection
         lacks the  positive  qualities  required  of  it,  including  being
         effective / durable / fundamental / significant  /  non-temporary),
         they do not meet the refugee definition,  and  if  they  are  being
         considered for cessation they are no longer a  refugee.   In  other
         words, if effective protection is available then a person does  not
         meet the definition of a refugee.


     47. However, the reality of the situation is that the expectation  that
         a person can avail himself of the protection of another part of his
         country of nationality,  i.e.  through  internal  relocation,  only
         arises for consideration where it is accepted that there is a well-
         founded fear of persecution for a Convention  Reason  in  the  home
         area of that country.  It is difficult to envisage how and in  what
         circumstances a well-founded fear of persecution can be said to  be
         "non-temporary", "significant" or  "permanently  eradicated"  in  a
         country for a particular person, wherein it  is  accepted  that  it
         continues in the person's home area of that same country and  /  or
         the person cannot safely move around the  country.   The  necessary
         requirement for the changes to be fundamental and durable  is  most
         likely to be absent.  It follows that the availability of  internal
         relocation is generally unlikely to  be  a  material  consideration
         when applying article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention or article 11
         of the QD.


     48. Although I note the difference in approach with the first  part  of
         [17] of the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines, in principle there  remains
         a requirement to apply the same refugee  definition  for  both  the
         grant of status and cessation, and this includes a consideration of
         internal relocation.  However, given the nature  of  the  demanding
         test required to be met for cessation, it is difficult to  see  how
         in practice 'an internal relocation case'  can  meet  the  required
         threshold.  To that extent, there is force in the last sentence  of
         [17] of the Guidelines that where safety is limited to  a  specific
         part of the country, that would indicate that the changes have  not
         been fundamental.  At [57] of MA Arden LJ was prepared to treat the
         Guidelines as an important text for the  purposes  of  interpreting
         the QD replicating the Refugee Convention, but considered  [17]  of
         the Guidelines to merely  address  internal  relocation,  which  is
         separately dealt with in the QD - see [39] and  [57]  of  MA.   The
         Court of Appeal therefore did not provide any  clear  view  on  the
         correctness of [17] of the Guidelines.


     49. Changes in the refugee's country of origin affecting only  part  of
         the country may, in principle, lead to cessation of refugee  status
         provided that the protection available is sufficiently  fundamental
         and durable notwithstanding the absence of this in other  parts  of
         the country.  It is difficult to see  how  in  practice  protection
         could be said to be fundamental and durable in these circumstances,
         but it is not necessarily impossible (particularly in a very  large
         country).  In so far as MS states that as a  matter  of  principle,
         refugee status cannot cease solely on the  basis  of  a  change  of
         circumstances in one part of the country  of  origin,  I  disagree.
         Whilst in principle internal relocation is relevant  to  whether  a
         refugee can continue to refuse to avail himself of  the  protection
         of his country of nationality, generally speaking or as a matter of
         practice, it is likely to be very difficult to cease refugee status
         in an 'internal relocation case'.  This  is  because  by  necessary
         implication there will be a part  of  the  country  where  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution continues (or else internal  relocation
         would not arise) and in such circumstances the requirement that the
         change in circumstances be fundamental and durable or  "significant
         and non-temporary" is unlikely to be met.


     50. Mr Tan accepted that this is an 'internal relocation case' i.e. the
         SSHD accepted that AMA could not safely return to his home area  in
         Qoryoley, but that he could internally  relocate  to  Mogadishu,  a
         city he has never lived in.  Mr Tan was unable to explain  how,  in
         the context of a country such as Somalia, with a lengthy and  fluid
         history of complex and egregious persecution by various  actors  in
         the face of an either non-existent or very  weak  state  apparatus,
         there can be the requisite "significant and  non-temporary"  change
         in circumstances, if, as here, a person is accepted to have a well-
         founded fear of persecution in one part of the country.  Mr Tan was
         unable to come close to explaining how the circumstances  that  led
         to AMA being granted refugee status can be said to  be  permanently
         eradicated when he is unable to travel outside of Mogadishu to  his
         home area (the distance between Mogadishu and Qoryoley being a mere
         120km).

     51. It follows that although the FTT  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
         appeal by applying the compelling reasons proviso to AMA,  this  is
         not a material error of law.  On no reasonable view of the evidence
         would  a  Tribunal  be  able  to  conclude  that  the   change   in
         circumstances meets the high test for cessation when the  SSHD  has
         accepted that AMA remains at risk  of  persecution  in  and  cannot
         travel to his home area.

Issue 3 - MOJ

     52. The FTT did not consider  that  it  needed  to  address  safety  in
         Mogadishu pursuant to MOJ, given its primary  conclusion  that  the
         compelling reasons proviso applied such that  the  SSHD  could  not
         lawfully cease AMA's refugee  status.   However,  the  FTT  briefly
         indicated that AMA would not be safe in  Mogadishu  is  any  event.
         Although all the relevant considerations pertaining to AMA were not
         considered, the FTT's conclusion  is  supported  by  the  following
         extract from MOJ at [425]:

             "On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person of  a
             minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access  to
             funds and no other form of clan, family or social  support  is
             unlikely to be realistic  as,  in  the  absence  of  means  to
             establish a home and some form of  ongoing  financial  support
             there will be a real risk of having no alternative but to live
             in makeshift accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a
             real possibility of having to live in  conditions   that  will
             fall below acceptable humanitarian standards."


     53. Significantly, any assessment of internal relocation would have  to
         include  not  just  the  safety  but  also  the  reasonableness  of
         relocation i.e. whether it would be unduly harsh for the individual
         to relocate.  The Upper Tribunal recently reviewed the  authorities
         in support of the holistic approach to internal relocation at  [79]
         to [90] of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212
         (IAC).  That holistic approach includes the extent  and  impact  of
         past persecution - see SSHD v AH Sudan [2007] UKHL 49  at  [5]  and
         [20].  This in turn includes the extent  to  which  the  compelling
         reasons proviso applies to the refugee, given the SSHD's acceptance
         that it has a role to play in the Revocation API.


     54. As set out above, Mr Tan did not place reliance on the first ground
         of appeal.  There is therefore an un-appealed factual finding  that
         AMA, and his close family members were the victims of atrocious and
         sustained  persecution  over  the  course  of  many   years.    The
         Revocation API recognises the  role  that  the  compelling  reasons
         proviso might play as a matter of policy when  making  a  cessation
         decision.  When this is combined with the country guidance in  MOJ,
         as summarised at [406] and [407], to the effect  that  AMA  has  no
         former or current links to Mogadishu and as a minority clan  member
         will be unable to seek assistance from  majority  clan  members  or
         minority clan members, it is difficult  to  see  how  a  conclusion
         could be reached that internal relocation to  Mogadishu,  for  AMA,
         could be said to be anything other than unduly harsh, even  on  the
         assumption that AMA would  be  able  to  receive  remittances  from
         abroad.


     55. If I am wrong in my approach to the  second  ground  of  appeal,  I
         would nonetheless dismiss the SSHD's appeal for the reasons I  have
         set out above in relation to the third issue.

Decision

    56.  The FTT's decision did not involve the making of a material  error
    of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 November 2018

