
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

               SA (ambit of s.85(5) of 2002 Act) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 December 2005                             |On 25 January 2006         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   Mr D K Allen (Senior Immigration Judge)
                   Miss K Eshun (Senior Immigration Judge)
                             Ms P L Ravenscroft


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Sher, of Counsel, instructed by RFK,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act applies to human rights issues  raised  in  an
appeal against refusal to grant entry clearance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.    She  appealed  to  an
      Immigration Judge against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 21
      January 2004 to refuse her entry clearance to join her spouse  MI  who
      is settled in the United Kingdom.  The  couple  married  on  22  March
      2003, and they have a son, on 15 January 2005.   The  sponsor  married
      his first wife, FK, in Pakistan in October 1984.  He  claims  to  have
      divorced her in 1992.

2.   The Immigration Judge, Ms S Henderson, dismissed the appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules, concluding that  the  couple's  marriage  was  void
      under the law of the United Kingdom.  There has been no  challenge  to
      that finding.

3.   The Immigration Judge went on  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention  and  concluded  that  the  decision  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer was not  proportionate  and  therefore  allowed  the
      appeal.  The Secretary of State subsequently sought, and  obtained  an
      order for reconsideration of the decision.

4.   In this regard it is relevant to note firstly that at paragraph  13  of
      her determination the Immigration Judge concluded that the sponsor had
      acquired a domicile of choice in the United Kingdom.     He  had  come
      to the United Kingdom on 7 September 1991 as a visitor, later  claimed
      asylum and appeared to have obtained indefinite  leave  to  remain  in
      around  December 2002 on the basis of long  residence  in  the  United
      Kingdom.   His first trip back to Pakistan was in February  2003  when
      he married the appellant on  22  March  2003,  and  the  couple  lived
      together for a month. He has subsequently twice visited the  appellant
      and, as we have noted above, they have a son, born on 15 January 2005.



5.   The Immigration Judge gave consideration  to  a  determination  of  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Fouzia Noreen (01/TH/00104).    In this
      case it was noted that in a similar situation as the  one  before  the
      Immigration Judge where the sponsor's divorce and second marriage were
      both valid under Muslim law, and under Muslim law it was not  possible
      for either the divorce or the  second  marriage  to  be  gone  through
      again, it was no longer possible for the sponsor to travel to Pakistan
      in order to institute a fresh talaq divorce from his  first  wife  and
      remarry the appellant.    In Fouzia Noreen the Tribunal suggested that
      the appropriate course would be for the sponsor to obtain a divorce in
      the United Kingdom from his first wife and for the appellant  then  to
      apply for entry clearance as a fianc�e in order  to  undergo  a  civil
      marriage to the sponsor in the United Kingdom.

6.   It seems to the Immigration Judge that this  was  an  unduly  difficult
      and probably lengthy process to expect the  appellant  to  go  through
      bearing in mind that she had a young child of 5 months  for  whom  she
      was presently caring without help from the sponsor.

7.   She went on to state at paragraph 15 that, given  the  length  of  time
      that the sponsor had lived in the United Kingdom and the degree of his
      commitment to the United Kingdom, it would be wholly  unreasonable  to
      expect him now  to  relocate  permanently  to  Pakistan  in  order  to
      maintain family life.    She considered  that  the  existence  of  the
      appellant's very young child meant that it was unreasonable to  expect
      her to wait for the formalities of a UK divorce and  a  further  entry
      clearance application to be gone through in order for her to  be  able
      to join her husband.     She stated that she very  much  doubted  that
      the appellant would have been at all aware of the technical  obstacles
      in the way of her entry clearance application and concluded  that  the
      decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was in all  the  circumstances
      not proportionate.

8.   At the hearing before us on 21 December  2005  Miss  S  Sher  for  RFK,
      Solicitors appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  Mr  P  Deller
      appeared on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

9.   Mr Deller adopted and expanded upon the points in the  application  for
      reconsideration.   He attached particular weight  to  ground  3.   The
      specific challenge set out there is that the Immigration  Judge  erred
      in law by taking into consideration circumstances at the date  of  the
      hearing rather than assessing the circumstances  appertaining  at  the
      time of the decision to refuse, as it was contended she  was  required
      to do by section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002.   The situation was to be contrasted with that  under  the  1999
      Act.   In contrast to a case involving expulsion which could  be  seen
      as a continuing decision, where there was a refusal of entry clearance
      it was a one-off issue and not a continuing  exclusion  and  only  the
      circumstances envisaged by section 85(5) were in play and  these  were
      to be contrasted with the circumstances which can be considered  under
      section 85(4).    It is an  appeal  brought  under  section  82(1)  in
      relation to which one ground was human rights.    Section 86  provided
      that the appeal could be allowed if the decision is not in  accordance
      with the law, and the relevant law in this case was the  Human  Rights
      Act.     There was no freestanding human rights appeal and it was part
      of the same appellate framework.

10.  As regards the other grounds, he  argued  that  there  was  a  contrast
      between the concept of an insurmountable obstacle as  referred  to  by
      the Court of Appeal  in  Mahmood  and  the  wording  employed  by  the
      Immigration Judge at paragraph 15 of her determination that  it  would
      be wholly unreasonable to expect the appellant to relocate permanently
      to Pakistan in order to maintain family life.  It was relevant however
      in this context to note her finding that he had acquired a domicile of
      choice in the United Kingdom.    Mr Deller contended that this  was  a
      surprising finding and yet, he added it was a finding  that  had  been
      made.

11.  Otherwise it was clear that the case needed to be  a  very  exceptional
      one where it fell outside the Immigration Rules, if Article 8 were  to
      be engaged.  This was a point,  made  at  ground  4,  which  had  been
      affirmed in Huang.  As regards ground 5, if the child were a  relevant
      factor, contrary to Mr Deller's earlier submission, then the case  was
      nevertheless not truly exceptional.    No  further  matters  had  been
      raised than the fact that the appellant was bringing  up  a  child  in
      Pakistan and it was unclear what support she  had  from  the  sponsor.
      It was not unusual for parents to be separated  while  awaiting  entry
      clearance.  On a proper application of Huang the  test  had  not  been
      met.

12.  In her submissions Miss Sher contended that  as  the  appeal  had  been
      allowed under Article 8, the Immigration Judge was  entitled  to  take
      post-decision factors such as the existence of the child into account.
        The appeal had not been allowed  under  section  82(1)  so  she  was
      permitted to do so.

13.  Otherwise she contended that at paragraph  15  there  were  proper  and
      sound reasons for allowing the appeal. The Huang test had been set out
      and the Immigration  Judge  had  found  that  there  were  exceptional
      circumstances.   There was the particular reason that the sponsor  had
      lived in the United Kingdom for a lengthy period and had a  degree  of
      commitment to the United Kingdom and on the evidence she was  entitled
      to find as she did.   The finding about domicile was clearly  relevant
      and it would be contradictory to that finding to require the appellant
      to return to Pakistan to maintain family life.   The facts were wholly
      exceptional or could properly be found to be so and there was no error
      of law in the determination.

Conclusions

14.  We consider first the point raised at ground 3 concerning the ambit  of
      section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
      The relevant provisions of section 85 are as follows:

      "(4)    On an appeal under section 82(1) or 83(2) against  a  decision
           an adjudicator may consider evidence about any matter  which  he
           thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
           evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date  of  the
           decision.


         (5)  But in relation to  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against
           refusal of entry  clearance  or  refusal  of  a  certificate  of
           entitlement under section 10 -


             (a)  sub-section (4) shall not apply, and

           (b)    the  adjudicator  may  consider  only  the  circumstances
               appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."


15.  It is clear that in her assessment  of  Article  8  in  this  case  the
      Immigration Judge attached weight to the existence of the  appellant's
      very young child together with the length  of  time  the  sponsor  had
      lived in the United Kingdom and the degree of his  commitment  to  the
      United Kingdom, as she put it, in concluding that the refusal  by  the
      Entry Clearance Officer was disproportionate.

16.  The date of decision in this  case  as  we  have  noted  above  was  21
      January 2004.   The appellant's son was born on 15 January 2005.    It
      is therefore the case that the child was not conceived let alone  born
      at the date of decision in this case.   It is clear from sub-section 4
      of section 85 that for most appeals under section 82(1) such a  matter
      could properly be considered by an Adjudicator  or  Immigration  Judge
      despite it being a matter arising after the date of decision.     This
      is however an appeal under section 82(1) of the  2002  Act  against  a
      refusal of entry clearance, in relation to which it is clear that sub-
      section 4 does not apply and the Adjudicator  may  consider  only  the
      circumstances appertaining at the time  of  the  decision  to  refuse.
      There is nothing  in  DR  (Morocco)  Starred  [2005]  UKIAT  00038  to
      indicate that a situation such as that which had occurred in this case
      would permit the Immigration Judge to imagine what the situation would
      be if a child were born.   The fact is clearly one that did not  exist
      at the date of decision and could not be said  to  be  a  circumstance
      appertaining at the time  of  the  decision  to  refuse.    The  other
      matters concerning the length of time spent  by  the  sponsor  in  the
      United Kingdom and his commitment to the United Kingdom are of  course
      circumstances appertaining at the date of decision together  with  the
      circumstances which, on the application by the  Immigration  Judge  of
      what was said by the Tribunal in Fouzia Noreen, would involve  perhaps
      a rather lengthier delay in awaiting the outcome of an entry clearance
      application than would normally be the case, since the  sponsor  would
      first have to obtain in the United Kingdom a divorce  from  his  first
      wife.

17.  The question before us is whether section  85(5)  properly  interpreted
      applies only to an appeal such as in DR (Morocco) which only concerned
      entry clearance issues, considered more recently in LS (Gambia) [2005]
      UKAIT 00085, or whether the nature of the human rights appeal is  such
      as to take it outside the limitation set  out  in  section  85(5)  and
      bring it within section 85(4).   If it is the latter then there  would
      be no error of law by the Adjudicator in having taken account  of  the
      birth of the child as she did.

18.  As Mr Deller reminded us, section  86  of  the  2002  Act  among  other
      things requires an adjudicator to allow an appeal if he or she  thinks
      that the decision is one which was not in accordance with the law, and
      that would include human rights matters.    There  is,  as  Mr  Deller
      pointed out, no freestanding human rights appeal. Section 82 sets  out
      the types of immigration decision in relation to which an  appeal  can
      be made and that includes in  section  82(2)(b)  a  refusal  of  entry
      clearance.   Section 84 sets out  the  various  grounds  on  which  an
      appeal under section 82(1) against an immigration decision as  defined
      in section 82(2) can be brought including, at  section  84(1)(c),  the
      ground that the decision is unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act.    Therefore the decision against  which  the  appeal  was
      brought in this case was the refusal of entry clearance and the ground
      with which we are particularly concerned is the  contention  that  the
      decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

19.  We have concluded that Mr Deller's argument  is  the  correct  one  and
      thus that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
      determination.    This is because it is  clear  that  the  context  of
      section 85(5) is an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  refusal  of
      entry clearance (and also a refusal of a  certificate  of  entitlement
      with which we are not  concerned  in  this  case),  and  there  is  no
      suggestion in section 85(5) that any of the grounds that may be raised
      in relation to such an appeal is not to be considered in  the  context
      of the clear limitations set out in section 85(5).   We  read  section
      85(5) as applying to each and every  ground  of  appeal  that  may  be
      brought under section 84 in relation  to  the  particular  immigration
      decision with which we are concerned, that being a  refusal  of  entry
      clearance.

20.  We go on to consider the situation in the alternative if we  are  wrong
      in our findings, that there was an error of  law  by  the  Immigration
      Judge in taking account of the existence of the appellant's son  as  a
      factor in assessing the Article 8 issue.

21.  Her analysis in legal terms of the Article 8 issue is relatively  terse
      and is to be  found  at  paragraph  15  of  her  determination.    She
      identified the proper test as being that there must  be  shown  to  be
      truly exceptional circumstances within the meaning of Huang and, as we
      have noted above, set out her reasons  for  this.    It  is  important
      however not to forget the  structured  approach  set  out  in  Mahmood
      concerning the proper analysis of Article 8 claims.   That has  in  no
      sense been overtaken by what was said in Huang, but  Huang  is  rather
      concerned with the appropriate test in assessing proportionality.   In
      particular we consider that the matter raised at ground two concerning
      the failure to consider whether there  were  insurmountable  obstacles
      for the sponsor to return to Pakistan is a matter of some force.    We
      bear in mind Miss Sher's point that there is an apparent inconsistency
      between the Immigration Judge's finding that the sponsor has  acquired
      a domicile of choice in the United Kingdom and yet requiring him to go
      to Pakistan either for the short or long term in order either to  live
      with the appellant until such time an entry clearance application  had
      been made, or indeed in the alternative remain there permanently.   It
      is however the case that the appellant is in  effect  being  asked  to
      give up her domicile of origin to come and live in the United Kingdom,
      and the point is properly made at paragraph 2 of the grounds that  the
      United Kingdom does not have any obligation to respect the  choice  of
      residence of a couple, although clearly that must be seen  within  the
      international obligations of this country.    We do not consider  that
      the Immigration Judge was entitled to find that  it  would  be  wholly
      unreasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate permanently to Pakistan
      in order to maintain family life.   Quite apart from the fact that  it
      need not be a permanent relocation if she were to be successful in  an
      entry clearance application,  nothing  has  been  shown  that  can  be
      properly be said to be an insurmountable obstacle  to  him  living  in
      Pakistan.  He has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  some  14  years,
      having come to the United Kingdom when he was aged  approximately  37,
      and we do not consider, bearing in mind the  amount  of  time  he  has
      spent in Pakistan as compared to that spent  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      that the life he has lived here can properly  be  said  to  mean  that
      there is any insurmountable obstacle to him returning to Pakistan.

22.  As regards the issue of truly exceptional  circumstances,  we  consider
      that the Immigration Judge's decision in this regard  is  not  one  to
      which a reasonable Immigration Judge could properly have  come.    The
      circumstances amount to no more than the fact that the appellant would
      be expected to continue, as she has been doing already for some  time,
      to live in Pakistan without  her  husband,  and  it  is  unclear  what
      support she has from the sponsor in this regard, and that  this  would
      be for a longer period than might normally be expected to be the  case
      since the sponsor would first have to obtain a divorce in  the  United
      Kingdom from his first wife, whom it seems he divorced in 1992.     As
      Mr Deller pointed out, it is hardly an unusual situation for  a  young
      woman with a child to have spent an amount  of  time  apart  from  her
      husband.   We do not consider that it can properly be characterised as
      being  truly  exceptional.    Accordingly,  therefore  even   if   the
      Immigration Judge had been right to include the existence of the child
      as  a  factor  properly  to  be  considered  in  her   assessment   of
      proportionality, we do not consider as a matter of law  that  she  was
      entitled to conclude that the circumstances as a  consequence  and  as
      set out by her at paragraph 15 of her  determination  showed  a  truly
      exceptional case.    This is not a matter of simple disagreement  with
      the Immigration Judge.  We have concluded that there is  an  error  of
      law in her determination in that her decision is not one  to  which  a
      reasonable Immigration Judge could come to on the  facts.     On  this
      alternative basis also we therefore  substitute  for  her  decision  a
      decision dismissing the appeal.




Signed                                  Date

D K Allen
Senior Immigration Judge
