
PA (Student's family: third-party support?) Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT 00016

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing: 5
February 2008

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Latter

                                   Between

                                     PA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. K Noor, Legal Representative of Noor Law
Associates
For the Respondent:     Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer,
Treasury Solicitor

The maintenance requirements of para 76 of the  Immigration  Rules  are  not
met by the provision of maintenance by a third party.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  She appealed to the Tribunal
    against the decision of the Respondent Entry Clearance  Officer  on  23
    January 2007 refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  the
    spouse of her husband who is a student  here.   The  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.  The Appellant sought and obtained an  order  for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The Immigration Judge found as a fact that the appellant's  maintenance
    in the United Kingdom was to be entirely supported by funds provided by
    her husband's uncle, who, he also found as a fact, would be  well  able
    to provide that support.  The Immigration Judge  dismissed  the  appeal
    because he held that, on the  true  construction  of  para  76  of  the
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395, which applied  to
    this appeal, the appellant was required  to  show,  not  that  she  had
    access to third party support, but that she could maintain herself.

 3. The grounds for reconsideration  assert  that  that  was  an  incorrect
    interpretation of para 76.  In support of them, Mr. Noor,  who  appears
    for the appellant today, has argued that although in  para  281,  which
    refers to the admission of a spouse of a person settled here, there  is
    a requirement that the parties will  be  able  to  maintain  themselves
    adequately without recourse to public funds, there is in para 57, which
    relates to students as principal applicants  or  appellants,  merely  a
    requirement that the applicant be "able to meet the costs of his course
    and accommodation and the maintenance of himself and any dependents".

 4. Mr. Noor recognises that paragraph 281 was interpreted by the  Tribunal
    in AM [2007] UKAIT 58 in a sense contrary to that for which he contends
    under para 76.  But he says that para 281 raises  different  questions;
    para 281 relates to a person who is coming to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    principle permanently whereas para 76 relates to a person who is coming
    for temporary purposes, and temporary purposes regulated indeed by  the
    length that someone else, that is to say the principal  -  the  student
    will be here.  He says that it is more logical to read paragraph 76  in
    a way that would bring its meaning in line with that of para 57,  which
    relates to the principal, rather than  in  line  with  para  281  which
    relates to the spouses of those who are settled here.

 5. We do not accept that argument.  The first reason is that the draftsman
    of the Immigration Rules has clearly chosen a different formulation  of
    the requirements for maintenance in para 76 from that chosen  for  para
    57.  It seems to us that a person who comes as a student may well  have
    the benefit of third party support for himself.  It may be a government
    grant, it may be a scholarship or it may be parents or relatives.   The
    considerations applying to a spouse are different and the draftsman  of
    the Rules has chosen for the spouse the very  same  formulation  as  he
    chose for paragraph 281.  In those circumstances it seems to us  simply
    impossible, as a matter of construction, to read  para  76  differently
    from para 281 which has the same words, but in the same way as para  57
    which has different words.

 6. In any event, as it appears to us there is no reason why the  Secretary
    of State should not have a regime that reflects the fact that a student
    is coming for studies, but that if he  is  to  be  accompanied  by  his
    family, the family members who are not themselves  coming  as  students
    should meet requirements analogous to those of any other family  member
    coming to the United Kingdom for a relatively long period of time.

 7. For those reasons it appears to us that the Immigration Judge was right
    to apply the construction adumbrated  in  AM  to  para  76(iv)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  made  no  material  error  of  law  and   his
    determination must therefore stand.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


