
SI (mixed Serb/Roma parentage) Kosovo CG [2009] UKAIT 00011


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 9 October 2008                             |                             |
|Prepared 16 October 2008                      |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MCGEACHY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KEKIC
                                MR C THURSBY

                                   Between

                                     si

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs
                    Cranbrook Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. Although there is clear evidence of discrimination  against  minorities
    and in particular Roma  in Kosovo, the evidence  does  not  demonstrate
    that  there is a real risk that a member of a minority group would face
    persecution for a Convention  reason   or  treatment  contrary  to  his
    rights under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  There  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Kosovo  for minorities - including those who  have  mixed
    Roma/ Serb parentage - in terms of Regulation 4 (2) of the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection Regulations 2006.


 2. The guidance  given  in  SK  (Roma  in  Kosovo  -  update)  Serbia  and
    Montenegro [2005] UKIAT 23, FD (Kosovo - Roma)  Serbia  and  Montenegro
    [2004] UKIAT 00214 and  ES  (Ashkaelians,  mixed-Ashkaelian  ethnicity)
    Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo) CG [2006] UKAIT 71 is confirmed and  the
    judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Hysi  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  711  is
    followed.


 3. Although there were increased  tensions  among  minorities  before  and
    after the Declaration of Independence in  February  2008  there  is  no
    evidence that the anticipated increase  in  violence   materialised  or
    that there ceased to  be a sufficiency of protection for minorities  in
    Kosovo.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a Kosovan, who was born on 10  June  1976,  arrived  in
    Britain on 11 July 1998,  claiming  asylum  two  days  later.   He  was
    interviewed in July 2002 and again in August 2007.  His application was
    refused on 31 August 2007, directions being made  for  his  removal  to
    Kosovo.

2.    The appellant appealed.  His appeal was  heard  by  Immigration  Judge
    Robinson on 11 October 2007 and  dismissed.   Reconsideration  of  that
    decision was ordered by Senior Immigration Judge Perkins on 27 November
    2007.

3.    In paragraph 2 of his determination the Immigration  Judge  summarised
    the appellant's claim.  He wrote:-

        "2. ...He states that his mother was a Serbian and his  father  was
             of Roma origin.   Both  his  parents  described  themselves  as
             Kosovan.  In June 1998 Serbian soldiers came  to  his  village.
             They began killing families and setting fire to  houses.   They
             came to his house at night.  He heard shots  and  ran  for  his
             life.  He was shot in the leg.  His father was killed.  He left
             Kosovo soon afterwards and came to the United Kingdom."


  4.   In paragraph 7 of the determination the Immigration Judge noted  that
    the appellant said that he did not speak Roma or Serbian as his  father
    had not wanted him  to  learn  those  languages.  His  first  and  only
    language is Albanian. In paragraph 25 the  Immigration  Judge  recorded
    that the appellant had said that his father had  worked  in  Peje,  had
    been accused of being a spy and had been killed.   The  appellant  also
    said that he had been sent threatening letters before  his  father  was
    killed.

5.    The Immigration Judge found that a statement made in  1998  which  had
    been put to the appellant in 2002 had not been made by  the  appellant.
    He   therefore  did  not  accept  the  respondent's  claims  that   the
    appellant's credibility was damaged by discrepancies  between  what  it
    was claimed the appellant had said in that statement and  what  he  had
    said at interview. In paragraphs 28 and 29 the  Immigration  Judge  set
    out his findings of fact as follows:-

        "28.     I find that the appellant's core story is  believable  and
             that he has dealt with the issues raised in the refusal  letter
             some  of  which  were  based  on  another  case.   I  reach  my
             conclusions on the basis that the  appellant  is  a  person  of
             mixed ethnicity and his father, who was of  Serbian  ethnicity,
             was killed during the civil war by persons who accused  him  of
             being a spy.


        29.      The appellant has  described  his  fears  for  himself  on
             return.  I consider that he accurately described his  feelings,
             that he does not 'belong' in Kosovo as he is  not  of  Albanian
             ethnicity.  Nevertheless I take the view  that  this  does  not
             lead inevitably to the conclusion that he has a genuine fear of
             persecution.  He was  able  to  continue  living  in  his  home
             village for two or three weeks after the death of  his  father.
             His mother remained in Kosovo and  decided  not  to  leave  the
             country with him.  I consider that the appellant would  not  be
             regarded as a Serb (he does not speak Serbian).  It appears  to
             me that there is nothing about him that would lead  any  person
             to believe that he is of mixed ethnicity.  In KX, at  paragraph
             17(5) it was  pointed  out  that  Roma  do  not  usually  speak
             Albanian.  The appellant clearly does  and  it  was  his  first
             language before he left Kosovo.  The appellant is  not  likely,
             in my view, to be considered either as a  Serb  or  a  Roma  of
             mixed ethnicity.  His ethnicity may well have been known in his
             home village.  However I take the view that after  a  lapse  of
             nine years the appellant would not be at risk in the  event  he
             returned to Kosovo.   He  has  given  evidence  that  his  home
             village was destroyed.  I take the view that he  would  not  be
             recognised as a person of mixed ethnicity if he returns to  one
             of the Kosovan cities or larger towns.   He  does  not  have  a
             partner of a different ethnicity.   He  is  a  young  man,  who
             speaks Albanian and who left the country with  many  others  at
             the time of the civil war.  I conclude that he would not be  at
             risk  from  the  Albanian  speaking  majority,  especially   as
             Albanian is his first language."

6.    We consider that the comment in  paragraph  28  that  the  appellant's
    father was a Serbian is a typographical error as it has  been  accepted
    throughout that the appellant's mother was Serbian and that his  father
    was Roma.


Error of law in the determination of the Immigration Judge


7.    On 20 February 2008 Senior Immigration Judge Nichols found that  there
    was a material error of law in the  determination  of  the  Immigration
    Judge.  Her reasons for that decision were as follows:

        "1.      This is a reconsideration of the decision  of  Immigration
             Judge  Robinson  who,  on  11th  October  2007,  dismissed  the
             appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights  grounds  against
             the decision of the respondent on 31st August  2007  to  refuse
             his  application  for  asylum  and  to  remove  him  to  Serbia
             (Kosovo).


        2. The appellant's case is that his family were of mixed ethnicity.
              His mother was Serbian and his father  of  Roma  origin.   The
             Immigration Judge was referred to the Tribunal's decision in KX
             (Serbia and Montenegro - Kosovo) CG [2006] UKIAT  00072,  which
             deals with the risk to those of mixed ethnicity in  Serbia  and
             Montenegro and to the Court of Appeal decision in  Hysi  [2005]
             EWCA Civ 711.  In Hysi, the Court of Appeal, who  were  dealing
             with an appellant who  spoke  fluent  Albanian,  as  does  this
             appellant, however concluded that on all of the  evidence,  the
             Tribunal had not properly assessed risk on  return  given  that
             the  appellant  was  of  mixed  ethnicity  and  that   internal
             relocation  may  not  be  reasonable  having  regard   to   the
             background material.  This was a case where the Court of Appeal
             was of the view that on the  evidence,  mixed  ethnicity  would
             inevitably emerge on  questioning  on  return.   The  case  was
             remitted to the Tribunal for rehearing.


        3. The Tribunal ordered reconsideration in this case because as the
             grounds of the application submit, the Immigration Judge failed
             to properly consider the risk factors identified in KX and  did
             not consider Hysi at  all,  despite  referring  to  it  in  the
             determination.  It was also submitted that the judge had failed
             to give any or  sufficient  weight  to  the  latest  UNHCR  and
             Amnesty reports  which  clearly  identified  persons  of  mixed
             ethnicity as being at risk if returned.


        4. Both parties agreed before me that there was a material error of
             law on this basis.  Mr Hawkins submitted that the judge had not
             considered the extensive conclusions made at  paragraph  70  of
             KX, and had relied solely on paragraph  70(5),  i.e.  that  the
             appellant did speak  Albanian.   This  was  wholly  inadequate,
             especially given that he had failed to consider Hysi where that
             appellant had also been able to  speak  Albanian,  but  it  was
             nevertheless held by the Court of Appeal that risk had not been
             properly determined.  The judge ought to have gone through  all
             of the factors identified by the Tribunal in  KX  and  assessed
             those with regard to the facts established in this case.


        5. Ms Isherwood agreed.  Mr Hawkin also pointed out there have been
             developments  recently  in  Kosovo  with  the  Declaration   of
             Independence, and that it was likely that  the  Tribunal  would
             need to look at the  updated  background  material  as  to  any
             increased risk for those of mixed ethnicity,  and  particularly
             in light of the fact that in this case the  appellant's  mother
             is Serbian and his father Roma.


        6. I find that there is  a  material  error  of  law,  because  the
             Immigration Judge has failed to properly consider KX, a country
             guidance determination, which he  was  bound  to  properly  and
             fully take into account in  reaching  his  conclusion  on  this
             case.


        7. Accordingly I have adjourned the hearing of this appeal for  the
             issue of risk because of the appellant's mixed ethnicity to  be
             re-determined, having regard to KX  and  also  to  any  updated
             background material that is submitted.  There is no issue taken
             with the Immigration Judge's findings of fact in this case  and
             those will stand; the only issue is risk on return."

8.    In her decision Senior Immigration Judge Nichols  therefore  preserved
    the Immigration Judge's findings of fact which we have set out above.

9.    The essential facts in this appeal are that the appellant is of  mixed
    ethnicity: his father was Roma and his mother was of Serbian ethnicity.
     When the Serbian army invaded Kosovo the appellant's father  was  shot
    because he was perceived to be an informer.  The appellant remained  at
    home for two or three weeks after his father's  death  (interview  2002
    answer 14) and he himself was shot and wounded  in  the  leg.   He  was
    adamant that his father had not been a collaborator.   In  essence  his
    claim is based on a fear of persecution or treatment  contrary  to  his
    rights under Article 3 of the ECHR because of his mixed  ethnicity  and
    the fact that his father was perceived to be a collaborator despite the
    fact that he was not. We note that the appellant has a Muslim  Albanian
    name, although he states that he has no religion.

10.   The  material  error  of  law  found  in  the  determination  was  the
    conclusion of the Immigration Judge that the  appellant  would  not  be
    required to disclose his mixed ethnicity.  In their  judgment  in  Hysi
    the Court of Appeal emphasised that it considered  that  an  individual
    should not be compelled to hide his own ethnic origins and this  appeal
    was therefore argued before us on the basis that,  notwithstanding  the
    Immigration Judge's findings that the appellant did not speak Roma  and
    that there was "nothing about him (the appellant) that would  lead  any
    person to believe that he is of mixed ethnicity", the fact that he  was
    of mixed ethnicity would become known.  Mr Gulvin  accepted  that  that
    was an appropriate starting point and the  central  question  therefore
    was whether or  not  a  person  of  such  mixed  ethnicity  would  face
    persecution on return.  It  was  not  argued  by  Mr  Hawkin  that  the
    appellant would face persecution from the authorities in Kosovo or from
    any state actors. He argued that the persecution which  he  would  face
    would be from non-state actors.

11.   Mr Hawkin  accepted  that  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's appearance and  language  ability  would  make  him  appear
    anything other than Albanian.  However, he argued  that  his  ethnicity
    would certainly be known in his home area and natural  curiosity  would
    mean that the appellant would be questioned by Albanians  whom  he  met
    about his background,  he  could  not  be  required  to  dissemble  and
    therefore his background would become  known.   It  would  also  become
    known that his father had  been  killed  because  he  was  a  perceived
    collaborator. Those submissions were accepted by Mr. Gulvin.

12.   We have set out in the  annex  to  this  determination  the  documents
    submitted on behalf of the appellant and those submitted on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.  Mr Hawkin relied principally on the report  of
    Mr Alex Standish and the annexes thereto.  Mr Gulvin in his submissions
    relied principally on the profile of the Municipality of Peje where the
    appellant had lived before coming to Britain.

Report of Mr. Alex Standish

13.   Mr Standish is a Senior Research Fellow at Durham University. He is  a
    specialist in Balkan Studies and a UN Special Adviser  on  Security  in
    Kosovo, currently  based  in  Pristina  in  the  Ministry  of  Internal
    Affairs.   He  states  that  his  brief  includes  policing,   national
    security, ethnic  minority  protection  issues,  emergency  and  crisis
    management and reviewing strategies for combating organised crime.   He
    is an ex officio member of the Kosovo Police Service  National  Liaison
    Committee and on the Intergovernmental Security Working Group.  In  his
    report he refers to serious security problems facing Kosovans  who  are
    involved in mixed ethnicity marriages and he states that it is his view
    that individuals perceived as belonging to marginalised ethnic groups -
    such as Serb and Roma - are at  risk.   His  report  refers  to  a  low
    prosecution rate for serious crimes particularly during  the  riots  in
    March 2004 and that there were  continuing  concerns  on  the  specific
    issue of security from minority groups in Kosovo.  He referred  to  the
    Kosovo Ombudsperson, Marek Nowicki, stating  in  his  final  report  in
    February 2006 that:

        "Under  the  current  circumstances  a  large  number   of   Kosovo
        inhabitants are experiencing hardship.  This being said the  people
        who tend to suffer principally are the most vulnerable  populations
        usually but not limited to, the non-Albanian communities."

14.   Mr. Standish' report goes  on  to  refer  to  UNHCR's  paper  entitled
    "Continued Protection Needs" of  June  2006  which  said  that  alleged
    collaborators might face serious problems including physical danger  if
    they were to return.  A report by UNHCR in August 2004  had  said  that
    the majority  of  those  targeted  belonged  to  the  Serbian  minority
    community but also included Roma, Ashkaelia and, Egyptian minorities.

15.   In paragraphs 65 onwards the report dealt at length with the  position
    of the Roma communities in Kosovo, placing weight on reports  from  the
    OSCE which refer  to  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptians  facing  general
    problems of discrimination, harassment and social exclusion.  The  2001
    report from the OSCE (the 8th Assessment) report however did go  on  to
    say:

        "While RAE communities overall can  be  said  to  have  experienced
        improvements, as compared to the  situation  in  late  1999,  their
        security  remains  volatile  and  incidents  of   acute   violence,
        including  arson,  grenade  attacks,  assaults   and   intimidation
        continue to be perpetrated against them.  The only apparent  motive
        in many cases appears to be ethnicity."

16.   At paragraph 69 Mr Standish refers to official  crime  statistics  for
    2000 produced by UNMIK mentioning twelve Kosovan  Roma  being  murdered
    and a further five being  kidnapped.   In  paragraph  105  Mr  Standish
    states that during his various visits to Kosovo between 1999  and  2008
    he had visited various Roma villages and  districts  which  had  either
    been abandoned or their inhabitants driven out.   He  referred  to  the
    level of hostility expressed by  many  Kosovan  Albanians  towards  any
    ethnic Roma as being both extreme and indiscriminate.

17.   At paragraph 106 he said that although the number of revenge  killings
    of suspected collaborators had fallen  over  the  past  nine  years  he
    attributed that simple  fact  to  the  fact  that  most  of  those  who
    genuinely acted as informers of the Serbs had  either  fled  Kosovo  in
    1999 or else were victims of  the  KLA  led  campaign  of  murders  and
    kidnapping which had become a feature of the province between 1999  and
    2000.

18.   In paragraph 113 Mr Standish referred to a fire, in November 2005,  at
    a house in "Kosovo Polje" inhabited by an Ashkaelia Roma family  of  13
    which had left four dead and one seriously injured.  He referred  to  a
    police enquiry which was  ongoing  but  said  that  UNMIK  reports  had
    "clearly raised the possibility that this may have been an  ethnically-
    motivated hate crime aimed at members of the Ashkaelia  minority".  The
    deaths had occurred less than two days before a series of bomb  attacks
    aimed at UNMIK personnel premises as well as a bomb attack against  the
    mainly Serbian market in the town of Sterpce.

19.   In section J of his report Mr Standish referred  to  state  protection
    for members of minority groups in Kosovo stating that according  to  Dr
    Stephane Laederich, who had prepared a report in 2006 after field  work
    among Roma in Kosovo that Roma  contacts  had  told  him  that  it  was
    hopeless to try to contact either KFOR or UNMIK for help as  claims  of
    ill-treatment by them could be simply dismissed because the complainant
    was Roma.  He also referred to the statement of Carla  del  Ponte,  the
    Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal at  the  Hague,
    who, when dealing with the trial of an  ex-Prime  Minister  of  Kosovo,
    Ramush Heradinaj, had said that there were significant difficulties  in
    securing testimony from large numbers of witnesses who did not want  to
    appear because of intimidation which meant that they were terrified  of
    testifying.

20.   In his section dealing with  the  concealment  of  ethnic  origins  in
    Kosovo, Mr Standish referred to the necessity of  appropriate  identity
    documents being obtained and stated that these could only  be  obtained
    by means of birth certificates or  reference  to  the  civil  registers
    demonstrating eligibility and the identity  of  parents.   It  was  his
    conclusion that any attempt to conceal  an  individual's  identity  was
    likely to prove extremely difficult and possibly illegal under Kosovo's
    current legislation.  He also referred to what was  referred  to  as  a
    parallel intelligence service in Kosovo stating  that  there  were  two
    such services operating  among  ethnic  Albanians  and  one  among  the
    remaining Serbian community.

21.   In  paragraph  152  he  stated  that  the  unilateral  declaration  of
    independence made by Kosovo's ethnic Albanian  government  in  February
    2008 could lead to a major rise of tension in Serbian minority areas.

22.   In paragraphs 183 Mr Standish sets out his conclusions that there  was
    an ongoing serious risk to members  of  ethnic  minorities  in  Kosovo.
    With regard to the issue of security he stated that:-

        "In my view it also cannot be assumed that  an  individual  in  the
        appellant's position  would  be  able  to  seek  safety  in  ethnic
        enclaves, particularly if he or she were to be regarded as being of
        specific risk owing to their family background.  In my  opinion  it
        is  entirely  possible  that  persons  who   would   be   seen   as
        collaborators with the Serbian regime in 1999 would be excluded  by
        other Serbs and Roma owing to the unacceptable degree of additional
        risk to their community, especially in the current tense  situation
        following the unilateral declaration of independency by the  ethnic
        Albanian government of Kosovo in February 2008."


23.    Mr  Hawkin  also  referred  to  UNHCR's  Report  on  the  Contingent-
    Protection Needs of Individuals from Kosovo and to the State Department
    Report 2008 which stated that ethnic discrimination is a prevalent  and
    constant problem in Kosovo and that minority groups continued  to  face
    regular threats.  The Human Rights Watch Report of July 2008 emphasised
    that President Bush should press  Kosovo's  Prime  Minister  Thaci  for
    improvements in its poor human  rights  record  which  frequently  left
    political and ethnic violence unpunished and left the  Roma,  Ashkaelia
    and Egyptian communities being marginalised and vulnerable to  violence
    and discrimination. He also alluded to the Human Rights Watch Report of
    March 2008 which referred to insufficient independent oversight of  the
    work of judges, prosecutors and the police and  set  out  a  number  of
    recommendations which had been  either  not  implemented  or  partially
    implemented (for  example,   the  recommendation  relating  to  witness
    protection).

24.   Mr Hawkin went on to refer to the Operational Guidance Note issued  on
    22 July 2008. However, we note that,  when  considering  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection the report states at 3.8.5:

        "In general there is sufficiency  of  protection  for  Kosovans  of
        mixed ethnicity and those in ethnically mixed marriages.  UNMIK/KPS
        [United Nations Mission in Kosovo/Kosovo Police Service]  are  able
        and willing to provide protection for those that  fear  persecution
        and ensure that there is  a  legal  mechanism  for  the  detection,
        prosecution and punishment of persecutory  acts.   In  general,  an
        ethnically mixed applicant who speaks Albanian and  can  physically
        pass as an Albanian will be less at risk  than  those  who  do  not
        speak Albanian and are  easily  distinguishable  as  being  from  a
        minority group."

25.   We note that at 3.8.6,  when  dealing  with  internal  relocation  the
    Operational Guidance Note states that:

        "There is in general freedom of movement for  ethnic  Albanians  in
        Kosovo (outside of  the  Serb  enclaves)  and  case  owners  should
        consider  that  internal  relocation  is  normally  possible,   for
        applicants that can pass as an ethnic Albanian, to another part  of
        Kosovo, where an applicant's ethnic background is  unlikely  to  be
        known and hence where there is not  a  real  risk  of  persecution,
        notwithstanding UNHCR and UNMIK's reservations about the return  of
        this group to Kosovo.  For example, relocation from  smaller  rural
        areas to much larger urban communities such as Pristina.   However,
        some applicants with mixed ethnicity  and/or  those  in  ethnically
        mixed marriages who are easily distinguishable as  a  member  of  a
        minority group may face limitations on their ability to  internally
        relocate."

26.    Mr  Hawkin  referred  in  particular  to  that  last  sentence.    He
    emphasised that that guidance in the OGN conflicted with  the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in Hysi. He therefore  asked  us  to  allow  the
    appeal.

27.   In reply Mr Gulvin stated that the central issue was  whether  or  not
    the appellant could go back to his local area.   Secondly,  whether  or
    not he could go to another area in Kosovo where in effect he would  not
    need to hide his ethnicity and thirdly whether or not he could live  in
    a Roma minority enclave.  He asked us to first consider the appellant's
    home area around Peje.  He argued that as the  appellant's  father  was
    Roma the appellant could be regarded as a Roma and indeed the fact that
    the appellant's father might  have  been  considered  to  have  been  a
    supporter of the Serbs was not at  all  unusual  for  Roma  in  Kosovo.
    There was no reason why the appellant would not  be  able  to  relocate
    within the Roma enclave in Peje.  He pointed out that it was  accepted,
    in all reported decisions that, within their  own  enclaves,  Roma  did
    have a sufficiency of protection.  If the appellant did not want to  go
    there then the fact that he spoke Albanian and indeed did not look Roma
    would mean that he would be able to move freely around  Kosovo.   There
    would be nothing to mark him out or  to  suggest  that  he  would  face
    persecution contrary to his rights under Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  He
    asked us to dismiss the appeal.

Relevant Legal Framework

28.   In considering this appeal we note the legal framework established  by
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations SI 2006/2525 (the "Protection Regulations")
    and the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules CM6918 (the  "amended
    Immigration Rules").  Together these  implement  EU  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification status  of  third
    country nationals or stateless persons or refugees or  as  persons  who
    otherwise need international protection.

29.   Regulation 5 defines "acts of persecution" as follows:
        "5(1)    In deciding whether a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
             persecution must be:

             (a)  sufficiently serious by its nature  or  repetition  as  to
                 constitute a severe violation of a basic  human  right,  in
                 particular a right from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
                 under Article 15 of the Convention for  the  Protection  of
                 Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


             (b)  an accumulation of various measures, including a violation
                 of a human right which is sufficiently severe as to  affect
                 an individual in a similar manner as specified in (a).
        5(2)     An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:

             (a)  an act of physical or mental violence, including an act of
                 sexual violence;"


30.   The Regulations set out the right of a person to be considered  as  to
    his or her eligibility for humanitarian protection.  Paragraph 339C  of
    the amended Immigration Rules states:
        "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
              United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
              (i)      he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port
                    of entry in the United Kingdom;
              (ii)     he does not qualify  as  a  refugee  as  defined  in
                    regulation 2  of  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
                    International  Protection  (Qualification)   Regulations
                    2006;
              (iii)    substantial grounds have been  shown  for  believing
                    that the person concerned, if  he  is  returned  to  the
                    country of return, would face a real risk  of  suffering
                    serious harm and is unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,
                    unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of  that
                    country; and
              (iv)     he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian
                    protection."
31.   The paragraph goes on to give a definition of serious harm:
        "Serious harm consists of:
        (i)      the death penalty or execution;
        (ii)     unlawful killing;
        (iii)    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
             a person in the country of return; or
        (iv)     serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."
32.   The Protection Regulations also set out, inter  alia,  definitions  of
    actors of  persecution  or  serious  harm  and  actors  of  protection.
    Regulation 4 states:
        "(1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible
             for humanitarian protection,  protection  from  persecution  or
             serious harm can be provided by:

             (a)  the State; or

             (b)  any party or  organisation,  including  any  international
                 organisation, controlling the State or a  substantial  part
                 of the territory of the State.

        (2)      Protection shall be regarded as  generally  provided  when
             the  actors  mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)(a)  and   (b)   take
             reasonable steps to prevent the  persecution  or  suffering  of
             serious harm by operating an effective  legal  system  for  the
             detection, prosecution  and  punishment  of  acts  constituting
             persecution or  serious  harm,  and  the  person  mentioned  in
             paragraph (1) has access to such protection."
33.   Paragraph 339O of the  Immigration  Rules  deals  with  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

34.   Where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' it is to  be  understood
    as an abbreviated way  of  identifying  respectively:  (i)  whether  on
    return there is a well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  under  the
    Refugee Convention;  (ii)  whether  on  return  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that  the  person  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm within the meaning  of  paragraph  339C  of  the
    amended Immigration  Rules  and  (iii)  whether  on  return  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that a person would face a real  risk
    of being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

 Relevant Tribunal determinations

35.   There are a number of  relevant  Tribunal  determinations  which  deal
    with the position of minorities  in  Kosovo.   SK  (Roma  in  Kosovo  -
    update) Serbia and Montenegro [2005] UKIAT 23 dealt with a  Roma  whose
    home village was on the road between Pristina and Peje (the  area  from
    which this appellant comes).  The appellant in SK had  argued  that  he
    would not be able to travel safely to any Roma enclave or  be  safe  in
    any  Roma  enclave.   The  Tribunal  considered  the  relevant  Country
    Information Policy Unit Report - March 2004  and  UNHCR's  August  2004
    Kosovo Paper.  They concluded that since March 2004  the  position  for
    Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities  was  one  of  a   gradual
    resumption of the relative levels of minority rights  held  before  the
    violence in mid-March 2004 and found that there was  evidence  of  KFOR
    and UNMIK policemen attaining a high level of visibility  and  presence
    particularly  in  minority  areas.   They  found  that  there   was   a
    sufficiency of protection for Roma as outlined in the earlier  case  of
    FD (Kosovo - Roma) Serbia and Montenegro CG [2004]  UKIAT  00214.   The
    determination in that appeal had concluded that  that  appellant  could
    return to a Roma enclave or camp and that would not involve a breach of
    his rights under Article 3.  The determination stated:

        "64.     The situation prevailing before the  recent  outbreaks  of
             interethnic violence was  not  one  of  substantial  peace  and
             harmony.  Interethnic hatred  simmered  below  the  surface  of
             daily life, with sporadic violent eruptions against  which  the
             UN  authorities  and  KPS  provided  a  sufficient  degree   of
             protection.  The return of ethnic  minorities  led  to  actions
             designed to intimidate and deter such returns  and  to  prevent
             return to a place where the returnees originally lived.


        65.      The events of mid-March represent an extreme but temporary
             expression of  those  hatreds  and  a  clear  demonstration  of
             promptitude and effectiveness of the protecting response.  They
             were not anticipated but they reflect what was there below  the
             surface which already, over the  years,  had  been  manifesting
             itself in isolated and smaller outbreaks of violence, secondary
             displacement,  reduction  in  ethnic   mixing,   and   constant
             discrimination, counteracted by the UN and  NATO  forces.   The
             response of the UN and NATO forces  has  promptly  brought  the
             violence totally under control.


        66.      The numbers killed and injured, the properties  destroyed,
             whether domestic institutional or ecclesiastical, were not of a
             scale which  prevented an  effective,  controlling,  protecting
             response from the authorities.


        67.      We do not see this leading to a change in our conclusions.
              Events of that sort, whilst the timing and organised scale may
             have caught the authorities by surprise, do not warrant a major
             re-evaluation.   Although  violence  of  itself   may   reflect
             underlying tensions but in its effect exacerbate them, altering
             them in degree and nature, changing people's  attitudes,  there
             is nothing of substance before us to show that the political or
             interethnic landscape has changed such that there is now a real
             risk  of  treatment  which  would  breach  Article  3   or   of
             persecution  under  the  Geneva  Convention  for   reasons   of
             ethnicity.  Rather they demonstrate that the tensions  lead  to
             sporadic and unpleasant violence which the authorities have the
             will and ability to suppress."

36.   A further determination, that  of  ES  (Ashkaelians,  mixed-Ashkaelian
    ethnicity) Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo) CG [2006] UKIAT 71  concluded
    that persons of Ashkaelian ethnicity or mixed-Ashkaelian ethnicity  did
    not in general face a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to
    Article 3 on return to  Kosovo.  In  that  determination  the  Tribunal
    considered at some considerable  length  the  background  documentation
    including the Human Rights Watch Report of  2005,  the  UNHCR  Position
    Paper of March 2005 and a report from the European Roma  Rights  Centre
    of June 2005.  The conclusions of the Tribunal noted  inter  alia  that
    one  significant  factor  which  significantly  reduced  the  level  of
    difficulties facing Ashkaelia was that they generally had  the  ability
    to speak fluent Albanian and that, although  the  conditions  in  which
    they had to live were far from ideal and there remained  discrimination
    as well as harassment  and  occasional  violence,  none  of  the  major
    reports indicated that conditions for  Ashkaelians  "generally  are  so
    dire as to violate basic non-derogable human rights".

37.   The final Tribunal determination on which Mr Hawkin  relied  was  that
    of KX (Mixed marriages - Roma - Albanian - Januzi applied)  Serbia  and
    Montenegro (Kosovo) CG [2006] UKIAT 00072.   The  conclusions  of  that
    Tribunal were as follows:-

        "Where there is a visible difference in skin colour  and  the  Roma
        partner speaks  no,  or  accented,  Albanian,  Roma-Albanian  mixed
        marriages  and  relationships  akin  to  marriage  in  Serbia   and
        Montenegro  (Kosovo)  put  both  parties  at  risk.   The   country
        background evidence now distinguishes between the risk to Roma  and
        their partners, who remain at risk because they  are  perceived  by
        the Albanian community as  traitors  and  Serb  collaborators,  and
        Ashkaelia and Egyptians whose position is not as serious.



        Roma-Albanian couples cannot access the protection  either  of  the
        Roma enclaves or the Albanian community  and  unless  either  party
        will normally be perceived as a member of the other community,  the
        parties to such a relationship are at general risk  of  persecution
        or serious harm from individuals in both  communities  because  the
        risk  is  from  non-state  actors  and  there   is,   in   general,
        insufficient protection from either Serbia and Montenegro  (Kosovo)
        state bodies or from K-FOR and other NGOs."

38.   In that case the appellant was of Albanian  ethnicity  and  appearance
    and his wife was a Roma gypsy by  ethnicity  and  in  appearance.   The
    Tribunal accepted that their relationship  had  not  been  accepted  by
    either the Albanian or the Roma communities in the past and  that  this
    had led to harassment and violence.  Although KX and his wife, AB,  had
    undergone a form of marriage they had not registered  their  union  for
    fear that both communities would take revenge on  them.   AB  had  been
    threatened with rape and her father had been beaten up by  men  wearing
    masks who came from KX's village.  The conclusion of  the  Tribunal  in
    that case was that, in general, the circumstances in which  Roma  lived
    would not  amount  to  a  risk  of  persecution  engaging  the  Refugee
    Convention or of serious harm engaging  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  The
    Tribunal did state, however, that:

        "(2)     Nevertheless, the majority Albanian  population  continues
             to suspect all Roma of being Serb collaborators and 'traitors';
             the domestic protection available is  the  Roma  enclaves,  and
             Roma  with  access  to  those  enclaves  are,  absent   special
             circumstances relating to them personally, safe to the  Horvath
             [2000 UKHL 37] standard...


        (5) Roma do not usually speak Albanian and when they do it will  be
             accented.   Having  regard  to  skin  colour  differences   and
             differences of accent, it will be extremely unusual for a  Roma
             woman to be perceived from her physical appearance and language
             abilities as Albanian  or  an  Albanian  man  be  perceived  as
             Roma...


        (6) Any risk of harm to Roma and those treated  as  Roma,  whatever
             its level, comes not from the state or its agents  (whether  by
             instruction   or    connivance).     Instead,    Roma    suffer
             discrimination from the ordinary population of Kosovo which the
             state is unable completely to  control,  but  which  ordinarily
             falls  below  the  high   standards   required   to   establish
             persecution  or  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or
             torture.


        (9) There is not, at  present,  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
             victims of inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo.  Although there are
             attempts to protect, the judicial route is not always open  and
             when  it  is,  lesser  charges   are   preferred,   there   are
             difficulties with witnesses, and the penalties imposed  are  at
             or below the minimum sentence for those lesser offences.  UNMIK
             itself says that the risk of persecution  engages  the  Refugee
             Convention, and UNHCR agrees."

39.   It must be remembered that KX deals  with  the  specific  case  of  an
    interethnic   marriage.  It does not  deal  with  children  of  such  a
    marriage.

40. This appeal was adjourned to a second stage reconsideration because the
    Immigration Judge had not followed the guidance in the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in Hysi.  The ratio of that judgment is that  a  failed
    asylum seeker returning to Kosovo,  cannot  be  expected  to  hide  his
    ethnicity nor lie when asked about his ethnicity: to  do  so  would  be
    denial of a basic human right. That premise was accepted by Mr.  Gulvin
    and we agree that this appellant could not  be  expected  to  hide  his
    ethnicity.  What the judgement in Hysi does not say, however,  is  that
    Roma in Kosovo face persecution. The Adjudicator had accepted that  the
    appellant in that appeal, a child of a mixed marriage,  was  a  genuine
    refugee, and that conclusion was not challenged: the issue  before  the
    Court was that of internal relocation. The judgment in  Hysi  therefore
    does not assist us in our consideration of whether or not the appellant
    would face persecution for a Convention reason or treatment contrary to
    his rights under the ECHR if returned to Kosovo.


Discussion:

      The issue of whether or not there is a real risk  of  persecution  for
    minorities in Kosovo.   Consideration  of background  evidence and  the
    report Mr. Alex Standish.

41.    We  have  considered  the  documentary  evidence  submitted  by   the
    appellant's representatives and  in  particular  the  report  from  Mr.
    Standish which we have summarised in paragraphs 13-22 above.   We  note
    that Mr. Standish is principally an anthropologist, albeit that  he  is
    currently a  special  advisor  on  Security  in  Kosovo.  Much  of  Mr.
    Standish's report is historical.  The references   to the  OSCE  report
    of October 2001, which talks of general problems of discrimination  and
    exclusion of minorities, and the report from UNHCR in 2000 relate to  a
    time  shortly  after  the  war  when  the  situation  in   Kosovo   was
    particularly volatile. We note his reference to the report of  Mr  Jiri
    Dienstbier,  The UN Special raporteur of  to the  General  Assembly  of
    the United Nations when,  in   November  1999,  he  talked  of  250,000
    people being displaced.  We  accept  that  during  the  riots  in  2004
    violence  against  Roma  escalated.  We  consider,  however,  that  the
    conclusions of the Tribunal in the determination in FD when considering
    the plight of Roma in the aftermath of those riots was  valid  -  there
    was a "protecting response" from the authorities  and  that   "tensions
    led to sporadic and unpleasant violence  which the authorities have the
    will and ability to suppress".  We consider  that  that  is  still  the
    position today.

42.   Mr Standish's report talks in  general  terms  of  discrimination  and
    poor living conditions and indeed  lack  of  opportunity  for  Roma  in
    Kosovo. We accept that there is considerable evidence of discrimination
    - the 2008  US  State  Department  refers  to  Roma  being  subject  to
    pervasive social and economic discrimination and often  lacking  access
    to basic  hygiene,  medical  care,  and  education  and  being  heavily
    dependent on humanitarian aid for survival.

43.  However, such discrimination does not show that there is  a  real  risk
    that Roma or those of  mixed  ethnicity  would  suffer  persecution  or
    treatment contrary to their rights under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  on
    return to Kosovo now.  There is simply no evidence  of  there  being  a
    reasonable likelihood of Kosovans from such groups facing  the  serious
    ill-treatment which would be a hallmark of persecution -  we  note  the
    definition of persecution set out in Regulation 5  of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in need of International Protection regulations 2006, which  are
    quoted in paragraph 29 above, and also the examples of  "serious  harm"
    in  paragraph  339C  of  the  amended   Immigration   Rules   detailing
    humanitarian  protection.   In  Mr.  Standish's  report  there  is  one
    instance of a house being burned down in 2005  and  four  people  being
    killed.  Another instance relates to a bus carrying Serbs being  stoned
    and an old man being beaten up. The only  crime  statistics  relate  to
    2000 when it is reported that 12 Roma were murdered, but  there  is  no
    evidence of who murdered them or the  circumstances  of  their  deaths.
    There is no detail in the reference to 5  Roma  being  kidnapped  then.
    There is simply no evidence  in  the  report  of  either  concerted  or
    prevalent violence against Roma in Kosovo.  The  reality  is  that  the
    examples of persecution in the report are not relevant to Roma or those
    of mixed ethnicity who were not collaborators, or a  witnesses  in  any
    political trial, and who are not in mixed marriages and who have  never
    supported the Serb authorities. In conclusion, while we  consider  that
    Mr.  Standish's  report,  while  detailed  and  historically  accurate,
    supports a conclusion that Roma in general may face discrimination,  it
    does not show that Roma in general or that someone of mixed  ethnicity,
    would face persecution or treatment  contrary  to  their  rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR on return to Kosovo.  While  we  would  emphasise
    that Mr. Standish's report given a useful overview of the conditions in
    Kosovo, particularly from a historical viewpoint, it  is  important  to
    note that he is a social anthropologist and that he is not a lawyer who
    must consider the situation in Kosovo for minority  groups  within  the
    context of the legal framework  both  relating  to  the  definition  of
    persecution and the relevant standard of proof of "real risk".

The issue of sufficiency of protection

44 .  We have  considered  whether  or  not  for  Roma  or  those  of  mixed
    ethnicity who might face, for whatever reason ill treatment contrary to
    their rights under the ECHR there would be a sufficiency of protection.
     We do not find that there is any evidence to  support  the  contention
    that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for   such
    individuals. In  their  determination  in  SK,  written  in  2005,  the
    Tribunal endorsed the conclusions in FD and  found  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection in Kosovo for Roma then. There is nothing  to
    suggest  that  that  has  changed.   There  is  clear  evidence  of   a
    sufficiency of protection within Kosovo both from UNMIK  and  from  the
    Kosovan authorities themselves. The Security Council  report  sets  out
    details of the police and court  system  in  Kosovo  and,  although  it
    clearly has defects it cannot be said that it is not fully functioning.
    There is a fully operational Human Rights Advisory Panel  and,  indeed,
    we note that Mr Standish is himself an advisor to the police  authority
    in Kosovo.  We note the US State Department Report  which  referred  to
    police activities and to a number of trials.

45.   The Operational Guidance Note, from which we have  quoted  above  when
    dealing with the issue of internal relocation, concludes  at  paragraph
    3.8.5 (page 67) that:

        "In general there is sufficiency  of  protection  for  Kosovans  of
        mixed ethnicity and those in ethnically mixed marriages.  UNMIK/KPS
        are able and willing to provide  protection  for  those  that  fear
        persecution and ensure that there is  a  legal  mechanism  for  the
        detection, prosecution and  punishment  of  persecutory  acts.   In
        general, an ethnically mixed applicant who speaks Albanian and  can
        physically pass as an Albanian will be less at risk than those  who
        do not speak Albanian and are easily distinguishable as being  from
        a minority group."


    There is nothing to show that that assertion is incorrect.


46. We have set out above, in paragraph  35  to  40,  the  current  country
    guidance cases relating to minorities in Kosovo.  They  conclude  that,
    despite discrimination and  on occasion outbreaks of violence there  is
    nothing to indicate that  there  is  not  for  Roma  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from State actors within Kosovo.  Our  conclusions  in  this
    determination, having considered recent evidence and the report of  Mr.
    Standish is that there is nothing to led us to a contrary conclusion.

47.   Mr. Standish said that he considered  that  it  was  likely  that  the
    declaration of independence in February  2008  would  lead  to  renewed
    violence. We have considered the report from the European  Roma  Rights
    Centre dated 24th April 2008, headed "Kosovo Roma Fleeing in Fear"  but
    we note that that related to Kosovo Roma living in a  Serbian  enclave.
    The reality is that, in the event, there has been no  notable  violence
    against Roma  since  independence.  Although  it  refers  to  increased
    tensions between the Kosovan Serb and Kosovan Albanian communities, the
    Security Council report of July 2008 states that the  general  security
    situation remained calm on the surface.  The concerns expressed  by  Mr
    Standish that the Declaration of Independence in  February  2008  would
    lead to further rioting have simply not materialised. There is  nothing
    to show that the conclusions in the country guidance cases to which  we
    have referred above are should be modified.

Application of our conclusions to the facts relating to this appellant.

48. We note  the  characteristics  of  this  appellant.   He  is  of  mixed
    ethnicity in that his father was  Roma  and  his  mother  Serbian.   He
    speaks Albanian but does not speak Roma.  He does not have the physical
    characteristics of a Roma.  He accepts that he could pass as  a  Kosovo
    Albanian.  He has been in Britain for ten years having left Kosovo when
    he was 22.  He was never involved in any political activity  in  Kosovo
    but although it is accepted that his father was  shot  as  a  perceived
    collaborator he was not a collaborator and there is nothing to  suggest
    that there is any substance in  that  perception  other  than  that  he
    worked for the Serbian authorities in Peje.  At interview the appellant
    stated that after his father was shot he had remained at home for three
    weeks.

49. It must be accepted that, in  1998,  with  the  invasion  of  the  Serb
    forces, feelings in Kosovo were running  particularly  high  but  that,
    although the appellant's father was shot, no attempt was made  to  kill
    the appellant despite the fact that he remained  in  the  family  home.
    The appellant refers to being shot in the leg when he  fled  by  "these
    people" but it is unclear whether he was shot at by  the  Serbs  or  by
    Kosovan Albanians.   Moreover, there is  nothing  that  indicates  that
    this appellant would now, after ten years, be considered to be  someone
    who should be targeted for ill-treatment.

50.   We accept Mr Gulvin's argument that the appellant  would  be  able  to
    live in a Roma enclave.  He is Roma through his father.    There is  no
    history of particular ill feeling  between  the  Serbs  and  the  Roma.
    Although Mr Hawkin claimed that the Roma would not wish to have the son
    of a perceived collaborator living with them in an enclave there is  no
    evidence, apart from the comment by  Mr.  Standish  which  he  did  not
    support by any evidence, that that is the case and  in  any  event  the
    appellant maintains that  his  father  was  not  a  collaborator.   The
    reality is that the Roma were, in general,  perceived  by  non-Roma  as
    being supportive of the Serbs.  We can only reach the conclusion  that,
    within a Roma enclave in his home area,  the  appellant  would  not  be
    targeted and would have a sufficiency  of  protection.  Notwithstanding
    the fact that he does not speak Roma there is nothing to  suggest  that
    he would be rejected if he returned to his  home  area.   That  is  the
    conclusion that must be  drawn  not  only  from  the  relevant  country
    guidance cases but also our assessment of the evidence before us  which
    we have set out above - for Roma there  is  clearly  protection  within
    their own enclaves. The appellant would not  face  persecution  in  his
    home area.


51.  The appellant does not speak Roma and therefore might not want to  live
    in a Roma enclave. Assuming that to be the case we have considered  the
    issue of whether or not, within Kosovo, outside any  Roma  enclave  the
    appellant would be likely to face persecution or treatment contrary  to
    his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.  We note, of course,  that  the
    appellant has an Albanian name, does not look as if  he  were  of  Roma
    ethnicity and speaks Albanian: that was a factor which the Tribunal  in
    ES considered would reduce the level of difficulties facing  Ashkaelia.
    He would be a man returning to Kosovo after ten years having left at  a
    time when tens of thousands of Kosovans fled  the  country  because  of
    their fear of the Serb army.  There really appears nothing  that  would
    readily distinguish  him  from  other  young  Kosovans  returning  from
    abroad.

52. We accept that, if asked, he would have to say where he came  from  and
    he would say that he came from Peje.  Whether or  not  someone  meeting
    him casually would then  press  him  further  about  his  ethnicity  is
    debatable but we accept that his ethnicity would,  in  due  course,  be
    known to those of his immediate  circle.   Given  the  appellant's  own
    evidence that he could pass as a Kosovan Albanian and that Albanian was
    his first and only language, it is unlikely, however, that he would  be
    subject to the petty harassment which Roma may well  suffer  in  Kosovo
    from Kosovans who merely pass them in  the  street,  nor  would  he  be
    likely to suffer the harassment which is suffered by  Roma  when  their
    homes in Roma areas are targeted by disaffected Albanians  if  he  were
    not living in a specifically Roma area.


53.   In any event, given our findings above we  conclude  that  given  this
    appellants particular profile there is nothing to indicate  that  there
    is a real risk that he would face persecution of treatment contrary  to
    his rights under the ECHR if returned to Kosovo nor is  there  anything
    to indicate that there would not be for him a sufficiency of protection
    there. We accept that as a man with a Roma father he  might  well  face
    the discrimination which  Mr.  Standish  indicated  in  his  report  is
    suffered by Roma in Kosovo but we would comment,  however,  that  given
    that the appellant has lived and worked in Britain for many  years  and
    speaks English as well as Albanian that we consider that  he  would  be
    better placed to find work in Kosovo than many of the Roma who  do  not
    speak Albanian and who  do  not  have  the  appellant's  experience  of
    working abroad.

54.   In conclusion  we  find  that,  applying  the  test  set  out  in  the
    Regulations it is clear that there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant would face persecution for a Convention reason on  return  to
    Kosovo, either in his home area or elsewhere in  Kosovo,  or  that  his
    rights under Article 3 of the ECHR would be infringed  by  his  removal
    and that there would, in any event, be a sufficiency of protection  for
    this appellant in Kosovo. There were no  arguments  put  before  us  to
    claim that his Article 8 rights would be infringed.

55.   Accordingly, although it has been  found  that  there  is  a  material
    error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge  his
    decision, dismissing this  appeal  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds shall stand.






Signed



Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy



                                    Annex

Documents Considered

1.    UNHCR's Position on the Continued International    June 2006
      Protection Needs of Individuals from Kosovo

2.    Kosovo  Serbs  launch   new  Assembly   BBC  Website              June
                                                         2006

3. UNHCR website Last family leave camp  for  displaced             November
     2007
       in Kosovo

4.    UNHCR Website - Last Family Leaves Camp for
      Displaced in Kosovo.   November    2007

5.    Kosovo vow as independence looms.    BBC  website.            February
                                                                 2008

6.    Inter-Press Service News Agency Report - Kosovo:   February   2008
      How a "Success Story" Became Such a Mess

7.    US State Department Report  March      2008

8.    International Crisis Group - Kosovo's First Month  March      2008

9.     Human  Rights  Watch  Kosovo  Criminal  Justice  Court          March
                                                               2008
        Card

10.    European  Roma  Rights  Centre  Kosovo  Roma  Fleeing           April
                                                     2008
      in Fear.

11.   European Roma Rights Centre RAE Returnees in April      2008
      Kosovo Face Desperate Situation

12.   US State Department Terrorism Report   April 2008

13.   OSCE - Four Years Later: Follow-up of March 2004
      Riot Cases Before the Kosovo Criminal Justice System    July  2008

14.   Report of Secretary General on the UN Interim
      Administration Mission Kosovo     July       2008

15.   Human Rights Watch Kosovo: Abuja Press at Tachi
      on Human Rights  July  2008

16.   Expert Report from Mr Alex Standish    July  2008

17.   Voice of America News - Serbia Requests ICJ Opinion
      on Legality of Kosovo Independence     August      2008

18.   SCE Human Rights, Ethnic Relations Democracy in    September  2008
      Kosovo

19.   South East European Times UNMIK to remain in Serb
      dominated Areas of Kosovo   September  2008

20.   International Crisis  Group  Kosovo's  Fragile  Transition   September
                                                     2008

21.   OSCE Municipality Profile for Peje     No date

22.    OSCE  Municipality Profiles for  Leposavic,  Mitrovice,            No
                                                     date
         Strpce, Zubim, Potok and Zvecan.  (Municipalities
         with the most significant Serb populations
