
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                       KM (definition of short course) Japan [2006] UKAIT
00014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 January 2006                              |On 10 February 2006        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    Mr G WARR (senior Immigration Judge)
                  Mr R CHALKLEY (SENIOR Immigration Judge)


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Kaihiva (Kaihiva & Co.)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Alleyne, Home Office Presenting Officer

A course of one year's duration is not a short course as defined in
paragraph 60(vi) of HC 395.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Japan. She was given leave to  enter  the
      United Kingdom on 6 March 2003 in the capacity of  student.   She  was
      granted leave until 31  December 2003.   Her leave was extended  until
      31 January 2005.   On 25 January 2005  she  made  an  application  for
      further leave to remain as a student of English to study the Cambridge
      IELTS examination at the  Natural  English  Conversation  School.  Her
      application was refused on 9 February 2005.

2.   In the original ground of refusal  the  Secretary  of  State  took  the
      point that the school had not been registered on  the  relevant  list.
      However, the Secretary of State in his explanatory statement said that
      the point could now be disregarded.  No point on the matter  has  been
      relied upon before us.

3.   The live issues before the Immigration  Judge  (Mr  M.B.  Hussain)  who
      allowed the appellant's appeal, were the questions raised in paragraph
      3 of the explanatory statement. It was contended  that  the  appellant
      had only undertaken short courses below degree level. The Secretary of
      State was not satisfied that the appellant would not, as a  result  of
      an extension of stay, spend more than two years on short courses below
      degree level.  It was  also  contended  that  the  appellant  did  not
      provide evidence of satisfactory progress  in  her  course  of  study,
      including the taking and passing of any  relevant  examinations.   The
      decision under appeal is dated 9 February 2005.

4.   The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing before  the  Immigration
      Judge.  The Immigration Judge did not accept the Secretary of  State's
      claim that the appellant had not made  satisfactory  progress  in  her
      studies.  The appellant's evidence, which the Secretary of  State  did
      not dispute, was that she had begun  by  studying  a  general  English
      language course and had now got herself prepared to sit for  an  IELTS
      examination.  In the Immigration Judge's  judgement the appellant  had
      made sufficient progress to bring her  to  the  position  she  was  in
      during the two years she had been  studying  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      There is no appeal against that  aspect  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
      decision.

5.   The Immigration Judge dealt with the short course argument as follows:

             'The respondent argued that if the  appellant  was  granted  a
             further extension of leave then she would have spent more than
             two years on short courses below degree level. However, by the
             date of his decision, namely 9 February  2005,  the  appellant
             would have been short of a month before the two year  [period]
             was up.  Therefore,  I  find  that  his  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the  rules.'

6.   In the grounds of appeal settled by  the  Secretary  of  State  it  was
      submitted that the date of the Secretary of State's decision  was  not
      the deciding factor under the relevant Immigration Rule. The  question
      was whether, if an extension were  granted, the appellant  would  have
      spent more than two years on short courses at the end of such leave.

7.   At the hearing  before  us,  we  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
      enrolled on a Cambridge IELTS examination  course  and  had  paid  her
      school fees for a period  of  one  year  according  to  the  enrolment
      confirmation supplied to the appellant and dated 17 January 2005.  The
      letter makes it clear that the appellant would  be  enrolled  for  one
      calendar year as a full time student, commencing on  24  January  2005
      and her registration would expire on 23 January 2006.

8.   We noted that paragraph 60(vi), as amended by Cm. 4339,  provides  that
      it is a requirement for an extension of stay as  a  student  that  the
      appellant 'would not, as a result of an extension of stay, spend  more
      than two years on short courses below degree level  (i.e.  courses  of
      less than one year's duration, or longer  courses  broken  off  before
      completion) ...'

 9.  We raised with Mr Alleyne the question whether in the circumstances  of
      the definition the appellant had enrolled on a short course at all. We
      put the case back to enable Mr Alleyne  to  consider  the  point.   Mr
      Alleyne,  on  the   court   resuming,   submitted   that   while   the
      interpretation based upon the rule by the Tribunal might  be  correct,
      he was not instructed to withdraw  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
      because of the uncertainty of the meaning of the definition.  The case
      depended upon the point because there was nothing in the other  ground
      of appeal where it was argued that the Immigration Judge had relied on
      the wrong rule.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved  our  decision.    The
      relevant rule appears to us to be perfectly clear. Short  courses  are
      defined as courses of less than one year's duration. If  it  had  been
      intended to catch the course on which the  student  had  embarked  the
      rule would have  defined  short  courses  as  courses  of  one  year's
      duration or less.   Mr Alleyne advanced no argument before  us  beyond
      submitting that the rule was not clear and we find it perfectly clear.
      Neither side referred us to WR [2005] UKAIT 00170 where  the  Tribunal
      considered the proper construction of paragraph 60(vi)  prior  to  its
      amendment by  Cm.  6339.  In  that  case  the  Tribunal  accepted  the
      submission from the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  that  the  total
      period of study was to be taken as the calendar year and was not to be
      restricted to the (shorter) academic year  in  which  the  course  was
      studied. The requirement of paragraph (vi) was "concerned only with an
      individual's immigration status as a student on short courses and  not
      with the minutiae of calculating time  actually  spent  studying."  In
      that case the appellant was indisputably engaged on short courses. The
      Tribunal was not concerned with the question that arises in this case,
      which is whether a one year course is a short course at all.  In  this
      case the evidence is that the appellant was engaged  as  a  full  time
      student (with daily tutorials Monday to Friday) for a one year period.
      Such a course is not, in our judgment, a short course as defined.

11.  We are also clear that the Immigration  Judge  misdirected  himself  in
      finding that the date of decision was the relevant date, but that  was
      immaterial given that the rule did not apply to  the  appellant  since
      she was not embarked on a short course.   Accordingly,  it  would  not
      follow that as a result of any extension the appellant would  infringe
      the two year rule provided by paragraph 60(vi) when one bears in  mind
      the definition of short course.

12.  The Immigration Judge determined the question of satisfactory  progress
      in favour of the appellant.  There has been  no  appeal  against  that
      aspect of the Immigration Judge's decision.  Although the  Immigration
      Judge misdirected himself on the question of the  relevant  date  when
      assessing  whether  the  appellant  fulfilled  the   requirements   of
      paragraph 60(vi) of the Immigration Rules, the error was not  material
      since the appellant was not embarked upon a short course and would not
      fall foul of paragraph 60(vi).

13.  Although the Immigration Judge made an error  in  his  construction  of
      the relevant rules, the error was  not  material  and  accordingly  we
      direct that the decision of the Immigration Judge shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 8 February 2006
G Warr
Senior Immigration Judge

