
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

       HA (Conduct of hearing: evidence required) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00018

Heard at Field House:  05.03.2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before:

                      Senior Immigration Judge Freeman



                                  Between:

                                     HA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:       James Collins (counsel instructed by Sheikh & Co)
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kandola

Where a party who was represented at the hearing  seeks  reconsideration  on
the basis of the way it was conducted, reconsideration will not normally  be
granted without evidence on the point in question by way of a  statement  of
truth from the representative, to which should be attached either a copy  of
any note on the point made by the representative at or near the time of  the
hearing, or an explanation of why no such note is available.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Tribunal has ordered reconsideration of  a  decision  of  Immigration
   Judge Pullig, sitting at Hatton Cross on 22 September 2008,  allowing  an
   asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Somalia, who claimed to be
   at risk on return as a member of the minority Ashraf clan.  The  Tribunal
   thought the judge might have made an error of law  in  dealing  with  the
   case on the basis that the presenting officer  before  him  had  conceded
   that the appellant was an Ashraf.


The judge's typed record of proceedings makes it quite clear that the
presenting officer did concede this, and Mr Kandola did not argue otherwise
before me. There is no need to say any more about this case than that the
judge's decision is upheld.

2.  However,  Mr  Collins  expressed  understandable  disquiet  that   this
   reconsideration had got as far as it has. The senior  immigration  judge
   who granted it on the papers had before her an assurance in the  grounds
   that no such concession had been made. The author of those  grounds  was
   clearly acting on the contents of the typed memorandum of hearing by the
   presenting officer dated 23 September, which Mr Kandola produced  before
   me. However that memorandum was not borne out by what actually happened.



3. Problems of this kind are said by Mr Collins to be  appearing  more  and
   more often. One reason may be the short time  allowed  for  applications
   for reconsideration. However, any party who suggests that something  was
   said, or not said at the  hearing,  contrary  to  what  appears  in  the
   judge's decision, needs to support that suggestion with evidence, if  it
   is to be the basis of  an  order  for  reconsideration.  An  unsupported
   claim, by either side, in the  grounds  for  review,  is  likely  to  be
   rejected without further inquiry. A party who was represented before the
   judge, when applying for reconsideration on a ground such as this should
   file with their application  a  statement  of  truth  as  to  the  facts
   claimed, together with either:

    a) a photocopy of a contemporaneous note by their representative; or

    b) an explanation as to why no contemporaneous (or near-contemporaneous)
       note is available.




4. Reconsideration is likely only to  be  granted  in  a  case  where  this
   material appears to bear out the claim: the comments of  the  judge  who
   heard the case will then  normally  be  sought  and  circulated  to  the
   parties. If, following this or at any other stage, it becomes clear that
   the statement is not borne out by the facts, then  the  application  for
   reconsideration, or the claim in question should at once  be  withdrawn.
   If that is not done, or if it appears that the claim should  never  have
   been made in the first  place,  then  there  is  likely  to  be  further
   investigation by the Tribunal, which may result in a report  being  made
   to the appropriate disciplinary authority.



5. If withdrawal of the claim in question effectively disposes of the basis
   for reconsideration after  that  has  already  been  granted,  then  the
   Tribunal may be invited to  deal  with  the  reconsideration  without  a
   hearing.



6. In this case the original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law
   and the original determination of the appeal stands.



                                                                       [pic]
                                                   Signed
                                  Senior Immigration Judge Freeman







































