
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                         AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012]
UKUT 00016 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28 October 2010 and 23 May 2011            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE OWEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JARVIS

                                   Between

                                     AA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                               The AIRE Centre

                                                   Interested Party

Representation:

28 October 2011

For the Appellant:     Ms S  Motz  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Braitch  RB
                     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Monica Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

23 May 2011
For the Appellant:           Ms K  Cronin  of  Counsel  and  Ms  S  Motz  of
                     Counsel,                                 instructed by
                     Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D  Blundell  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Treasury
                     Solicitor
For the Interested Party:    Mr Adam Weiss of the AIRE Centre


(1)   The evidence before the  Tribunal  does  not  alter  the  position  as
    described in HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate violence  -  forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC), namely that when  considering  the  question  of
    whether children are disproportionately affected by the consequences of
    the armed conflict in  Afghanistan,  a  distinction  has  to  be  drawn
    between children who were living with a family and those who  are  not.
    That distinction has been reinforced by the additional material  before
    this Tribunal.  Whilst it is recognised that there are  some  risks  to
    which  children  who  will  have  the  protection  of  the  family  are
    nevertheless subject, in particular the risk of landmines and the risks
    of being trafficked, they are not of such a level as  to  lead  to  the
    conclusion  that  all  children   would   qualify   for   international
    protection.  In arriving at this conclusion, account has been taken  of
    the necessity to have regard to the best interests of children.

(2)    However,  the  background  evidence  demonstrates   that   unattached
    children returned  to  Afghanistan,  depending  upon  their  individual
    circumstances and the location to  which  they  are  returned,  may  be
    exposed to  risk  of  serious  harm,  inter  alia  from  indiscriminate
    violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and  a  lack
    of adequate arrangements for child protection.  Such risks will have to
    be taken into account when addressing the question of whether a  return
    is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a  primary  consideration  when
    determining a claim to humanitarian protection.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Introduction and History of the Case

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan from  Kabul  Province,  whose
    date of birth is accepted as being 1 January 1994 and who is  therefore
    now 17  years  of  age.   He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    unaccompanied child on 7 May 2009 and sought asylum on the  basis  that
    he would be at real risk of being persecuted on return to  Kabul  as  a
    separated child, and/or by reason of political opinion imputed  to  him
    by virtue of his being a son of a man  who  was  an  informer  for  the
    government, and the brother of a man who was an army commander who  had
    been killed by the Taliban, and that he himself had been among a  group
    who sang an anti-Taliban song at a public gathering on  Teacher's  Day,
    at which the deaths of foreign military  personnel  were  mourned.   He
    attended  a  screening  interview  on  13  May  2009  and  underwent  a
    substantive interview with regard to his application on 5 October 2009.

 2.  On  21  October  2009  the  respondent  refused  the  application  for
    recognition as a refugee and grant of status, but granted the appellant
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  rules
    until  1  July  2011  in  accordance  with  her  policy   relating   to
    unaccompanied children, the Home Office Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on
    Discretionary Leave.

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision, and on 29 January 2010 his
    appeal under section 83 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (an 'up-grade appeal') came before Immigration Judge Napthine, who
    dismissed  the  appeal  rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  as  lacking
    credibility.

 4. The appellant's  application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    determination by the immigration judge came before Upper Tribunal Judge
    Jarvis on 10 March 2010 when she reached the provisional decision  that
    the determination disclosed an error of law;  that  it  should  be  set
    aside, and the appeal  be  referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  re-
    decision.  On 7 May 2010 Upper Tribunal Judge Jarvis ruled, under  rule
    34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  without  a
    hearing, that the decision of the immigration judge contained an  error
    of law, namely that that judge failed to  take  into  account  evidence
    relating to unaccompanied or separated children, and failed  to  assess
    the evidence on the basis that the appellant was a child, and  that  it
    should be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing of 28 October 2010

 5. The appeal came before us on 28 October 2010, when  the  appellant  was
    represented by Ms S Motz  of  counsel,  the  respondent  by  Ms  Monica
    Tanner, a Home Officer presenting officer.  It was common  ground  that
    the issues before us were the appellant's claim  to  recognition  as  a
    refugee, and, in the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in FA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 696 handed down  on  18  June  2010,  his
    claim to humanitarian protection (the parties in FA  having  reached  a
    settlement  following  the  judgment  of  the  UKSC  (FA  (Iraq)   (FC)
    (Respondent) v SSHD (Appellant) [2011] UKSC 22). We heard evidence from
    the appellant and submissions on behalf of the parties.  But Ms  Tanner
    had indicated at the outset of the hearing that the respondent had  not
    appreciated that the appellant was raising challenges  to  GS  (Article
    15(c): Indiscriminate Violence) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT  0044,  and
    was not therefore in a position to respond as to the  construction  and
    application of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

 6. We therefore reserved our  decision  and  gave  directions  as  to  the
    service of further submissions by the respondent, and  in  response  on
    behalf of the appellant.

 7. On 23 November 2010 and 3 December 2010  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jarvis
    gave further directions identifying the issues to  be  addressed  at  a
    restored hearing to take account, inter alia, of the  country  guidance
    given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")  in  HK  and  Others   (minors-
    indiscriminate  violence-forced  recruitment  by  Taliban-contact  with
    family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 (IAC).

The Hearing of 18 March 2011

 8. In January 2011 the restored hearing was fixed for 18  March  with  the
    agreement of the parties.  But on 1 February  2011  the  Supreme  Court
    handed down its judgment in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4,  in
    which it addressed, inter alia, the  construction  and  application  of
    s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  (the  '2009
    Act'), the assessment of the best interests of a child in  the  context
    of an application for asylum.

 9. On 1 March 2011 a letter was sent to the parties  notifying  them  that
    the UT Country Guidance Convener had decided that the appellant's  case
    was likely to be used as country guidance.  As  a  result  the  parties
    sought further time in which to prepare their respective cases; and the
    hearing on 18 March was treated as an oral case management  hearing  at
    which both parties were represented.

10. On 18 March an order for anonymity was made; and it was further ordered
    that the AIRE Centre be joined as an interested party  subject  to  any
    further submission from the appellant or respondent by no later than  1
    April 2011. The order joining the  AIRE  Centre  was  confirmed  on  14
    April, and on 6 May further directions were  given  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jarvis as to the issues to be addressed at the restored hearing.

The Hearing of 23 May 2011

11. It is appropriate to  express  our  appreciation  of  the  considerable
    efforts made by all parties to ensure that the hearing of 23 May  would
    be  effective,  and  in  particular  of  their  co-operation   in   the
    preparation of agreed bundles of relevant documentary material and case
    law, which reflected the onus on the parties  to  co-operate  in  cases
    involving  children  articulated  by  the  Court  of   Appeal   in   DS
    (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 305 handed down on 22  March  2011.   The
    documentary material before the Tribunal is listed in  Appendix  A  and
    relevant extracts are found at Appendix B. The index to the  bundle  of
    authorities is at Appendix C and to the appellant's  personal  evidence
    at Appendix D.  Following oral submissions we  reserved  our  decision,
    subject to receipt of written submissions. We subsequently received the
    appellant's Reply to submissions dated 31 May  2011;  the  respondent's
    Rejoinder dated 1 June 2011, and the appellant's  Reply  dated  9  June
    2011, to new points raised in the respondent's Rejoinder.

The Issues

12. The appeal gives rise to the following issues:


      1.  the  proper  approach  to  an  application  for  asylum  and/   or
         humanitarian protection by a child,


      2. the application of s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
         Act 2009,


      3.  whether  in  relation  to  children  cases  the  country  guidance
         contained in GS  and HK remains valid in the light  of  the  up-to-
         date background material and expert evidence,


      4. whether the appellant is entitled to recognition as a refugee,


      5. whether the appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection,


    Two further issues were addressed by the parties, namely,


      6. whether the appellant  is  a  victim  of  trafficking  and/or  debt
         bondage,


      7. whether there has been failure to conduct family tracing enquiries.

The Legal Framework

13. A person is a refugee and, therefore, entitled to  asylum  pursuant  to
    Directive 2004/83/EC, (the Qualification Directive) if, (in  the  words
    of Article 1A of the  Geneva  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees) owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
    race, religion, nationality or membership of a particular social  group
    or political opinion, he is outside the country of his nationality  and
    is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country
.
14. A person not entitled to refugee status may  nevertheless  be  eligible
    for 'subsidiary' protection pursuant to Article 2 of the  Qualification
    Directive.

15.   Article 15 defines the serious harm as follows:


         "Serious harm consists of:


         a. Death penalty or execution; or


         b. Torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of  an
             applicant in the country of origin; or


         c. Serious and individual threat to a civilian life  or  person  by
             reason   of   indiscriminate   violence   in   situations   of
             international or internal armed conflict."


16.   The following recitals to the Qualification Directive are relevant  to
    the interpretation of Article 15(c):


         "(12)    The 'best interests of the child'  should  be  of  primary
             consideration  of  Member  States   when   implementing   this
             Directive.


         (20)     It is necessary, when assessing applications  from  minors
             for international protection, that Member States  should  have
             regard to child-specific forms of persecution.


         (24)     Minimum  standards  for  the  definition  and  content  of
             subsidiary  protection  status  should  also  be  laid   down.
             Subsidiary protection should be complementary  and  additional
             to refugee protection enshrined in the Geneva Convention.


         (25)     It is necessary to introduce  criteria  on  the  basis  of
             which applicants for which international protection are to  be
             recognised  as  eligible  for  subsidiary  protection.   Those
             criteria should be drawn from international obligations  under
             human rights instruments  and  practices  existing  in  Member
             States.


         (26)     Risks to which a population of a country or a  section  of
             the population is generally exposed do normally not create  in
             themselves an individual threat which would qualify as serious
             harm."


17.   Article 15(c) is given effect in domestic law  by  paragraph  339C  of
    the Immigration Rules, which provides as follows:


         "339C.   A person will be granted humanitarian  protection  in  the
                United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


                i.     he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a  port
                    of entry in the United Kingdom;


                ii.    he does not  qualify  as  a  refugee  as  defined  in
                    regulation 2  of  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
                    International  Protection  (Qualification)   Regulations
                    2006;


                iii.   substantial grounds have  been  shown  for  believing
                    that the person concerned, if he returned to the country
                    of return, would face a real risk of  suffering  serious
                    harm and is unable, or, owing to such risk, unwilling to
                    avail himself of the protection of that country; and


                iv.    he is not  excluded  from  a  grant  of  humanitarian
                    protection.


                Serious harm consists of:


                a.     the death penalty or execution;


                b.      unlawful killing;


                c.      torture  or  inhuman  or  degrading   treatment   or
                    punishment of a person in the country of return; or


                 d.  serious and individual threat to a civilian's  life  or
                    person  by  reason   of   indiscriminate   violence   in
                    situations of international or internal armed conflict."

Internal relocation


18.   Article 8 of the Qualification Directive provides that:


         "(1)      As  part  of  the  assessment  of  the  application   for
             international protection, Member States may determine that  an
             applicant is not in need of international protection if  in  a
             part of the country of origin there is no well-founded fear of
             being persecuted or no real risk  of  suffering  serious  harm
             then the applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in  that
             part of the country.


         2. In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
             accordance with paragraph 1, member states shall at  the  time
             of taking the decision on the application have regard  to  the
             general circumstances prevailing in that part of  the  country
             and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.


         3. Paragraph 1 may apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin."


19.   Article 9 of the  Qualification  Directive,  which  defines  'Acts  of
    Persecution', reflects recital 20 in providing  at  Article  9(2)  that
    acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1, can, inter alia,  take
    the form of "acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature".

20. Given the requirement articulated in recital 20  to  the  Qualification
    Directive, it is relevant to consider the provisions of the  Convention
    on the Rights of  the  Child  (the  'CRC').   Furthermore  as  Munby  J
    observed in R (on the application of Howard League for Penal Reform)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  &  Anor  [2002]  EWHC  2497
    (Admin):


         "51. The European  Convention  is,  of  course,  now  part  of  our
         domestic law by reason of the Human Rights Act 1998. Neither the UN
         Convention [on the Rights of the Child] nor the European Charter is
         at present legally  binding  in  our  domestic  law  and  they  are
         therefore not sources of law in the strict sense. But both can,  in
         my judgment,  properly  be  consulted  insofar  as  they  proclaim,
         reaffirm or elucidate the content of those human  rights  that  are
         generally recognised throughout the European family of nations,  in
         particular the nature and scope of those  fundamental  rights  that
         are guaranteed by the European Convention."

21.   The UKBA Asylum Policy Guidance on Processing  an  Asylum  Application
    from a Child. states that:




         "The UK is a signatory to the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the
         Child and its text includes key commitments that UKBA has  to  meet
         when handling asylum applications from children."

22.   The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child  ('UNHCR')  which  is  the
    treaty-monitoring body for the CRC, has identified articles 9, 19,  24,
    37 and 38 of the CRC as of particular  relevance  to  a  child-specific
    definition of persecution in its  December  2009  Guidelines  on  Child
    Asylum Claims, and has  given  further  guidance  on  a  child-specific
    approach to the refugee definition in its  General  Comment  No.  6  at
    paragraph 74 namely:


         "...the refugee definition... must be interpreted  in  an  age  and
         gender-sensitive manner, taking into account the particular motives
         for, and forms and manifestations of,  persecution  experienced  by
         children. Persecution of kin; under-age recruitment; trafficking of
         children for prostitution; and sexual exploitation or subjection to
         female genital mutilation, are some of the child-specific forms and
         manifestations of persecution which may  justify  the  granting  of
         refugee status if such acts are related to one of the 1951  Refugee
         Convention grounds. States should, therefore, give utmost attention
         to such child-specific forms and manifestations of  persecution  as
         well  as  gender-based  violence  in   national   refugee   status-
         determination procedures."


Welfare and best interests of the child

23.   Council Directive  2003/9/EC  (the  'Reception  Directive')  sets  out
    "minimum standards for the reception of  asylum  seekers".  Chapter  IV
    deals with "Provisions for Persons with Special Needs".  Article 18 (1)
    provides that:


         "The best interest of the child shall be  a  primary  consideration
         for Member States when implementing the provisions of the Directive
         that involve minors".


    Provision for the treatment of unaccompanied minors is made in  Article
    19.  Article 19(3) provides that:


         "Member  states,  protecting  the  unaccompanied  minor's  or  best
         interest, shall endeavour to trace the members of his or her family
         as soon as possible.  In cases where there  may be a threat to  the
         life or integrity to the minor  or  his  or  her  close  relatives,
         particularly if they have remained in the country of  origin,  care
         must be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  collection,  processing  and
         circulation of information concerning those persons  is  undertaken
         on a confidential basis, so as to avoid jeopardising their safety."


24.   The Reception Directive is given effect in domestic law by the  Asylum
    Seekers   (Reception   Conditions)   Regulations   2005   (the    '2005
    Regulations').  Tracing family members of unaccompanied minors is dealt
    with in regulation 6:

         "(1)     So as to protect an unaccompanied minor's  best  interest,
             the Secretary of State shall endeavour to trace the members of
             the minor's family as soon as possible after the  minor  makes
             his claim for asylum.


          (2)     In cases where there may  be  a  threat  to  the  life  or
             integrity of the  minor  or  the  minor's  close  family,  the
             Secretary of State shall take care to ensure  the  collection,
             process and circulation of information concerning the minor or
             his close family is undertaken on a confidential basis  so  as
             not to jeopardise his or their safety.


          (3)     For the purposes of this regulation


             "(a)      An unaccompanied minor means a person below the  age
                  of 18 who arrives in the United Kingdom  unaccompanied  by
                  an adult responsible for him whether by law or custom  and
                  makes a claim for asylum;


             (b) A person shall be unaccompanied minor until  he  is  taken
                  into the care of such an adult or until he reaches the age
                  of 18 whichever is the earlier;


             (c) An unaccompanied minor also includes a minor who  is  left
                  unaccompanied after he arrives in  or  enters  the  United
                  Kingdom but before he makes his claim for asylum."


25.   Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  ('the
    2009 Act') provides, so far as is relevant that:


         "(1)     The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring
             that -


             (a)        the  functions  mentioned  in  subsection  (2)  are
                  discharged having regard to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
                  promote the welfare of children  who  are  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (b)       any services provided by another person pursuant  to
                  arrangements which are made by the Secretary of State  and
                  relate  to  the  discharge  of  a  function  mentioned  in
                  subsection (2) are provided having regard to that need.


         (2)      The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -


             (a)  any function of the Secretary of  State  in  relation  to
                  immigration, asylum or nationality;


             (b)  any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration
                  Acts on an immigration officer;


             (c)  any general customs function of the Secretary of State;


             (d)       any  customs  function  conferred  on  a  designated
                  customs official.


         (3)      A person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
             exercising the function, have regard to any guidance given  to
             the person by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  purpose  of
             subsection (1).


         [...]


         (6)      In this section -


             "children" means persons who are under the age of 18;


         [...]"

26.   The proper approach to an application for asylum or  for  humanitarian
    protection by a  child  was  addressed  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4,  [2011]  2  WLR  148.   It  held  that
    international law placed  a  binding  obligation  upon  public  bodies,
    including the immigration authorities and the Secretary  of  State,  to
    discharge their functions having regard to the need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children; that the obligation applied  not  only
    to how children were looked after in the United  Kingdom  but  also  to
    decisions made about asylum, deportation and removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom; that any such decision which was taken without  having  regard
    to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of any child  involved
    would not be "in accordance with law" for the purposes of  Article  8.2
    of  the  Convention;  that,  further,  in  all  decisions  directly  or
    indirectly affecting a child's  upbringing  national  authorities  were
    required to  treat  the  best  interest  of  the  child  as  a  primary
    consideration, by first identifying what the best interest of the child
    required  and  then  assessing  whether  the  strength  of  any   other
    considerations, or the accumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,
    outweighed the child's best interests.  The principal judgment  of  the
    court was given by Baroness Hale of Richmond JSC with whom  Lord  Hope,
    Lord Kerr, Lord Brown and Lord Mance agreed.   The  court  addressed  a
    number of international instruments in respect of which it  had  sought
    submissions from the parties.  It considered in particular Article 8 of
    the ECHR, section 55 of the 2009 Act, the United Nations Convention  on
    the  Rights  of  the  Child  1989  (the  UNCRC),  the  United   Nations
    Declaration on the Rights of the Child 1959 (the  UNDRC), Article 24 of
    the  European  Union(s)  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights,  (the  UNHCR
    Guidelines on Determining the Best Interests of the Child  and  General
    Comment N06 of the United Nations Committee on the rights of the  child
    (2005) on the treatment of Unaccompanied and Separated Children Outside
    their Country of Origin.

27.   The principal judgment was  given  by  Baroness  Hale.  The  following
    paragraphs are of particular relevance to  the  issues  to  which  this
    appeal gives rise.

             "23.For  our  purposes   the   most   relevant   national   and
             international obligation of the United Kingdom is contained in
             Article 3.1 of the UNCRC: 'in all actions concerning children,
             whether  undertaken  by  public  or  private  social   welfare
             institutions, courts of  law,  administrative  authorities  or
             legislative bodies, the best interest of the child shall be of
             primary consideration'.   This  is  a  binding  obligation  in
             international  law,  and  the  spirit,  if  not  the   precise
             language, has also been  translated  into  our  national  law.
             Section 11 of the Children Act 2004 places a duty upon a  wide
             range of public bodies to carry  out  their  functions  having
             regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  of
             children.  The immigration authorities were at  first  excused
             from this duty, because  the  United  Kingdom  had  entered  a
             general  reservation  to  the  UNCRC  concerning   immigration
             matters.  But that reservation was lifted in 2008  and,  as  a
             result, section 55 of the borders, citizenship and immigration
             act 2009 now provides that, in relation among other things  to
             immigration, asylum or nationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
             must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions  'are
             discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and  promote
             the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom'.


                  24. Miss Carrs-Frisk acknowledges that this  duty  applies
             not only to how children are  looked  after  in  this  country
             while decisions  about  immigration,  asylum,  deportation  or
             removal are being made, but also to the decisions  themselves.
             This means that any decision which  is  taken  without  having
             regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of any
             children involved will not be 'in accordance with the law' for
             the purpose of Article 8.2.  Both the Secretary of  State  and
             the Tribunal will therefore have  to  address  this  in  their
             decisions.


                  25. Further it is clear from the recent jurisprudence that
             the Strasbourg court will expect national authorities to apply
             Article 3.1 of the UNCRC and to treat the best interests of  a
             child as 'a primary consideration'.  Of  course,  despite  the
             looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  'a
             primary  consideration'  is  not  the  same  as  'the  primary
             consideration', still as 'the paramount consideration'. ...


             However questions with respect to the upbringing  of  a  child
             must be distinguished from other decisions  which  may  affect
             them.  The UNHCR, in its Guidelines on  Determining  the  Best
             Interests of the Child (May 2008), explains the matter  neatly
             at para. 1.1:


             "The term 'best interest' broadly describes the well-being  of
             a child, ...  the CRC neither offers a precise definition, nor
             explicitly outlines, factors  of  the  best  interest  of  the
             child, but stipulates that: the  best  interest  must  be  the
             determining factor  for  specific  actions,  notably  adoption
             (Article 21) and separation of a child  from  parents  against
             their will: (Article 9): the best interest must be  a  primary
             (but  not  the  sole)  consideration  for  all  other  actions
             affecting children, whether undertaken by  public  or  private
             social welfare institutions,  courts  of  law,  administrative
             authorities or legislative bodies see: Article 3."


             This seems to me accurately to distinguish  between  decisions
             which directly affect the  child's  upbringing,  such  as  the
             parent or other person with whom she is to live, and decisions
             which may affect her more indirectly, such as decisions  about
             where one or both of her parents are to live.   Article  9  of
             the UNCRC,  for  example,  draws  a  distinction  between  the
             compulsory separation of a child from her parents, which  must
             be necessary in her best interests, and the separation from  a
             parent  from   his   child,   for   example,   by   detention,
             imprisonment, exile, deportation or even death.


                  26...this did not mean (as it would do in other  contexts)
             that identifying their best interests would lead inexorably to
             a decision in conformity with those interests.  Provided  that
             the  Tribunal   did  not  treat  any  other  consideration  as
             inherently more significant than the  best  interests  of  the
             children,  it  could  conclude  that  the  strength  of  other
             considerations outweigh them.  The important thing, therefore,
             is to consider those best interests first. ..."


28.   Lord Kerr summarised the position concisely at paragraph 46.

         "It is a universal theme of the various international and  domestic
         instruments to which  Baroness  Hale  JSC  has  referred  that,  in
         reaching  decisions  that  will  affect  a  child,  a  primacy   of
         importance must be accorded to his or her best interest.   This  is
         not, it is agreed, a factor of limitless importance  in  the  sense
         that it will prevail  over  all  other  considerations.   It  is  a
         factor, however, that must rank higher than any other.  It  is  not
         merely one consideration that weighs in the balance alongside other
         competing factors.  When the best interests of  the  child  clearly
         favour a certain course, that  course  should  be  followed  unless
         countervailing reasons of considerable force to dispose  them.   It
         is not necessary to express this in terms of a presumption that the
         primacy of this consideration needs to be made  clear  in  emphatic
         terms.  What is determined to be in a child's best interests should
         customarily dictate the outcome  of  cases  such  as  the  present,
         therefore, and it will require considerations of substantial moment
         to permit a different result."

29.   ZH was considered by the Court of Appeal in AD Lee v SSHD [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 348, in which the appellant had argued that the  judgment  of  Lord
    Kerr carried 'a different emphasis' to that of Lady Hale.  The Court of
    Appeal disagreed, per Sedley LJ at paragraph 15:


         "It seems to us that Lord Kerr is expressing the same view as  Lady
         Hale in different language; but if we are mistaken about this,  the
         majority of opinion is that expressed by Lady Hale and this  is  to
         be followed."


30.   In DS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 305, the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered the application of section  55  of  the  2009  Act  and  the
    tracing obligation under regulation 5 of the 2005 regulations.   As  in
    this case, the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum had  been
    made before coming into force of section 55 on 2 November 2009 but  was
    in force by the time of the reconsideration of the appeal by  the  AIT.
    At paragraph 71 Lloyd LJ said:

         "This provision did not apply directly to the appellant's  case  at
         the time it came into force, because no function referred to in sub-
         section (2) remained to be performed by the Secretary of  State  or
         an immigration officer as regards to the appeal.  What remained  to
         be done was the hearing and determination of the reconsideration of
         the appeal by the AIT.  Nevertheless it seems to me  that  the  AIT
         ought to have borne this  obligation  in  mind  when  deciding  the
         appeal, because of the Tribunal's role  as  decision-maker:  see  R
         (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 1AC368 at paragraph 15.  The
         position might have been different if the role of the Tribunal were
         not that of being a part of the decision-making  process.   If  its
         function were equivalent to that of deciding a conventional  appeal
         or a conventional judicial review  application,  then  the  process
         might be limited by reference to material which had been before the
         decision maker and to the law as  it  stood  at  the  time  of  the
         decision.  But it has long been clear that the role of the AIT, now
         the first-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal, as the case may  be,
         is not constrained in this way: see Macdonald's Immigration Law and
         Practice, 8th Ed, paragraph 19.22."


31.   There is an issue between the parties as  to  whether  the  duty  that
    arises under section 55 is procedural, as the respondent  contends,  or
    applies to the substantive decision.  In our judgment it is implicit in
    the judgment of Lady Hale in ZH (see paragraph 24 of  her  judgment  at
    paragraph 24 above) and in the judgments of the Court of Appeal  in  DS
    (see in particular Lloyd LJ at paragraphs 82 and 83 and  Rimmer  LJ  at
    paragraph 88),  that  section  55  is  applicable  to  the  substantive
    decision.  At paragraph 88 Rimmer LJ gives the example that in the case
    of DS, "no steps have been taken by  the  Secretary  of  State  towards
    enquiring as to the availability of adequate reception  facilities  for
    the appellant in Afghanistan", an example that is plainly directed at a
    substantive decision.

32.    But  there  are  elements  of  a  claim  to  refugee  status  or   to
    humanitarian protection in relation to which section  55  can  have  no
    application.  In the case of a refugee, the first question  is  whether
    the individual is outside the country of  origin.   That  is  a  simple
    question of  fact  to  which  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are
    irrelevant.  Similarly the child's best interests have no part to  play
    in determining the answer to the question  of  whether  he  or  she  is
    unable to avail themselves of their  state's  protection.   Either  the
    child is able to seek protection from his or her state of origin or  is
    not. As to the situation where the child wants to go back - is  willing
    to go back - and try to seek protection from the state authorities, but
    objectively that is not in his or her best interests in  the  light  of
    the other primary facts including background evidence that show a  real
    risk of prohibited harm to the child; in those circumstances, it  would
    indicate that a question as to best interests arises and the section 55
    duty is engaged.  Further there is the matter of the 1989 UNCRC  and  a
    children's rights based analysis to the determination  of  the  refugee
    status of a child.  Although  that  is  quite  a  separate,  additional
    approach to be applied, the statutory  guidance  Every  Child  Matters,
    does make clear the relevance of the UNCRC even to the s55 duty.

33.   Thus in our judgment it is not helpful to attempt to analyse the  duty
    imposed by section 55 as being either procedural or substantive in  its
    effect. It applies to the procedures involved  in  the  decision-making
    process; but will also  apply  to  those  aspects  of  the  substantive
    decision to which it is relevant.  In remaking  the  decision  we  must
    therefore consider the best interests of the appellant, and  treat  his
    best interests as "a primary consideration" per Lady Hale in ZH.

      34.   In DS the Court of Appeal also addressed the  issue  of  'Family
    Tracing and Reunification'.  At paragraph 68 Lloyd LJ observed that:

         "68. The obligation  to  endeavour  to  trace  under  regulation  6
         applies when a child  has  made  an  asylum  application,  but  the
         application is to be determined on its merits, whether or  not  any
         steps have been taken pursuant to the obligation.  To that  extent,
         I would accept the submission of Mr Waite for the  respondent  that
         the obligation to endeavour to trace is distinct  from  the  issues
         that arise from an application for  asylum.   If  steps  have  been
         taken pursuant to the obligation under regulation 6,  the  results,
         if  any,  maybe  relevant  to  the  determination  of  the   asylum
         application, depending on what the issues are on that  application.
         In fact no attempt to trace was made by UKBA in the  present  case.
         All that was done was draw to the attention of the appellant or his
         foster-carer the facilities of the Red Cross, with a  view  to  his
         attempting to trace his relatives through that agency.  There is  a
         question as to whether the use made of these facilities  by  or  on
         behalf of the appellant  was  appropriate,  but  nothing  was  done
         pursuant to regulation 6.  It seems to me that the failure  is  not
         by itself, relevant to the determination of the appellant's  asylum
         application. ..."


Article 15(c)


35.   The starting point in a consideration of  the  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection is the decision of the  ECJ  in  Elgafaji  (Case  C-465/07);
    [2009] 1WLR 2100.  After reviewing the three types  of  'serious  harm'
    defined in Article 15, the judgment continued in the following terms:


         "35.     In that context, the word 'individual' must be  understood
             as covering harm to civilians irrespective of their  identity,
             where the degree of indiscriminate violence characterising the
             armed conflict taking place assessed by the competent national
             authorities  before  which  an  application   for   subsidiary
             protection is made, or by the courts  of  a  member  state  to
             which a decision refusing such  an  application  is  referred,
             reaches such a high level that substantial grounds  are  shown
             for believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the  relevant
             country or, as the case may be, to the relevant region, would,
             solely on account of his presence on  the  territory  of  that
             country or region, face a real risk of being  subject  to  the
             serious threat referred in Article 15(c) of the Directive.


         36.      That  interpretation,  which  is  likely  to  ensure  that
             Article  15(c)  of  the  Directive  has  its  own   field   of
             application, is not invalidated by the wording of  recital  26
             in the pre-amble to the Directive, according to  which  'risks
             to which a population  or  a  section  of  the  population  is
             generally exposed do normally  not  create  in  themselves  an
             individual threat which would qualify as serious harm'.


         37.      While that recital  implies  that  the  objective  finding
             alone of a risk linked to the general situation in the country
             is not, as a rule, sufficient to establish that the conditions
             set out in Article 15(c) of the directive  have  been  met  in
             respect of a specific person, its wording nevertheless  allows
             by the use of the word 'normally' for the  possibility  of  an
             exceptional situation which would be  categorised  by  such  a
             high degree of risk that substantial grounds  would  be  shown
             for believing that that person would be  subject  individually
             to the risk in question.


         38.      The exceptional nature of that situation is also confirmed
             by the fact that the relevant protection is subsidiary, and by
             the broad logic of Article 15 of the Directive, as the harm to
             find in (a) and (b) of that Article requires a clear degree of
             individualisation.   Whilst  it  is   admittedly   true   that
             collective factors play a significant role in the  application
             of Article (C) of the Directive, in that the person  concerned
             belongs, like other people, to a circle of  potential  victims
             of indiscriminate violence in situations in  international  or
             internal armed conflict, it is nevertheless the case that  the
             provision must be subject  to  a  coherent  interpretation  in
             relation to the other two situations referred to in Article 15
             of the Directive and must, therefore cover to  be  interpreted
             by close reference to that individualisation.


         39.      In that regard the more the applicant is able to show that
             he is specifically affected by reason of fact as particular to
             his  personal  circumstances,   the   lower   the   level   of
             indiscriminate violence required for him to  be  eligible  for
             subsidiary protection.


         ...


         43.      Having regard to all  the  foregoing  considerations,  the
             answer to the questions referred is that Article 15(c) of  the
             Directive, in conjunction with Article 2(e) of the  Directive,
             must be interpreted as meaning that:


             The existence of a serious and individual threat to  the  life
             or person of an applicant for  subsidiary  protection  is  not
             subject to the condition that that applicant  adduce  evidence
             that  he  is  specifically  targeted  by  reason  of   factors
             particular to his personal circumstances;


             The existence of such a threat can exceptionally be considered
             to be established where the degree of indiscriminate  violence
             characterising the armed conflict taking place assessed by the
             competent national authorities for which  an  application  for
             subsidiary protection is made, or by the courts  of  a  member
             state to which a decision  refusing  such  an  application  is
             referred reaches such a high level  that  substantial  grounds
             are shown for believing  that  a  civilian,  returned  to  the
             relevant country or, as the  case  may  be,  to  the  relevant
             region, would, solely  on  account  of  his  presence  on  the
             territory of that country or region, face a real risk of being
             subject to that threat."


Relevant country guidance

36.    In  HK  and  Others  (minors  -  indiscriminate  violence  -   forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378  (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  addressed  the  objective
    evidence as to the level of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Afghanistan,
    with particular reference to the position of children, holding that:


         "1.       Children  are  not  disproportionately  affected  by  the
             problems  and  conflict   currently   being   experienced   in
             Afghanistan. Roadside blasts, air-strikes, crossfire,  suicide
             attacks and other war-related incidents do not  impact  more
             upon children that (sic) upon adult civilians.


         2.       While  forcible  recruitment  by  the  Taliban  cannot  be
             discounted as a risk, particularly in areas of  high  militant
             activity or militant control, evidence  is  required  to  show
             that it is a real risk for the particular child concerned  and
             not a mere possibility.


         3. Where a child  has close  relatives  in  Afghanistan  who  have
             assisted him in leaving the country, any assertion  that  such
             family members are uncontactable or are  unable  to  meet  the
             child in Kabul and care for him on return, should be supported
             by credible  evidence  of  efforts  to  contact  those  family
             members and their inability to meet and care for the child  in
             the event of return."


37.   HK drew on the earlier country guidance given in  GS  (Article  15(c):
    indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00044, which  held
    that:


         "There is not in Afghanistan such a high  level  of  indiscriminate
         violence that  substantial  grounds  exist  for  believing  that  a
         civilian would, solely by being present there,  face  a  real  risk
         which threatens the civilian's life or person, such as  to  entitle
         that person to the grant of  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.   GS  (Existence  of
         internal armed conflict) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00010  is  not
         longer to be treated as extant country guidance."


Assessment of credibility


38.    Article  4(3)  of  the  Qualification  Directive  requires  that  the
    assessment of an application for  international  protection  is  to  be
    carried out on an individual  basis,  and  that  includes  taking  into
    account:


         "...


         (c)       the  individual  position  and   circumstances   of   the
             applicant, including factors such as  background,  gender  and
             age, so as to assess whether, on the basis of the  applicant's
             personal circumstances, the acts to which  the  applicant  has
             been or could  be  exposed  would  amount  to  persecution  or
             serious harm".


39.   Paragraphs 350-352X of HC  395  concern  unaccompanied  children,  and
    paragraph 351 provides that:


         "A person of any age may  qualify  for  refugee  status  under  the
         Convention and the criteria in paragraph 334 [dealing with Grant of
         Asylum] applied to all cases.  However, account should be taken  of
         the applicant's maturity and in assessing the claim of a child more
         weight should be given to objective indications of risk than to the
         child's state of mind  and  understanding  of  his  situation.   An
         asylum application made on behalf the child should not  be  refused
         only because the child is too young to understand the situation  or
         have formed a well-founded fear of  persecution.   Close  attention
         should be given to the welfare of the child at all times."


40. In this context it is also relevant to bear in  mind  the  respondent's
    Asylum Policy Guidance (APG) which contains the following principles to
    be applied in the determination of a claim to asylum by a child:


         "(1)     more weight must be given to objective indications of risk
             than to the child's state of mind;


         (2)      other  factors  to  consider  might  include:  documentary
             evidence, objective country  evidence,  evidence  from  people
             with knowledge of the child - including post  arrival  in  the
             UK;


         (3)       a  case  owner  must  not  draw  an  adverse  credibility
             interference from omissions in the child's knowledge if it  is
             likely that their age or maturity is a factor or if there  are
             logical or other reasons for those omissions;


         (4)      the benefit of the doubt will  need  to  be  applied  more
             generously when dealing with  a  child  particularly  where  a
             child is unable to provide detail on a particular  element  of
             their claim."

41.   Such guidance reflects the UNHCR Guidelines  issued  by  the  UN  High
    Commissioner  for  refugees  in  2009  "Guidelines   on   International
    Protection No. 8: Child Asylum Claims under Articles 1A(2) and 1(F)  of
    the 2951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees, which provide that:

         "[65]     Due  to  their  young  age,   dependency   and   relative
             immaturity, children  should  enjoy  specific  procedural  and
             evidentiary safeguards to  ensure  that  fair  refugee  status
             determination decisions are  reached  with  respect  to  their
             claims.  The general measures outlined below set  out  minimum
             standards for the treatment  of  children  during  the  asylum
             procedure.  They  do  not  preclude  the  application  of  the
             detailed guidance provided, for example, in the Action for the
             Rights of Children Resources Pack,  the  Inter-Agency  Guiding
             Principles on Unaccompanied  and  Separated  Children  and  in
             national guidelines.


         [68]      For unaccompanied and separated child applicants, efforts
             need to be made as soon as possible to  initiate  tracing  and
             family reunification with parents  or  other  family  members.
             There will be exceptions, however, to these  priorities  where
             information  becomes  available  suggesting  that  tracing  or
             reunification could put the parents or other family members in
             danger, that the child has been subjected to abuse or neglect,
             and/or where parents or family members may  be  implicated  or
             have been involved in their persecution."


         [73]     Although the burden of proof usually is shared between the
             examiner  and  the  applicant  in  adult  claims,  it  may  be
             necessary for an examiner to assume a greater burden of  proof
             in children's claims, especially if  the  child  concerned  is
             unaccompanied.  If the facts of the case cannot be ascertained
             and/or the child is incapable of  fully  articulating  his/her
             claim, the examiner needs to make a decision on the  basis  of
             all  known  circumstances,  which  may  call  for  a   liberal
             application of the benefit  of  the  doubt.    Similarly,  the
             child should be given the benefit of the doubt should there be
             some concern regarding the credibility  of  parts  of  his/her
             claim."


42.   In this context see also the  UNHCR  Refugee  Children  Guidelines  on
    Protection and Care, 1994 which at page 101 state that:

         "(e) The problem of  "proof"  is  great  in  every  refugee  status
         determination. It is compounded in the case of children.  For  this
         reason, the decision on  a  child's  refugee  status  calls  for  a
         liberal application of the principle of the benefit of  the  doubt.
         This means that should  there  be  some  hesitation  regarding  the
         credibility of the child's story, the burden is not on the child to
         provide proof, but the child should be given  the  benefit  of  the
         doubt."



General situation for children


43.   In GS (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence) Afghanistan  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00044, the AIT found  on  the  basis  of  background  and  expert
    materials for the period to May 2009, that the violence in  Afghanistan
    had not then  reached  such  a  high  level  that  the  adult  civilian
    population were generally at risk. In HK and  Ors  the  Upper  Tribunal
    considered the  claims  to  humanitarian  protection  by  three  Afghan
    children, and addressed background and expert evidence dated  no  later
    than April 2010 with specific reference to the  position  of  children.
    Its conclusions are set out at paragraph 36 above.

44.   The questions that arise in relation to this aspect of the appeal  are
    therefore whether the conclusions at which the Tribunal arrived  in  HK
    and Ors with regard to the position of  children  in  Afghanistan  hold
    good in the light of the up to  date  country  evidence,  and  secondly
    whether there are in any event features of the  appellant's  case  that
    affect his entitlement to humanitarian protection.

45.   Appendix B contains a summary  of  the  country  material  before  us,
    almost all of which post-dates GS and HK and Ors.   Such  material  can
    conveniently be addressed under the following heads:

      Indiscriminate violence
      Child specific risks which are addressed under a number of  sub-heads
         namely -displacement of population
      sufficiency of protection
         forced recruitment
         absence of protection
         sexual violence
         landmines


46.   Before addressing such material, it is to be noted  that  in  HM  Iraq
    the Upper Tribunal gave guidance as to the approach to  be  adopted  in
    assessing risk in the context of Article 15(c), namely:


         "a.      An approach which seeks to  distinguish  between  targeted
             and incidental killing [as employed  by  the  tribunal  in  GS
             (Afghanistan) is "not a helpful exercise  in  the  context  of
             Article  15(c)  nor  does  it  reflect  the  purposes  of  the
             Directive" (HM (Iraq), at [73]) and  it  fails  to  take  into
             account common problems such as underreporting."  (HM  (Iraq),
             at [75])


         b. General criminality causing harm  of  the  necessary  degree  of
             seriousness can  have  a  sufficient  causal  nexus  with  the
             conflict  where  "normal  law   and   order   provisions   are
             significantly  disrupted"  so  as  to  "permit   anarchy   and
             criminality occasioning serious harm"  (HM  (Iraq),  at  [79]-
             [80]); and GS (Afghanistan), at [65]);


         c. Individuals may be at greater risk, for instance, because  "they
             are more likely to be in or  near  places  where  attacks  are
             made: churches, mosques, government buildings,  the  homes  of
             security force members and the like." (HM (Iraq), at [86]).


         d. "serious threat to the life or person" extends  to  "significant
             physical injuries, serious mental traumas and serious  threats
             to  bodily  integrity"   and   the   evidence   pertinent   to
             establishing whether Article 15(c)  is  engaged  must  not  be
             limited to the number of casualties (HM (Iraq), at [76]);


         e. Figures of casualties  "only  furnish  a  part  of  the  overall
             evidence needed to assess Article 15(c) risk" (HM  (Iraq),  at
             [258]).


         f. "Sharp differences  [in  the  figures  of  civilian  casualties]
             illustrate that in  wars  and  armed  conflicts  we  must  not
             exclude the possibility that one or more of those involved  in
             giving or drawing up figures concerning  deaths  and  injuries
             may  sometimes  be  influenced  by   political   or   military
             considerations" (HM (Iraq), at [248]) and regard should be had
             to all figures produced, taking particular note of the highest
             ones (HM (Iraq) [253])"

Indiscriminate violence

47    The extensive country background material before  us  demonstrates  an
    increase in indiscriminate violence since 2009.  We rely in  particular
    upon:


    1.     the UNHCR Guidelines 17.12.2010, Appendix B paragraph 1,
    2.     Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human  Rights
         on  the  situation  of  Human  Rights  in  Afghanistan   19.01.2011
         Appendix B paragraph 2,
    3.     United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General to the  Security
         Council on children and armed conflict in  Afghanistan  03.02.2011,
         Appendix B paragraph 3,
    4.     Human Rights Watch, Annual Report - Afghanistan January 2011,
    5.      Afghanistan  NGO  Safety  Office  (ANSO)  reports,  Appendix  B
         paragraph 7,
    6.     UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Annual Report 2010
         Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict,
    7.     Oxfam 'Nowhere to Turn': The Failure  to  Protect  Civilians  in
         Afghanistan 19.11.2010, Appendix B paragraph 8.



48.   UNHCR Guidelines 17.12.2010 record a  worsening  security  environment
    in  certain  parts  of  the  country,  and  the   increasing   civilian
    casualties.  It characterises  the  situation  as  one  of  generalised
    violence in the Helmand, Kandahar, Kunar and parts of Ghazni and  Khost
    provinces further observing that:




         "In addition, given the fluid and volatile nature of the  conflict,
         asylum  applications  by  Afghans  claiming  to  flee   generalised
         violence in other parts of  Afghanistan  should  each  be  assessed
         carefully..."




49.   Similarly the section of the Guidelines directed to the  determination
    of eligibility for international protection of Afghan  asylum  seekers,
    who do not meet the refugee criteria  in  Article  1A(2)  of  the  1951
    Convention noted "(i) the worsening  security  environment  in  certain
    parts  of  the  country;  (ii)  the  increasing  number   of   civilian
    casualties; and (iii) the significant  population  displacement"  (page
    33).



50.   The increase in civilian casualties is also recorded in the report  of
    the Secretary General to the UN Security Council  3  February  2011  at
    Part II A, p2, paragraph 3-5:



         "3 ...The year 2010 was the most volatile year  in  security  terms
             since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. According to the United
             Nations, the number of security  incidents  was  40  per  cent
             higher in January 2010 compared to January 2009,  and  93  per
             cent higher in June 2010 compared to 2009.  This  was  due  in
             part to the continued attacks by the  Taliban-led  insurgency,
             their expansion into previously stable areas, such as northern
             and  western  Afghanistan,  as  well  as  increased   counter-
             insurgency operations by Afghan National Security  Forces  and
             international military forces. Incursions of foreign  fighters
             and the deteriorating security situation along the border area
             with Pakistan also contributed to increased insecurity.


         4  ...As compared to 2,118 civilian casualties recorded in 2008 and
             2,412 in 2009,  the  2010  mid-year  report  documented  3,268
             conflict-related civilian casualties between 1 January and  30
             June 2010, a 31 per cent increase  over  the  same  period  in
             2009.   In  2010,  women  and  children  made  up  a   greater
             proportion of those killed and  injured  than  in  2009,  with
             child casualties increased by 55 per cent from the same period
             in 2009."


51.   The increase is also noted in the UNAMA Annual Report  for  2010,  and
    in the ANSO reports, for example that for the  first  quarter  of  2011
    (Appendix B paragraph 7).



52.   The situation in Kabul has also been reported  as  deteriorating,  and
    the map produced by the parties derived from the ANSO quarterly  report
    for the fourth quarter of 2010, shows the provinces  surrounding  Kabul
    as at moderate to high risk, an area  including  the  appellant's  home
    region.  The UKBA Afghanistan Security Situation Update for the  period
    covering  1  January  2010  to  15  March  2011  recorded  that   Kabul
    experiences  regular,  indiscriminate  rocket  and  bomb  attacks   and
    targeted  attacks  against  ISAF  patrols  and  establishments,  and  a
    heightened risk of roadside bombs and ambush outside Kabul city.



53.   In this context we recognise, as  did  the  UT  in  HK  and  Ors  (see
    paragraph 18), that the  methodology  used  to  record  casualties  may
    result in under-reporting.

54.    On 1 May 2011 the Taliban  issued  a  press  release  announcing  the
    start of the Spring offensive 'Operation Badr' further  increasing  the
    danger and attack throughout all of Afghanistan.  Threats of  terrorism
    are reported almost on a daily  basis,  with  frequent  and  widespread
    lethal attacks against British and coalition  armed  forces,  political
    and civilian targets.

 Displacement of population



55.   As to population displacement, the report of the Secretary-General  to
    the UN  General  Assembly  and  Security  Council,  'The  situation  in
    Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and security',
    dated 11.04.2011 (at Appendix B, page  14  paragraph  63)  records  the
    scale of displacement of the population as a result  of  the  conflict.
    The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) report of  15  April
    2010 (p 5) 'A profile of internal displacement situation' records that:



         "Forty-two per cent of the country's 28.2 million (UNFPA 2010)  has
         been  internally  displaced  at  least  once  in  their   lifetime,
         according to a recent NGO  study.  Seventeen  per  cent  have  been
         displaced both internally and internationally (Oxfam, 2009).


56.   Large numbers of internally displaced persons  (IDPs)  have  moved  to
    urban areas.  Informal settlements make up 70% of Kabul's  total  urban
    area and accommodate 80% of the city's population (IDMC 15  April  2010
    page 40). Many returning refugees are going hungry and are  unemployed.
    The Brookings  Project  on  U.S.  Relations  with  the  Islamic  World,
    'Displacement in the Muslim World: A Focus  on  Afghanistan  and  Iraq'
    (2009) and IDMC (p 13), note:


         "In Kabul in particular  there  is  a  lack  of  infrastructure  to
         support the population that has been swelled by returning  refugees
         and IDPs-much of  the  city  lacks  proper  sanitation  facilities,
         electricity,  schools   or   health   centers.   Unemployment   and
         underemployment is rife. There are reports of  food  shortages  and
         hunger in IDP camps. Lack of security  is  both  a  concern  and  a
         reality for  returning  refugees...  Furthermore,  young  returnees
         often feel discriminated  against  as  they  often  lack  extensive
         networks or speak their mother tongue with an accent leading  to  a
         question of their 'Afghan-ness' by those who remained."


57.   As part  of  the  displacement  of  population  large  and  increasing
    numbers of separated children have become street children in Kabul. The
    Watchlist report to the CRC Committee August 2010 and  its  Afghanistan
    Report 6.5.2011 note: 'The numbers forced to  leave  their  homes  have
    increased significantly in recent weeks'.  The  Consortium  for  Street
    Children & War Child, NGO Shadow report for UN Committee on  Rights  of
    Child (p59) reports that 70% of Afghan population lives in poverty  and
    that 60% of families rely on children for household income ... In Kabul
    estimates on street children increased from: 37,000 in 2003; 50,000  in
    2007 to 70,000 in 2008. The Aschiana  Foundation  estimates  there  are
    60,000 street children in Afghanistan. The report states:


         "Children living in Kabul city  are  commonly  forced  into  street
         begging and child labour even  when  living  with  their  families.
         There are tens of thousands of homeless children aged between  five
         and 18 in Kabul... The children work up to 16 hours a  day  selling
         anything from newspapers to plastic bags."



58.   The UNICEF  Afghanistan  Humanitarian  Action  Report  2010  (pp93-96)
    reports that:


         "Currently around 235,000 people are living in displacement, either
         in makeshift camps or  host  communities.  These  difficult  living
         conditions are made even more so because of little or no access  to
         essential health care, safe  water,  a  basic  education  or  child
         protection services.  In  addition,  another  2.6  million  Afghans
         remain registered as refugees in  neighbouring  countries.  Despite
         the urgency to meet the basic humanitarian needs of Afghan disaster
         - and conflict-affected children and women, nearly 44 per  cent  of
         the country remains  inaccessible  to  the  humanitarian  community
         because of armed fighting and concomitant lack of security."



59.   About 54% of IDPS are under 18 years. Young, displaced and  unemployed
    men are particularly vulnerable to recruitment to the  insurgency,  and
    research in early 2010 showed that insurgent groups had increased their
    recruitment efforts especially among the IDP populations.  IDP children
    fleeing  from  areas  controlled  by  the  insurgency  have  also  been
    suspected of loyalty to opposition groups and been arrested  by  Afghan
    or international military forces.  Some of  these  children  were  ill-
    treated in detention. The UN Committee on the Rights of the  Child  has
    noted in its Concluding Observations April 2011(p15) that there  is  no
    clear policy to monitor the situation of internally displaced children.


Sufficiency of Protection

60.   The US  Congressional  Research  Service,  Afghanistan:  Post  Taliban
    Governance, Security, and US Policy, 15 April 2011 (p 17) states that:


         "Prior to U.S.-led offensives launched since mid-2009,  the  Karzai
         government was estimated to control about 30% of the country, while
         insurgents controlled 4% (13  out  of  364  districts).  Insurgents
         "influenced" or "operated in" another 30% (Afghan Interior Ministry
         estimates in August 2009). Tribes and  local  groups  with  varying
         degrees of loyalty to the central government control the remainder.
         Some outside groups report higher percentages of insurgent  control
         or influence. U.S. military officers in Kabul told CRS  in  October
         2009 that the Taliban had named "shadow governors" in 33 out of  34
         of Afghanistan's provinces, although  many  provinces  in  northern
         Afghanistan were assessed as having minimal Taliban presence."

61.   The United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on  the  situation
    in Afghanistan and    its  implications  for  international  peace  and
    security, 10/03/2010 (p3, paras 9-10) noted that:


         "Corruption within the Government remains among the  concerns  most
         frequently cited by both private citizens and Government officials,
         and is a  primary  impediment  to  the  entrenchment  of  effective
         institutions.


         The  formal  justice  system  remains  beyond  the  reach  of  many
         Afghans."


62.   The UN Human  Rights  Council,  Report  of  the  United  Nations  High
    Commissioner for Human Rights on  the  situation  of  human  rights  in
    Afghanistan and on the achievements  of  technical  assistance  in  the
    field of human rights, 19 January 2011, A/HRC/16/67 (p4) noted:

         "Long-standing human rights problems associated  with  the  ongoing
         armed conflict, dysfunctional  governance,  widespread  and  deeply
         entrenched  impunity,  weak   rule   of   law,...pose   significant
         challenges  to  the  enjoyment   of   human   rights   ...Civilians
         experienced  an  erosion  of  Government  presence  and  a  further
         decrease in protection in more areas of the country.



63.   There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  material  before  us  reveals  a
    deterioration in  the  security  situation  in  Afghanistan  from  that
    revealed by the material before the UT in  HK and Ors.  That conclusion
    gives rise to two questions.  In HK and Ors the UT found that  although
    there had been an increase in the number of civilian casualties, it was
    not satisfied that  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    guidance given by the AIT in GS was no longer to be regarded as  valid.
    Thus the first question is whether that conclusion holds  good  in  the
    light of the further deterioration in the security situation.  Secondly
    in HK and  Ors  the  UT  was  not  satisfied  that  "...  children  are
    disproportionately affected by the problems and the conflict  currently
    being experienced in Afghanistan."  The second  question  is  therefore
    whether the material before  us  now  demonstrates  that  children  are
    disproportionately  affected  by  the  dangers  to  which  the  current
    situation in Afghanistan gives rise.

64.   As to the first, in  GS  the  UT  undertook  an  extensive  review  of
    background and expert materials for the period to  May  2009.   It  was
    assisted in its analysis of such materials by Professor Farrell of  the
    Department of War Studies at Kings College London.   Professor  Farrell
    identified four measures of the consequences of armed conflict  on  the
    general  population,  the  number  of  battle  deaths,  the  number  of
    civilians killed or injured, the  number  of  displaced  persons,  both
    refugees and internally displaced persons  (IDP),  and  state  failure.
    With regard to the latter his evidence was  that  state  failure,  when
    chronic, can lead to the collapse of infrastructure and basic services,
    including law and order, making life for communities unsustainable.  As
    to population displacement and  state  failure,  it  was  his  opinion,
    accepted by the UT, that they may  provide  reinforcing  evidence  when
    looking at the severity of an armed conflict, but are  not  necessarily
    independent tests of conflict severity.

65.   We have given careful consideration to the  very  considerable  volume
    of material before us with  a  particular  focus  on  the  measures  of
    severity of the consequences of armed conflict identified by  Professor
    Farrell, but we do not consider that the deterioration in the  security
    situation is such as to lead to the conclusion that the adult  civilian
    population is generally at risk.

66.   We acknowledge that there has been a significant increase in  civilian
    casualties; but the figures must  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the
    population of Afghanistan.  There is no clear evidence as to the  scale
    of increase in displaced persons since 2009.  Nor is there evidence  to
    suggest that any increase that there may have been, has been such as to
    make a material difference to the risk  to  which  the  adult  civilian
    population is subject.  Similarly the evidence as to state failure does
    not demonstrate a significant  decline  since  2009.   In  GS  the  AIT
    acknowledged at paragraph 214 that "It is  very  difficult...to  get  a
    reliable feel for  what  is  really  going  on"  and  that  "Nobody  is
    suggesting that the situation in Afghanistan is  anything  but  a  very
    long way short of  ideal".   We  respectfully  agree;  but  we  do  not
    consider that the voluminous background material now  available  serves
    to undermine the conclusion at which the AIT then arrived.

67.    But  the  second  question  is  whether  the  up  to  date   material
    demonstrates that children are now disproportionately affected  by  the
    consequences of the armed conflict.  To  answer  that  question  it  is
    necessary to consider the principal features of the material before  us
    in so far as it bears on the position of children.

68.   First as to children casualties, the report of  the  Secretary-General
    to  the  UN  Security  Council  on  children  and  armed  conflict   in
    Afghanistan dated 3 February 2011, (p1) to which we have  already  made
    reference at paragraph 90 above, reported that:


         "3 ... The year 2010 was the most volatile year in  security  terms
             since the fall of the Taliban in 2001. According to the United
             Nations, the number of security  incidents  was  40  per  cent
             higher in January 2010 compared to January 2009,  and  93  per
             cent higher in June 2010 compared to 2009.  This  was  due  in
             part to the continued attacks by the  Taliban-led  insurgency,
             their expansion into previously stable areas, such as northern
             and  western  Afghanistan,  as  well  as  increased   counter-
             insurgency operations by Afghan National Security  Forces  and
             international military forces. Incursions of foreign  fighters
             and the deteriorating security situation along the border area
             with Pakistan also contributed to increased insecurity." (page
             2)


         "4 ... As compared to 2,118 civilian casualties  recorded  in  2008
             and 2,412 in 2009, the 2010 mid-year report  documented  3,268
             conflict-related civilian casualties between 1 January and  30
             June 2010, a 31 per cent increase  over  the  same  period  in
             2009.   In  2010,  women  and  children  made  up  a   greater
             proportion of those killed and  injured  than  in  2009,  with
             child casualties increased by 55 per cent from the same period
             in 2009" (page 2)


69.   Similarly the Report of  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for
    Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan and on the
    achievements of technical assistance in the field of human  rights,  19
    January 2011, noted that:


         "9.      As civilian casualties rose in 2010,  women  and  children
             made up a greater proportion of those killed and injured  than
             in 2009. Women and children continued to experience an extreme
             lack of  protection  in  conflict-affected  areas  along  with
             widespread violations of their basic human rights.  Between  1
             January and 30 November 2010, IEDs and suicide attacks by AGEs
             caused the most women and children casualties -  33  per  cent
             and 44 per  cent,  respectively.  During  this  period,  women
             casualties increased by 9 per cent and child casualties  leapt
             by 56 per cent from 2009." (page 5)


70.   It is also to be noted that in a report entitled  'Devastating  Impact
    - Explosive Weapons and Children' by Save the Children and published in
    2011, the author  notes  at  Part  2  chapter  3  'Armed  Conflict  and
    Education (p143)' that:


         "...casualty figures highlight the level of risk children  face  in
         many conflicts, but they do not adequately capture  the  impact  of
         the associated violence, psychological trauma and loss of  parents,
         siblings and friends (UNESCO, 2010a). One survey of  Iraqi  refugee
         children in Jordan found that  39%  reported  having  lost  someone
         close to them, and 43% witnessing violence (Clements, 2007).  (p40)
         For marginalised and  vulnerable  households,  armed  conflict  can
         block the path to more secure and prosperous livelihoods. Homes are
         destroyed,  crops  and  livestock  stolen  and  access  to  markets
         disrupted. The overall effect is to wipe  out  assets  ...for  poor
         households. .. reinforcing ..poverty [and]  an  increase  in  child
         labour".


71.   Such material is to be compared with that before  the  UT  in  HK  and
    Ors, and in particular to paragraph 26.04 of the April  2010  COIR  set
    out at paragraph 20 of the determination:

         "On 6 January 2010 Integrated Regional  Information  Networks  News
         stated that:


         "Armed conflict killed hundreds of children and adversely  affected
         many others in 2009 the deadliest year for  Afghan  children  since
         2001 - an Afghan Human Rights Group has said:


         "About 1,050 children died in suicide attacks, roadside blasts, air
         strikes and in the cross-fire between Taliban insurgents  and  pro-
         Government Afghan and foreign forces from January to December  2009
         the Afghan Rights Monitor, a Kabul based rights  group  said  in  a
         statement on 6 January."


         "At least 3 children were killed in war related incidents every day
         in 2009 and many others suffered in diverse mostly unreported  ways
         Almai Smadi, ARM's Director was quoted in the statement as saying"


Forced Recruitment of Children


72.   In HK and Ors the UT considered inter alia the COIR April  2010  which
    noted that armed groups continued to recruit children  to  be  used  as
    spies and informants or to transport  explosives  and  conduct  suicide
    attacks.  It also referred to the USSD report 2009 which had noted that
    "anecdotal evidence suggests that insurgent recruitment  of  under  age
    soldiers was on the rise".  In addition  to  such  material  we  had  a
    report of the Office of the Special Representative  of  the  Secretary-
    General for Children and Armed Conflict on a visit  to  Afghanistan  in
    late February 2010 which at page 5 recorded that:


         "Reports of recruitment and use of children have been received from
         all regions,  and  particularly  from  the  south,  south-east  and
         eastern regions, but the security environment and the lack of human
         resources dedicated to monitoring and verifying cases  has  limited
         reporting on these trends of  abuse.  Internally  Displaced  People
         (IDP)  and  isolated  populations  in  conflict-affected  areas  in
         particular are at risk of child recruitment  into  non-state  armed
         groups, including the Taliban, Haqqani network,  Hezb-i-Islami  and
         Jamat Sunat al-Dawa Salafia. The Taliban have been  listed  in  the
         8th report of the Secretary-General on children and armed  conflict
         for the recruitment and use of children under the age of  18  years
         (A/63/785- S/2009/158).

         Documented cases show  that  children  are  also  used  as  suicide
         bombers by the Taliban. Children involved range from 13-16 years of
         age and, according to testimonies  of  failed  bombers,  have  been
         tricked, promised money  or  otherwise  forced  to  become  suicide
         bombers. However, some children who have attempted suicide  attacks
         have been heavily indoctrinated, many times in foreign countries...



         Detention of children for alleged  association  with  armed  groups
         remains a concern. The detention  of  children  in  Afghanistan  on
         security-related charges is in contravention to provisions  of  the
         Afghan juvenile code. Since 2001, an  unknown  number  of  children
         have been captured and arrested by security/ law enforcement forces
         as well as International Military Forces. Many children reported no
         legal assistance or legal documentation,  and  some  reported  ill-
         treatment or threats against their person during interrogation.  Of
         particular concern are  children  arrested  under  security-related
         charges held by the National Directorate of Security  (NDS),  which
         also receives cases arrested by ISAF. However, although  access  to
         these children remains a challenge, the NDS has begun sharing names
         of children detained in NDS facilities on a  fairly  regular  basis
         with the United Nations."


    The report also recorded concern as to the detention  of  children  for
    alleged association with armed groups.


73.   The UNHCR guidelines of 17 December 2010 (see Appendix B paragraph  1)
    note that:


         "Among the most vulnerable groups in Afghanistan, children bear the
         brunt of the ongoing armed conflict. The Taliban  and  other  anti-
         Government armed groups are reportedly  responsible  for  the  vast
         majority of the human rights  violations  against  children.  UNHCR
         considers  that  children  with  the  specific  profiles   outlined
         below,169 including child soldiers, ..., may  be  at  risk  on  the
         ground of membership of a particular social group, religion  and/or
         (imputed)   political   opinion   depending   on   the   individual
         circumstances of the case.  ...

         Forced recruitment of  children  by  armed  groups,  including  the
         Taliban, the Haqqani network, Hezb-i-Islami, the  Tora  Bora  Front
         and Jamat Sunat al-Dawa Salafia, is reported, particularly  in  the
         southern, south-eastern and eastern regions.  Internally  displaced
         children and children part of  isolated  populations  in  conflict-
         affected areas are particularly at risk of recruitment  into  armed
         anti-Government groups."


74.   The Watchlist Report August 2010 (p27) notes that:


         "There are no precise figures on child soldiers in Afghanistan  but
         several  reports  attest  to  the  severity  of  the  concern.   In
         particular, widespread displacement and the consequent  absence  of
         protective community structures have increased the vulnerability of
         children to recruitment. The March 2009 Secretary-General's  report
         on Children and Armed Conflict noted  that  forced  recruitment  of
         children  by  armed  groups  is  "prevalent  in  areas  with   high
         concentrations  of  returnees  or  internally  displaced   persons,
         particularly in the south and southeastern provinces." The surge in
         international armed forces is feared to trigger a new rise  in  the
         recruitment and use of child soldiers by armed opposition groups as
         part of new large-scale recruitment drives'."

Child Protection

75. The UNHCR guidelines of 17 December 2010 noted that:


         "The traditional extended family and community structures of Afghan
         society continue to  constitute  the  main  protection  and  coping
         mechanism, particularly in rural areas where infrastructure is  not
         as developed. Afghans rely on these structures and links for  their
         safety and economic survival, including access to accommodation and
         an adequate level of subsistence. Since the protection provided  by
         families and tribes is limited to areas where family  or  community
         links  exist,  Afghans,  particularly   unaccompanied   women   and
         children,  and  women  single  head  of  households  with  no  male
         protection, will not be able to lead a life without undue  hardship
         in areas with  no  social  support  networks,  including  in  urban
         centres. In certain circumstances, relocation to  an  area  with  a
         predominantly different ethnic/religious make-up may  also  not  be
         possible due to latent or overt tensions  between  ethnic/religious
         groups."



76.   The vulnerability of unaccompanied  children  was  underlined  in  the
    report of the Office of the Special Representative  of  the  Secretary-
    General for Children and Armed Conflict of the visit of 20-26  February
    2010.


         "UNAMA had established its Child Protection Unit and had one  child
         protection  adviser  on  the  ground  with  one  additional   child
         protection  officer  expected  in  the  near  future.  The  Special
         Representative ... noted that... the Child Protection  Unit  should
         be expanded  quickly  to  ensure  that  UNAMA  fulfills  its  child
         protection mandate adequately, as  requested  by  Security  Council
         Resolutions on Afghanistan 1868 (2009) and 1917 (2010)."

77.   We note that at paragraph 45 of its determination in HK and  Ors,  the
    UT noted that the COIR of April 2010  "...  refers  to  the  fact  that
    police regularly beat and  incarcerated  children  they  took  off  the
    streets, and "the USSD Report of 2009 which noted the child  abuse  was
    endemic throughout the country, ranging from general neglect,  physical
    abuse, abandonment, and  confinement  to  working  to  pay  off  family
    debts."   The UT then went on to make  reference  to  sexual  abuse  of
    children, a subject upon which there was  further  information  in  the
    material before us.

78.   In this context it is also necessary to take account of the effect  on
    children of the displacement of population, see paragraphs 95-99 above.

Sexual Violence

79.   The report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict  in
    Afghanistan dated 3 February  2011(p10),  which  covers  the  period  1
    September 2008 to 30 August 2010, notes that:


         "36. Sexual violence  continues  to  be  vastly  underreported  and
             concealed in Afghan society. Sexual violence,  including  that
             against  children,  is  pervasive.  The  general  climate   of
             impunity, a vacuum in the  rule  of  law,  lack  of  faith  in
             investigating and prosecuting authorities, and misplaced shame
             have adversely affected the reporting of sexual  violence  and
             abuse against children  to  law  enforcement  authorities  and
             subsequent prosecution of perpetrators.  Child  sexual  abuse,
             against both girls and boys, is not clearly defined as a crime
             in Afghan law, and perpetrators of such violations are  rarely
             held accountable."


80.   The report also noted  that  there  was  insufficient  protection  for
    victims of  sexual  violence.   Fear  of  violent  retaliation  against
    victims and families was cited as a factor for under reporting.   Child
    victims, both boys and girls,  are  often  arrested  and  charged  with
    intention to commit zina (sexual intercourse outside marriage)  (see  p
    10, paragraph 39).

81.   The Watchlist report dated August 2010, noted that sexual violence  on
    children is committed by  armed  or  criminal  gangs,  family  members,
    guardians, carers and  staff  of  police  stations,  juvenile  centres,
    orphanages, and that few if any perpetrators are  brought  to  justice.
    The subject was also addressed in  detail  in  the  report  of  the  UN
    Committee on the Rights of the  Child,  8  April  2011  (  p22),  which
    expressed concern as to the "... great risk of physical  emotional  and
    sexual exploitation and abuse"  to  children  working  in  the  streets
    (paragraph 68).

82.   The report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Rights  of  the  Child,  also
    addressed  the  issues  of  'sale,  trafficking  and  abduction.'    At
    paragraph 72 it said:

         "The Committee expresses concern that children  are  trafficked  by
         criminal groups mainly within the  country  and  into  neighbouring
         countries for forced prostitution,  begging  and  labour  in  brick
         kilns, carpet making factories, the  drug  smuggling  industry  and
         domestic service.  The Committee is also deeply concerned that some
         families knowingly sell their children  into  forced  prostitution,
         including for bacha baazi.  The Committee notes  the  concern  that
         little has been done to implement the provisions of the 2008 Law on
         Counter Abduction and Human Trafficking and the 2004 National  Plan
         of  Action  on  Combating  Child  Trafficking,   and   that   human
         trafficking convictions remain rare while  victims  of  trafficking
         are punished for acts they may have committed as a direct result of
         being trafficked, and jailed  pending  resolution  of  their  legal
         cases, despite their recognised victim status."


83.   The IOM Trafficking Persons in Afghanistan Field Survey  Report,  June
    2008 (p5) noted "imbedded economic and social factors, contributing  to
    the high prevalence of child trafficking in Afghanistan":


         "There  are  numerous  factors  making  Afghan   people   extremely
         vulnerable to trafficking: more than two decades  of  conflict  and
         the subsequent loss of lives and  livelihoods,  prolonged  economic
         instability and deteriorating insecurity .... Children are  another
         large pool of potential "targets" for trafficking  with  widespread
         poverty compelling up to one third of Afghan children  to  work  in
         order to augment their family income.  The  majority  of  them  are
         exposed to adverse working conditions  outside  of  any  protective
         mechanism. Afghanistan is facing a  mass  population  displacement.
         Many of the displaced persons have no secure place to stay and  end
         up living in camps or open  areas  deprived  of  any  basic  social
         services or means of livelihood. Women and  children  living  under
         these conditions are particularly at risk of being trafficked.


         In addition to factors related to the supply of potential  victims,
         Afghanistan offers an environment favourable  to  facilitating  the
         process  of  trafficking.  Afghanistan  shares  borders  with   six
         countries and some parts are very difficult to control due  to  the
         terrain and trans-border  tribal  structures.  In  the  absence  of
         modern  border  management  and  a  weakening  of  law  and  order,
         racketeers freely cross borders to traffic or smuggle people to  or
         through neighbouring countries. With poppy production and smuggling
         of narcotics flourishing in the country, the  tactics  of  criminal
         groups are more sophisticated than ever and their  well-established
         networks contribute to cross-border trafficking operations."


84.   The IOM field survey report (pp22-23) also reported that:


         "According to the International labour Organization (ILO), 92.5 per
         cent of child labourers from 12 to 17 years of age  work  for  more
         than 42 hours a week  and  the  majority  are  exposed  to  adverse
         working  conditions:  a  polluted  environment  (73.3%),  risks  of
         injuries(60.1%),  dangerous  equipments  (57.6%),  direct  sunlight
         (54.9%) and extreme temperatures and noise (51.4%), among others30.
         Child labourers are thus  more  prone  to  danger  than  any  other
         segment of  the  child  community,  serving  as  a  large  pool  of
         potential targets for human trafficking in Afghanistan".


85.   In this context we have also had regard to paragraph 66 of the  report
    of the Committee on the Rights of the Child ( pp2-17) and the US  State
    Department  report  'Findings  on  the  Worst  Forms  of  Child  Labour
    Afghanistan, 2009'.

86.   The Watchlist Report August 2010 also noted at page 24 that:

         "Armed conflict has exacerbated the socio-economic hardship of many
         Afghan families due to displacement,  the  death  of  one  or  both
         breadwinners or the loss of livelihood. ...As of November 2009,  an
         estimated 38 percent of Afghan children were forced into hard labor
         in violation  of  international  and  national  law,  according  to
         AIHRC.146 In some provinces this number  is  substantially  higher.
         ...Children's  working  hours  often  exceed  45  hours  per  week;
         children often must engage in activities that are harmful to  their
         health ...These activities also render them susceptible to economic
         exploitation, sexual abuse or, in some cases, landmine injuries".


87.   The risks to children of  trafficking  were  also  identified  in  the
    UNHCR Guidelines 17 December 2010 (see pp 25 - 27).

Landmines

88.   There is material before us  to  the  effect  that  children,  and  in
    particular, boys, are disproportionately affected  by  landmines.   The
    Watchlist Afghanistan Report of 6 May 2011 notes  that  Afghanistan  is
    "among the most densely land mined  areas  in  the  world  -  including
    residential, commercial, grazing and  agricultural  land."   It  states
    that children comprise more than half the land mine  casualties.   More
    than 70,000 have been killed or injured, and an estimated 61%  of  such
    deaths or injuries involve children - mostly boys,  who  play  outside,
    tend animals, or collect food, water or wood.  The Brookings Project on
    US Relations with Islamic World Displacement in  the  Muslim  World:  A
    Focus on Afghanistan and Iraq (2009) (p14) notes that:


         "Land mines are another critical obstacle: Afghanistan  is  one  of
         the most  heavily  contaminated  countries  in  the  world-with  15
         percent of the population living in affected areas.  "According  to
         the Mine Action Coordination Centre  for  Afghanistan  (MACCA),  on
         average over 60 people are killed or injured every month  in  mine-
         related incidents and half of the victims  are  children."58  There
         are currently 5,560 known hazards  and  still  690  million  square
         metres of land that  need  to  be  cleared,  impacting  over  2,090
         communities. Disputes over land  ownership  and  tenure  are  major
         sources of conflict  in  Afghanistan,59  as  the  livelihood  of  a
         majority of  Afghanistan's  rural  population  (about  70  percent)
         depends on agriculture."

Conclusion

89. It is clear that when considering the question of whether children  are
    disproportionately affected by the consequences of the  armed  conflict
    in Afghanistan, a distinction has to be made between children  who  are
    living within a family and those who are not.  It is to be  noted  that
    in HK and Ors the UT found that  the  three  appellants  had  not  lost
    contact with their families  and  that  they  could  not  therefore  be
    regarded as unaccompanied children on return to Kabul, there  being  no
    reason to believe that their relatives would not be able  to  meet  and
    accompany them.  As the UT put it at paragraph 49 of the  determination
    "none of these boys  is  an  orphan  and  none  is  without  family  in
    Afghanistan."

90. But at paragraph 48 of its  determination  the  UT  observed  that  the
    material before it "... presents a bleak picture for children  who  are
    returned to Afghanistan and who do not have a family that will care for
    them."

91. That distinction has been reinforced by the additional material  before
    us.  Whilst we recognise that there are some risks  to  which  children
    who have the protection  of  a  family  are  nevertheless  subject,  in
    particular the risk of land mines and the risks of being trafficked, we
    are not satisfied that they are of such a  level  as  to  lead  to  the
    conclusion that all children would qualify for humanitarian protection.
     In arriving at that conclusion we have taken account of the  necessity
    to have regard to the best interests of children.

92.   But the background  evidence  demonstrates  that  unattached  children
    returned  to  Afghanistan  may,   depending   upon   their   individual
    circumstances and the location to which they are returned,  be  exposed
    to a risk of serious harm, inter  alia  from  indiscriminate  violence,
    forced recruitment, sexual violence, trafficking and a lack of adequate
    arrangements for child protection.  Such risks will have  to  be  taken
    into account when addressing the question of whether a return is in the
    child's best interests, a  primary  consideration  when  determining  a
    claim to humanitarian protection.


93.   We have therefore arrived at the following general conclusions.


    (i)    The evidence before us does not alter the position as  described
         in HK,  namely  that  when  considering  the  question  of  whether
         children are disproportionately affected by the consequences of the
         armed conflict in  Afghanistan,  a  distinction  has  to  be  drawn
         between children who were living with a family and  those  who  are
         not.  That  distinction  has  been  reinforced  by  the  additional
         material before us.  Whilst we recognise that there are some  risks
         to which children who will have the protection of  the  family  are
         nevertheless subject, in particular the risk of landmines  and  the
         risks of being trafficked, we are not satisfied that  they  are  of
         such a level as to lead to the conclusion that all  children  would
         qualify  for  international  protection.   In  arriving   at   this
         conclusion we have taken the  account  of  the  necessity  to  have
         regard to the best interests of children.


    (ii)   However, the background evidence  demonstrates  that  unattached
         children returned to Afghanistan, depending upon  their  individual
         circumstances and the location to which they are returned,  may  be
         exposed to risk of serious harm,  inter  alia  from  indiscriminate
         violence, forced recruitment, sexual violence,  trafficking  and  a
         lack of adequate arrangements for  child  protection.   Such  risks
         will have to be taken into account when addressing the question  of
         whether a return is  in  the  child's  best  interests,  a  primary
         consideration when determining a claim to humanitarian protection.


The Evidence of the Appellant

94.   At the outset of the hearing on 28 October  2010,  Ms  Motz  drew  our
    attention to  the  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses
    Practice Direction of 30 October 2008, and to the guidance  as  to  its
    application issued in October 2010.  We took account of both.  We  were
    satisfied that the appellant and the interpreter fully  understood  one
    another, and that the appellant fully  understood  the  nature  of  the
    proceedings.

95.   The appellant adopted his two  statements  and  the  contents  of  the
    interview record as amended by him, but did  not  adopt  the  screening
    interview record.

96.   He gave evidence that until his departure  from  Afghanistan,  he  was
    living with his father, mother and a  younger  brother  and  sister  in
    Mosaie (Musayhi/Musayi), Kabul province.  He  has  two  older  sisters,
    both married.  He attended school from  the  age  of  7  until  leaving
    Afghanistan.  At school he had been  in  one  class  with  children  of
    different ages, and had studied science, maths, geography, physics  and
    a little English.

97.   He also had an elder brother named YA, who used to be a  commander  in
    President Karzai's army, located in Gardaz, living in a  compound,  and
    working with foreign troops.   The  appellant  had  learnt  from  other
    family members that his brother was in charge of men,  and  had  fought
    against the Taliban.

98.   His father worked for the Karzai  government.   He  would  go  to  the
    District Office or to Kabul to provide information on the movements and
    activities of the Taliban, of whom there were many in the  village  and
    the area of Mosaie. The Taliban were involved in killing  and  torture;
    and his father would provide information about them to  the  government
    as he did not approve of their activities.  As a result of  information
    given by his father many Taliban were arrested in the area.

99.    The  Taliban  came  to  suspect  his  father  was  working  for   the
    government, and delivered letters to the house by  night  to  warn  his
    father and his brother YA to stop working for  the  government  or  the
    family would be killed.  The first such letter was received  about  two
    and a half months before the appellant left Afghanistan.

100.  After the letters had been delivered, the appellant's father  went  to
    Guzni, following which    YA came home for a few days.  On  the  second
    night after his return, some Taliban came to  the  house.   On  hearing
    their voices, the appellant's mother hid the appellant in the clay oven
    and wound a large scarf around YA's face  and  head.  But  the  Taliban
    entered, recognised YA and took him away, to the great distress of  the
    appellant and his family.

101.  At morning  prayer  in  the  mosque  on  the  following  day,  it  was
    announced that a man had been killed. It was discovered that it was YA.
    The Taliban had slit his throat and left his body outside  the  mosque.
    His father came home and  was  very  upset.  The  appellant's  maternal
    uncle, Q, brought YA's body to the house, and with others conducted the
    funeral and buried YA.

102.  About a month later the Taliban killed  some  foreigners  with  bombs,
    following which, on a date  of  which  the  appellant  was  unsure,  he
    attended a Teachers' Day ceremony in front of the District Office. Many
    foreign army personnel were present, and they carried pictures  of  the
    people who had been  killed  in  the  bombings.  At  the  ceremony  the
    appellant sang an anti-Taliban song.  An  interpreter  interpreted  the
    words of the song to the foreigners, one of whom gave the appellant US$
    50.00.

103.  About two hours into the ceremony the Taliban arrived and opened  fire
    on those  who  had  gathered.  People  were  killed  and  injured.  The
    appellant returned home and told his mother what had happened. She then
    took him to her son-in-law's house, where his father would  often  stay
    when he was returning home from attending  the  government  offices  in
    Kabul.

104.  Two nights after the Teachers' Day ceremony the Taliban  came  to  the
    family house, asking after the appellant and  his  father.  His  mother
    said that they were not at home. The following morning she travelled to
    her son-in-law's house and told the appellant and his father  that  the
    family was in danger. As a result his  father  spoke  to  an  agent  to
    arrange for the appellant to leave Afghanistan.  His  father  told  him
    that he was to claim asylum in the UK.

105.  The appellant met the agent in Kabul. He  was  not  sure  whether  his
    father had paid the agent to take him to the UK. They travelled to Iran
    by vehicle and on foot, then on to Turkey,  again  by  vehicle  and  on
    foot. From Turkey they travelled to Greece on foot and by boat, then to
    Italy by lorry and on foot, from Italy to France and eventually to  the
    UK by lorry. The journey took about one year. He did not  claim  asylum
    en route because his father had told him to do so in the  UK.   He  had
    been under the control of  agents.   There  were  different  agents  at
    different stages of the journey.

106.  He said that  although  he  had  initially  stated  that  he  was  not
    fingerprinted en route to the UK, he had been fingerprinted  in  Greece
    when  detained  by  police  or  immigration  officers.  There  was   no
    interpreter and he did not understand the officers nor they him. He was
    held for several hours in an unknown detention centre. He was kicked on
    the shin and punched in  the  neck  by  the  officers,  as  were  other
    detainees. He was required to put his hands in ink and then put them on
    pieces of paper. He did not recall  whether  he  signed  anything.  The
    agent was also detained and fingerprinted. On release they returned  to
    the forested area where he waited until being put on a lorry bound  for
    Italy.

107.  In  cross-examination  the  appellant  gave  further  details  of  his
    journey to the UK, saying that he had been in Iran and Turkey for about
    a month, in Greece for about 9 months, in Italy only for a short  time,
    and in Calais for about 2 months.

108.  He said that he was in touch with his father until he reached  Calais;
    but had not been able to contact him since  arriving  in  the  UK.  His
    father, who had been in Kabul when the appellant last spoke to him, had
    told him that he continued to inform  on  the  Taliban.  The  appellant
    further said that  he  has  relatives  in  the  UK,  a  step-cousin  in
    Birmingham and a step-maternal uncle in London.

109.  He repeated in cross-examination that since arriving  in  the  UK  the
    telephone number on which he had called his father has not  worked.  He
    had tried it himself and had also given it to his  social  worker,  who
    had tried it without success. He said that his social worker  had  told
    him about the Red Cross tracing service about 8 months ago, and that he
    had asked the social worker to write to the Red Cross on his behalf  to
    help him to find his family.  In  the  course  of  the  hearing  on  28
    October, a letter from his social worker, Jen  Collett,  was  produced,
    which confirmed that there had not yet been any response from  the  Red
    Cross.

The Assessment of the Appellant's Evidence

110.  In making an assessment of the appellant's evidence, both  as  to  the
    events that preceded his departure  from  Afghanistan  and  as  to  the
    course of his journey to the United Kingdom,  there  are  a  number  of
    considerations to  be  taken  into  account.   First,  and  of  central
    importance, is the fact that the appellant was 14 years of age when  he
    left Afghanistan.  Due allowance must be made for his age at  the  time
    of the events in question.

111.  Secondly in assessing the appellant's  evidence  it  is  necessary  to
    bear in mind the evidence from Dr Melzak, to  which  we  refer  further
    below, to the effect that the appellant is suffering from PTSD, and  in
    consequence from an arrested emotional development, conditions that may
    bear on his ability to give an account of distressing events  occurring
    some years ago.

112.  Thirdly, and in so far as it is submitted on behalf of the  respondent
    that the appellant's account  is  implausible,  we  bear  in  mind  the
    guidance afforded by the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  HK  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037  and
    contained in the judgment of Neuberger LJ at paragraphs 27 - 30:

         "27      .... The standard of proof to be applied for  the  purpose
             of assessing the appellant's fear of persecution is  low.  The
             choice is not normally which of two parties  to  believe,  but
             whether or not to believe the appellant. Relatively  unusually
             for an English Judge,  an  Immigration  Judge  has  an  almost
             inquisitorial function, although he has none of the  evidence-
             gathering or other investigatory powers  of  an  inquisitorial
             Judge. That is a particularly acute problem in cases where the
             evidence is  pretty  unsatisfactory  in  extent,  quality  and
             presentation, which is particularly true of asylum cases. That
             is normally through nobody's fault: it is the  nature  of  the
             beast.


         28.      Further, in  many  asylum  cases,  some,  even  most,  the
             appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely but  that  does
             not mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story,  and
             the story as a  whole,  have  to  be  considered  against  the
             available country evidence and reliable expert  evidence,  and
             other familiar factors, such  as  consistency  with  what  the
             appellant has said before, and with other factual evidence..."


113.  Similarly in R (Mlloja) v SSHD [2005] EWHC 283 (Admin)  Gibbs  J  held
    that:


         "33.     The underlying reason which supports the special  detailed
             provisions for children is obvious.  The child, by  reason  of
             its lack of knowledge,  experience  and  maturity,  cannot  be
             expected to comply with procedures  in  the  same  way  as  an
             adult.  Of course a child might lie as well as tell the truth,
             but he may also find it more  difficult  to  answer  questions
             with the necessary understanding and insight."


114.  Fourthly and in so far as the respondent submits that the  appellant's
    credibility is damaged by his failure to take advantage of a reasonable
    opportunity to make an asylum or human rights claim in a safe  country,
    it is necessary to take account of the control exercised by agents over
    their charges.  In R (Q & Others) v SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  364,  Lord
    Phillips MR noted at paragraph 40:


         "...Home Office research ... demonstrates  the  degree  of  control
         that some facilitators  have  over  their  charges.  The  Attorney-
         General recognised the possibility of duress by threats against the
         families of asylum seekers, and this phenomenon is recorded in  the
         Home Office research. It is also clear that some asylum seekers are
         so much under the influence of the agents who are shepherding  them
         into the country that  they  cannot  be  criticised  for  accepting
         implicitly what they are told by them. ... To disregard the  effect
         that they may have on their charges would be both  unrealistic  and
         unjust."


115.   The  point  was  reinforced  by  the  report  of  the  UNHCR   Policy
    Development and Evaluation Service  study  'A  study  of  unaccompanied
    Afghan children in Europe' June 2010, entitled 'Trees only move in  the
    wind" (p21), which contained the following paragraphs:


         "The organized smuggling networks involved in the movement of young
         Afghans to Europe clearly extend from the UK in the west to Turkey,
         Iran, Pakistan and beyond in the east.... The risks encountered  by
         children who use the services of such  networks  are  incalculable,
         especially as the boys' parents, relatives  and  friends  who  have
         arranged a contract with a local agent in  the  country  of  origin
         have no direct contact with the smugglers themselves.

         Throughout the journey, the smugglers maintain tight  control  over
         the children through fear and intimidation, especially if the  boys
         or their families are having difficulty in paying. They confuse the
         children through deliberate misinformation  with  regard  to  their
         options, so as to convince  them  to  continue  their  journey  and
         thereby exact the highest possible fee.  ...  this  study  suggests
         that  there  is  a  deliberate  strategy  among  the  smugglers  to
         constantly split up the  groups  of  children  who  are  travelling
         together, keeping the level of anxiety high, and preventing  people
         from building up friendships and  trust  that  might  threaten  the
         authority of the smugglers and their assistants."

Expert Evidence


116.  On 28 October 2010 we had the benefit of a report  from  Dr  Giustozzi
    dated 23 December 2009, and at the restored hearing  on  23  May  2011,
    reports from Dr Iain Shearer dated 9 May  2011  and  Dr  Sheila  Melzak
    dated  16  May  2011.   Dr  Giustozzi  is  a  research  fellow  at  the
    Development  Studies  Institute  within  the  LSE,  with  a  specialist
    interest in Afghanistan, having frequently  visited  Afghanistan  since
    2003 in the course of his research.  Dr Shearer  is  an  archaeologist.
    He is the Sackler Scholar for  Afghanistan  and  Iran  at  the  British
    Museum and Research Affiliate at the Centre for Applied Archaeology  at
    the Institute of  Archaeology  UCL.   He  has  visited  Afghanistan  on
    numerous occasions since 2003, working  with  the  National  Museum  in
    Kabul and undertaking archaeological investigations in remote parts  of
    the country.  It was submitted on behalf  of  the  respondent  that  Dr
    Shearer's  evidence did not qualify as expert evidence relevant to  the
    issues with which we are concerned as his professional expertise is  as
    an archaeologist.  We accept that he is not one who has  conventionally
    come to be described  as  a  'country  expert';  but  his  considerable
    personal and recent experience of Afghanistan,  and  of  the  political
    situation within that country, together with the  objectivity  that  is
    implicit in his professional qualifications and  experience,  give  the
    authority to his evidence.  Dr Sheila Melzak is a child psychotherapist
    who was formerly a member of the  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychotherapy
    Team within the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims  of  Torture
    (as it then was), and is now the clinical director of the Baobab Centre
    for Young  Survivors  in  Exile.   In  her  opinion  the  appellant  is
    suffering from post traumatic stress  disorder,  who  although  now  17
    years of age "... is functioning emotionally as a  troubled  13  or  14
    year old."

Findings on the appellant's evidence

117.  In assessing the appellant's evidence we have borne in mind  that  the
    standard of proof to be applied for the purpose of assessing  his  fear
    of persecution is low, and that benefit of the doubt should be  applied
    liberally in his favour.  But in any event we found the appellant to be
    a credible witness, doing his best to give a full and truthful  account
    of his experiences.  He has given a consistent account  of  his  family
    and circumstances and of the  events  that  prompted  his  flight  from
    Afghanistan, in particular:


         "i.      His  brother's  involvement  with  the  ISAF  forces,  his
             promotion to Commander and his killing;


         ii.      His father's role as an informant against the Taliban, his
             father's flight and seclusion after  he  received  threatening
             'night letters' and


         iii.     The appellant's own public expression of hostility against
             the Taliban at the Teachers' Day ceremony some weeks after his
             brother's murder and the Taliban enquiring about  him  at  his
             family home."


118.  We found persuasive the appellant's vivid account  of  the  events  at
    the Teachers' Day ceremony, giving a description which  was  compelling
    in its detail, and highly unlikely to have been invented.   Furthermore
    some support for the occurrence of such an incident is to be  found  in
    the Home Secretary's Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  2010  at
    paragraph 12.02 where there is a reference to the  Human  Rights  Watch
    World Report 2010 in respect  of  the  year  2009  which  contains  the
    following:

         "As part of their campaign of terrorizing the civilian  population,
         the Taliban and other insurgent groups continued to target schools,
         in  particular  girls'  schools.  According  to  the  Ministry   of
         Education, in the first five months of the Afghan year 1387  (April
         - August 2009), 102  schools  were  attacked  using  explosives  or
         arson, and 105 students  and  teachers  were  killed  by  insurgent
         attacks. Three girls' schools in the central region  were  attacked
         with chemicals (thought to be pesticide or  insecticide)  in  April
         and May 2009, which the Ministry  of  Education  says  injured  196
         girls."

119.  The following core facts recounted by the appellant are  supported  by
    country and expert information:


    i.     The appellant's home area was assessed as a  site  of  increased
         insurgency and insecurity at the time of his departure (Afghanistan
         COI Report February 2009, 8.18-8.21 and 8.30)


    ii.    In his asylum interview the appellant stated that just prior  to
         his departure in 2008 foreigners  (he  thought  Italian)  had  been
         killed by the Taliban in a village transcribed by the  IO  as  Sofi
         baba near to his village. (Interview Q  98-99;  Hearing  evidence).
         The Guardian 20.8.2009 reports the killing of 10 and  the  wounding
         of 21 French soldiers following a Taliban ambush, near to Sorobi in
         east Kabul province - shown on the  map  as  near  the  appellant's
         village. The killing attracted significant attention because of the
         numbers of soldiers killed and because  the  ambush  occurred  soon
         after the French military replaced Italian  military  as  the  NATO
         forces responsible for the region. This provides some corroboration
         for this appellant's evidence.


    iii.   Contrary to the assertion in the refusal letter  (para  28  -31)
         military personnel frequently attend  school  ceremonies  (see  for
         example Military  News  4.4.2011  celebrating  first  day  at  S...
         school) Furthermore  the  country  evidence  shows  repeat  violent
         incidents in schools. The Afghanistan COI February  2009,  covering
         the relevant period prior  to  the  appellant's  departure  stated:
         '24.28 "Ministry of Education statistics  shown  to  IRIN  indicate
         there were 2,450 'terrorist' attacks on schools from March 2006  to
         February 2008. In the same  period  235  schoolchildren,  students,
         teachers and other education workers were killed, and 222  wounded.
         About  500  schools  have  remained  closed  due   to   insecurity,
         particularly in the volatile south  where  Taliban  insurgency  has
         also hindered humanitarian and development access. 'Up  to  300,000
         students cannot go to school because of  insecurity  and  threats,'
         per Hamid Elmi, a spokesperson for the Ministry of Education.


    iv.    Dr Giustozzi states in his report that:


         "The fact that A's father might have been suspected of  spying  for
         the Americans is plausible";
         "The practice of the Taliban to threaten 'collaborators'  in  order
         to  force  them  to  resign  or  receive  their  cooperation  is  a
         widespread one";
         "Night letters are the standard ways used by the Taliban to deliver
         their   propaganda   and   carry   out   their   intimidation   and
         threat"(Afghanistan COI February 2009 at 17.2)";
         "When intimidation does not work, assassinations are common";
         "Both the police and the  Afghan  security  services  (NDS)  employ
         large  numbers  of  informers;  often  even  governors  and   other
         government officials have their own networks of informers";
         "The Taliban networks in [...] were  probably  not  very  developed
         when they first entered the district en  masse  in  2006  and  they
         might not have been in a position to spot A's [father's] activities
         early on; as they developed their own network of  informers,  their
         ability to pick up government supporters also increased";
         "As the Taliban compiled information  about  local  families,  they
         would also find out that the brother served in the armed forces";
         "Army soldiers are usually  posted  away  from  their  province  of
         origins" (with reference  to  the  appellant's  evidence  that  his
         brother was stationed in Gardaz)"


    v.     Dr Shearer states that the evidence of  the  appellant's  father
         working as an informer against the Taliban 'is very  believable  as
         the Karzai regime and ISAF have invested heavily in paid  informant
         networks throughout Afghanistan.' He  confirms  the  'very  active'
         presence of Taliban in  Kabul  province  and  the  'very  real  and
         considerable risk to any individual perceived to be  a  traitor  by
         the Taliban' - with acts of  'brutality  and  murder'  carried  out
         against such individuals in all parts of Afghanistan as part of the
         broader Taliban campaign to destabilise and  discredit  the  Karzai
         regime.

120.  The vulnerability of those connected with those  associated  with  the
    Karzai regime or with ANSF is borne out by the Afghan Independent Human
    Rights Commission (AIHRC) report of December  2008,  'Insurgent  Abuses
    against Afghan Civilians' which records (pp 3,5,13) that:


         "...the simple act of being a civil servant or being friendly  with
         government officials is frequently seen as  enough  to  justify  an
         attack..."

         ...[insurgent targets] include...'unassociated relatives  of  civil
         servants have also be targeted"

         In  a  country  suffering  from  high   levels   of   poverty   and
         unemployment, threats and murders of people labelled by  insurgents
         as 'collaborators' and 'spies' is striking such  fear  into  people
         that they abandon their jobs and sometimes leave their homes."

         The  AIHRC  has  documented  cases  of  widespread  and  systematic
         intimidation,   abductions,   shootings,   beheadings,    hangings,
         mutilations, perfidious suicide attacks, and indiscriminate rockets
         attacks by insurgents against  civilians  around  the  country  and
         especially in the  southern,  south-eastern,  eastern  and  central
         regions of Afghanistan over the past two years. Media  reports  and
         other sources have corroborated many of the testimonies included in
         this report ....

         The insurgents  argue  that  in  their  fight  against  the  Afghan
         government and international forces, anyone associated  with  their
         enemy is a legitimate target, including  civilians.  As  a  result,
         insurgents  have  sought  out  for  punishment  doctors,  teachers,
         students, government  aligned  elders,  ...and  former  police  and
         military personnel. Others have also been targeted,  including  un-
         associated relatives of persons alleged to have "collaborated" with
         the Government or international presence. The Taliban has  gone  so
         far as to issue death threats instructing  family  members  not  to
         attend burials and memorial services for people who insurgents have
         killed."


121.  In the refusal letter the Secretary of State  disbelieved  aspects  of
    the appellant's  claim.   Thus,  (a)  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant's brother, Y, was a commander in the army in Afghanistan,  as
    he never discussed his job with the appellant and the  appellant  could
    not say when or why Y joined the army nor when Y became a commander, he
    did not mention a brother Y at the  screening  interview,  and  in  his
    written statement he said Y worked with foreign troops in a compound in
    Gardaz, whereas at interview he said Y never  discussed  his  job  with
    him; (b) he gave  no  reasons  for  why  or  how  his  father  obtained
    information about the Taliban, he  said,  on  the  one  hand  that  the
    Taliban discovered what his father was doing because too  many  Taliban
    members were arrested in their area and on the  other  hand  that  they
    discovered this because his father was always  going  to  the  district
    office; (c) the appellant was vague and speculative  about  the  letter
    from the Taliban delivered to his house, as it lacked credibility  that
    the  Taliban  would  send  his  father  a  letter  rather  than  acting
    immediately against him; (d) his evidence about the claimed incident in
    which the Taliban came to the house and took Y away lacked credibility;
    (e) his  claim  that  the  Taliban  kill  foreigners  in  bombings  was
    speculative; (f) his claim about the Teachers Day ceremony incident was
    inconsistent and lack credibility, but, even if it were  true,  it  had
    not been shown how the Taliban would have become aware of him singing a
    song about them.

122.  We do not consider the concerns of the Secretary of State as  set  out
    above are fatal to the appellant's credibility.  As regards (a),  given
    the appellant's age  we  consider  that  he  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to be aware of Y's role if Y had  not  specifically  told  him
    about it, and we think his vagueness on this matter was  understandable
    given his age.  As regards (b), Dr Shearer supports the evidence of the
    appellant's father working as an  informer  against  the  Taliban  (see
    paragraph 2 of his report), and the discrepancy over  how  the  Taliban
    obtained information about his father is in any event a minor one.   As
    to (c), we have already noted that Dr Giustozzi bears out the  evidence
    of night letters as a technique used by the Taliban to  intimidate  and
    threaten (paragraph 9 of his report).  Regarding (d),  the  appellant's
    explanation, that the scarf used to take his brother away was a woman's
    scarf does not seem to us implausible,  and  the  credibility  of  this
    aspect of the  evidence  is  enhanced  by  the  lack  of  an  effective
    challenge to the claim that Y was a commander (see paragraph  7  of  Dr
    Giustozzi's report).  As regards (e), the  appellant's  evidence  about
    the killing of foreigners is supported, as we have already seen, by the
    Guardian report of 20 August 2009 concerning the killing of  10  French
    soldiers and wounding of 21 French soldiers following a Taliban ambush.
     As to (f), the claim finds support in the background evidence, see  eg
    COIR February 2009 at paragraph 24.28; there is some  support  for  the
    appellant's claim of a threat  to  him  in  Dr  Giustozzi's  report  at
    paragraph 7 concerning the Taliban  compiling  local  information;  and
    they have their own network  of  informers  (see  also  Dr  Shearer  at
    paragraph 2).

The Claim to Recognition as a Refugee

123.  The first question is whether the appellant  has  a  genuine  fear  of
    being persecuted were he to be returned to Afghanistan.  In  the  light
    of our findings as to the appellant's credibility, that  question  must
    be answered in the affirmative.  He fears persecution by the Taliban by
    reason of his membership of his family, and therefore being  associated
    with their political opinions, and  by  reason  of  his  own  political
    opinions  as  demonstrated  from  his  actions  at  the  Teachers'  Day
    ceremony.

124.  The second and critical issue is whether such fears are well  founded.
     In our judgment  the  objective  evidence  and  that  of  the  experts
    provides strong support for the contention that the  appellant's  fears
    are well founded.  We accept that the  appellant  is  a  child  with  a
    profile of supporting the ISAF/Karzai government and  of  hostility  to
    armed insurgency, specifically the Taliban. There is evidence  to  show
    that children are killed by  armed  opposition  groups,  including  the
    Taliban, on suspicion of spying or alleged association with or  support
    for international military forces, albeit a very low  number.  Children
    have also been  killed  when  armed  opposition  groups  have  targeted
    parents because of their association with  government  (Report  of  the
    Secretary General  on  Children  and  Armed  Conflict  in  Afghanistan,
    S2011/55).

125.   The  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines   for   Assessing   International
    Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan, 17  December  2010
    (the UNHCR Guidelines 17.12.2010) record that:



         "There is a  systematic  and  sustained  campaign  by  armed  anti-
         Government groups to target civilians associated with, or perceived
         as  supporting,  the  Afghan  Government   or   the   international
         community, particularly in areas where such groups are active.

         Attacks by armed anti-Government groups,  which  have  ranged  from
         intimidation, assassinations, abductions and stand-off attacks,  to
         the use of improvised explosive devises (IEDs) and suicide attacks,
         increasingly target  civilians  associated  with  or  perceived  as
         supportive   of    the    Government    and    the    international
         community/ISAF....A recently intercepted message from Mullah  Omar,
         the spiritual leader  of  the  Taliban  movement,  ordered  Taliban
         members to capture and kill any Afghan who is supporting or working
         for Coalition forces or  the  Government  of  Afghanistan  ...  The
         message, which departs from his previous instructions  to  minimize
         civilian deaths.

         The increased targeting of civilians is perceived  as  part  of  an
         effort  by  armed  anti-Government  groups  to  gain  control  over
         territories  and  populations.  Local  inhabitants  are  reportedly
         coerced into supporting anti-Government groups through  threats  or
         the use of force. These intimidation tactics are compounded by  the
         reduced public confidence in the capacity of the Afghan  Government
         and international forces to maintain  security  and  provide  basic
         services. Intimidation tactics used by armed anti-Government groups
         against the civilian population reportedly include:  individual  or
         community warnings or threats, often in the form of "night letters"
         (shab nameha), to stop working for, or supporting,  the  Government
         or international forces, upon pain of death) as well as setting  up
         road blocks.  It  is  also  reported  that  individuals,  including
         children, suspected of "spying" on behalf of the Afghan military or
         international forces have been summarily executed  by  armed  anti-
         Government groups.

         Local and central Government officials of  all  levels,  and  their
         family members, are at increased risk of being  targeted  in  areas
         where armed anti-Government groups operate or control."

126.  The expert and country evidence confirms the risk to  those  who  have
    'collaborated with' or are associated with the Karzai government or  UN
    or Western forces. The risk is identified in UN, UNHCR, COI and country
    reports. The UNAMA/Afghan Independent Human Rights  Commission  records
    Taliban targets as including 'unassociated relatives' of those  alleged
    to have collaborated with the  government  or  international  presence.
    (Annual Report 2011), and documents  the  insurgent  threat  to  Afghan
    police, military, and their families.

127.  Such  assessments  are  reinforced  by  the  findings  in  RQ  (Afghan
    National Army, Hizb-i-Islami, risk) Afghanistan CG [2008] UKAIT  00013,
    in which the Tribunal accepted the expert evidence that  'memories  [of
    service] were long and even where service was  complete',  someone  who
    'betrayed the cause' by joining the occupying  forces  would  still  be
    viewed in a negative light. Those associated with the West were  deemed
    to have abandoned Islam; 'the passage of time would not help.'

128.  Such evidence is also reflected in the decision in  GS  (Existence  of
    internal armed conflict) Afghanistan [2009] UKAIT  00010  at  101  "...
    where an individual was 'wanted' by the Taliban or Hizb-i-Islami,  then
    the evidence was that the situation in Afghanistan remains sufficiently
    lawless that if he were found, there would be nothing to  prevent  them
    dealing with him as they thought fit. A person who was  wanted  in  his
    home area for a specific reason would be able to show a  real  risk  of
    persecution (or treatment entitling him to humanitarian protection,  as
    appropriate) in his home area". The UNHCR Guidelines 17.12.2010 confirm
    that  family  members  of  security  services  are  targeted  by  anti-
    government forces.

129.  Such a risk would be present were  the  appellant  to  be  located  in
    Kabul on his return, or if he was able to return to his  home  area  in
    the Mosaie district, which is located near the border of Kabul Province
    with Logar and Wardak Provinces and not far from Nagarhar.   Travel  to
    his home area would itself present risk, see the IDMC report, 14  April
    2010, at page 26:



         "The main highway between Kabul and Kandahar runs  through  Ghazni,
         and ISAF supply convoys come under frequent attack when  they  pass
         through the province. The security  situation  in  adjacent  Wardak
         province has deteriorated since 2008 as Taliban influence has grown
         and has been  met  with  operations  by  international  and  Afghan
         military forces (CPAU, 27 April 2009). The  Taliban  are  the  main
         insurgent force, though Hizb-i Islami (HiG) and other factions also
         operate  in  the  region.  The  Taliban  have  established   shadow
         administrative systems in areas of Wardak and  the  inhabitants  in
         Logar, Wardak and other provinces rely on  them  for  justice  (The
         Guardian, 24 August 2008). As in other regions, communal  conflicts
         in the central provinces are related to land and water resources."

130.  As to the position  in  Kabul,  it  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the Taliban would not actively be seeking to  track  him
    down within Kabul city, rather  it  is  a  chance  encounter  with  the
    Taliban that he fears, and which Dr Giustozzi regards as a real risk.

131.  Dr Giustozzi specifically reported on the lack  of  police  protection
    available to the appellant in his home district or in  Kabul  city.  We
    also take into account his evidence that tracking down someone from the
    provinces in Kabul is not difficult; and although the Taliban would not
    be proactively seeking him, it would not be easy for him to settle away
    from the southern and south-eastern parts of the city which are Pashtun
    dominated. The north is  dominated  by  Tajiks,  the  west  by  Hazaras
    'heavily hostile to Pashtuns', and the central areas are very expensive
    so that the appellant is highly unlikely to be able to afford  to  live
    there.

132.   Similarly  Dr  Shearer  identified  a  'tangible',  'real,   genuine,
    worrying' risk to the appellant as a young male related  to  'perceived
    traitors'.  He considered that the risk exists both in the  appellant's
    home area, and were he to relocate, within  Pashtun  communities  where
    his identity and family  history  would  be  'probed...  discussed  and
    almost certainly discovered' as  familial  lineages  and  the  webs  of
    interlocking reciprocal obligations are Pashtun mechanisms of survival.

133.  We are further satisfied that the appellant would be at real  risk  of
    persecution as an unattached child from his particular  home  area  who
    has lost all contact with his family, so that  family  protection  will
    not be available to him.  We note in that regard  that  the  respondent
    has not made any tracing enquiries as required by  the  Asylum  Seekers
    (Reception Conditions) Regulations 2005.  But as the  Court  of  Appeal
    observed in DS (see paragraph 34 above) the appellant's claim has to be
    determined on its merits, whether or not any steps had  been  taken  by
    the respondent in discharge of that obligation.  We  would  simply  add
    that we are entirely satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant
    immediately responded when his social worker told  him  about  the  Red
    Cross tracing service; but that that has not yet produced any  response
    (see paragraph 109 above).  But  the  centrality  of  the  question  of
    whether a child would have the protection  of  his  or  her  family  on
    return, serves to demonstrate the importance of the  discharge  by  the
    respondent of her duty to make tracing enquiries.

134.  There is a further feature of Dr Shearer's evidence, which  we  accept
    as being based upon his direct and extensive experience of Afghanistan,
    namely that the appellant will be expected to avenge the death  of  his
    brother.  The existence of blood feuds in Afghanistan is well-known and
    well-documented.  The point made by Dr Shearer, is that the Taliban may
    consider that the appellant will intend to avenge the  killing  of  his
    brother, and will therefore be prepared to pre-empt  any  such  action.
    The respondent invited us to reject such evidence on the basis that the
    appellant has not himself asserted that he will be expected  to  avenge
    the death of his brother. In the event  we  decided  that  it  was  not
    necessary to resolve the issue, bearing in mind that we  did  not  have
    full evidence on the point.

135.  We are satisfied that the appellant has  a  justified  fear  of  being
    persecuted or of other serious harm if returned to his home area or  to
    Kabul; and it has not been suggested that  there  is  another  part  of
    Afghanistan to which he can be safely returned.

136.  We therefore conclude that the appellant is  entitled  to  recognition
    as a refugee, and  his  appeal  succeeds  on  this  ground.  Given  the
    appellant's well-founded fear of being persecuted  is  based  upon  his
    anti-Taliban political opinion, whether actual, or imputed by reason of
    family membership; that he may have attained the age of  majority  does
    not, in the circumstances  of  his  case,  affect  his  entitlement  to
    recognition as a refugee and the consequent grant of status.

137.  In the light  of  our  finding  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    recognition as a refugee, it is not necessary specifically  to  address
    his claim under Article 3  of  the  ECHR.  But  in  the  light  of  our
    findings, he would clearly also be entitled to succeed on that ground.

Humanitarian Protection

138.  In the light of our decision as  to  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
    recognition as a refugee, it is not necessary to address the  claim  to
    humanitarian protection.  Suffice it to say that we are satisfied  that
    had he not succeeded in his claim to recognition of refugee status,  he
    would have been entitled to humanitarian protection

Decision

139.  The appeal is allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

140.  The appeal on humanitarian protection grounds is dismissed.



                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Owen










                       APPENDIX A
              DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL



   |      |Document                                                         |
|Item  |                                                                 |
|      | UN Secretary-General                                            |
|1     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on the situation |
|      |in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and  |
|      |security, 09/03/2011                                             |
|2     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on children and  |
|      |armed conflict in Afghanistan, 03/02/2011                        |
|3     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on the situation |
|      |in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and  |
|      |security, 14/09/2010                                             |
|4     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to      |
|      |paragraph 40 of resolution 1917 (2010), 16/06/2010               |
|5     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on Children and  |
|      |Armed Conflict, 23/04/2010                                       |
|6     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on children and  |
|      |armed conflict (Afghanistan excerpt), 13/04/2010 [Excerpt]       |
|7     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on the situation |
|      |in Afghanistan and its implications for international peace and  |
|      |security, 10/03/2010                                             |
|      | UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)                       |
|8     |UNHCR, 2011 UNHCR country operations profile - Afghanistan,      |
|      |undated (accessed 11/05/2011)                                    |
|9     |UNHCR: UNHCR Seeks Common Sense European Approach towards those  |
|      |fleeing violence, 19/01/2011                                     |
|10    |UNHCR, Afghanistan Protection Cluster: Protection Overview       |
|      |(Southern Region 2010), 08/02/2011                               |
|11    |UNHCR, UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the            |
|      |International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from            |
|      |Afghanistan, 17/12/2010                                          |
|12    |UNHCR, Aide Memoire - Special measures applying to the return of |
|      |unaccompanied and separated children to Afghanistan, August 2010 |
|13    |UNHCR, Trees only move in the wind: A study of unaccompanied     |
|      |Afghan children in Europe, 14/06/2010                            |
|14    |UNHCR: Assistance to unaccompanied refugee minors: Report of the |
|      |Secretary-General, A/60/300, 24/08/2005                          |
|      |UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)                     |
|15    |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) /       |
|      |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission (AIHRC),         |
|      |Afghanistan: Annual Report on Protection of Civilians in Armed   |
|      |Conflict 2010, 09/03/2011                                        |
|16    |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),        |
|      |Afghanistan Mid Year Report on Protection of Civilians in Armed  |
|      |Conflict, 2010, 10/08/2010                                       |
|17    |United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),        |
|      |Afghanistan: Annual Report on Protection of Civilians in Armed   |
|      |Conflict, 2009, 13/01/2010                                       |
|      |                                                                 |
|      |UN Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict        |
|18    |United Nations, Press Conference by Special Representative for   |
|      |Children and Armed Conflict (on the agreement to prevent the     |
|      |recruitment of children into the national security forces),      |
|      |03/02/2011                                                       |
|19    |Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary General for|
|      |Children and Armed Conflict, Mission report Visit of the Special |
|      |Representative for Children & Armed Conflict to Afghanistan,     |
|      |20-26 February 2010                                              |
|      |Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights              |
|21    |UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Fifty sixth session,    |
|      |Consideration of Reports Submitted by States Parties Under       |
|      |Article 44 of the Convention, Concluding Observations of the     |
|      |Committee on the Rights of the Child: Afghanistan, CRC/C/AFG/1,  |
|      |08/04/2011                                                       |
|22    |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|      |(OHCHR), Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human|
|      |Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan and on the|
|      |achievements of technical assistance in the field of human       |
|      |rights, 19/01/2011                                               |
|23    |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|      |(OHCHR), Committee on the Rights of the Child reviews report of  |
|      |Afghanistan, 18/01/2011                                          |
|24    |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|      |(OHCHR), Concluding observations of the Committee on Economic,   |
|      |Social and Cultural Rights: Afghanistan, 07/06/2010              |
|      |Other UN Reports                                                 |
|25    |United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), UNICEF calls for a      |
|      |comprehensive Child Act in Afghanistan, 23/11/2010               |
|26    |United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization |
|      |(UNESCO), Education under Attack 2010: Afghanistan, 10/02/2010   |
|27    |UNICEF Humanitarian Action Report 2010,  pp93-96, 4/2/2010       |
|28    |UNICEF, Children on the Move: A Report on Children of Afghan     |
|      |Origin Moving to Western Countries, February 2010                |
|      |The World Bank                                                   |
|29    |Afghanistan Data and Statistics: Poverty at a Glance 25/2/2011   |
|30    |The World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and       |
|      |Development, Chapter 2: Vulnerability to Violence                |
|37    |Knowledge on Fire: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan: Risks and|
|      |Measures for Successful Mitigation, September 2009 A study       |
|      |conducted by CARE on behalf of the World Bank and the Ministry of|
|      |Education, with the assistance of CoAR/OSDR.                     |
|      |Foreign and Commonwealth Office                                  |
|38    |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Afghanistan Travel Advice, still|
|      |current at 14 May 2011, updated 14 May 2011                      |
|      |Country of Origin Information Service                            |
|39    |Country of Origin Information Service Request, May 2011          |
|40    |Country of Origin Information Service, Afghanistan Security      |
|      |Update 01/01/2010-15/03/2011                                     |
|41    |Country of Origin Information Report, Afghanistan, 08/04/2010    |
|42    |Country of Origin Information Report, Afghanistan, Feb. 2009 -   |
|      |extracts                                                         |
|      |House of Lords European Union Committee                          |
|43    |House of Lords European Union Committee 8th Report of Session    |
|      |2010-2011: the EU's Afghan Police Mission - Report with Evidence |
|      |                                                                 |
|      |Child Exploitation and Online Protection Agency                  |
|45    |Strategic Threat Assessment April 2009, Section on Afghan Boys   |
|      |[Extract]                                                        |
|      |United States Official Reports                                   |
|46    |US Department of State, 2010 Country Reports on Human Rights     |
|      |Practices: Afghanistan, 08/04/2011                               |
|47    |United States Congressional Research Service, Afghanistan:       |
|      |Post-Taliban Governance, Security, and U.S. Policy, 15/04/2011   |
|48    |US Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Interim Assessment|
|      |2011: Afghanistan, 05/04/2011                                    |
|49    |United States Department of Labor, 2009 Findings on the Worst    |
|      |Forms of Child Labor - Afghanistan, 15/12/2010                   |
|50    |US Department of State, Attacks on Afghan School Children,       |
|      |31/08/2010                                                       |
|51    |US Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report 2010:      |
|      |Afghanistan, 14/06/2010                                          |
|      |Institute for War and Peace Reporting                            |
|52    |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK), Afghans Complain of  |
|      |Police Harassment, 28/01/2011                                    |
|53    |Institute for War and Peace Reporting, Plight of Afghan Child    |
|      |Workers, 21/10/2010                                              |
|54    |Institute for War and Peace Reporting (UK), Outrage at Afghan    |
|      |Boy's Murder for "Collaboration", 19/06/2010                     |
|      |International Council for Security and Development (ICOS)        |
|60    |Afghanistan Transition: Dangers of a Summer Draw Down, February  |
|      |2011                                                             |
|      |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO)                             |
|61    |ANSO Bi-Weekly Report, 16-30 April 2011                          |
|62    |ANSO Bi-Weekly Report, 1-15 April 2011                           |
|63    |ANSO Quarterly Data Report Q.1 2011                              |
|64    |ANSO Quarterly Data Report Q.4 2010                              |
|65    |ANSO Quarterly Data Report Q.3 2010                              |
|66    |ANSO Quarterly Data Report Q.2 2010                              |
|67    |ANSO Quarterly Data Report Q.1 2010                              |
|      |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission                  |
|68    |Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, (AIHRC) Civilian|
|      |Casualty Figure; First Seven Months of 2010 (1st January - 31st  |
|      |July), 08/08/2010                                                |
|71    |AIHRC, Causes of Torture in law enforcement Institutions, 2009   |
|72    |AIHRC, Insurgent Abuses Against Afghan Civilians, Dec. 2008      |
|      |Amnesty International                                            |
|73    |Amnesty International, 'Amnesty International Report 2011:       |
|      |Afghanistan', May 2011                                           |
|74    |Amnesty International, Afghan parliament inauguration highlights |
|      |crisis of accountability, 27/01/2011                             |
|75    |Amnesty International, 'Amnesty International Report 2010:       |
|      |Afghanistan', 27/05/2010                                         |
|      |Human Rights Watch                                               |
|76    |Human Rights Watch Afghanistan: Government Takeover of Shelters  |
|      |Threatens Women's Safety, 13/02/2011                             |
|77    |Human Rights Watch, Annual Report  2011 - Afghanistan, January   |
|      |2011                                                             |
|      |Freedom House                                                    |
|78    |Afghanistan Report 2011                                          |
|      |Child-specific Reports                                           |
|79    |Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Afghanistan Indicators,|
|      |06/05/2011                                                       |
|80    |Save the Children, Devastating Impact: Explosive weapons and     |
|      |children, March 2011                                             |
|81    |Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Children Affected by   |
|      |Armed Conflict in Afghanistan, 01/03/2011                        |
|82    |Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2011: Chapter 3       |
|      |Education and Armed Conflict - The Deadly Spirals                |
|83    |Civil-Military Fusion Centre, Afghanistan - Social Well-Being :  |
|      |Child Labour and Trafficking, 20/12/2010                         |
|84    |Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Report to the Committee|
|      |on the Rights of the Child in advance of the examination of      |
|      |Afghanistan's initial report in January 2011, August 2010        |
|85    |Consortium for Street Children, NGO Shadow Report for the United |
|      |Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child, August/September   |
|      |2010                                                             |
|86    |Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, 'Setting the Right     |
|      |Priorities: Protecting Children Affected by Armed Conflict in    |
|      |Afghanistan', 14/06/2010                                         |
|87    |Terre des Hommes, An Assessment of Juvenile Justice in           |
|      |Afghanistan, January 2010                                        |
|88    |Afghanistan UNCRC Civil Society Coalition, NGO Alternative Report|
|      |on the Implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the     |
|      |Child Afghanistan: Every Single Right for Every Single Child,    |
|      |October 2009                                                     |
|89    |International Organization for Migration (IOM), Trafficking in   |
|      |Persons in Afghanistan Field Survey 2008                         |
|      |Other Reports                                                    |
|90    |Brookings, Afghanistan Index: Tracking Variables of              |
|      |Reconstruction and Security in Post-9/11 Afghanistan, 30/04/2011 |
|      |                                                                 |
|91    |Refugee Documentation Centre of Ireland Afghanistan - Information|
|      |on the current threat of indiscriminate violence, Researched and |
|      |compiled on 23 February 2011                                     |
|92    |Center for Strategic and International Studies, Afghanistan and  |
|      |the Uncertain Metrics of Progress, Part Three: Key Ongoing       |
|      |Challenges, 07/03/2011                                           |
|93    |Refugees International (USA), Afghanistan: In a Time of Conflict,|
|      |01/12/2010                                                       |
|94    |Refugee Documentation Centre of Ireland, Treatment by the Taliban|
|      |in Afghanistan of persons believed to be suspected spies for the |
|      |government, researched on 19 November 2010                       |
|95    |Oxfam, Nowhere to Turn: The Failure to Protect Civilians in      |
|      |Afghanistan, 19/11/2010                                          |
|96    |International Crisis Group, Afghanistan: What Now for Refugees?, |
|      |31/08/2009                                                       |
|      |INTERNAL DISPLACEMENT REPORTS                                    |
|97    |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (Norwegian Refugee       |
|      |Council), Afghanistan: Need to minimise new displacement and     |
|      |increase protection for recently displaced in remote areas,      |
|      |11/04/2011                                                       |
|98    |Jacob Rothing, protracted Displacement in Afghanistan can be     |
|      |mitigated by a Change in Policy , Middle east Institute,         |
|      |05/04/2011                                                       |
|99    |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (Norwegian Refugee       |
|      |Council), Afghanistan: Armed conflict forces increasing numbers  |
|      |of Afghans to flee their homes, 15/04/2010                       |
|100   |The Brookings Project, (contributors E Ferris; Khalid Koser,     |
|      |Susanne Schmeidl) Displacement in the Muslim World, A Focus of   |
|      |Afganistan and Iraq, 2009 & Internally Displaced persons in      |
|      |Pakistan and Afghanistan A report from the Field , 2010          |
|101   |The Brookings Project, Khalid Koser, Internal Displacement and   |
|      |Refugee Status Determination, 2010                               |
|      |NEWS REPORTS                                                     |
|102   |UN News Service: UN officials stress Security Council's role in  |
|      |protecting civilians during armed conflict, 10/05/2011           |
|103   |The International Herald Tribune, 9 are killed in an attack on   |
|      |NATO in Afghanistan; Officials say shooting, at Kabul airport,   |
|      |was done by Afghan officer, 28/04/2011                           |
|104   |IRIN News, Analysis: Conflict leads to Afghan displacement, but  |
|      |which side most to blame?, 21/04/2011                            |
|105   |Xinhua General News Service, 1st LD Mine explosion kills 2 Afghan|
|      |police, wounds 1 near Kabul, 21/04/2010                          |
|106   |Afghan News, Suicide bomber targets district headquarters near   |
|      |Afghan capital, 14/04/2011                                       |
|107   |International Business Times News, Suicide bombing in Kabul      |
|      |targets defense minister, 18/04/2011                             |
|108   |Pajhwok Afghan News, Suicide blast hits army vehicle in Kabul; 7 |
|      |injured by Khwaja Basir Ahmad, 10/04/2011                        |
|109   |Pajhwok Afghan News, 4 bombers killed, 3 ISAF soldiers injured in|
|      |Kabul attack by Khwaja Basir Ahmad, 02/04/2011                   |
|110   |Military News Blackanthem, Panjshir PRT helps celebrate first day|
|      |of school in Shutnol, 04/04/2011                                 |
|111   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: Government hails Taliban decree on schools,         |
|      |29/03/2011                                                       |
|112   |Amanda Kloer, Afghan Government, ISAF Refuse to Implement Child  |
|      |Trafficking Prevention Plan. Change.Org  15/03/2011             |
|113   |Michael Kamber, "In Afghan Kilns, a Cycle of Debt and Servitude,"|
|      |New York Times, 15/03/2011                                       |
|114   |Voice of America News, Suicide Attacker Strikes Afghan Army      |
|      |Recruiting Office, 14/03/2011                                    |
|115   |Alissa Rubin, Taleban causes most Civilian deaths in Afghanistan |
|      |, The NY Times 09/03/2011                                        |
|116   |Voice of America News, UN Urges Review After Airstrikes Kill     |
|      |Afghan Children, 04/03/2011                                      |
|117   |Voice of America News, Afghan Probe Links NATO Strikes to 65     |
|      |Civilian Deaths, 27/02/2011                                      |
|118   |Xinhua General News Service, 1st LD One injured in gunshots in   |
|      |Kabul, 26/02/2011                                                |
|119   |Voice of America News, Taliban Claims Responsibility for Kabul   |
|      |Blast, 14/02/2011                                                |
|120   |Associated Press Online, Bomb explodes in central Kabul; no dead |
|      |reported, 08/02/2011                                             |
|121   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Suicide Attack Kills Eight In   |
|      |Kabul Supermarket, 28/01/2011                                    |
|122   |Amanda Kloer, Victory! UN Creates National Action Plan to Fight  |
|      |Bacha Bazi in Afghanistan Chanmge.Org, 26/01/2011               |
|130   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: Fears over child recruitment, abuse by              |
|      |pro-government militias, 20/01/2011                              |
|131   |Xinhuanet, 'Street children in Kabul call for peace, seek        |
|      |education', 18/01/2011                                           |
|132   |Voice of America News, Music Store Owners Bear Brunt of          |
|      |Insecurity in Afghan City of Jalalabad, 17/01/2011               |
|133   |Agence France-Presse (AFP), Four killed, 29 wounded in Kabul     |
|      |suicide attack, 12/01/2011                                       |
|134   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty,  Explosion In Kabul Kills One,  |
|      |Wounds Three Others, 04/01/2011                                  |
|135   |The International Herald Tribune, Taliban attack Afghan troops in|
|      |Kabul and Kunduz, 20/12/2010                                     |
|136   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Insurgents Strike In Kabul And  |
|      |North Of Country, 19/12/2010                                     |
|137   |Politiken, Afghan asylum children to be sent back, 16/12/2010    |
|138   |Associated Press, Afghan Armed Groups Interfere in Red Cross     |
|      |Work, 15/12/2010                                                 |
|139   |Alissa J. Rubin, 'Taliban Extend reach to North, Where Armed     |
|      |Groups Reign', 15/12/2010                                        |
|140   |Associated Press Online, 9 Afghan guards kidnapped in Kabul      |
|      |province, 30/11/2010                                             |
|141   |CBC News, Canada's handling of young Afghan detainees queried,   |
|      |28/11/2010                                                       |
|142   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Outrage Over A NATO Dismissal Of|
|      |Kabul Children's Fears, 23/11/2010                               |
|143   |Kevin Connolly, BBC News, ' Afghanistan war: US says violence    |
|      |reaches all-time high' 23/11/2010                                |
|144   |Associated Press Online, Afghan officials: Kabul attack kills 1, |
|      |wounds 2, 12/11/2010                                             |
|145   |Daily Times (PK), 10, including three NATO troops, killed in     |
|      |Afghanistan, 11/11/2010                                          |
|146   |Pajhwok Afghan News English, Woman injured in Kabul rocket       |
|      |strike, 05/10/2010                                               |
|147   |The Boston Globe, Afghan vote marred by deadly attacks, fraud    |
|      |reports; Bombings, gunfire kill 14Fewer voters than last year,   |
|      |19/09/2010                                                       |
|148   |BBC Monitoring South Asia - Political Supplied by BBC Worldwide  |
|      |Monitoring, Taleban claim killing four foreign soldiers in Afghan|
|      |capital, 10/10/2010                                              |
|149   |US State News Coalition Forces Kill Taliban Senior Commander     |
|      |Planning Kabul Attacks, 11/09/2010                               |
|150   |McClatchy Washington Bureau, Taliban tries to stop the music in  |
|      |Afghanistan - again, 03/09/2010                                  |
|151   |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), Afghanistan: Task Force   |
|      |373, the Secret Killers, 21/08/2010                              |
|152   |The Washington Post, Insurgents blamed for rise in Afghan        |
|      |civilian casualties; U.N. report comes as blasts kill 2 security |
|      |workers in Kabul, 11/08/2010                                     |
|153   |Agence France Presse - English, Mounting toll of attacks on      |
|      |Kabul, 10/08/2010                                                |
|154   |Xinhua General News Service,  Afghan, NATO troops kill armed     |
|      |militant in Kabul, 01/08/2010                                    |
|155   |US Fed News, Bomb Kills Three In Kabul Ahead Of Conference,      |
|      |20/07/2010                                                       |
|156   |Pajhwok Afghan News, Music, games shops targeted in Jalalabad,   |
|      |20/07/2010                                                       |
|157   |The Independent (London) Kabul blast kills three ahead of Afghan |
|      |state-building conference; As international delegates start to   |
|      |arrive, militants declare their intent, 19/07/2010               |
|158   |Voice of America News, 'NATO Says Taliban Orders Attacks on      |
|      |Civilians',  18/07/2010                                          |
|159   |Voice of America News, 'Petraeus Arrives in Afghanistan as       |
|      |Taliban Attack kills 5', 02/07/2010                              |
|160   |Voice of America News, Afghans Allege Civilians Killed in NATO   |
|      |Operation, 28/06/2010                                            |
|161   |Voice of America News, 'UN: Violence Getting Worse in            |
|      |Afghanistan', 21/06/2010                                         |
|162   |Chicago Tribune Militant attack on U.N. truck in Kabul kills 1;  |
|      |Brazen strike raises concerns for humanitarian efforts in region,|
|      |30/06/2010                                                       |
|163   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: Don't deport child migrants from Europe - rights    |
|      |groups, 22/06/2010                                               |
|164   |Pajhwok Afghan News, People asked to close shops for prayer,     |
|      |15/06/2010                                                       |
|165   |Voice of America News, Afghanistan Bombings Kill 11 Civilians, 2 |
|      |NATO Soldiers, 11/06/2010                                        |
|166   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Forty Killed, Scores More       |
|      |Wounded In Kandahar Blast, 10/06/2010                            |
|167   |The Guardian (London) - Final Edition, Rockets and burqa-clad    |
|      |suicide bombers mar Kabul meeting, 03/06/2010                    |
|168   |British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), The harsh lives of       |
|      |Kabul's street children, 24/05/2010                              |
|169   |The Guardian (London) - Final Edition, Kabul blast kills 12      |
|      |civilians and six Nato troops, 19/05/2010                        |
|170   |Voice of America News, Kabul Blast Kills at Least 18, Including  |
|      |US Soldiers, 18/05/2010                                          |
|171   |Pajhwok Afghan News English, Blast destroys music shops in       |
|      |Jalalabad, 13/05/2010                                            |
|172   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: Taliban "terror" campaign steps up a gear in        |
|      |Kandahar, 12/05/2010                                             |
|173   |Voice of America News, Roadside Bomb Kills 12 Civilians in       |
|      |Afghanistan, 28/04/2010                                          |
|174   |Deutsche Welle, Tough life for Kabul's street children,          |
|      |13/04/2010                                                       |
|175   |Voice of America News, More Afghan Civilians Dead; US, NATO      |
|      |Commander Addresses Elders, 06/04/2010                           |
|176   |Voice of America News, More Afghan Civilians Dead; US, NATO      |
|      |Commander Addresses Elders, 06/04/2010                           |
|177   |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS), Rights: Two-Thirds of Boys|
|      |in Afghan Jails Are Brutalised, Study Finds, 30/03/2010          |
|178   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Afghan children 'face world's   |
|      |worst conditions', 18 March 2010                                 |
|179   |Pajhwok Afghan News, Principal killed in Jalalabad blast,        |
|      |15/03/2011                                                       |
|180   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Vulnerable Kandahar Reels After |
|      |Blasts, 14/03/2010                                               |
|181   |Pajhwok Afghan News, Principal killed in Jalalabad blast,        |
|      |15/03/2011                                                       |
|182   |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Vulnerable Kandahar Reels After |
|      |Blasts, 14/03/2010                                               |
|183   |The Washington Post, At least 16 killed in Kabul suicide attack; |
|      |Taliban claims responsibility for guesthouse explosions,         |
|      |28/02/2010                                                       |
|184   |Pajhwok Afghan News English, Suicide bombing rocks Kabul,        |
|      |27/01/2010                                                       |
|185   |The Independent (London) Taliban storm Kabul with wave of suicide|
|      |bombings; Twelve dead and scores injured as militants target     |
|      |shopping centres and cinema in bid to derail swearing-in of      |
|      |government, 19/01/2010                                           |
|186   |Agence France Presse - English, Kabul on high alert after brazen |
|      |Taliban strikes, 19/01/2010                                      |
|187   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: 2009 worst year for children - rights watchdog,     |
|      |06/01/2010                                                       |
|188   |Integrated Regional Information Networks News (IRIN),            |
|      |Afghanistan: "The most dangerous place to be born", 26/11/2009   |
|189   |PARSA, Kids of Kabul dance with death along city's wrecked       |
|      |streets, September 2009                                          |



                                  APPENDIX B
                               COUNTRY MATERIAL


|      |Document                                                         |
|Item  |                                                                 |
|      |Indiscriminate violence                                          |
|1     |UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing International         |
|      |Protection Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan, 17 December |
|      |2010                                                             |
|2     |Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights  |
|      |on the situation of Human Rights in Afghanistan, 19 January 2011 |
|3     |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General to the Security  |
|      |Council on children and armed conflict in Afghanistan, 3 February|
|      |2011                                                             |
|4     |Human Rights Watch, Annual Report - Afghanistan, January 2011    |
|5     |Afghanistan NGO Safety Office (ANSO) reports                     |
|6     |UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Annual Report 2010 |
|      |Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict                        |
|7     |Oxfam 'Nowhere to Turn': The Failure to Protect Civilians in     |
|      |Afghanistan, 19 November 2010                                    |
|8     |Report of the Secretary General to the UN Security Council, 3    |
|      |February 2011                                                    |
|9     |UKBA Afghanistan Security Situation Update for the period        |
|      |covering 1 January 2010 to 15 March 2011                         |
|      |Displacement of population                                       |
|10    |Secretary-General to the UN General Assembly and Security        |
|      |Council, 'The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for  |
|      |international peace and security', 11 April 2011                 |
|11    |The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) report, 15    |
|      |April 2010                                                       |
|12    |The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World,  |
|      |'Displacement in the Muslim World: A Focus on Afghanistan and    |
|      |Iraq', 2009                                                      |
|13    |Consortium for Street Children & War Child, NGO Shadow report for|
|      |UN Committee on Rights of Child                                  |
|14    |UNICEF Afghanistan Humanitarian Action Report 2010               |
|15    |UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations,|
|      |April 2011                                                       |
|16    |Sufficiency of Protection                                        |
|17    |US Congressional Research Service, Afghanistan: Post Taliban     |
|      |Governance, Security, and US Policy, 15 April 2011               |
|18    |United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General on the situation |
|      |in Afghanistan and   its implications for international peace and|
|      |security, 10 March 2010                                          |
|19    |UN Human Rights Council, Report of the United Nations High       |
|      |Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation of human rights in|
|      |Afghanistan and on the achievements of technical assistance in   |
|      |the field of human rights, 19 January 2011                       |
|20    |Report of the Secretary-General to the UN Security Council on    |
|      |children and armed conflict in Afghanistan dated 3 February 2011 |
|21    |Save the Children, 'Devastating Impact - Explosive Weapons and   |
|      |Children' 2011                                                   |
|      |Forced Recruitment of Children                                   |
|22    |Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for|
|      |Children and Armed Conflict report, February 2010                |
|23    |Watchlist Report, August 2010                                    |
|      |Sexual Violence                                                  |
|24    |Report of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict in|
|      |Afghanistan, 3 February 2011                                     |
|25    |Report of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, 8 April   |
|      |2011                                                             |
|26    |IOM Trafficking Persons in Afghanistan Field Survey Report, June |
|      |2008                                                             |
|27    |US State Department Report 'Findings on the Worst Forms of Child |
|      |Labour Afghanistan, 2009                                         |
|      |Landmines                                                        |
|28    |Watchlist Afghanistan Report, 6 May 2011                         |
|29    |Brookings Project on US Relations with Islamic World Displacement|
|      |in the Muslim World: A Focus on Afghanistan and Iraq, 2009       |







                       APPENDIX C
                                         INDEX OF CASE AUTHORITIES



Supreme Court
   1.   ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]
      UKSC 4; [2011] 2 WLR 14



Court of Appeal

   2.      Ad Lee v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA
      Civ 348

   3.      DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2011] EWCA Civ 305

   4.      PO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]
      EWCA Civ 132

   5.      ZK (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2010] EWCA Civ 749

   6.    HH (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]
      EWCA Civ 426

   7.    QD (Iraq) and Anor v SSHD [2009] INLR  514,  [2009]  Imm  AR  132,
      [2009] EWCA Civ 620

   8.    AA (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2008]
      EWCA Civ 579

   9.    BE (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
      Civ 540

   10.  Jasim v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ
      342

   11.  E v Secretary of State  for  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49
      (extracts)

   12.  O, R v SSHD [2008] EWCA Crim 2835



High Court

   12.  Mansoor, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) (23 March 2011)

   13.  R (TS) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 2614
      (Admin)

   14.  R (Saeedi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  EWHC
      705 (Admin) (extracts)

   15.  R (on the application of Mlloja) v Secretary of  State  [2005]  EWHC
      2833 (Admin)



Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  /  Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal

   16.  HK and Others (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment
      by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG  [2010]  UKUT
      378 (IAC)

   17.  HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC)

   18.  AZ (Trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118 (IAC) (extracts)

   19.  AM and BM  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG  [2010]  UKUT  80  (IAC)
      (extracts)

   20.  TK (Tamils - LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 (extracts)

   21.  GS (Article 15(c): indiscriminate violence)  Afghanistan  CG  [2009]
      UKAIT 00044

   22.  AJ (Risk to Homosexuals) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 0001

   23.  AM & AM (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
      00091

   24.  RQ (Afghan National Army, Hizb-i-Islami, risk) Afghanistan CG [2008]
      UKAIT 00013

   25.  LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005

   26.  YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145

Statutes

   26.  Children Act 1989, ss 23A-24C



European Court of Justice/Court of Justice of the European Union

   27.  Elgafaji (Justice and Home Affairs) [2009] EUECJ C-465/0;  [2009]  1
      WLR 2100

   28.  Reference for a preliminary ruling from High Court of  Ireland  made
      on  15  October  2010,  M.E.  and  others   v   Refugee   Applications
      Commissioner, Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform  (Case  C-
      493/10)

   29.  Reference for a preliminary ruling from the Court of Appeal (England
      & Wales) (Civil Division) made on 18 August 2010 - NS v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department (Case C-411/10)



European Court of Human Rights

   30.  M.S.S. v Belgium and  Greece  [2011]  ECHR  108  (21  January  2011)
      (extracts)

   31.  N. v Sweden (23505/09) [2010] ECHR 1139 (20 July 2010)

   32.  Muskhadzhiyeva and others v Belgium (app no 41442/07) (2010) (French
      only, with translations of relevant extracts)

   33.  Rantsev v Cyprus & Russia [2010] ECHR 22 (app no 25965/04)

   34.  NA v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 616, (2009)  48  EHRR  15  (17  July
      2008);

   35.  Mubilanzila Meyuka and Kaniki Mitunga v  Belgium  [2006]  ECHR  1170
      (app no 13178/03)

   36.  Z and others v UK [2001] ECHR 333 (app no 29392/95)

   37.  Aydin v Turkey [2001] ECHR 440

   38.  Ireland v the United Kingdom [1978] ECHR 1 (18 January 1978)



European Charter of Fundamental Rights

   39.  The Charter of Fundamental Rights  of  the  European  Union  (2000/C
      364/01)

   40.  Commentary of the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European
      Union, the EU Network of Experts (extracts on Article 24)







Council of Europe

   41. Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in  Human
      Beings, Warsaw, 16.V.2005 (extracts)

   42.  Unaccompanied children in Europe: issues of arrival, stay and return
      Parliamentary Assembly Recommendation 1969 (2011)

   43.  EU Guidelines on Children and Armed Conflict 1507, 2004

   44.  Reception Conditions Directive 2003/9/EC



International law measures and statements

   44.  UN Convention on the Rights of the Child

   45.  Separated Children in Europe Programme  (SCEP),  Statement  of  Good
      Practice, 2004
   46.  Optional Protocol II to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
      the involvement of children in armed conflict, 2002
   47.  UN Committee on the Rights of the Child,  General  Comment  (No  6):
      "Treatment of  Unaccompanied  and  Separated  Children  outside  their
      Country of Origin"

   48.  ILO Convention 182 concerning the Prohibition and  Immediate  Action
      for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, 1999


Respondent's policy instruments

   49.  Every Child Matters: Change for Children: Statutory guidance to  the
      UK Border Agency on making arrangements to safeguard and  promote  the
      welfare of children: "the 2009 guidance" (extracts)

   50.  The Asylum Process Guidance on victims of trafficking: Guidance  for
      Competent Authorities (extracts)

   51.  The Asylum Process Guidance, Victims of  Trafficking:  guidance  for
      frontline staff  (extracts)

   52.  The Asylum Process Guidance, Processing Asylum  Application  from  a
      Child (extracts)

   53.  Operational Guidance Note on Afghanistan (March 2011)

 UNHCR Guidelines and documents

   54.  UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection,  Child  Asylum  Claims
      under Articles 1(A)2 and 1(F)  of  the  1951  Convention  and/or  1967
      Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees (22 December 2009)

   55.  UNHCR Guidelines on International  Protection,  The  application  of
      Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating  to
      the Status of Refugees to victims of trafficking and persons  at  risk
      of being trafficked (7 April 2006)

   56.   UNHCR  Guidelines  on  Policies  and  Procedures  in  Dealing  with
      Unaccompanied Children Seeking Asylum (February 1997)

   57.  UNHCR Refugee Children  Guidelines  on  Protection  and  Care,  1994
      (extracts)

   58.  UNHCR Handbook (extracts)

                                  APPENDIX D
                 INDEX TO THE APPELLANT'S PERSONAL EVIDENCE


|      | Index to the Appellant's Bundle                                 |
|1     |Expert report from Dr Sheila Melzak, 16/05/2011                  |
|2     |Opinion of Amnesty International, 12/05/2011                     |
|3     |Expert report from Iain Shearer, 09/05/2011                      |
|4     | Report from the Asylum Research Consultancy, 04/05/2011         |
|5     | Letter from Shropshire Council, 11/03/2011                      |
|6     |Letter from Shropshire Council, 01/03/2011                       |
|7     |Letter from Shropshire Council, 28/10/2010                       |
|8     |Letter from Newcastle under Lyme College, 21/10/2010             |
|9     |Letter from foster carer, Mohammed Naeem, 19/10/2010             |
|10    |Letter from Wolstanton High School, 18/10/2010                   |
|11    |Letter from Wolstanton Medical Centre, 17/10/2010                |
|12    |Letter from Shropshire Council, 28/09/2010                       |
|13    |Decision of SIJ Jarvis, 10/03/2010                               |
|14    |Grounds of Appeal, 24/02/2010                                    |
|15    |Determination of Immigration Judge Napthine, 10/02/2010          |
|16    |Expert report from Dr Giustozzi, 23/12/2009                      |
|17    |Statement of Appellant, 17/12/2009                               |
|18    |Award, Appellant is a Star, undated                              |
|19    |Map of Afghanistan, undated                                      |
|20    |Map of Musayi district, undated                                  |
|21    |Map of Surobi district, undated                                  |


