
  SP (Time for reply - Rules 30(2) and 45(4)(c)) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT
00010


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  8 November 2005                             |                           |
|Prepared                                        |...08 February             |
|                                                |2006.........              |


                                   Before

                   Mr D K Allen, Senior Immigration Judge
                       Mr T B Davey, Immigration Judge
                               Mr P Rogers, JP

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M S Gill, QC, Counsel instructed by Akther &
Darby Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Morris, Home Office Presenting Officer.

Procedure  Rule  30(2)  is  mandatory,  subject  to   the   possibility   of
prospective variation of the time-limit, as envisaged in Rule 45(4)(c)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  an  Adjudicator
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  of  19  February  2003
    refusing entry clearance.  The appeal was heard by the  Adjudicator  on
    11 June 2004.   She dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,
    but allowed it under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer subsequently sought and was granted  permission
    to appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.    By  virtue  of  a
    Transitional Provisions Order the appeal comes  before  the  AIT  as  a
    reconsideration  of  the  Adjudicator's  decision.   At  a  hearing  on
    28 April 2005 the Tribunal concluded that there was an error of law in
    the Adjudicator's determination.  The reason  for  this  was  that  the
    Adjudicator had said that she was applying the test in Edore (which was
    correct at that time), that her task was limited to seeing whether  the
    decision lay outside the range of  reasonable  responses  open  to  the
    respondent, and the matter was not for her discretion.  However at page
    28 of her determination she gave reasons for finding a disproportionate
    interference which amounted  largely  to  speculation  about  what  the
    future held.  Even on the current test  in  Huang  and  Kashmiri  these
    reasons did not make  the  case  "truly  exceptional".    The  Tribunal
    concluded that it was  therefore  appropriate  for  the  matter  to  be
    considered afresh.   It noted that Mr Gill QC wished to cross-appeal on
    the issue of interpretation of rule 281(iii) and that this deserved  to
    be aired.   The wing members had not been provided with copies  of  the
    appellant's bundle as  important  background  material.   The  Tribunal
    noted that the "respondent's notice" was only served yesterday (i.e. 27
    April 2005) and was too late to be considered either under Rule  19  of
    the 2003 Procedure Rules or under Rule 30 of the 2005 rules, neither of
    which provided for an extension of time.

2.   The appeal came before us on 8 November 2005 for the  second  stage  of
    the reconsideration.   Mr M S Gill, QC instructed  by  Akther  &  Darby
    Solicitors appeared on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  and  Mr  J  Morris
    appeared on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

3.   Mr Morris was hampered by not having a file.   We were able  to  assist
    him by providing copies of some of the papers.   We were also  able  to
    clarify that the Tribunal had found the error of law on  the  terms  as
    set out above and that reconsideration had been ordered.

4.   The first issue that fell for determination was that of  the  reply  or
    cross-appeal put in by Mr Gill on 27 April  2005.    First  of  all  we
    invited submissions as to whether this fell to be governed by the  2003
    Procedure Rules or the 2005 Procedure Rules.   It appeared to  us  that
    the matter was in principle governed by Rule 62(i) of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  That states as follows,

         "Subject to the following paragraphs  of  this  rule,  these  rules
         apply to any  appeal  or  application  to  an  Adjudicator  or  the
         Immigration Appeal Tribunal which was pending immediately before  4
         April 2005, and which continues on or after that date as if it  had
         been made to the Tribunal by virtue of  a  transitional  provisions
         order."


5.   Mr Gill accepted that the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal was  pending
    on 4 April 2005.  He referred  us  to  Article  9  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act  2004  (Commencement  No.5
    and Transitional Provisions)  Order  2005.    Article  9(1)  states  as
    follows.

         "Where,  immediately  before  commencement,   an   appeal   to   an
         Adjudicator is pending to which any of the old  appeals  provisions
         apply, those provisions shall continue to apply to the appeal after
         commencement, subject (except  where  Article  3  applies)  to  the
         modification  that  any  reference  in  those  provisions   to   an
         Adjudicator shall be treated as  a  reference  to  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal."


6.   As we pointed out, this was clearly subject to  a  consideration  of  a
    definition of the phrase "the old appeals provisions" in  Article  1(2)
    of the Order.   This is defined as follows:

         " 'The old appeals  provisions'  means  the  following  provisions,
         insofar  as  they  continue  to  have  effect  immediately   before
         commencement in relation to a pending appeal -


         (i)  Part IV of, and Schedule 4 to, the Asylum and Immigration  Act
         1999;


         (ii) Section 8(1) to (4) of the Asylum and Immigration Act 1993;


         (iii)    Sections 13 to 17 of the Immigration Act 1971."


7.   Mr Gill argued that Part IV and Schedule 4 of the 1999 Act had  created
    the power to make the procedure rules and therefore the 2003  Procedure
    Rules came within Part IV and Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act and  therefore
    had to be read as flowing from it and therefore this was a  case  where
    Rule 19 of the 2003 Procedure Rules applied.

8.   However, if one looks at the explanatory note to the 2003 rules  it  is
    stated that the Rules prescribe  the  procedures  to  be  followed  for
    appeals and applications to  an  Adjudicator  and  to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal under Part V of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, which came into force on 1 April 2003, and under Section  40A
    of the British Nationality Act 1981, as inserted by Section IV  of  the
    2002 Act.   If one then turns to Part V of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, and in particular to Section 106, it can  be  seen
    from  Section  106(b)  that  the  Lord  Chancellor   may   make   rules
    "prescribing procedure to be followed in  connection  with  proceedings
    under Section 82, 83, 101(1) or 103.   It is clear therefore  that  the
    power to make the 2003 Procedure Rules derived from Section 106 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and not from Part  IV  of,
    and Schedule 4 to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   In any  event,
    since the 2003 Procedure Rules were revoked by  Rule  61  of  the  2005
    Rules (subject to limited exceptions relating  to  time  limits  of  no
    relevance to this case), if the 2005 Rules did not apply to this issue,
    nothing would; a construction which we were not inclined to apply.

9.   We understood Mr Gill to accept our conclusions on  this  at  least  on
    the face of it, but he argued that on the basis of either set of  rules
    there were many cases allowing a statutory tribunal to  supplement  its
    rules and the key was to look at the substance of the rules  and  apply
    them fairly and justly.

10.  He went on to contend in particular with regard to Rule 30 of the  2005
    Rules  that  the  words  "any  hearing  of  or  in  relation   to   the
    reconsideration  of  the  appeal"  had  to  be  read  as  meaning:  any
    substantive hearing of the reconsideration of the appeal.

11.  We pause to remind ourselves of the wording of Rule  30.     It  states
    as follows,

    "30(1)   When the other party to the appeal is served with an order for
             reconsideration, he must, if he  contends  that  the  Tribunal
             should uphold the initial determination for reasons  different
             from or additional to those given in the  determination,  file
             with the Tribunal and serve on the applicant a  reply  setting
             out his case.


         (2)  The other party to the appeal must file and  serve  any  reply
             not later than five days before the  earliest  date  appointed
             for any hearing of or in relation to  the  reconsideration  of
             the appeal.


         (3)  In this rule, 'other party to  the  appeal'  means  the  party
             other than the  party  on  whose  application  the  order  for
             reconsideration was made."


12.  As we say, Mr Gill contended that this had to be read in order to  mean
    a  substantive  hearing  of  the  reconsideration  of  the  appeal,  as
    otherwise something such as an erroneous listing of the  hearing  which
    was adjourned could be enough. He contended that it did not follow that
    the fact that a hearing had taken place on 28 April meant that it was a
    lawfully conducted hearing in any event.  The Tribunal had not had  the
    bundles and had no proper basis to assess whether the  Adjudicator  was
    in error.   No written reasons had been provided so, insofar as it  was
    a decision purporting to identify an error of law, it was  an  unlawful
    decision and today was the only substantive hearing and  therefore  the
    reply had been put in in time.   It  was  therefore  argued  that  with
    reference to Rule 30(2) the Tribunal  should  interpret  the  words  as
    meaning "for any substantive hearing" which was the hearing today as no
    lawful ruling had been made on 28 April.

13.  Otherwise Mr Gill argued that such a rule should be looked at in  terms
    of its substance and the overriding objective of  the  rule  should  be
    borne in mind.  It was saying that the appellant should not  be  caught
    by surprise and set only a target timescale and was directory  and  not
    mandatory.  The Presenting Officer did  not  argue  that  he  had  been
    prejudiced although he did say that it was late, as had the  Presenting
    Officer at the stage one hearing.   It was necessary therefore to  look
    at the rule in that sort of way.

14.  Decisions such as Jeyanthan dealt with the question  of  the  power  of
    statutory tribunals to go beyond their own black  letter  rules.    The
    Secretary of State had had plenty of time to prepare a response to  the
    reply.

15.  We invited Mr Gill to say why, if it  were  relevant,   the  reply  had
    been put in so late.

16.  Mr Gill said that it seemed that the clients  had  wanted  a  different
    Counsel after the Adjudicator hearing and another  junior  Counsel  had
    been identified who considered the case complex and it  had  come  late
    before the hearing to Mr Gill.  He accepted that  it  could  be  argued
    that the problem should have been  identified  earlier  but  it  was  a
    reason and there was no blame to be ascribed to the appellant for that.
     There were cases in the context of judicial review and appeals to  the
    Court of Appeal where delay not attributable to an  appellant  was  not
    usually held against the appellant, especially with regard to something
    like a respondent's notice in relation  to  which  courts  were  fairly
    relaxed.   As to whether it was relevant for the Tribunal to  know  the
    reason he contended that given the position of the Secretary  of  State
    it was not, as no prejudice was claimed on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State but it was simply noted that it was out of time and it  was  left
    to the Tribunal.  The reason therefore did not really matter.

17.  He contended that for the Tribunal to do justice it would be  necessary
    for it to construe the rules accordingly and say the rule  was  capable
    of being construed to allow late replies.  These were really  procedure
    rules and subordinate legislation not primary and had to be  approached
    with a degree of flexibility.

18.  In response Mr Morris said that it was  unclear  what  was  before  the
    Tribunal in April but if it was the bundles provided today  then  there
    was not a difficulty.   The Secretary  of  State  would  need  time  to
    consider the notice if it were before the Tribunal and he did not  have
    any of the paperwork and there was  no  suggestion  that  it  had  been
    considered.  The reason for the late serving of the notice was relevant
    but it would not usually be a problem.   He would need time if  not  an
    adjournment to consider  the  case  in  the  round  and  the  issue  of
    intention to live together if it were before the Tribunal  today.   The
    rules were clear but he accepted that he was in difficulty today.

19.  By way of reply Mr Gill referred to the point  concerning  the  bundles
    and the fact that the Tribunal had purported to identify  an  error  of
    law with regard to the Article 8 findings.  The Tribunal had considered
    the  Adjudicator's  reasons  which  they  considered  appeared  to   be
    inadequate or speculative.   They needed to have looked at the evidence
    in order to make such a finding.  The decision of the Adjudicator could
    not be said to be perverse and the evidence, for example at page 20  of
    the  bundle,  showed  information  from  the  Lifers   Manager   giving
    information about what visits the sponsor would be entitled to  and  on
    that evidence the Adjudicator was entitled to find as she did.

20.  We adjourned briefly in order to give  consideration  to  and  come  to
    conclusions on the issue of the application of Rule 30 to the timing of
    Mr Gill's reply.

21.  After consideration we concluded that  the  reply  could  not  be  said
    properly to be before us.  We read the wording of  Rule  30(2)  of  the
    2005 Rules as  being  mandatory.   We  do  not  see  any  latitude  for
    interpretation otherwise where the wording is  that  a  person  in  the
    appellant's position in this situation must file and  serve  any  reply
    not later than five days before the earliest  date  appointed  for  any
    hearing of or  in  relation  to  the  reconsideration  of  the  appeal.
    Clearly service on the day before the hearing, as in this  case,  would
    not suffice.  We do not see merit in Mr Gill's argument that what  took
    place on 28 April 2005 could not properly be regarded  as  a  hearing.
    We see nothing to suggest that the fact that the wing members  had  not
    been provided with copies  of  the  appellant's  bundle  in  any  sense
    precluded the Tribunal from coming to a proper conclusion on the  error
    of law point.  It cannot be said that the Tribunal  did  not  have  the
    material in question. Even if it could, there is no  conceivable  doubt
    that it was a hearing.  But, further, Mr  Gill's  submission  fails  to
    deal with the fact that time under Rule 30 is not limited by  reference
    to any actual hearing, but by reference to the earliest date  appointed
    for any hearing (our emphasis), whether or not the hearing takes place.
    That, we think, is not accidental.  After all, the service (in time) of
    the reply might cause the hearing to be adjourned.  The  reasons  given
    by  the  Tribunal  were  clearly  based  on  its  assessment   of   the
    determination which we have set out above.  It is clear from  paragraph
    14.4 of the President's Practice Directions of 4 April 2005 that:

         "'Where the Tribunal acting  under  paragraph  14.2  transfers  the
         proceedings, it shall prepare written reasons for its finding  that
         the original Tribunal made  a  material  error  of  law  and  those
         written reasons shall  be  attached  to,  and  form  part  of,  the
         determination of the Tribunal which substitutes a fresh decision to
         allow or dismiss the appeal."


22.  We have set  out  those  reasons  above.   It  is  a  decision  of  the
    Tribunal, and the decision on an error of law has already been  reached
    and even if we had the power to revisit the decision that there was  an
    error of law we would see no reason to do so.  There is no  basis  upon
    which it can be contended that the hearing on 28 April 2005 was  not  a
    hearing within the meaning of rule 30(2), and, as we have noted  above,
    it is clear that the reply was only served a day  before  that  hearing
    and therefore does not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  sub-
    paragraph of the Rule.

23.  Since the hearing, Rule 45(4)(c) of the 2004 Procedure Rules  has  come
    to our attention. This states as follows:

         "Directions of the Tribunal may in particular -


         ...


         vary any time limit in these  Rules  or  in  directions  previously
         given by the Tribunal for anything to be done by a party."


24.  On the face of it this might appear  to  permit  consideration  of  the
    late reply in this case.  However, we are of the view  that  a  careful
    reading  of  Rule  45(4)(c)  indicates  a  prospective  rather  than  a
    retrospective variation, in the light of the  words:  "anything  to  be
    done by a party." No direction was sought, and no explanation  for  the
    lateness of service of the reply was provided.  Though it is clear from
    Rule 45(4)(c) that variation of the time limit in Rule 30 is  possible,
    we conclude that a power to make prospective  directions  in  no  sense
    connotes a power to condone, ex post facto, a failure  to  comply  with
    the requirements of the Rules.

25.  In any event, even if we had a discretion to vary, and  the  reply  was
    before us, we would see no merit to it. The  point  was  considered  in
    Shabbana Bibi [2002] UKIAT 06623, on which the Adjudicator relied,  and
    we find compelling the reasoning in that determination,  in  particular
    at paragraph 13, that intention means more than hope, that it would not
    have been lawful for the appellant and the  sponsor  to  live  together
    while the sponsor was in prison,  and  an  intention  to  do  something
    unlawful cannot be recognised by the way in which the Immigration Rules
    are interpreted.

26.  We went on to hear argument on the Article 8 issue which was  the  only
    issue  before  us  as  a  consequence  of   our   ruling   above,   for
    reconsideration.

27.  Mr Gill referred us to his skeleton argument.   He argued that the  way
    in which  the  Adjudicator  had  construed  the  immigration  rule  was
    relevant to the Article 8 issue. It was not just a  question  of  being
    exceptional.   He accepted that argument on paragraph 281(iii) was  not
    before the Tribunal because of its ruling on  his  reply.    He  argued
    that it would be artificial however not to take the matter into account
    as to do so would remove the Secretary of State's own approach to  such
    cases from the Article 8 issue even if the Tribunal  were  entitled  to
    rule that Mr Gill could not rely on paragraph 281(iii).    There was  a
    question as to the consistency of the  approach  of  the  Secretary  of
    State as set out in his guidance, and the State's policy could  not  be
    ruled out.

28.  Mr Morris on invitation said  that  he  was  content  for  the  witness
    statements that had been before  the  Adjudicator  to  stand  as  being
    unchallenged.   Mr Gill suggested that paragraphs  14  and  15  of  the
    determination could in effect be incorporated into our determination as
    providing a summary of the oral evidence.  We stated however that  this
    would not be appropriate as the matter  was  being  considered  afresh.
    However, we were prepared for the two witnesses who had appeared before
    the Adjudicator to be  called  and  in  essence  to  go  through  their
    evidence as given to the Adjudicator and confirm that it  remained  the
    case that that was their evidence today.

29.  The first witness was the sponsor's father.   He confirmed that he  had
    given evidence on 11 June to  the  Adjudicator  and  he  had  told  the
    Adjudicator that he confirmed his witness statement and  in  accordance
    with their beliefs had taken responsibility for the appellant  and  her
    son which necessitated him travelling back and  forth  to  Pakistan  to
    support her.  They were a close family unit and  respected  members  of
    their community both in Pakistan  and  the  United  Kingdom  and  would
    fulfil their duties and responsibilities.  His eldest daughter and  her
    husband would accommodate and support the appellant and her son.

30.  The next witness was the sponsor's sister.   She had given evidence  on
    11 June to the Adjudicator.  She was  referred  in  particular  to  the
    point that she had made in her evidence that the appellant spoke on the
    telephone to her husband but could not call him.   She could  not  call
    him in prison but he got cards and he called Pakistan but it  was  very
    hard as they lived in  a  village  in  Kashmir  and  there  were  often
    problems with crossed lines and it  was  very  hard  to  speak  to  the
    appellant and his child regularly but he tried.    She  confirmed  that
    the couple intend to live together.   There would  be  difficulties  if
    they could not live together in the United Kingdom as  a  family  unit.
    She had been in Pakistan earlier this year and spent a lot of time with
    the appellant. The village was a very small one of some two hundred and
    fifty people and everybody knew everybody. On  marriage  the  appellant
    should have gone to her in-law's house and she suffered  twice  because
    she could not do this and because her husband was  in  prison  and  the
    community talked about it.  She was living with her parents and not her
    parents in-law and this was a burden on her and on her son who was  now
    nearly four.   The family here could not go and see her  regularly  but
    visited her for two or three weeks and then had to leave and it  was  a
    double life for the appellant's son.

31.  The appellant's son was now of an age to  be  starting  school  and  he
    could attend pre-school at three.  The appellant did her best  at  home
    but there were no schools unless privately funded in the area until the
    child was five or six.  If he were in the United Kingdom he would be in
    pre-school now.   The village had suffered some tremors in  the  recent
    earthquake but luckily they had not experienced the  kind  of  problems
    experienced elsewhere.

32.  In his submissions Mr Morris said that the grounds covered  the  points
    that he wished to make and he queried what was  exceptional  about  the
    case.  The witness statements did not show the  case  was  exceptional.
    Family life could be maintained with contact between  the  sponsor  and
    the family and although it  would  be  erratic  there  was  a  workable
    telephone system.  The authority of Huang was clearly of  significance.
    Family life could be  maintained.   The  appellant's  own  actions  had
    caused  this  problem  for  his  family  life  not  being  able  to  be
    maintained.

33.  In his submissions Mr Gill  referred  us  to  the  points  set  out  at
    paragraphs 8 to 21 of his skeleton argument which cross  referred  back
    to the intention point.   He also stated that the  submissions  to  the
    Adjudicator at paragraphs 16 to 21 of the determination remained valid.
      The Adjudicator's findings of fact at  paragraph  22  and  26  to  30
    needed to be looked at.

34.  The only issue under Article 8  was  that  of  proportionality  and  he
    queried what it was the State was wishing  to  protect.   He  contended
    that how the State viewed  its  own  rules  became  important  and  the
    Tribunal was obliged to have regard to the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    interpretation of his formerly stated rules which brought in  paragraph
    2.2 of the Secretary of State guidance referred  to  in  the  skeleton.
    Policy objectives had to be considered.  If the  approach  set  out  at
    paragraph 20(a) was adopted as it was suggested it should be then there
    was no need to consider exceptionality.  He referred to an authority of
    Mr Justice Collins to the effect that if it came within the  spirit  of
    the immigration rules if not within the letter then it was  enough  for
    Article 8 to be satisfied.   The  spirit  of  Article  8  required  the
    Tribunal to consider these arguments.  The appellant should  have  been
    granted leave to enter under Article 8.

35.  If he had to show exceptionality then the Tribunal was referred to  the
    skeleton. Paragraph 26(b)(i) showed that it  was  especially  important
    where prisoners' families were concerned and he referred to the  bundle
    on that.  The sponsor was  already  being  punished  for  his  criminal
    conduct but deprivation of his family life was not  part  of  that.  If
    they were in the United Kingdom they  could  go  and  see  him  and  he
    queried why he and the family  should  be  denied  access  because  the
    appellant was abroad.  Family life was to be actively  promoted.    The
    Secretary of State's policy and Article  8  were  designed  to  protect
    family life.  Page 20 of the bundle concerned  the  degree  of  contact
    that would be possible if the appellant were in the United Kingdom  and
    there  was  a  positive  obligation  to  encourage  and  assist  family
    relationships.  There were further matters in the bundle concerning the
    children, at pages 130 and 131 and there was the  oral  evidence  also.
    The effect on the child should be considered.  He was entitled  to  see
    and be with his father.

36.  It was unrealistic to suggest that there could be regular  visits  from
    Pakistan.  The child was a British citizen and entitled  to  come  here
    and benefit from British education.  It was not  an  entitlement  as  a
    matter of law to come here for his education but if  he  exercised  his
    right to come here as a British citizen it could be said  that  he  was
    entitled to that education.   However if he moved here and  his  mother
    stayed behind in Pakistan there would be disruption to the family.   It
    would be an error of law to say that because the husband was in  prison
    he had to put up with the consequential problems.  It was not  a  point
    in any event raised in the grounds.  It was important  to  this  family
    with  their  religious  and  cultural  tradition  and   the   appellant
    recognised his obligations and wanted to maintain them.   The  fact  of
    his being in prison should not stop his wife and child  from  being  in
    the United Kingdom.   They were being denied the strong monthly contact
    that could take place if she were here and she could not come close  to
    that kind of family life even if she were able to visit once or twice a
    year.   There was a cost to that and  in  financial  terms  there  were
    inevitable restrictions on visits.  The family did what they  could  to
    visit her in Pakistan.  It was true that they would not have to do that
    if she came here but it was questioned how many visits  there  were  to
    be.   As he was in prison there was all the more reason to give  effect
    to his family  life.    The  United  Kingdom  recognised  the  need  to
    overcome the obstacles and it compounded it to say that she  could  not
    come here.  The reality of  the  problems  of  making  entry  clearance
    applications was not irrelevant and it had to be queried as to  whether
    she would get entry clearance and often it  could  be  that  a  refused
    applicant would fail under a visit application in practice, although in
    theory she could apply.

37.  In effect the family was being punished as well as the sponsor.    This
    gave rise to it being an exceptional case.   The Tribunal was  reminded
    of the Home  Office  policy  and  all  the  statements  in  the  bundle
    concerning promoting  prisoners'  family  life.    These  matters  were
    emphasised in the skeleton argument.  But there was no  relevant  state
    interest or policy here.

38.  Mr Gill also referred us to the decision of the Court of  Human  Rights
    in Boultif which he argued was  relevant  to  exceptionality  since  it
    showed that looking at the relevant criteria the Court of Human  Rights
    looked at a whole range of circumstances but did not use language  such
    as "exceptionality" so this could give meaning to the  Court  of  Human
    Rights case law.   Paragraph 53 in  particular  in  that  judgment  was
    relevant and also paragraph 55.   It showed  how  the  Court  of  Human
    Rights struck such balances. It was less restrictive than the Secretary
    of State's position in this case.  The language of exceptionality could
    lead to looking at the  matter  from  the  most  extreme  circumstances
    possible  It was necessary to comply with the spirit of the  rules  and
    the Court of Human Rights adopted a liberal approach and the  Secretary
    of State accepted the need to promote prisoners'  family  rights.    It
    was an overwhelmingly strong case and the appeal should be allowed.

39.  We stated that we would  reserve  our  determination  and  subsequently
    provide full written reasons which we now do.

40.  We have set out above our ruling on the matters which  led  us  to  the
    conclusion that the only matter before us was that of Article 8 of  the
    Human Rights Convention.   It is important that we remind ourselves  of
    the facts in this case.   The appellant married the sponsor, who  is  a
    British citizen, on 2 August 2001 in Pakistan.  The two  families  live
    in the same village and are well known to each other although they  are
    not related.  The couple first met when the sponsor was on a  visit  to
    Pakistan in 1999 and  although  the  marriage  was  arranged  they  had
    already decided to get married.   The sponsor returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom after the marriage and was arrested in September 2001,  charged
    with murder  and  convicted  with  two  others  in  December  2002  and
    sentenced to life imprisonment.

41.  In MB (Croatia) (Huang -  Proportionality  -  Bulletins)  [2005]  UKIAT
    00092, the IAT examined the implications  of  Huang  for  the  ordinary
    case.  The Tribunal concluded  that  the  immigration  rules  were  the
    starting  point  for  the  assessment  of  proportionality.     If   an
    individual had no case within the rules or the extra-statutory policies
    and concessions, it would have to be a truly exceptional  case  on  its
    facts for an Adjudicator  properly  to  conclude  that  an  immigration
    decision  was  disproportionate  and  unlawful.    It  is  within  this
    framework that we consider the issue of  proportionality  which  as  Mr
    Gill pointed out is the issue that requires determining in the  context
    of the Article 8 appeal here.

42.  We do not agree with Mr Gill that it can properly be  argued  that  the
    case is not one  where  the  exceptionality  principle  applies.    The
    appeal was dismissed under paragraph 281(iii) of HC 395, on  the  basis
    that the requirement of that sub-paragraph was not met, the Adjudicator
    taking guidance from a determination of the IAT in Shabbana Bibi [2002]
    UKIAT 06623.  There is no reconsideration of that finding since  as  we
    have set out above the only challenge to that aspect  of  the  decision
    came so late that on our ruling the reply of Mr Gill  setting  out  the
    challenge was not before us since it was not put in in time.  The  case
    therefore must be regarded  as  one  in  which  the  appellant  has  no
    substantive claim within the Immigration Rules.   The  Tribunal  in  MB
    went on to say at paragraph 32, that where a  Rule  or  extra-statutory
    provision covers the sort of  circumstance  upon  which  an  individual
    relies, e.g. entry for marriage, but the individual falls  outside  the
    specific requirements or limits of the otherwise  applicable  rules  or
    policy, that is a very clear indication that removal  is  proportionate
    and it is not for the judicial decision maker, except in the clear  and
    truly exceptional case,  to  set  aside  the  limitations  set  by  the
    executive,  accountable  to  Parliament  and,  in  the  case   of   the
    Immigration Rules, approved by Parliament.

43.  The Tribunal went on to say at paragraph 35 that Article  8  is  not  a
    general provision justifying the overriding of immigration  control  on
    general compassionate grounds or whether there  may  be  harshness  and
    misfortune from removal.

44.  The circumstances in this case are that clearly the quality  of  family
    life that can be enjoyed by the appellant and her  child  from  outside
    the United Kingdom must be significantly less than that that which they
    would enjoy if in the United Kingdom.   We see from the  memorandum  of
    the Lifers Manager at pages 20 to 21 of the appellant's bundle that  as
    a well behaved prisoner who is considered to be  on  "enhanced  status"
    the sponsor is entitled to 6 x 2 hour family visits in open  forum  per
    month.  He is also able to apply for two family days per year again  in
    open forum (twelve hours).   It is also said that  there  is  unlimited
    contact available by letter and telephone on a daily basis.  The  point
    is also made that support for a "lifer" is a critical role  as  release
    nears and a prolonged period of  sustained  contact  and  support  will
    enhance the resettlement process for any prisoner.

45.  Mr Gill also drew our attention to a  statement  in  Parliament  on  20
    January 2004  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department that the prison service  has  been  working,  together  with
    other  agencies,  to  develop  an  integrated  approach  to  supporting
    prisoners and their families in sustaining their  relationship.   There
    is a paper from Karen Laing of the Newcastle Centre for Family  Studies
    at the University of Newcastle which notes general  acceptance  of  the
    fact that prisoners' families suffer a great deal and comments  on  the
    effect on the relationships within the family  of  a  prisoner  between
    themselves and with the prisoner.   There is also reference to  rule  4
    of the Prison Rules of 1989 which states as follows:

         "A prisoner shall be  encouraged  and  assisted  to  establish  and
         maintain such relations with  such  persons  and  agencies  outside
         prison as may, in the opinion of the  governor,  best  promote  the
         interests of his family and his own social rehabilitation."


    We have also read  the  summary  of  submissions  made  by  Action  for
    Prisoners' Families to the Green Paper consultation  and  the  comments
    there on the problems experienced most likely by children  who  have  a
    prisoner, in particular a parent, within the family.   It is said  that
    children will never maintain a healthy emotional link with  the  parent
    in prison while there are so many barriers both in relation to visiting
    prison and receiving support in the community.  There is also reference
    to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1988, both holding that all  children  have  a  right  to  maintain
    personal  contact  with  both  parents  but  that  many  children  find
    themselves separated from, and unable  to  maintain  contact  with  the
    parent or sibling in prison.   There is also a paper from a Mr Murray a
    PhD student at the  Institute  of  Criminology  at  the  University  of
    Cambridge where it is said among other things that over  the  last  ten
    years some prisons have developed family and children's extended visits
    giving children longer and more normal contact time with their  fathers
    in prison but that these are few and far between and only offered to  a
    small number of prisoners.


46.  These matters tie in with the points made in Mr Gill's skeleton to  the
    effect that Article 8 involves not  merely  a  negative  obligation  to
    refrain from interfering with Article 8 rights but involves a  positive
    obligation to promote and develop those  rights.    He  refers  to  the
    context of the United Kingdom's policies being  very  much  to  promote
    family relationships of prisoners and  points  to  the  danger  of  any
    suggestion that the whole situation is simply the fault of the  sponsor
    for being in prison in the first place.   He also refers  to  the  fact
    that there is family life going beyond the husband/wife relationship in
    that the appellant has a married sister in the United Kingdom  and  has
    been fully supported by her husband's family and she  seems  very  much
    part of  his  family  and  is  expected  in  accordance  with  cultural
    conditions to move in with them. We have heard from  her  sister-in-law
    about the difficulties being  experienced  by  the  appellant  and  her
    child.

47.  It is of course the case, in the light of  the  fact  that  this  is  a
    reconsideration of the Article 8 issue that the findings in this are  a
    matter for us and the findings of the Adjudicator  on  this  particular
    point in no sense bind us.  We do not consider,  bearing  in  mind  the
    test that we have set out above, that this case can be  said  to  be  a
    truly exceptional one.   It is clear as we have noted above that  there
    is a significant adverse impact on the quality of family life  in  this
    case by dint of the sponsor being in prison in the United  Kingdom  and
    the appellant living in Pakistan.   Obviously for  a  number  of  years
    they would not be able to spend more than the relatively limited amount
    of time together that it appears from  the  Lifers  Manager's  evidence
    they would be able to do on the visits.  It is the  case  however  that
    from Pakistan telephone contact can be and is made.   The appellant has
    the opportunity to apply to visit her husband, and  we  cannot  predict
    and nor should we attempt to do so what the likely chance of success of
    such application would be. On the face of it though there seems  to  be
    no reason why a visit should not be made from time to time and  contact
    to be made person to person between the appellant, her  child  and  her
    husband.   The context of government policy to families of prisoners is
    not without relevance to this situation, but we do  not  consider  that
    the particular situation where the prisoner's wife  and  child  are  in
    another country rather than in this country is such as  to  render  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision unlawful under the Human Rights Act.



48.  We should add that we do not derive assistance  from  the  decision  of
    the European Court of Human Rights in Boultif v Switzerland  [2001]  33
    EHRR 50 to which Mr Gill referred us.   This, it will be recalled, is a
    case involving an Algerian national  who  had  entered  Switzerland  in
    December 1992, married a Swiss citizen in March  1993,  and  some  four
    years later was sentenced to two years  imprisonment  for  robbery  and
    damage to property, offences committed in 1994.  In May 1998 the  Swiss
    authorities refused to review his residence permit.   This was held  to
    comprise a violation of Article 8 of the Convention.  It  can  be  seen
    therefore that it was dealing with a very different situation from that
    before us.   We bear in mind Mr Gill's point that the relevance of this
    point is that it shows how  the  Court  of  Human  Rights  strikes  the
    balance in such cases, concluding as it did that the appellant had been
    subjected to a serious impediment to established family life  since  it
    was practically impossible for him to  live  his  family  life  outside
    Switzerland and the court did not  consider  that  his  wife  could  be
    expected to follow him to Algeria.  That is a far cry however from  the
    situation before us, however, and in particular in a case such as  that
    before us where the Immigration Rule is not satisfied,  in  considering
    whether on the facts of the case it can properly be  described  as  one
    that is truly exceptional.  With regard to the decision of Collins J in
    Lekstaka [2005] EWHC 0745 (Admin), which we think is the  authority  Mr
    Gill had in mind, it was a case on removal, with very  different  facts
    from those in the instant appeal, and the reference at paragraph 38  to
    the case falling within the spirit of the Rules, if not the letter,  is
    clearly fact-specific, and we do not read it as being of any more  than
    marginal relevance to the appeal before us.

49.  For the reasons stated above, we have concluded  that  this  is  not  a
    truly exceptional case.  Family life can be carried  on  albeit  to  an
    attenuated extent and over the number of years when it will be required
    to do so in this form, between the appellant  and  her  husband.    The
    notion of a case being truly exceptional is  one  which  by  definition
    must embrace a very small minority of cases and this is not  one  which
    in our view comes close to fulfilling that narrow criterion.

50.  This appeal is dismissed.





Signed:
Date:
              Mr D K Allen, Senior Immigration Judge

