
MD (Judge's knowledge; standard of English) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00013

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

      No hearing


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     MD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

1. An Immigration Judge who believes that, in dealing with other  cases,  he
has developed a specialised familiarity with a particular sort of  evidence,
that causes him to reach an adverse view  of  the  genuineness  of  evidence
produced to him, ought not to act on that view without  giving  the  parties
an opportunity to deal with the point.

2.  An appellant may be able to make himself understood in  written  English
statements produced in his own time without having the  ability  in  English
necessary to follow an advanced course dealing with abstract concepts.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant, a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  Tribunal
      against the decision of the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer  on  25
      September  2007  refusing  him  Entry  Clearance  as  a  student.   An
      Immigration Judge dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant  sought  and
      obtained an order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter  comes  before
      us.

2.    The appellant is outside the  United  Kingdom  and  has  no  nominated
      representative in the United Kingdom.  This appearing to us  to  be  a
      suitable case in which to do so, we have exercised our  discretion  to
      determine this reconsideration without a hearing, as we are  permitted
      to do  by  rule  15(2)(b)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
      (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended).

3.    The respondent stated that he refused the application because  he  was
      not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of subparagraphs
      57(ii) and (vii) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC
      395. That is to say, he was not persuaded that the appellant was  able
      and intended to follow his course, or (as he makes clear by  the  text
      of the notice of refusal) that there were sufficient  funds  available
      to the appellant to enable him to meet the costs of the course and his
      maintenance and accommodation during it.

4.    In his determination  dismissing  the  appeal  the  Immigration  Judge
      begins by alleging  that  the  application  was  refused  because  the
      appellant could not meet the 'following requirements of paragraph 57',
      and then sets out paragraph 57 in  full.   It  is  not  clear  how  he
      reaches the  view  that  the  respondent  thought  that  none  of  the
      requirements of para 57 were met, and it seems  to  us  that  that  of
      itself would be sufficient to amount to a material error  of  law,  in
      that it is extremely difficult to say that the Immigration Judge would
      himself necessarily have reached the view he did on the outcome of the
      appeal if he had appreciated the limited nature  of  the  respondent's
      refusal.

5.    The Immigration Judge continues his  determination  by  deciding  that
      the documentation produced by the appellant to support his case should
      be rejected for a number of reasons.  The IELC diploma, said to attest
      the appellant's abilities in the English language, is,  he  says,  'an
      obvious forgery'.  He draws on his own  knowledge  and  experience  to
      make this judgment, stating that he has seen 'very many  genuine  IELC
      certificates', and that this one has 'plainly been produced on a  word
      processor' and 'is not in the usual form with the  score  achieved  in
      the test'.

6.    We are not in a position specifically to doubt  what  the  Immigration
      Judge says about having seen many genuine IELC certificates,  although
      bearing in mind that, as  the  certificate  itself  makes  clear,  the
      abbreviation stands for 'Irich English  Language  Centre',  a  private
      institution in Peshawar founded in 1998, his assertion may be regarded
      as implausible.  What is clear, however, is that  if  the  Immigration
      Judge thought he had the specialised  knowledge  necessary  to  detect
      forgeries of IELC certificates, he should have  declared  it  to  both
      parties before acting on it.  Further,  the  respondent  had  cast  no
      doubt  on  the  genuineness  of  the   certificate:   and   in   those
      circumstances although the Immigration Judge was clearly  entitled  to
      raise the issue, he ought  not  to  have  determined  it  against  the
      appellant without giving him an opportunity to deal  with  the  point.
      Further again, there is no trace in the determination that in reaching
      his conclusion the Immigration Judge bore in mind that  forgery  in  a
      civil case requires proof to a high  standard,  the  burden  of  proof
      being on the party relying (or, in a case such as  this,  presumed  to
      rely) on the allegation of forgery.  His treatment of this document is
      a further clear error of law, possibly compounded by his confusion  of
      this certificate with some other document of which he had indeed  seen
      many examples.

7.    The Immigration Judge went on to reject  other  documents  because  he
      thought they had been prepared  on  'the  word-processor'  and  others
      because  they  were  self-serving  or  derived  from  members  of  the
      appellant's family.  These were  again  points  not  previously  taken
      against the appellant, and of which he ought to have been given notice
      if they were to motivate a decision  against  him.   In  reaching  his
      conclusions the Immigration  Judge  referred,  as  the  appellant  has
      pointed out in his grounds for  reconsideration,  to  a  part  of  the
      application form that does not appear to exist.

8.     For  the  foregoing  reasons  we  find  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      materially  erred  in  law  in  making  his  determination.   We  must
      therefore substitute a determination of the appeal.

9.    As we have said, the respondent took two specific points  against  the
      appellant.  He has had ample opportunity to deal with those points  in
      the documents accompanying his appeal.  We take them in turn.

10.   The rules require that the appellant be able to undertake his  course.
       In this case the course proposed is an Advanced Diploma  in  Business
      Management, taught from the  beginning  in  English,  awarded  by  the
      Association of Business Executives, a UK body that we have  no  reason
      to  suppose  does  not  endeavour  to   ensure   that   its   advanced
      qualifications are awarded only to those  who  in  a  UK  context  are
      worthy of them.  The  crucial  question  is  whether  the  appellant's
      abilities in English are sufficient.  The respondent  decided  not  to
      accept the IELC certificate as evidence of the appellant's ability  to
      follow the course.  He pointed  out  that  there  was  no  independent
      evidence of the appellant's abilities in English from  any  body  that
      would be recognised in the UK as one whose opinions had weight.   That
      is correct as far as it goes, but given  that  in  applications  under
      para 57 there is no specific requirement for an opinion  from  such  a
      body we must do what we can  with  that  material  the  appellant  has
      supplied.

11.   He says in his grounds of appeal that he has studied English  and  has
      studied in English (in Pakistan) for many years.  On the  other  hand,
      he now relies on a certificate from a body which itself is  apparently
      unable to supply certificates in standard English.  The printed  parts
      of the form read (the bracketing of what might be  otherwise  regarded
      as the title of the certificate is a feature of the original):

        "(Diploma in English Language) ... Awarding to Mr/Miss/Mrs. ...  On
        successful completion of the advanced level of English Language  at
        IELC.  ... This diploma is awarded to him/her because of  excellent
        performance in English language examination."

12.   The appellant's mark is recorded, here and on another  IELC  document,
      as 73%, but there is no  information  about  what  mark  entitles  the
      examinee to describe his result  as  'excellent',  nor  is  there  any
      information about the qualifications of those who attribute the  marks
      to candidates.

13.   In his written submissions, the appellant claims that the  college  at
      which he proposed to study has  accepted  that  his  English  is  good
      enough.  That does not appear to be the case.  Amongst the papers is a
      letter from the college saying that his language skills will be tested
      on arrival, and 'if we don't find your skills up to our  requirements,
      you will be required to follow an intensive language course before you
      start your major course'.  So it  is  clear  that  acceptance  by  the
      college in question carries neither an assurance about the applicant's
      ability in English nor indeed an assurance that the candidate will, on
      arrival, be allowed to begin the course for which he has registered.

14.   The papers contain a number of  documents  apparently  emanating  from
      the appellant and written in English.  Only one of  them  contains  an
      assertion that the appellant prepared and wrote it himself.  It is the
      standard 'student questionnaire'.  One of the questions  is  'Did  you
      personally type or write this form yourself?'.  The appellant's  typed
      answer is: 'Yes,I have typed and work it myself.'  Asked  why  he  has
      chosen to study abroad, and how the course chosen differs from similar
      course available in Pakistan, the appellant does not answer the latter
      part of the  question,  which  suggests  (assuming  that  he  was  not
      deliberately declining to answer the respondent's questions)  that  he
      did not understand it; amongst the reasons  given  in  answer  to  the
      first part is 'UK Institution have strong  faculty  and  an  excellant
      studding envirement not only theoritical but  also  provide  practical
      experience too.'  Asked whether there has been a gap  since  his  last
      studies and if so how  he  filled  it,  he  again  misunderstands  the
      question, saying 'Yes,during this gap' he was employed; but  the  form
      was completed in September 2007 and his previous studies only ended in
      June 2007: the summer vacation is  not  normally  called  a  'gap'  in
      studies.  Elsewhere on the form he writes, in inverted commas  for  no
      apparent reason unless it is because  he  is  copying  from  something
      else:


           "I have search many colleges for  advance  diploma  in  business
           Management on Web and finally I choose "RIMS COLLEGE".


      No reason for the choice is given there, but later the reader  of  the
      form is told that 'This  Programe  is  to  enhance  student's  Carrier
      prospects', but what he proposes to do on its  completion  is  clearly
      stated to be setting up 'my Own  Business  of  Electric,Equipments  in
      Pakistan'. Similar errors can be found in the other documents  he  has
      supplied, including the last, a letter complaining about the delay  in
      dealing with his case (not an unusual delay,  regrettably,  given  the
      vast number of cases whish the Tribunal has to determine), not set out
      like an ordinary English business or professional letter, and  reading
      as follows:

           "Respected Sir/Madam!
           It is requested that my appeal for re-consideration was approved
           by the Senior Judge back in July 2008. But till date, I have not
           been assigned any hearing date by the Tribunal, I will be highly
           obliged if the Tribunal enlist it for my hearing date and let me
           inform about the final outcome.
           Sincerely yours!"

15.   These documents are full of elementary errors and fail to observe  the
      ordinary rules of grammar and business practice.  It could rightly  be
      said that they are largely intelligible.  But we have to bear in  mind
      that these documents are the best the appellant could  do,  given  all
      the time he wished to take to prepare  them,  with  all  the  help  he
      wished to have, and in a context where he knew that his  abilities  in
      English were on trial.  By contrast, the English  abilities  he  needs
      are those for immediate oral discourse in an advanced business  course
      which will no doubt deal from the very first day with concepts of some
      subtlety, taught and discussed in English alone.  It also remains true
      that the appellant chose not to  offer  any  recognised  qualification
      (for  example  IELTS)  and  has  done  nothing  since   his   original
      application to supplement it in this way.

16.   It seems to us that despite the fact that, in  the  circumstances  set
      out above, the appellant  is  capable  of  constructing  sentences  in
      almost intelligible near-English, we are unable to  say  that  he  has
      established that his English is sufficiently good for  the  course  he
      proposed.  We find that at  the  date  of  the  decision  he  has  not
      discharged the burden of proof in relation to para 57(ii).

17.   That is sufficient to dispose of this appeal,  but  we  look  also  at
      para 57(vii).  The respondent noted that the  appellant  had  provided
      certain documents said to show the financial standing of  his  father,
      who was to fund the appellant's studies, but refused  the  application
      in part because there was no material showing what other claims  there
      might be on those funds.  That remains the case.  The appellant is one
      of six siblings.  Only one other was at the date of the decision still
      in full-time education, but  there  is  nothing  to  show  what  other
      demands there are on his father's  resources;  whether  they,  or  any
      identifiable part of them, is genuinely available and genuinely  going
      to be used for the further education of the appellant (in priority  to
      any other demands that there may be or that may arise), or whether any
      of the fixed assets of which evidence has been offered can or will  be
      rendered liquid in  order  to  fund  the  appellant's  proposal.   The
      appellant has, as we said above, had every opportunity  to  deal  with
      the  respondent's  concerns,  but  nothing  to  the  point  has   been
      forthcoming.  In these circumstances we find that  the  appellant  has
      failed to discharge the burden upon him in relation to para 57(vii).

18.   For the foregoing reasons, having found  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      materially erred in law, we substitute a determination dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date: 12 March
                                                   2009

