
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

             LA (para 289A: causes of breakdown) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |                        |
|On 5 March 2009                         |                        |
|                                        |                        |

                                   Before

                     SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     la
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

In the light of AG (India) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2007] EWCA Civ 1534, when deciding if an appellant who  is  the  victim  of
domestic  violence  has  proved  that  the  "relationship  was   caused   to
permanently break down before  the  end  of  that  period  as  a  result  of
domestic violence" the Tribunal must be careful to assess  the  evidence  in
the round, looking at the totality of the evidence and  remembering  that  a
broken marriage may have ended before the parties separate and the  marriage
may have broken down as a result of domestic violence even if other  grounds
are given in matrimonial proceedings or raised before the Tribunal.

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr M Symes, Counsel
For the Respondent:       Mrs M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was  granted  an  order  for  the
    reconsideration of the determination of  Immigration  Judge  P-J  White
    who, sitting at Surbiton on 12 December 2008, dismissed the  appeal  of
    the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated  17  October
    2008 to curtail her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 323(ii) of HC 395, the Respondent  having  decided  that  the
    marriage of the Appellant was no longer  subsisting  and  that  she  no
    longer met the requirements of the Immigration Rule under which she had
    been admitted.

2.       On  12  November  2008  the  Appellant  made  an  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain as a spouse whose marriage had  broken  down
    as a result of domestic violence under paragraph 289A  of  HC  395  (as
    amended).  In that regard on 21 November 2008 her appeal came before an
    Immigration Judge who granted two  applications  first  permitting  the
    Appellant to amend the grounds of appeal so as  to  rely  expressly  on
    paragraph 289A and the second was for  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
    Respondent to consider and decide upon the application of 12  November.



3.      The Immigration Judge records at paragraph 4  of  his  determination
    that in the event no decision had been reached when the appeal was  re-
    listed before him and the Respondent was for  operational  reasons  not
    represented.  The Immigration Judge was not invited by either party  to
    adjourn on that account and was satisfied that the interests of justice
    did not require any further adjournment.

4.      In the event, the Immigration Judge determined  that  the  Appellant
    did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 289A (iv) and accordingly
    the Respondent was  entitled  to  curtail  her  leave  under  paragraph
    323(ii) and  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  thus  failed.
    Paragraph 289A(iv) provides that a person who is the victim of domestic
    violence and who is seeking indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom "is able to produce such evidence as may  be  required  by  the
    Secretary of State to establish that the  relationship  was  caused  to
    permanently break down before the end of that period  as  a  result  of
    domestic violence". The reference to "that period" is to the time  that
    the appellant had leave to be in the United Kingdom as, inter  alia,  a
    spouse and is defined elsewhere in paragraph 289A.

5.       In  ordering  reconsideration  Senior  Immigration   Judge   Latter
    considered the grounds, and in particular grounds 1  and  2,  satisfied
    him that it was arguable that the Immigration Judge may have  erred  in
    law in his assessment of whether this appeal should have  been  allowed
    on immigration grounds.

6.      The Appellant entered into an arranged marriage  with  her  husband,
    Mufazzal Sham, a person present and settled in the United Kingdom, on 3
    November 2006.  She came to the United Kingdom on 1 June 2007  and  was
    granted leave to enter until 1 June 2009 as his spouse.

7.      The Secretary of State, having received information  to  the  effect
    that the marriage was no longer subsisting from  Mr  Sham,  decided  to
    curtail her leave to remain as of 17 October 2008.

8.      The Immigration Judge heard evidence from the Appellant who  adopted
    her witness statement and explained that the Appellant's marriage to Mr
    Sham was unsuccessful from the start.

9.      The Immigration Judge further summarised  the  Appellant's  evidence
    as follows:

        "She regarded it as her duty to be a good wife to him and tried  to
        be so, but he was immature  and  temperamental  and  took  out  his
        frustrations on her. Initially the abuse was verbal, but  later  it
        progressed to physical abuse as well.  When this happened she tried
        to protect herself and had to strike back.


        He often told her to get out of the house and  on  occasions  threw
        her out.  At one stage he went away for 5  days,  during  which  he
        told her family in Pakistan that she had had an affair.   On  their
        anniversary he said he wanted a divorce.


        She described a number of specific episodes.  One,  on  9  December
        2007, began with verbal abuse, including a  threat  to  cancel  her
        visa.  He then pushed her face into the sofa, in  self-defence  she
        scratched his nose and he called the police.   She  felt  disgraced
        and tried to slit her wrists.  When the police came they gave first
        aid and called an ambulance but  they  also  questioned  her.   She
        admitted hitting him and was cautioned.


        On  3  March  2008  they  attended  Relate,  she  having  made   an
        appointment, but he was not interested in any counselling and  they
        were asked to leave.  There were further arguments that day,  which
        led her to take refuge for an hour or so with a neighbour, but that
        night he slept in her bed which he usually did not.  The  next  day
        there was a further argument and a fight, in the  course  of  which
        she hit him, again in self-defence.   He  left  the  flat  and  she
        called the police to record the abuse, although she did  not  press
        charges.  On 8 March he went to friends for two days.  On 11  March
        the police came and arrested her, evidently on Mr Sham's report  of
        the incident on the 4th.  She was charged and bailed  and  went  to
        the Mosque community  centre.   Her  husband  sent  her  belongings
        there."


        The case was heard on 23 June and she was acquitted.  She then went
        back to her own rented accommodation".


10.    The Immigration Judge noted that in relation  to  the  incident  when
    she was cautioned the Appellant expressly stated that she did not  tell
    the police the full extent of her husband's provocation.

11.    The Appellant told the Immigration Judge  that  a  condition  of  her
    bail was not to return to the matrimonial home.

12.   I pause there, because in the course of the  hearing  before  me,  the
    parties  confirmed  that  they  had  had  no  documentary  evidence  to
    substantiate the Appellant's  understanding  that  this  was  indeed  a
    condition of her bail.

13.    There was, however, common ground between the  parties  that  on  the
    evidence, it was apparent, as accepted by the Immigration  Judge,  that
    the Appellant never returned to  the  matrimonial  home  following  her
    arrest on 11 March 2008.

14.    The Immigration Judge noted that  it  was  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that after the trial she  thought  the  marriage  was  over,  that  she
    understood that Mr Sham was  going  to  file  a  petition.   There  was
    correspondence between solicitors about it.

15.    The Immigration Judge also heard evidence from a Dr  Idris  Zainuddin
    who adopted his witness statement.  He was an Amil  at  the  Mosque  in
    Northolt that the Appellant attended.  Of particular relevance  (though
    the Immigration Judge made no further reference to within his  findings
    and reasons) was Dr Zainuddin's evidence that the Appellant  was  taken
    in:

        "When she came to them in March saying she  had  suffered  domestic
        violence"


16.    The Immigration Judge recorded the submissions of Mr Symes (who  also
    appeared before me) that the Appellant was in a subsisting marriage  at
    the start of her two years' leave and it had now broken down.  Mr Symes
    had pointed at various reports, witness statements and the  Appellant's
    police interview that all showed that the Appellant had been the victim
    of violence.  Mr Symes submitted before the Immigration Judge that this
    was the cause of the breakdown and he pointed to  various  passages  in
    the Appellant's witness statement showing  that  she  had  contemplated
    ending the marriage but felt  under  pressure  to  continue.   It  was,
    however, the violence that drove the Appellant out of the  house.   She
    was too frightened to stay.

17.    Mr Symes referred the Immigration Judge to the judgment in the  Court
    of Appeal in AI v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 386 where at paragraph 30, Dyson
    LJ had stated the policy underlying paragraph 289A was clear:

        "Spouses and partners who are  the  victims  of  domestic  violence
        should not feel constrained to remain in  an  abusive  relationship
        for two years solely in order to qualify for  indefinite  leave  to
        remain".


18.    Mr Symes had further submitted before the Immigration Judge  that  if
    there was some  ambiguity,  the  Immigration  Judge  should  favour  an
    interpretation that brought the Appellant within the Rule for  fear  of
    defeating the policy underlying it.

19.    No Presenting Officer appeared before the Immigration Judge.

20.    The Immigration Judge had before him a facsimile letter  from  Hendon
    Magistrates' Court  with  the  Justice's  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    assault charge.  The Magistrates indicated that the bench having  heard
    from Mr Sham and some of  his  family  and  also  from  the  Appellant,
    rejected his evidence and accepted hers and they  were  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had hit him, causing injury, but only in reasonable self-
    defence after he had attacked her.

21.    The Immigration Judge continued:

        "It necessarily follows from her acquittal that she was innocent of
        the charge brought, but the note makes clear that the acquittal was
        based not merely on a reasonable doubt but on a positive finding of
        fact in her favour.  I accept on that basis that on  that  occasion
        at least she was clearly the victim of domestic violence.


        I further accept that Mr Sham  was  found  not  to  be  a  credible
        witness with the implication that he had  gone  to  the  length  of
        creating a false accusation.  It does not necessarily  follow  from
        that that he was regularly violent, but it seems to me to  indicate
        that he is a person with scant regard either for his  wife  or  for
        the truth, which in turns increases the probability  that  he'd  be
        violent to her if he wished.  I note in this regard  that  when  he
        wrote to the Respondent in August to authorise  use  of  his  early
        letter against the Appellant,  the  criminal  case  to  which  that
        letter referred had been heard and dismissed,  a  matter  which  he
        failed to mention".  (Emphasis added).


22.    Notably at paragraph 23 of his determination  the  Immigration  Judge
    continued:

        "I  have  considered  also  the  evidence  from  the  GP  and   the
        Appellant's family, the Appellant answers in interview and her  own
        evidence, which I found to  be  generally  credible.   I  note  her
        admission that when he became violent  she  would  have  to  defend
        herself, involving hitting back and that on two occasions certainly
        this resulted in some degree of injury.  She is not in any sense to
        be blamed for defending herself, but I regard her  frankness  about
        this as a factor in her  credibility.   I  am  left  in  no  doubt,
        weighing all of that evidence, that  the  Appellant  has  been  the
        victim of domestic violence".  (Emphasis added).


23.    The Immigration  Judge  continued  that  he  accepted  that  domestic
    violence might take many  forms,  not  necessarily  involving  physical
    abuse; that emotional abuse within the family might properly be classed
    as domestic violence.  The Immigration Judge continued at paragraph  24
    to state inter alia:

        "I find the Appellant has suffered  significant  verbal  abuse  and
        threats, a good deal of emotional abuse and  some  physical  abuse,
        although that may have been the least  frequent  of  the  forms  of
        abuse to which she was subjected.  I see no  reason  to  doubt  the
        evidence that she has  suffered  as  a  result  both  physical  and
        psychological injury".  (Emphasis added).


24.    The Immigration Judge was further satisfied that the  Appellant  came
    to this country in a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  that  she  was
    determined to see work.

25.    The Immigration Judge concluded that  the  marriage  had  now  broken
    down:

        "... and that it did so finally in March 2008  when  the  Appellant
        left the matrimonial home for good, that being within her  two-year
        probationary leave".


26.    Notwithstanding those positive findings, the Immigration Judge  found
    that the difficulty in the case was "over  the  cause  of  the  marital
    breakdown".  Although  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  the  issue   was
    "absolutely consistent and clear" the Immigration  Judge  concluded  at
    paragraph 26 that:

        "When she left the  house  it  was  not  because  she  was  fleeing
        violence but because he had caused her to be  arrested.   When  she
        went elsewhere it was because of her bail conditions.  It was after
        the trial that she acknowledged the marriage was over".


27.    The Immigration Judge  concluded  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    breakdown of the marriage was not caused by the domestic violence  that
    had never led the Appellant to try and end the  relationship.   It  was
    caused by the husband's lack of commitment and eventual  desire  to  be
    rid of his  wife  that  he  took  to  the  length  of  making  a  false
    accusation.  The domestic violence was in the Immigration Judge's view:

        "... a symptom of his attitude to the  Appellant,  one  which,  for
        cultural reasons, she was determined  to  endure  in  the  hope  of
        change".


28.    It would be right to say that in  relation  to  that  last  mentioned
    paragraph, Mrs Tanner expressed her disquiet at the Immigration Judge's
    reasoning.  Mrs Tanner frankly told me that she found it  difficult  to
    understand, bearing in mind the totality  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
    positive credibility findings, how he could conclude that the breakdown
    of the marriage was  not  caused  by  domestic  violence,  but  by  the
    husband's lack of commitment and desire to rid himself of his wife.

29.    As Mrs Tanner, in my view, rightly observed "violence comes  in  many
    forms".  Mrs Tanner continued that it was  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Immigration  Judge  could  ignore  the  Appellant's   husband's   false
    accusation that brought his wife before  the  Hendon  Magistrates  that
    stemmed from an incident  in  which,  as  the  Magistrates  found,  the
    Appellant had acted in self-defence  after  her  husband  had  attacked
    her.  Mrs Tanner continued that "underlying all this  was  the  general
    antagonism and very unpleasant behaviour of the husband  and  I  cannot
    see how the Immigration Judge  would  thus  sustain  the  finding  that
    domestic violence was  not  causative  of  the  breakdown".   (Emphasis
    added).

30.    I have emphasised the above words because they in  my  view  dovetail
    not least with the views expressed by Laws LJ in AG (India) [2007] EWCA
    Civ 1534 to which I had drawn the parties' attention. Indeed  Mr  Symes
    believed that in any event, the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  AG  was
    before the Immigration Judge although he had not referred to it in  his
    determination.

31.    Before referring more particularly to AG  it  would  be  as  well  to
    begin by reference to the decision of  the  Tribunal  in  JL  (Domestic
    Violence: evidence of procedure) India [2006] UKAIT 00058 in which  the
    Tribunal observed that:

        "The question of whether domestic violence has occurred  is  to  be
        determined on the basis of all the evidence before the  Immigration
        Judge.  Paragraph 289A (iv) is to be read down to reflect this".


32.    In Ishtiaq [2007] EWCA Civ  386  (a  transcript  of  which  was  most
    helpfully provided to me by Mr Symes) the Court  upheld  the  essential
    finding that perceivable evidence of a Rule 289A issue relating to  the
    domestic violence was not limited to what was specified in the IDI.

33.    Indeed Dyson LJ giving the judgement of the  Court  said  inter  alia
    this:

        "In my judgment para 289A(iv) should be construed so as to  further
        the policy of enabling persons whose relationships had  permanently
        broken down as a result of domestic violence before the end of  the
        probationary period to be granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   A
        construction which precludes an applicant, whose  relationship  has
        in fact broken down as a result of domestic violence, from  proving
        her case by producing cogent relative  evidence  would  defeat  the
        evident purpose of the Rule.  The purpose of para 289A (iv)  is  to
        specify what an applicant has to prove  in  order  to  qualify  for
        indefinite leave to remain during the probationary period: viz that
        the relationship has been caused to break  down  permanently  as  a
        result of domestic violence". (Emphasis added)


34.    In AG and in the course of his judgment, Laws LJ had this to  say  at
    paragraph 18:

        "It is not clear whether, had the Immigration  Judge  accepted  the
        factual case about the violence, he  would  have  held  it  had  no
        causative force in the breakdown of  the  marriage.   I  would  not
        accept Mr Johnson's submission that, as  the  evidence  stands,  no
        reasonable Immigration Judge could conclude (putting  the  evidence
        at  its  highest  for  the  Appellant)  that  the  violence  was  a
        substantial cause of the breakdown".


35.    At paragraph 19 of his judgment Laws LJ continued inter alia:

        "... but on the Appellant's case it may be said  that  the  husband
        was a violent and cruel man and those characteristics of his  could
        not be separated out from the end of the marriage".


36.    I  would  thus  agree  with  Mrs  Tanner's  most  helpful  and  frank
    submission and one that was indeed echoed by Mr Symes before  me,  that
    in effect and as indeed accepted not  least  at  paragraph  27  of  the
    Immigration Judge's determination, that the Immigration Judge  made  no
    adverse  credibility  findings.  Indeed  it  was  clear  that  believed
    everything that the Appellant had to say.

  37. It was the inference  that  the  Immigration  Judge  drew  from  those
    findings that satisfy me in all the circumstances  that  he  materially
    erred in law. The Immigration Judge simply failed to appreciate that on
    the basis of his factual findings, it was apparent  that  the  violence
    the Appellant suffered at the hands of her husband, was the  "causative
    force in the breakdown of the marriage".

38.    For the sake of completeness, I would agree with  Mr  Symes'  further
    submission that the Immigration Judge had at one point determined  that
    the marriage had broken down in March 2008 but elsewhere concluded that
    it "was after the trial that (the Appellant) acknowledged the  marriage
    was over".

39.    That was a material error of law given  that  the  appeal  failed  on
    account of the Immigration Judge's dissatisfaction  with  the  evidence
    said to show that domestic violence was the reason for the breakdown of
    the marriage and hence the timing of its breakdown was a critical issue
    in the fact-finding process.   The  Appellant  had  actually  left  the
    matrimonial home after suffering further  domestic  violence  early  in
    March 2008 and then felt obliged to take refuge at a  Community  Centre
    and indeed never returned to the matrimonial home thereafter.

40.    On the Immigration Judge's factual  findings,  it  should  have  been
    apparent to him that but for the domestic violence in  this  case,  the
    marriage would not have ended.  It was only the domestic  violence  and
    its consequences that forced the Appellant out of the family home.

41.    I would add the observation,  that  whenever  a  relationship  breaks
    down one or both parties to that relationship are likely to announce an
    intention to leave and/or in fact leave the  matrimonial  home.  Whilst
    that might define when a relationship breaks down it does  not  explain
    the cause.  In order to assess the cause of the breakdown  it  is  also
    necessary to look at the relationship as a whole.

 42.  In that regard,  the  Immigration  Judge  in  the  present  case,  in
    deciding that the breakdown of the  marriage  was  not  caused  by  the
    domestic violence suffered by the appellant as  a  consequence  of  her
    husband's conduct, failed to remind himself that he had  accepted  that
    the Appellant had been the victim of domestic violence,  who  had  also
    been subjected to frequent verbal abuse.  Her husband had threatened to
    cancel her visa.  He had on one  occasion  pushed  her  face  into  the
    sofa.  He  had  told  the  Appellant's  family  in  Pakistan  that  the
    Appellant had had an affair.  He had  called  the  police  and  brought
    false charges against the Appellant for an assault that  in  truth  (as
    indeed found subsequently by the Hendon Magistrates) was in relation to
    his attack upon her in which the appellant had purely  acted  in  self-
    defence.

43.    There was no evidence before the Immigration  Judge  in  the  present
    case that the Appellant was in any way to blame for  the  breakdown  of
    her marriage  or  for  the  deterioration  in  the  relationship.   The
    responsibility for the breakdown on the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
    lay fairly and squarely at  the  feet  of  the  husband  whose  boorish
    conduct was on any view thoroughly reprehensible.

   44.  For  the  above  reasons,  I  agreed  with  the  parties,  that  the
    Immigration Judge thus materially erred in law.  I was urged to proceed
    to make a fresh decision.  In the light of the fact, not least that the
    Immigration  Judge  had  accepted  effectively  in  its  entirety   the
    Appellant's account as credible, I  saw  no  reason  why  I  could  not
    proceed to do so.

45.    Notably Mrs Tanner informed me that she did not intend  to  make  any
    further submissions.

46.    Mr Symes relied on his earlier submissions and indeed the grounds  of
    application that he had authored, but he also interestingly provided me
    with a copy of the letter that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  to  the
    Respondent in support  of  her  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  It would be as well to set out its content:

        "I can confirm that I no longer reside with  my  husband,  Mufazzal
        Sham.  I departed from our matrimonial home some months ago further
        to the breakdown of our marriage.


        I cite the cause of the breakdown of our marriage  to  be  domestic
        violence - my husband was abusive towards me for some time until  I
        felt it was no longer safe for me to be living with him".


47.    I would agree with Mr Symes  that  as  such,  the  contents  of  that
    letter in support of the Appellant's application aptly  and  accurately
    summarises the Appellant's case. It was a letter before the Immigration
    Judge that he would appear to have overlooked.

48.    I find in the light of the Immigration Judge's positive findings  and
    for the reasons that I have outlined above, that it cannot be said that
    the husband's behaviour  towards  his  wife  did  not  demonstrate  the
    characteristics that could  be  separated  out  from  the  end  of  the
    marriage.

 49.  I find that the  Appellant  has  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    discharged the burden upon  her  to  show  that  the  violence  of  the
    Appellant's  husband  towards  her  was  the  causative  force  in  the
    breakdown of the marriage.

50.   I therefore find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  not
    in accordance with the law and the Immigration Rules applicable to this
    case.

51.    I will, therefore, substitute a  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's
    immigration appeal.

Decision

52.    The Immigration Judge materially erred in law.

53.    The decision I have substituted for that of the Immigration Judge  is
    to allow the appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules.



Signed




Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein




















