

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality -  correct  approach)  [2016]  UKUT
00028 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 03 December 2015                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

                                   Between

                                ARUN DASGUPTA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

Appellant:    Mr R De Mello and Mr T Muman, both of Counsel,  instructed  by
             JM Wilson Solicitor

Respondent:   Mr N Sheldon, of Counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal
             Department

   i)     A tribunal's  failure to make clear findings about family life  is
      not per se  erroneous  in  law  where  its  existence   has  not  been
      contested in the Secretary  of  State's  decision  and  has  not  been
      challenged at the appeal hearing and the tribunal's  decision  is  not
      otherwise unsustainable in law.


  ii)     The question of whether there is family life in a child/grandchild
      context  requires  a  finding  of  something  over  and  above  normal
      emotional ties and will invariably be intensely fact sensitive.

 iii)     In error of law appeals,  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  apply  the
      principles in Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.

  iv)     In appeals involving the proportionality of an interference with a
      Convention right, the ultimate question  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      whether the interference is proportionate, per Huang  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2007] 2 AC 167.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The Appellant is a national of India, aged 85 years.  The  origins  of
      this appeal to the Upper Tribunal are traceable to a decision made  by
      the Entry Clearance Officer of New Delhi (the "ECO"),  dated  27  June
      2013, whereby the Appellant's application for clearance to  enter  the
      United Kingdom as an adult dependant relative under Appendix FM of the
      Immigration Rules was refused.  The Appellant's ensuing appeal to  the
      First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was, by its determination  promulgated
      on 06 August 2014, allowed.  The  appeal  succeeded  under  Article  8
      ECHR.  The appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules. We  shall
      elaborate on this infra.

   2. The procedural developments thereafter may be  described  as  somewhat
      atypical. First, the ECO, who is represented by the Secretary of State
      for the Home Department ("the Secretary of  State")  sought,  and  was
      granted, permission to appeal.  The permission Judge, in  making  this
      decision, highlighted:"....  the weight which the Judge gives  to  the
      rights of the sponsor's children ....", continuing:

         "The Judge [arguably] erred in his application of the Rules and the
         jurisprudence relating to the Article 8  rights  of  the  Appellant
         ....."

    At the stage when this order was made the Appellant had an application,
    undetermined, seeking permission to appeal on the ground that  the  FtT
    should also have allowed the appeal under the Rules  and  decided  that
    the adult dependant relative  rule  is,  at  least  in  part,   not  in
    accordance with the law and/or is incompatible  with  Article  8  ECHR.
    Next, having learned that  the  ECO  had  been  granted  permission  to
    appeal, the Appellant's representatives lodged a "cross-appeal" on  the
    same grounds.  This elicited a grant of permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Appellant.  By way of  sketching  the  contextual  framework  of  these
    combined appeals, it is appropriate to set out part of the decision  of
    the second permission Judge:


         "It seems to me that the  Appellant's  submissions,  in  suggesting
         that the Upper Tribunal could deal simultaneously with the case  as
         a judicial review (deploying a High Court  Judge),  has  [sic]  not
         only technical obstacles (no such application having been made) but
         overlooks that a challenge to the vires of the Rules is excluded by
         the Lord Chief Justice's Practice Direction governing  UT  judicial
         reviews. However, there is some authority for the proposition  that
         in  exercising  its  statutory  'in  accordance   with   the   law'
         jurisdiction ....   the Upper Tribunal in deciding  appeals  cannot
         exclude issues going to vires."

     The scene is thus set.

Decision of the ECO

   3. The ECO noted that the Appellant's application for clearance to  enter
      the United Kingdom had been made as an adult dependant relative  under
      Appendix FM of the Rules.  The ECO considered  the  application  under
      paragraph EC-DR.1.1 thereof, continuing:

         "You have applied to join your sponsor in the UK [SD] and you  have
         stated that she provides you with financial  support  in  the  form
         [of] providing you [with] accommodation here in India  and  payment
         of all of your utility  bills  and  tax.   However,  you  have  not
         submitted any evidence of any financial support from your  sponsor.
         You have also stated that you require care on a day  to  day  basis
         due to both having medical conditions ........


         You are aged 83 years and state that you  have  end  stage  macular
         degeneration in both eyes, Glaucoma and Ischemic heart disease ....


         From the evidence I am not satisfied that these conditions  are  so
         severe that you would both  require  long  term  personal  care  to
         perform everyday tasks ......


         I am ....  not satisfied that you require, due to either [sic] age,
         illness or disability, long term personal care to perform every day
         tasks.  I therefore refuse your  application  under  paragraph  EC-
         DR1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules."

         The decision of the ECO continues:

         "Additionally you state that you have employed your  domestic  help
         ....  for several years and that she currently  provides  care  for
         you; cooking for you and doing other daily  chores.   Although  you
         state that only your daughter can provide the care you need,  I  am
         therefore not satisfied that you are unable to obtain the  required
         level of care in India. I am  also  satisfied  that  the  financial
         support your currently receive from your sponsor will continue  and
         that any care if required could be provided through financial  help
         from her."

Decision of the FtT

   4. The decision of the FtT illuminates the factual matrix of this  appeal
      (which we shall augment  infra).   The  uncontentious  facts  recorded
      include that the Appellant  is  a  widower  and  the  sponsor  is  his
      daughter, a married lady who has two  children  now  aged  15  and  14
      years.   The  Appellant  has  been  visiting  this  family  with  some
      frequency.  His daughter is an NHS  Doctor.   She  has  undertaken  in
      writing that she  will  be  fully  responsible  for  the  maintenance,
      accommodation and care of the Appellant in the United  Kingdom  for  a
      period of 5 years.

   5. The appeal to the FtT was pursued on three bases:

      (a) The Appellant  satisfied  the  age/illness/disability  requirement
           enshrined in paragraph E-ECDR2.4/2.5 of the Rules.


      (b)  In  the  alternative,  the  impugned   decision   infringed   the
           Appellant's right to respect for family life under ECHR.


      (c) In the further alternative, the operative provisions of the  Rules
           are incompatible with Article 8 ECHR.

   6. The FtT determined the appeal in the following terms:

        a) The relevant provisions of the Rules  are  not  "discriminatory,
           manifestly  unjust,  made  in  bad  faith  or   [involving]   an
           oppressive or gratuitous interference with people's rights  ....
           [and are] not an inherently disproportionate  interference  with
           rights to respect for family life".


        b) In individual cases, any interference with the right to  respect
           for family life would be in accordance with the law and  pursues
           a legitimate aim.

        c) The Appellant failed to demonstrate that "...   the  sponsor  is
           unable, with the practical and financial  help  of  the  sponsor
           [sic], to obtain the required  level  of  care  in  India  .....
           [and] ...  does not meet the requirement E-ECDR.2.5 of  Appendix
           FM".

        d)     The  Appellant's   case   satisfied   the   requirement   of
           "exceptionality":


             "I find that there are such  exceptional  circumstances  here,
             particularly  the  fact  that  there  are  children  that  are
             affected and also the  cultural  aspects.   I  find  that  the
             decision is a disproportionate interference  with  the  family
             life of the Appellant and the sponsor  and  her  children  and
             therefore infringes Article 8 ECHR."

      In making this latter  conclusion,  the  Judge  explicitly  considered
      section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

Issues of law in this appeal

   7. The Secretary of State's appeal and the Appellant's cross-appeal raise
      very different issues, as the following outline confirms:

        a) The Secretary of State's primary case is that the FtT  erred  in
           law in concluding  that  there  was  family  life  protected  by
           Article 8 ECHR.


        b) It is contended, in the alternative, that the FtT erred  in  law
           in allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 out with  the
           framework of the Rules.

        c) By his cross-appeal, the Appellant contends that  that  the  FtT
           erred in law in dismissing his  appeal  under  the  Rules.   The
           contention underlying this  proposition  is  that  the  relevant
           provision of the Rules is unlawful as it is ultra  vires  and/or
           irrational and/or incompatible with Article 8.

    Both parties agreed that the first question raised by the  cross-appeal
    is whether this Tribunal is competent to consider a challenge  of  this
    kind.  If  "yes,"  the  second  question  is  whether  the  Appellant's
    challenge to the offending provision of the Rules is  established.   If
    "yes", the third question focuses on the consequences which follow,  in
    broad terms the issue of relief or remedy.


The Secretary of State's Appeal

   8. First, we consider whether the finding of family life by  the  FtT  is
      harmonious with legal principle. In this respect there is no  shortage
      of  guidance  in  the  relevant  jurisprudence,  both   domestic   and
      international.   In  Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2003] INLR 170, the Court of Appeal,  in  the  context  of
      considering  a  mother/adult  son  relationship,  gave  expression  to
      certain general principles. The two main judgments enunciate with some
      emphasis the principle that normal emotional ties between a mother and
      adult son do not, without more, constitute family life  under  Article
      8.  This derives from S v United Kingdom [1984] 40  DR  196,  at  198.
      Sedley LJ, adopting this approach, stated in [19]:

         "Neither blood ties nor the concern and affection  that  ordinarily
         go with them are, by themselves or together, in my judgment  enough
         to constitute family life.  Most of us have close relations of whom
         we are extremely fond and whom we visit, or who visit us, from time
         to time; but none of us would say on those grounds  alone  that  we
         have a family life with them in any sense capable of coming  within
         the meaning and purpose of Article 8."

     In a slightly more extensive formulation, Arden LJ stated, at [25]:

         "Because there is no presumption of family life,  in  my  judgement
         a family life is not established between an adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties: see S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196
         and Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  United  Kingdom  [1985]  7
         EHRR 471. Such ties might exist if the appellant were dependent  on
         his family or vice versa. It is not, however,  essential  that  the
         members of the family should be in the same country. The  Secretary
         of State accepts that that possibility may exist,  although  in  my
         judgment it will probably be exceptional. Accordingly there  is  no
         absolute rule that there must be family life in the United Kingdom,
         as the Immigration Appeal Tribunal held."

    Notably, in allowing the Secretary of State's appeal, scant regard,  or
    weight, was given to the period of some 15 years,  beginning  when  the
    Appellant was aged around 20, which the Appellant had spent in  Germany
    with his mother, his brother and his  sister's  family.   The  emphasis
    was, rather, on his voluntary transition to the  United  Kingdom,  over
    two years before the adjudicator's decision, coupled with  the  factors
    of a (mere) single family visit  to  him  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    periodic phone calls only since his departure.

   9. The decision in Kugathas was followed mutatis mutandis by the Court of
      Appeal in JB (India) v Entry Clearance Officer [2009]  EWCA  Civ  234:
      see especially per Sullivan LJ at [14].  The Court held  that  if  the
      Kugathas principles had been applied, there was no rational basis upon
      which the immigration Judge could have concluded that there was family
      life between the three adult children, all living in India  and  their
      mother, who had been living in the United Kingdom for six years  prior
      to the impugned decision: see [17].

  10. Mr Sheldon in argument also relied on the recent decision of the Court
      of Appeal in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
      EWCA Civ 630.  There the Court of  Appeal,  agreeing  with  the  Upper
      Tribunal, stated at [26]:

         "....  The Judge correctly found that the Appellants had no  family
         life in  this  country  to  which  Article  8  applies.   They  are
         independent and working. Their siblings, who are  younger,  are  in
         India and their mother [who had been granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the UK] understandably spends as much  or  more  time  in
         India than in this country.  There  was  no  evidence  of  anything
         beyond the normal bonds of  affection,  apart  possibly  from  some
         financial support of the family in India.  That support cannot lead
         to a finding of a family life in this country, which was  the  only
         family life for which the Appellants contended."

    We have also considered the decision of the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in GHB v United  Kingdom  [Application  number  42455/98]  which
    contains the following passage, at page 5:


         "The Court recalls that the expression  'family  life'  in  Article
         8(1) is broad enough to include the ties between  grandparents  and
         grandchildren (see Marckx v Belgium) ..."

    The Applicant in that case was one of two grandparents whose grandchild
    had been adopted when aged 12, following some  three  years  in  foster
    care  brought  about  by  her  mother's  unstable  mental  health.  The
    grandchild had lived  with  the  grandparents  temporarily,  for  three
    months, when aged 10 and during  the  following  year  there  had  been
    regular contact.  This was sufficient for the Court  to  conclude  that
    there was family life between grandparents and grandchild under Article
    8 (see page 5).

  11. The decision in GHB v United Kingdom and those reviewed in extenso  by
      the Court of Appeal in Singh lend emphasis to the proposition that the
      question of whether there exists family life between, or among,  those
      under scrutiny will invariably be an  intensely  fact  sensitive  one.
      The scope of the protection afforded by  Article  8  is  elastic,  not
      susceptible to precise measurement.  Article  8  is  couched  in  open
      textured language. It was memorably described by Stanley Burnton J  as
      "the least defined and most unruly" of  the  Convention  rights  in  R
      (Wright) v Secretary of State for Health [2006] EWCH 2886  (Admin)  at
      [60]. Bearing in mind the emphasis on the individual factual matrix in
      all cases of this kind, we turn to consider the decision of the FtT in
      a little detail.

Factual Matrix

  12. We elaborate on [4] above as follows. The family  circle  consists  of
      the Appellant, a retired businessman who is now aged 85; his  daughter
      (the sponsor), a doctor, who has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
      almost 25 years; her husband, whom she married some 20 years ago;  and
      their two children (the Appellant's grandchildren),  aged  17  and  16
      years respectively.  The Appellant's spouse died in 2007. Both retired
      from their respective occupations around 2001.

  13. Mr De Mello invited us to read the decision of the FtT in  conjunction
      with the evidence  available  to  it  and  we  have  done  so,  paying
      particular attention to those  materials  which  were  highlighted  in
      Counsel's submissions:  the  witness  statements  of  the  Appellant's
      daughter, son, and old grandchild;  the  written  accounts  of  family
      friends; the medical evidence; and the family photographs.

  14. The unchallenged evidence is that by the  time  of  the  grandmother's
      death in 2007, a very close  and  loving  bond  had  been  established
      between grandparents and grandchildren through visits  from  India  to
      the United Kingdom and vice-versa, coupled with family reunions in the
      United States, where the sponsor's brother  resides;  since  2007  the
      Appellant  has  visited  his  daughter's  family  in  England   almost
      annually, each sojourn lasting three - five months; the Appellant  has
      developed a strong and close relationship with his grandchildren;  and
      there are robust ties of mutual love and  affection.   In  short,  the
      Appellant has gradually assumed a special position in the lives of his
      grandchildren.   Simultaneously,  the   father/daughter   relationship
      between the Appellant and the sponsor has  continued  and  flourished,
      notwithstanding the factors of  distance  and  marriage  and  has,  if
      anything, strengthened during recent years following the demise of the
      Appellant's wife and in conjunction with his  gradually  deteriorating
      health.

The Arguments and our Conclusions

  15. Mr Sheldon, on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  criticised  the
      determination of the FtT primarily on the basis that  it  consists  of
      extensive recitation of  evidence,  coupled  with  very  few  explicit
      findings of fact. As appellate courts have frequently observed,  while
      this is sometimes a vice it is not necessarily fatal.  Furthermore, it
      is of no little significance that the  existence  of  family  life  in
      respect of all members of the family circle identified above, was  not
      disputed before the FtT.  In particular, we were informed, and accept,
      that there was no cross-examination of the  Appellant's  daughter.  We
      would add that this is consistent with the ECO's decision,  which  did
      not dispute the nature or depth of the relationships  under  scrutiny.
      It is also reflected in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  to
      this Tribunal, which contain no complaint about the FtT's approach  to
      the topic of family  life.  We  attach  significant  weight  to  these
      considerations. It is within this context that we must  evaluate  what
      Mr Sheldon characterised the FtT's "assumption" that there  is  family
      life in relation to  the  five  persons  concerned  and  construe  the
      decision.

  16. There is, in the abstract, some force in Mr Sheldon's  criticism  that
      the FtT did not  conduct  the  exercise  of  acknowledging,  and  then
      applying, the principles in Kugathas and  the  line  of  authority  to
      which we have referred. Furthermore, the FtT did  not  carry  out  the
      "Razgar" exercise (Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2004] 2 AC 368, at [17]).  In addition, the obligation imposed by the
      Tameside principle to pose the correct question - namely whether there
      was family life - was not  explicitly  discharged.   However,  as  the
      House of Lords has made clear, decisions in human rights  cases,  save
      where the Convention right in question has a procedural  content  (the
      paradigm being Article 6), are about outcome, rather than the anterior
      decision making process.   See R (SB)  v  Governors  of  Denbigh  High
      School [2007] 1 AC 100 at [68] especially and Belfast City  Council  v
      Miss Behavin' Limited  [2007]  UKHL  19,  at  [12]  -  [13]  per  Lord
      Hoffmann.

  17. Alternatively, bearing in mind that this is an error of law appeal and
      not a challenge on the merits, we apply the Edwards v Bairstow  [1956]
      AC 14 prism.  It is timely to recall these principles.  There,  in  an
      error of law appeal, the House of Lords applied the standard  of  "the
      true and only reasonable conclusion" open  to  the  Commissioners  [at
      p10] and, notably, in doing so, employed the language of  "perversity"
      [at p 6].  They defined the latter as a case in which -

         ".....  the facts found are such that no person  acting  judicially
         and properly instructed as to the relevant law could  come  to  the
         determination under appeal."


         [per Lord Radcliffe at p 10]

     In the language of Viscount Simonds [at p 6]:

         "For it is universally conceded that, although it is a pure finding
         of fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have been  stated  in
         various ways but are, I think, fairly summarised by saying that the
         court should take that course if it appears that the  commissioners
         have acted without any evidence or upon a view of the  facts  which
         could not reasonably be entertained."

    The enduring  application  and  pedigree  of  the  Edwards  v  Bairstow
    principles is not, so far as we are aware, in question.

  18. We apply these principles in the following way.  In  the  decision  of
      the FtT there is an underlying acceptance of  Article  8  family  life
      involving all five people in question.  We consider that our  scrutiny
      of the decision of the FtT must take into account  both  the  evidence
      available to it, its undisputed nature and the significant  contextual
      factor, also uncontentious, that the existence of  family  life  among
      the five relatives concerned was not contested.  In  JB  (India),  the
      test  formulated  by  Sullivan  LJ  was  whether  the  tribunal  could
      rationally have found that there was family life if it  had  expressly
      applied the Kugathas principles.  Weighing  all  of  the  evidence  in
      tandem with the de facto concession on this issue,  which  illuminates
      the content of the FtT's decision, we conclude that it withstands  the
      Secretary of State's challenge.  In our judgement the  assumption,  or
      finding  [the  precise  formulation  matters  not]  of   family   life
      underlying and underpinning the decision of the FtT was properly  open
      to the Judge having regard to the findings express or implicit in  the
      decision, the available evidence, the terms of the ECO's decision  and
      the de facto concession. In these particular  circumstances,  while  a
      more structured approach coupled with more extensive findings  by  the
      FtT would have been preferable, this does not  vitiate  its  decision.
      No error of law has been demonstrated.

  19. The second limb of the Secretary of  State's  appeal  focuses  on  the
      following passage in the concluding paragraph of the FtT's decision:

         "The  Appellant  can  only  succeed  in  this  appeal  if  he   can
         demonstrate that his circumstances are  exceptional,  so  that  the
         decision represents a  disproportionate  interference  with  family
         life.  But 'exceptional'  does  not  necessarily  mean  unusual  or
         unique.  I find that there are such exceptional circumstances here,
         particularly the fact that there are children that are affected and
         also  the  cultural  aspects.  I  find  that  the  decision  is   a
         disproportionate interference with the family life of the Appellant
         and the sponsor and her children and therefore infringes Article  8
         of ECHR."

     [our emphasis]

    Mr Sheldon accepts that, in thus  concluding,  the  Judge  applied  the
    correct test and committed no misdirection in law.  This much is  clear
    from both the terminology employed in this passage and earlier passages
    of the decision. The challenge is, in essence, to  the  sufficiency  of
    the  Judge's  reasons  for  concluding  that  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances.

  20. We refer to, but do not repeat, our consideration of the  decision  of
      the FtT above.  To this we add  that  the  Judge,  en  route  to  this
      conclusion, made certain specific findings about the Appellant's state
      of health.  Further, having noted his isolated and lonely way of life,
      he found:

         "There are compassionate circumstances in this case.  Although  his
         physical needs might be met by a programme of care,  his  emotional
         needs would not be met."


    Next, the Judge turned his attention to a report prepared by the  Joint
    Council for the Welfare of Immigrants  ("JWCI"),  which  he  summarised
    thus:


         "The JCWI  report  refers  to  the  culture  in  India  of  younger
         generations caring for elderly parents and grandparents  under  the
         same roof.  Although there are care homes in the country, there are
         not enough of them providing  good  care  and  there  is  a  stigma
         attached to the idea of formal care homes.  The Appellant is, in my
         view, likely to be less vulnerable than many to the risk  of  being
         given inadequate care because he has children who  would  be  in  a
         position to pay for the best possible service.  But this  does  not
         entirely remove the sponsor's anxiety about letting him go  into  a
         care home since, as long as she remains in the UK, she would have a
         very limited opportunity to monitor the level of care so as to give
         her  reassurance  that  her  father  is  well  looked   after.   In
         considering the impact of the decision  upon  family  life,  it  is
         appropriate to take into account the  culture,  which  the  sponsor
         refers to in her statement, that children are expected to take care
         of their parents when they are old  and  infirm.   There  is  every
         reason to think that the sponsor would be in a position to continue
         to look after her father, if he is in the UK, for  the  foreseeable
         future without recourse to public funds."



  21. The Judge's  next  port  of  call  was  section  55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (the "2009 Act"), giving rise  to
      the following assessment:

         "The sponsor's children were aged 15 and  13  respectively  at  the
         date of the decision.  They were  born  in  the  UK  and  they  are
         British citizens.  Their relationship with their grandfather is not
         a remote one, since he has been coming to the UK to stay  at  their
         home during the summer months for many years.  One of them has made
         a statement in which he refers to his emotional attachment  to  his
         grandfather. I accept that there is that attachment."


    As our resume of the evidence, our scrutiny of the decision of the  FtT
    and our related analysis in [13]-[18] above demonstrate, this  was  far
    from  the  only  evidence  available  to  the  Judge  relating  to  the
    relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his  daughter.   The  Judge
    continues:


         "It is unrealistic to assume that the Appellant would in the future
         be able to divide his time between staying in India and  coming  to
         the  UK  for  the  summer  months.  Firstly,  travel  would  become
         increasingly difficult whilst, with age and continuing ill  health,
         he becomes more and more frail.  Secondly, it is  likely  to  prove
         less easy in the future for him to be able to demonstrate  that  he
         meets the requirements for a visit visa ....."

    In the next passage of his decision, the  Judge  clearly  accepted  the
    evidence of the sponsor that  if  her  father  were  unable  to  secure
    settlement in the United Kingdom she would leave and go to  look  after
    him in Delhi.  The Judge noted  the  further  evidence  on  this  issue
    emanating from the BMA.  He continued:


         "The impact on family life upon the sponsor being forced to  return
         to India after having spent many years in the UK  is  considerable.
         The welfare of the children would be particularly affected, as they
         would either be uprooted in order to live in  a  country  which  is
         very different from the one they have been brought  up  in  or  the
         family would be split while their mother is in  India  whilst  they
         remained in the UK."

  22. The Judge found,  in  terms,  that  the  best  interests  of  the  two
      grandchildren would be promoted by the advent of the Appellant to live
      with their family and the continued presence  of  the  mother  in  the
      family unit.  We consider these findings to be unimpeachable.   It  is
      clear that the Judge committed no error of law in his approach to  the
      best interests of the grandchildren.  In substance, he viewed this  as
      a primary consideration. This consideration  is  to  be  evaluated  in
      tandem with the Judge's other findings and the weight given by him  to
      the cultural issue specifically raised.  All  of  the  ingredients  in
      this equation must be considered as a whole. Mr  Sheldon's  submission
      is that they are insufficient to  justify  a  finding  of  exceptional
      circumstances. Viewed through the prism of   conventional  public  law
      litigation, this has all the hallmarks of an irrationality  challenge.
      As the Court of Appeal stated recently in Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department v Boyd [2015] EWCA Civ  1190, at  [16],  the  question
      for the appellate court or tribunal  in  such  cases  is  whether  the
      decision of the first instance tribunal on this issue is "one that was
      open to it".  Framed in somewhat more elaborate  terms,  the  test  is
      whether it is sustainable by reference to the principles in Edwards  v
      Bairstow, rehearsed above.

  23. The elevated hurdle which a challenge of  this  nature  must  overcome
      requires  no  elaboration.   Mr  Sheldon  submitted  that  in  finding
      exceptional circumstances the FtT identified  two factors only, namely
      the grandchildren and the "cultural aspects".  This was  the  core  of
      the Secretary  of  State's  appellate  challenge.   We  consider  this
      submission unsustainable for two reasons.  First, the FtT  highlighted
      these  two  factors  "particularly,  not  exclusively.   Second,   the
      submission focuses on the concluding paragraph of the  decision  only,
      neglecting everything which precedes it.  We consider that the Judge's
      exceptional circumstances finding  was  based  on  the  whole  of  the
      evidential picture.  The question  for  us  is  whether,  viewing  the
      decision  of  the  FtT  as  a  whole,  its  finding   of   exceptional
      circumstances is sustainable in law.  This, in the context of an error
      of law appeal, requires  us  to  pose  the  question  of  whether  the
      decision is compatible with the Edwards  v  Bairstow  principles.   We
      consider  that  this  invites  an  affirmative  answer.   The  Judge's
      exceptional circumstances  conclusion,  uncontaminated  by  any  legal
      misdirection or other error of law, lay within the range  of  outcomes
      reasonably available to him, was not contradicted by the evidence but,
      rather, had a sufficient  evidential  foundation  and  did  not  leave
      anything material out of account.  Or,  to  borrow  again  the  recent
      Court of Appeal  phraseology  (supra),  we  are  satisfied  that  this
      conclusion was "open to" the FtT in the circumstances.

  24. The alternative approach is to view this aspect of  the  Secretary  of
      State's appeal through the lens of Convention rights, given the  nexus
      between the exceptional circumstances test and Article 8(2)  ECHR,  as
      explained and illuminated by the Court of Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.   The
      FtT having made (in our judgment) no error  in  its  approach  to  the
      existence of family life  linking  and  uniting  the  several  persons
      concerned, the next question which it was bound to address was whether
      the impugned decision represented a disproportionate interference with
      the Article 8 rights of the family  members.  Having  found  that  the
      Appellant's settlement application could not succeed under the  Rules,
      the Judge, in order to decide the question of proportionality, had  to
      apply the recognised test of exceptional circumstances  and  proceeded
      to do so.  His finding that exceptional circumstances existed  equates
      to   a   conclusion   that   the    impugned    decision    interfered
      disproportionately with the Article 8 rights  of  the  family  members
      concerned.

  25. In thus concluding, the FtT was giving effect to Huang v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2007] 2 AC  167,  where  the  House  of
      Lords held that when deciding appeals on human rights grounds,  it  is
      the function  of  the  relevant  immigration  appellate  authority  to
      conduct a full merits appeal - see  [13]  -  as  the  arbiter  of  all
      aspects of the human rights claim, including proportionality.  To this
      one adds the footnote that the court or tribunal, in common  with  the
      executive's decision maker, is a public authority under section  6  of
      the Human Rights Act 1998.  We can detect  no  error  of  law  in  the
      conclusion reached  by  the  FtT  on  the  issue  of  proportionality.
      Neither the decision  making  process  of  the  FtT  nor  its  outcome
      discloses any such error.  We remind ourselves that the focus  of  the
      Secretary of State's challenge was  the  sufficiency  of  reasons  and
      evidence  underpinning  the  impugned  conclusion.   For  the  reasons
      explained above, this challenge is not made out.


  26. Finally, while observing that the provisions of Part 5A  of  the  2002
      Act did not form part of the grounds  of  appeal  or  the  submissions
      developed in argument, we are alert to our duty  under  s  117A(2)(a).
      There was no suggestion that either of the public interests  enshrined
      in s  117B  (2)  or  (3)  is  engaged.  Further  the  "little  weight"
      provisions do not arise. Applying the same reasoning and  analysis  as
      set out  above, we are satisfied that the conclusion  of  the  FtT  in
      substance, which was to tip the balance  in  favour  of  the  assorted
      factors on the Appellant's  side  of  the  equation  over  the  public
      interest factor in s 117B(1), cannot be impugned.



Conclusion

  27. This disposes of the Secretary of State's appeal.  As appears from our
      recent case management  directions,  we  have  decided  to  sever  the
      Secretary of State's appeal from the Appellant's cross-appeal, for the
      reasons therein explained.

Decision

  28. We dismiss the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  affirm  the
      decision of the FtT.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date:  10 December 2015


