


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                MK (Family reunion policy: scope) Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00020

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |                           |
|On 8 November 2007                              |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Entry Clearance Officer - addis abABA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Love, Counsel, instructed by Pickup & Jarvis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The wording of paragraph 16.2 of Diplomatic Services  Procedures  on  family
reunion is clear with regard to the  family  members  who  are  entitled  to
family reunion under that policy.  There is no scope for arguing that  other
family members fall within it.


1.   The appellant, together with her sister MM (appeal  no.  OA/11372/2006)
    and her sister MH (appeal no. OA/11378/2006) appealed to an Immigration
    Judge against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 16  March  2006
    refusing to grant entry clearance under paragraph 297 of HC 395.    The
    appellants are the nieces of AG, who has been recognised as a  refugee.
    Her husband applied for entry clearance to join her together with their
    own children, and that application was successful.  The evidence, which
    it seems the Immigration Judge accepted, was that the three  appellants
    lived with the sponsor and her husband from July 1997  when  they  were
    aged respectively three, one and five days old, when their  mother  was
    killed, until 2003.  The sponsor came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2003
    and, as I have noted above, was recognised as a refugee.   She did  not
    ever officially adopt the children in Somalia  but  looked  after  them
    until the  time  when  she  left  there.   The  sponsor's  husband  was
    interviewed by the Entry Clearance Officer in Addis Ababa and  he  said
    that his wife still had a mother and brother  living  in  Somalia.   As
    regards other siblings, there was a brother in the United  Kingdom  and
    he was aware of the whereabouts of two others and another sister was in
    Kenya.  He said that the three girls had been  living  with  him  since
    July 1997 in the  house next door, and his wife had been sending US$100
    since December 2005 and prior to that  his  brother  had  been  sending
    vegetables to help to support the family.

2.   In cross-examination at the hearing before the  Immigration  Judge  the
    sponsor confirmed that the children were  being  looked  after  by  her
    brother-in-law's mother and they had been living there for about  three
    months since her husband had come to the United Kingdom.  She said that
    she was only there on a temporary  basis.  Her  husband  had  made  the
    arrangements for them all to travel to Ethiopia together.

3.   Counsel before the  Immigration  Judge  conceded  that  the  appellants
    could not come within paragraph 352D of HC 395 as  they  were  not  the
    blood children of the sponsor.  He also accepted that paragraph 297 was
    not the strongest part of his argument, given difficulties with  regard
    to maintenance and accommodation, but he argued  that  because  of  the
    Diplomatic Service  Procedures  Policy  (DSP)  at  paragraph  16.2  the
    decision made by the Entry Clearance Officer was not in accordance with
    the law as it was inconsistent with the DSP.   It  was  said  that  the
    evidence showed that they had all been living as a family unit and this
    left a difficulty for the three young children in Ethiopia  now  living
    with the mother of an in-law.

4.   The Immigration Judge found that the appeal  could  not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules as the children were neither the  blood  children
    of the sponsor nor was she their stepmother, and they could not succeed
    as dependants as the maintenance and accommodation test  could  not  be
    met.

5.   She went on to refer to the decision of the  Tribunal  in  H  (Somalia)
    [2004] UKIAT 00027 where consideration was given to the wording of  the
    DSP policy.  She noted paragraph 17 of  that  decision  where,  as  she
    said, the Tribunal had found in the context of  that  policy  that  the
    reference was clearly to the  spouse  of  the  minor  children  of  the
    sponsor refugee.  The appellants therefore could only come  within  the
    definition of other members of the family and it  was  clear  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had considered them  under  this  part  of  the
    policy and  had  correctly  found  that  there  were  no  compassionate
    circumstances of a compelling nature to  warrant  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance.   She also noted paragraph 46 of H (Somalia)  where  it  was
    said that it would normally be the position that the combination of the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules  and  extra  statutory  policy  and
    discretion would provide a proportionate  basis  for  any  interference
    with a lack of respect for family life.  She found the sponsor and  the
    appellant credible in their evidence.  She found that  there  had  been
    family life previously but it could not any longer be said that  family
    life existed between the appellants and the sponsor.  Even if it could,
    she concluded following what had been said in Huang (this  must   be  a
    reference to the decision in the Court of  Appeal, given  the  date  of
    determination) that the circumstances were not truly exceptional as the
    appellants were not the sponsor's own children, they were  accommodated
    by extended family, the sponsor was able to fund them from  the  United
    Kingdom and whilst arguably the sponsor  might  not  be  able  to  live
    legally in Ethiopia, she could indeed visit and in turn the  appellants
    could visit the sponsor. She therefore dismissed the appeal.

6.   The appellant sought reconsideration of this decision, arguing  firstly
    that a  proper  interpretation  of  the  policy  should  have  led  the
    Immigration Judge to conclude that the appellants were  minor  children
    who formed part of the family until prior to the time the sponsor  fled
    to seek asylum, and therefore issues of maintenance  and  accommodation
    did  not  have  to  be  satisfied.  Secondly  it  was  argued,  in  the
    alternative, that the Immigration Judge applied the wrong  approach  to
    the policy in that she had erred in limiting her enquiry to whether the
    policy had been considered by the decision-maker and in this  regard  a
    decision of the Tribunal in IA [2006] UKAIT 00082 was  cited.   Thirdly
    it was argued that the Immigration Judge erred in finding there was not
    family life, quoting from paragraph 14  of  H  (Somalia),  referred  to
    above, and fourthly, that as a consequence the Immigration Judge  erred
    in not taking into account the  policy  with  regard  to  family  life,
    bearing in mind what was said in IA that the substance of a policy  was
    extremely  relevant  when  considering  a   case   under   Article   8.
    Reconsideration was ordered on all grounds.

7.   Ms Love relied upon and developed the grounds.   She  argued  that  the
    Immigration Judge had incorrectly applied the policy.  The children had
    been part of the family unit of  the  sponsor  since  1997  when  their
    mother died and had remained so until 2003. She  had  effectively  been
    their mother for that period. H (Somalia) could be distinguished, as in
    that case the mother of the children disappeared in the same  month  as
    the sponsor fled to the United Kingdom, so the children were never part
    of the family unit with her and that  should  be  contrasted  with  the
    facts of this case.  It was not the case that they should  have  to  be
    legally adopted as the policy did not distinguish between  adopted  and
    birth children and would have said so if it was intended to be  limited
    to the birth children of the sponsor.

8.   In the alternative, it was argued  in  line  with  ground  2  that  the
    Immigration Judge had taken  the  wrong  approach  and  had  failed  to
    consider the compelling and compassionate circumstances herself  rather
    than simply relying on the previous decision.

9.   At this point it became clear that the representatives had not had  the
    opportunity to read and digest the determination of the Tribunal in  AG
    and Others (Policies; executive discretion; Tribunals'  powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UKAIT 00082, and there was an adjournment to enable them to read
    and develop submissions on it.

10.  In the light of this, Ms Love referred back  to  ground  1  and  argued
    that paragraph 50 of AG assisted her in this regard.  There it had been
    said that there were cases where if the  claimant  proved  the  precise
    terms of the policy, this created a presumption in  the  facts  of  his
    case in favour of granting leave, and this was such a case.  There  was
    DNA evidence to prove the relationship.

11.  With regard to ground 2, Ms Love referred to paragraph 43 of  AG  where
    it was  said  that  the  Tribunal  was  bound  to  consider  whether  a
    particular decision was proportionate and in so doing had to assess the
    force of the Secretary of State's claim that the decision was necessary
    in order to maintain immigration control.  That related to this  ground
    and what was said at paragraph 44 was also of relevance.    The  appeal
    should have been allowed with a direction.

12.  There was a clear error as  regards  ground  3  on  the  basis  of  the
    quotation from H (Somalia), and ground 4 was self-explanatory.

13.  In his submissions Mr Tarlow argued that it was implicit in the  policy
    that the children had to be blood children or formally adopted children
    within the laws of the country in which they lived.  He referred to  MN
    (India) [2006] UKAIT 00015 where it had been said that whether such  an
    adoption as it might have been argued would have  occurred  here  would
    have been recognised  had  been  considered.   The  rules  allowed  for
    prospective adoptive children to come to  the  United  Kingdom  but  no
    application in that regard had been made.

14.  As regards ground 2, it was a question of circumstances.  The  children
    were in Ethiopia in accommodation with running  water  and  some  money
    from UNHCR and the sponsor's husband's mother lived there  as  part  of
    the family unit.  There was nothing  compelling  and  compassionate  in
    those circumstances. As regards ground 3, sending the children to  live
    with a relative was a voluntary decision the family had made  and  they
    were entitled to do so and there was no  error  in  the  finding  here.
    Ground 4 fell away as a result.

15.  By way of reply, Ms Love argued  that  on  a  careful  reading  of  the
    policy it envisaged any children who formed part of the family unit and
    could include stepchildren or children from the civil partner.  It  did
    not say who the children had to belong to.  There had  been  a  lot  of
    family displacement in Somalia and provision had been made for this  in
    the policy and it was questionable whether  any  formal  adoption  from
    there could ever be carried out.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.   It  is  perhaps  helpful  if  in  considering  the  challenge  to  the
    Immigration Judge's  decision I deal  with  it  on  the  basis  of  the
    grounds as set out and developed by Ms Love.   The  first  argument  is
    that the wording of the relevant policy is  such  that  the  appellants
    fall within it.   Paragraph  16.2  of  Diplomatic  Services  Procedures
    provides as follows:

         "Only pre-existing families are eligible for family  reunion,  i.e.
         the spouse, civil partner, and minor children who  formed  part  of
         the family unit prior to the time the sponsor fled to seek  asylum.
         Other members of the family (e.g. elderly parents) may  be  allowed
         to  come  to  the  UK  if  there  are   compelling,   compassionate
         circumstances."

18.  The Immigration Judge quoted remarks made by the AIT in H (Somalia)  in
    this regard.  They are taken from paragraph 17 of the determination  in
    that case. The Tribunal said this:

         "[Counsel] suggested more  tentatively  that  the  appellants  were
         minor children within the scope of 'the spouse and  minor  children
         who formed part of the family unit' when the sponsor fled.   We  do
         not accept that latter suggestion; in context, it clearly refers to
         the spouse of and the minor children of the sponsor - refugee."

19.  I do not think this can be read in the way suggested in the grounds  or
    by Ms Love. The differences between the factual situation  in  the  two
    cases can in no sense be  said  to  permit  the  conclusion  that  this
    comment relates only to the specific facts in H (Somalia). The  wording
    employed by the Tribunal is clear  and  it  clearly  did  not  envisage
    anyone other than the spouse and minor children of the  sponsor-refugee
    as falling within the policy.

20.  Although the Tribunal did not  go  on  to  deal  with  this  point  any
    further, perhaps in light of the way in which the submission was put to
    it,  it is relevant to consider why that limitation  would  exist.   It
    needs to be borne in mind that this is an extension  to  the  provision
    made in the Immigration Rules  at  paragraph  352D  clarifying  who  is
    eligible for family reunion.  The further aspect of  the  policy  is  a
    matter I shall come on to shortly.  But this is clearly an  exceptional
    provision since it precludes the need to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    the Rules that would otherwise exist for maintenance and accommodation,
    and its potential ambit must clearly therefore be regarded  as  limited
    as a result.  In my view, as was said by the Tribunal in  H  (Somalia),
    in context there is clear reference only to the spouse of and the minor
    children of the sponsor-refugee and not to other  children  who  formed
    part of their family unit prior to the time when the sponsor  fled  the
    relevant country to seek asylum.  A line has to be drawn somewhere,  in
    particular  bearing in mind that, where the rules or policies  do  seek
    to cover such categories as  adoptive  or  stepchildren,  they  say  so
    expressly.  In my judgment it is at that point that the line  is  drawn
    in this case and consequently the appellants cannot  be  said  to  fall
    within part of the policy. Therefore I conclude  that  the  Immigration
    Judge did not err in this regard in following what the IAT had said  in
    H (Somalia).  I do not think that the support which  Ms  Love  suggests
    can be derived from paragraph  50 in AG in fact assists since  this  is
    not a case where the claimant has  proved  the  precise  terms  of  the
    policy, as in my view the appellants fall outside it.

21.  As regards the second ground, the  argument  is  that  the  Immigration
    Judge should effectively have applied the policy  herself  rather  than
    simply noting, as  she  did,  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    considered the policy.  Ms Love referred to the sentence I have  quoted
    above from  paragraph  43  of  AG  in  this  regard.   However,  it  is
    particularly important to look at the first sentence of that paragraph.
     There the Tribunal said the following:

         "For the foregoing reasons we reject the argument that the Tribunal
         is bound or entitled to  consider  or  review  the  exercise  of  a
         discretion outside the Immigration Rules."

22.  The Tribunal regarded as surprising  the  argument  that  the  Tribunal
    might be the primary decision-maker in exercising a discretion  outside
    the rules  or  might  be  the  reviewer  of  the  exercise  of  such  a
    discretion.  As the Tribunal noted, Section 86(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides as follows:

         "Refusal to depart from or to authorise departure from  immigration
         rules is not the exercise of  a  discretion  for  the  purposes  of
         subsection 3(b)."


    This relates to the requirement that the Tribunal must allow an  appeal
    insofar as it thinks that the discretion exercised in making a decision
    against which the decision is brought or is treated  as  being  brought
    should have been exercised differently.


23.  This is not a case, in my view, in  which  it  can  be  said  that  the
    Tribunal is empowered to give effect to a  policy  either  directly  or
    through the medium of Article 8.  The question  of  whether  there  are
    compelling and compassionate circumstances is one for the Secretary  of
    State in the exercise of her policy, and  through  the  medium  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer she  has  exercised  that  discretion,  as  the
    Immigration Judge correctly noted, and come to a conclusion on it.   It
    was not for the Immigration Judge to do any more than  note  that  fact
    which she rightly did.  Again, there is no error of law in this regard.

24.  As regards the third ground, I agree with Ms  Love  that  there  is  an
    error in the conclusion that there is not family life since the sponsor
    left the children and came to the United  Kingdom.    As  was  said  at
    paragraph 14 in H (Somalia):

         "It cannot be right to approach the disruption to family life which
         is caused by someone having to flee persecution as a refugee as  if
         it were of the same nature as someone who  voluntarily  leaves,  or
         leaves in the normal course of the changes  to  family  life  which
         naturally occur as children grow up."

25.  That  having  been  said,  the  question  is  whether  that  error  was
    material.  The Immigration  Judge  went  on  at  paragraph  18  of  her
    determination to say the following:

         "Even if it could be argued that there is still a subsisting family
         life as the sponsor is a refugee and that  refusal  amounts  to  an
         interference I do not find, following the dicta in Huang, that  the
         circumstances are truly exceptional as the appellants are  not  the
         sponsor's own children, they are accommodated by  extended  family,
         the sponsor is able to fund them from the UK  and  whilst  arguably
         the sponsor may not be able to live legally  in  Ethiopia  she  can
         indeed visit and in turn the appellants can visit the sponsor."

26.  It is clear therefore that the Immigration Judge considered the  matter
    in the alternative.  Even though she employed the test  of  exceptional
    circumstances as set out by the Court of Appeal  in  Huang,  I  do  not
    consider there is a material error since she clearly set  out  relevant
    circumstances  which,  on  a  proper  assessment  of   proportionality,
    justified  the  conclusion  that  there  would  be  no  breach  of  the
    appellants' Article 8 rights by refusing entry clearance.  Clearly  the
    policy is relevant to this but, as the Tribunal has made  clear  in  KL
    [2007] UKAIT 44, a near miss has to be regarded as such and, though  of
    relevance to the Article 8 balancing exercise, it  does not  of  itself
    mean that an expulsion decision (as it was in that case) constitutes  a
    disproportionate interference with an  appellant's  Article  8  rights.
    Proper consideration was given to the relevant  circumstances  in  this
    case in my view, and I consider that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not
    commit any material errors of law and  her  decision  dismissing  these
    appeals stands.




Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Allen


