

      DA (EEA - revocation of residence document) Algeria [2006] UKAIT 00027

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17 February 2006                             |On  09 March 2006          |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   Mr D K Allen - Senior Immigration Judge
                      Mr T B Davey - Immigration Judge
                               Mrs S I Hewitt

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer


Where a qualified person within the meaning  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations  2000  leaves  the  United  Kingdom,  it  is  not
inconsistent with relevant EU law for the United Kingdom to  make  provision
for revocation of the  residence  document  of  the  family  member  of  the
qualified person, as set out in Regulation 22(2)(b)(ii).

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appealed to an Adjudicator against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 1 October 2002 revoking  his  residence  document
    under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000,  in
    particular Regulation 29 with reference to Regulation 22(b)(ii).  In  a
    determination promulgated on 16 November 2004  the  Adjudicator,  Mr  S
    Blackford, dismissed his appeal.   Subsequently  the  appellant  sought
    permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, and permission
    was granted on 10 January 2005 by a Vice President.   By  virtue  of  a
    transitional  provisions  order  the  appeal  comes  before  us  as   a
    reconsideration of the Adjudicator's decision.

2.   The appeal was first listed for hearing on 8 November  2005.   On  that
    date the appellant appeared  without  representatives.   He  said  that
    though he had paid them quite a lot of money they had  asked  for  more
    which he did not have.  In the  light  of  the  issues  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal it seemed to us  that  there  were  some  significant
    issues of law potentially to be argued in this  case.   We  decided  to
    adjourn
    the appeal to enable the appellant to obtain representation and advised
    him of the possibility of getting representation from the Refugee Legal
    Centre or the IAS.  We also directed the Secretary of State to  produce
    a skeleton argument directed to the points raised  in  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal and in particular to deal with the authorities  cited
    therein.  We subsequently received a skeleton  argument  with  attached
    authorities.  We are grateful to the Secretary of State  for  providing
    these.

3.   The hearing before us next took place on 17 February 2006.   Again  the
    appellant was unrepresented.  Ms S Leatherland appeared  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State.

4.   The appellant told us that he had  obtained  fresh  representation  but
    again he had had problems in that he was unable to pay the  money  that
    the representatives wanted from him and therefore  they  had  withdrawn
    representation.  We stated that in the circumstances it seemed unlikely
    that he would  be  any  more  successful  if  we  adjourned  again  and
    therefore we concluded that it was proper for us to go ahead  and  hear
    the appeal today.  We explained to the appellant  the  essence  of  the
    Secretary of State's case as we saw it, and we also  heard  submissions
    from Ms Leatherland and from the appellant.

5.   Ms Leatherland developed the points made in the skeleton argument.   It
    was accepted by the appellant that his wife was not  and  had  not  for
    some little time been exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom,
    indeed she had not been here since July 2002.  There was  therefore  no
    question of the Secretary of State being required to prove  this.   The
    appellant's wife was not a qualified person  as  she  was  not  in  the
    United Kingdom and was not working, and the Secretary of State had  the
    power in law to revoke a residence permit.

6.   The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000  represented
    the United Kingdom's interpretation of the appropriate  directive.   It
    was a high test to say that this was not a  correct  representation  of
    the law.  The United Kingdom was bound not to  legislate  in  a  manner
    deviating from the spirit of the free movement  legislation,  and  that
    was so in this case as the wife  was  not  here  and  not  working  and
    therefore the spirit of the legislation remained intact.

7.   It was  accepted  that  the  directive  was  silent  on  the  issue  of
    revocation.  However, the fact of revocation  did  not  prevent  anyone
    from exercising their treaty rights.  There was no need to  cancel  the
    wife's permit.  If she were in the United Kingdom and exercising treaty
    rights, that would be sufficient without the need to have  papers,  and
    the  same  must  be  true  in   reverse.    Eligibility   rather   than
    documentation was the issue.  The  purpose  of  the  directive  was  to
    facilitate free movement of EEA  citizens  and  not  of  third  country
    spouses.  The decision did not impinge on the wife's rights so it could
    not be said to be deviating from the intention of the directive.

8.   We asked the appellant if there was anything he wished to  say  and  he
    said that he had been given five years and had done his best  to  be  a
    good resident and had learned English and had worked.  We explained  to
    him that the decision to revoke the permit was in no sense a  criticism
    of his conduct while in the United Kingdom but simply a  conclusion  on
    the part of the Secretary of State that in the light of the  fact  that
    his wife was not exercising Treaty rights it was not open  to  him  any
    longer to be in the United Kingdom as his presence  here  was  directly
    related to her exercise of Community rights.

9.   We reserved our determination.


10.  Council Directive of 15 October 1968  (68/360/EEC)  is  concerned  with
    the abolition of restrictions on  movement  and  residence  within  the
    Community for  workers  of  member  states  and  their  families.   The
    relevant provisions of this are as follows:

        "Article 2


        1.   Member States shall grant the nationals referred to in Article
             1 the right to leave their  territory  in  order  to  take  up
             activities as employed persons and to pursue  such  activities
             in the territory of another Member State.  Such  rights  shall
             be exercised simply on production of a valid identity card  or
             passport.  Members of the family shall enjoy the same right as
             the national on whom they are dependent.


         ...


        Article 4


         ...


        2.   As proof of  the  right  of  residence,  a  document  entitled
             "Residence Permit for a National of a Member State of the EEC"
             shall be issued.  This document must include a statement  that
             it has been issued pursuant to Regulation (EEC) No.1612/68 and
             to  the  measures  taken  by  the  Member   States   for   the
             implementation of the present Directive.   The  text  of  such
             statement is given in the Annex to this Directive.


        ...


        4.   A member of the family who is not a national of a Member State
             shall be issued with a residence document which shall have the
             same validity as that issued to  the  worker  on  whom  he  is
             dependent.


        Article 6


        1.   The residence permit:


             (a)  must be valid throughout  the  territory  of  the  Member
                  State which issued it;


             (b)  must be valid for at least five years from  the  date  of
                  issue and be automatically renewable.

         2.   Breaks in residence not exceeding six consecutive  months  and
             absence on military service shall not affect the validity of a
             residence permit.


              ...


         Article 7


         1.   A valid residence permit may not be withdrawn  from  a  worker
             solely on the grounds that he  is  no  longer  in  employment,
             either because he is temporarily incapable of work as a result
             of illness or accident, or because




             he is involuntarily unemployed, this being  confirmed  by  the
             competent employment office.


              ...


         Article 10


              Member States shall not derogate from the provisions  of  this
             Directive save on grounds of public policy, public security or
             public health."

11.  We turn now to relevant provisions of Regulation  (EEC)  No.1612/68  of
    the Council of 15 October 1968, which  is  concerned  with  freedom  of
    movement for workers within the Community.

        "Article 10


        1.   The following shall, irrespective of their  nationality,  have
             the right to  install  themselves  with  a  worker  who  is  a
             national of one Member  State  and  who  is  employed  in  the
             territory of another Member State:


             (a)  his spouse and their descendants who are under the age of
                  21 years or are dependants;


             (b)  dependent relatives in the ascending line of  the  worker
                  and his spouse.

         2.   Member states shall facilitate the admission of any member  of
             the family not coming within the provisions of paragraph 1  if
             dependent on the worker referred to above or living under  his
             roof in the country whence he comes."

12.  The Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2000  (SI  2000
    No.2326) are designed to implement the free movement provisions  of  EU
    law.  It is perhaps appropriate to set out in full  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 10 of the Regulations.

        "10. Dependants and members of the household of EEA nationals


             (1)   If a person satisfies any of the conditions in  paragraph
                  (4), and if in all the circumstances it  appears  to  the
                  decision maker appropriate to do so, the  decision  maker
                  may  issue  to  that  person  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
                  residence permit or a residence document (as the case may
                  be).


             (2)    Where  a  permit  or  document  has  been  issued  under
                  paragraph (1), these Regulations apply to the  holder  of
                  the permit or document as if he were the family member of
                  an EEA national and  the  permit  or  document  had  been
                  issued to him under Regulation 13 or 15.


             (3)   Without prejudice to Regulation 22, a decision maker  may
                  revoke (or refuse to renew) a permit or a document issued
                  under paragraph (1) if he  decides  that  the  holder  no
                  longer satisfies any of the conditions in paragraph  (4).






             (4)   The conditions are that the person is a  relative  of  an
                  EEA national or his spouse and -


                    a) is dependent on the EEA national or his spouse;


                    b) is living as part of  the  EEA  national's  household
                       outside the United Kingdom; or


                    c) was living as part of the  EEA  national's  household
                       before the EEA national came to the United Kingdom.

             (5)   However, for  these  purposes  "EEA  national"  does  not
                  include -


                  (a) an EEA national who is in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                       self-sufficient  person,  a  retired  person   or   a
                       student;


                  (b) an EEA  national  who,  when  he  is  in  the  United
                       Kingdom,  will  be  a  person  referred  to  in  sub-
                       paragraph (a).

         13.  Issue of EEA Family Permit

             (1)  An Entry Clearance  Officer  must  issue  an  EEA  family
                  permit, free of charge, to a person who applies for one if
                  he is a family member of -


                   a) a qualified person; ...

             (2)  But paragraph (1) does not apply if -


                   a) the applicant;


                   b) the person whose family member he is,

                  falls to be excluded from the United Kingdom on grounds of
                  public policy, public security or public health.


             ...

         14.  Right of Residence

             (1)  A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom without the requirement for leave to remain  under
                  the 1971 Act, for  as  long  as  he  remains  a  qualified
                  person.


             (2)  A family member of a  qualified  person  is  entitled  to
                  reside in the United Kingdom, without the requirement  for
                  such leave, for as long as he remains the family member of
                  a qualified person."

13.  In this regard it is relevant to refer to Regulation  5  which  defines
    the term "qualified person".  A "qualified person"  includes  a  person
    who is a worker, a self-employed person, a provider of services  and  a
    recipient of services.  Such person must be an EEA national and in  the
    United Kingdom as a worker, self-employed person, provider of services,
    recipient of services or any of the  other  matters  set  out  in  sub-
    paragraph (1) of Regulation 5.  It is clear  that  a  worker  does  not
    cease to be a qualified person

    solely because they are temporarily incapable of work as  a  result  of
    illness or accident or involuntary unemployment.

     It is also relevant to quote from Regulation 22.

        22.  Refusal to  issue  or  renew  residence  permit  or  residence
             document  and  revocation  of  residence   permit,   residence
             document or EEA family permit.


             (1)  The Secretary of State may refuse to  issue  a  residence
                 permit or residence document (as the case may  be)  if  the
                 refusal is justified on grounds of  public  policy,  public
                 security or public health.


             (2)  The Secretary of State may revoke, or refuse to renew,  a
                 residence permit or residence document if -

                 (a)   the revocation or refusal is justified on grounds  of
                      public policy, public security or public health; or


                 (b)   the person to whom the residence permit or  residence
                      document was issued -


                  (i)  is not, or has ceased to be, a qualified person;


                      (ii) is not, or has ceased to be, the  family  member
                           of the qualified person."

14.  Thereafter the appeal rights are set out at Regulation 29.

15.  We turn to the facts of  the  case,  which  do  not  appear  to  be  in
    dispute.  The appellant said that he first entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 1 May 2001.  On 20 November 2001 his wife (a French national whom he
    married on 15 October 2001) and he applied respectively for a residence
    permit and a residence document.  On 4 January 2002 the  appellant  was
    issued with a five-year residence document, valid until 4 January 2007,
    as a confirmation of his right to remain in the United Kingdom  as  the
    family member (spouse) of his wife, an EEA national exercising a Treaty
    right in the United Kingdom under the Treaty of Rome.

16.  It appears to be common ground  that  the  appellant's  wife  left  the
    United Kingdom in July 2002 to go to Romania in order to care  for  her
    mother who was severely ill, and the appellant has not seen her  since.
    He told the Adjudicator that he had sent money to his wife on a  number
    of occasions since her departure, and in March 2003 he had travelled to
    Algeria to visit his family and friends and it was on his  return  from
    that visit, it seems, that he learnt of  the  decision  to  revoke  his
    residence document.

17.  He told the Immigration Judge that his wife was still  in  Romania  and
    he was still in touch with her.  She was not working in Romania but was
    looking after her mother who was very ill with diabetes and her  father
    was dead and she was an only child and there was no one  else  to  help
    her mother.  They had talked about the possibility of her mother coming
    to the United Kingdom but she was too old and very ill  and  she  could
    not come back to London.



18.  In a relatively brief determination the Adjudicator concluded that  the
    appellant's wife had ceased to exercise any Treaty rights that she  may
    have been exercising  prior  to  July  2002  and  was  satisfied  as  a
    consequence that the appellant had no right to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

19.  In the grounds it is argued that the  provisions  of  Directive  68/360
    and  Regulation  1612/68  do  not  make  express  provision   for   the
    cancellation of a residence document.  They simply  state  that  family
    members, as we have seen above, have the right to reside or "to install
    themselves with the worker", and Directive 68/360 provides merely  that
    breaks of residence not exceeding six  consecutive  months  should  not
    affect the validity of a residence permit.  It is argued that the  only
    basis upon which a permit properly issued may be withdrawn  or  revoked
    is in accordance with Directive 64/221, that is to say on  the  grounds
    of public policy, public security or public health.   No  such  grounds
    have been invoked by the Secretary of State.

20.      It is also argued in the grounds that Community  Law  recognises  a
    right to continue to reside for a purpose covered by  the  Treaty  once
    the EEA principal has left the territory,  and  reference  is  made  to
    decisions of the Court of  Justice  in  Echternach  and  Moritz,  cases
    389/87 and 390/87, and also Baumbast and R case C-413/99.  It  is  also
    contended that a family member who  has  validly  been  issued  with  a
    family document is entitled to rely on it so long as the  EEA  national
    on whose status its issue depends  is  in  possession  of  a  residence
    permit.   It  had  not  been  suggested  that  the  appellant's  wife's
    residence permit had been revoked and therefore, it  was  argued,  this
    must be a condition precedent to revocation of the  appellant's  family
    document and hence the revocation of that document was unlawful.

21.  As we say, a skeleton argument was provided on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State together with copies of the decisions in Echternach and Moritz
    and in Baumbast and R.  In  addition  we  referred  the  parties  to  a
    decision of the Court of Appeal in R v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department ex parte Sandhu [1983] 3CMLR 131, [1983] IAR  61.   We  have
    set out above Ms Leatherland's submissions based on the skeleton.

22.  It is, we think, common ground that there  is  nothing  in  either  the
    Directive or the  Regulations  concerning  revocation  of  a  residence
    permit other than on  the  grounds  specified  in  Article  10  of  the
    Directive.  It is not in dispute that at the time  when  the  appellant
    and his wife were issued with  their  residence  permit  and  residence
    document they were entitled to these documents,  in  the  case  of  the
    appellant's wife as an EEA national exercising Treaty rights,  and  the
    appellant as a member of her family within the definition  set  out  in
    Article 10 of the Regulations.  It is also not in  dispute,  we  think,
    that the relevant provisions of Community legislation are reflected  in
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2000  concerning
    their rights in this regard.  The  point  of  difference  is  that  the
    Community legislation is silent on the ability of the authorities of  a
    Member State to revoke a residence document except in the circumstances
    contemplated in the Directive at Article 10 which allows for derogation
    on grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health,  which
    itself  follows  from  the  Council  Directive  of  25  February   1964
    (64/221/EEC) subtitled the co-ordination of special measures concerning
    the movement and residence of foreign nationals which are justified  on
    grounds of public policy, public security or public health.

23.  The essential point of disagreement between the parties is whether  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000  (hereafter  the
    2000 Regulations)

    properly reflect the  relevant  Community  law  in  particular  in  the
    provision set out there permitting revocation of a permit  or  document
    if the relevant conditions  are  no  longer  satisfied.   The  relevant
    provisions in particular are to  be  found  at  Regulation  22  of  the
    Immigration Regulations which we have set out above.  This  is  clearly
    not a case where it has  been  sought  to  justify  the  revocation  on
    grounds of public  policy,  public  security  or  public  health.   The
    decision is founded on Regulation 22(2)(b)(ii) in that it is said  that
    the appellant is not a family member  of  a  qualified  person,  since,
    though it is not disputed, we think, that he  remains  married  to  his
    wife, it is said that she is no longer a qualified  person  within  the
    definition in Regulation 5 since she is not an EEA national who  is  in
    the United Kingdom as a worker  or  any  in  other  of  the  capacities
    identified in Regulation 5(1).

24.  It is to our mind clear that the ability of the Secretary of  State  to
    revoke the residence document in the case of a family  member  such  as
    the appellant is not contingent upon revocation of the residence permit
    of the qualified person.  As Ms Leatherland pointed out in submissions,
    just as the qualified person does  not  need  formal  documentation  to
    exercise her community rights in an EEA state, equally it seems  to  us
    it must be right to say that it is true that if such a person fails  or
    ceases to exercise community rights that carries no obligation to  make
    a formal revocation of their residence permit.  Though the  appellant's
    right is derived from his wife's, as will be  the  case  for  a  family
    member of a qualified person, it does not to our mind follow that there
    must be revocation of her documentation in order for his rights  to  be
    revoked.

25.  The essential issue is however whether the absence of provision in  the
    Community legislation for revocation in the circumstances envisaged  in
    the Immigration Regulations, comprises a failure properly to  translate
    community rights into domestic law which entails the decision  in  this
    case being unlawful.

26.  We have concluded it is not unlawful.  It is clear that this is  not  a
    case where the  national  law  contradicts  or  fails  to  implement  a
    provision of Community law.  The principle of  supremacy  of  Community
    law, first adumbrated by the Court of Justice in Van Gend en Loos (case
    26/62), and recognised by the House of Lords in R v Secretary of  State
    for Transport, ex parte Factortame Ltd [1991] AC 603, does not preclude
    a provision in national legislation which does no more than  supplement
    provisions of Community law.  It is rather  a  question  of  whether  a
    purposive  interpretation  of  the  directly  effective  Directive  and
    Regulation in this case  can  be  said  to  be  embodied  in  the  2000
    Regulations.  We see nothing inimical  to  the  aims  of  the  relevant
    Community  legislation  in  this  case,  specifically  with  regard  to
    Regulation 22 of the 2000 Regulations.  If the rights  conferred  on  a
    worker are no longer being exercised because the worker  has  left  the
    host  state  (and,  indeed,  left  the  Community),  there  is  nothing
    inconsistent with Community legislation designed to make provision  for
    free movement of workers within the Community in bringing to an end the
    derivative rights of the worker's family member at that point.

27.  We consider that our  views  in  this  regard  are  reinforced  by  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Sandhu to  which  we  have  referred
    above.  In that case the applicant for judicial review was a citizen of
    India who in 1975 had married a citizen  of  the  Federal  Republic  of
    Germany, in Germany.  They were granted temporary leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom on 4 April 1975 and this was  later  extended  for  five
    years until 10    October 1980.  A son was born to them in  March  1976
    but thereafter the wife returned to Germany with  the  child,  and  the
    applicant acknowledged that the parting appeared to be permanent.   His
    application for revocation of  conditions  and  unrestricted  leave  to
    remain was refused.  An appeal to an Adjudicator against that

    decision was dismissed.  An application for judicial review was granted
    and the Secretary of State  appealed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  which
    allowed his appeal.  This was,  of  course,  before  the  days  of  the
    Immigration Regulations.  The Court of Appeal considered the wording of
    Regulation 1612/68 and noted that in the preamble there is reference to
    "the worker's right to be  joined  by  his  family"  rather  than  "the
    family's right to join the worker".  It was said, at  page  65  in  the
    Immigration Appeal Reports, that the right given to the spouse was  not
    a right to come on their own or to  come  independently  of  the  other
    spouse but a right to install themselves with the worker who, and  here
    the Court of Appeal emphasised the tense involved, "is employed in  the
    territory of another member state".  This wording is taken from Article
    10 of the Regulations.  The court went on to say  that  one  could  not
    simply look at the preamble to the Regulations  which  was  in  general
    terms and spell out a broad independent right in the worker  concerned,
    since the Regulations themselves  more  specifically  showed  that  the
    right was a limited one and limited  in  terms  of  the  Article  which
    conferred the right.  The point is also made on page 65 that  a  number
    of provisions of European law establishing rights for EEC nationals and
    rights in the national in respect  of  their  dependants,  only  create
    rights in the dependant  himself  where  they  are  derivative  rights,
    depending on the exercise by the European national of his  or  her  own
    rights,  except  when  the  legislation  itself  specifically   confers
    independent rights.  Examples of that are given at page 66, but  it  is
    clear that the case before the Court of  Appeal  did  not  involve  the
    specific conferring of independent rights.  This led the court  to  the
    conclusion that any right given to someone other than an  EEC  national
    is to be found specifically in the Regulations and the extent  of  that
    right was very carefully spelled out.

28.  It is also relevant to note that in the case of Sandhu  it  seems  that
    the House of Lords refused to make a reference to the Court of Justice,
    on the basis that the issue was "acte clair".

29.  We also note Regulation 1251/70 on the right of workers  to  remain  in
    the territory of a Member State after  having  been  employed  in  that
    State.  Article 3 of the Regulation makes provision for  members  of  a
    worker's family who are residing with him in the territory of a  Member
    State to remain there permanently if he has the right to  do  so,  even
    after his death, and even, in certain circumstances, if he dies  before
    acquiring the right to remain in the territory of the State  concerned.
    The Regulation is however silent on the question of rights of  workers'
    family members to remain in other circumstances, which is  not  without
    significance.

30.  It is also relevant to note  Directive  2004/38/EC,  which  has  to  be
    implemented by 30 April 2006 and which, inter alia,  repeals  Directive
    68/360/EEC and amends Regulation  (EEC)  1612/68.   It  is  clear,  for
    example from Article  7,  that  rights  of  residence  given  to  Union
    citizens and their family members depend upon the Union citizen being a
    worker or self-employed, or having sufficient resources not to become a
    burden on the social assistance system of the host member state, or are
    in education or training or have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
    in the host member state.  None of these criteria is met in this case.

31.  In Echternach and Moritz a German student  had  received  education  in
    the Netherlands while his  father  was  working  for  an  international
    organisation there.  After his father's employment came to an end,  and
    the family left the Netherlands, the student  experienced  difficulties
    in going on to higher education in Germany, as the German  college  did
    not recognise his Netherlands diploma.  He therefore  returned  to  the
    Netherlands and resumed his education there.  It was held that, despite
    his father's departure, he was entitled to a grant, under Article 12 of
    Regulation 1612/68,  on  the  basis  that,  having  entered  the  Dutch
    educational system at a time when  his  father  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights, he retained rights of his own under Community law.

32.  In Baumbast and R a migrant EC national  divorced  a  US  citizen,  but
    remained in the United Kingdom.  She was the principal carer for  their
    children, who had the right to remain.  It was held that as a corollary
    of the children's rights the mother had the right to remain.

33.  In our view these cases are of only marginal relevance.  As is  pointed
    out in the skeleton, in each case the EEA national from  whom  benefits
    were derived remained in the EU.  Also, the cases  are  concerned  with
    the situation of couples looking after  dependent  children,  and  with
    rights of, and derived from children.  In no sense can they be said  to
    illustrate a general principle that Community law recognises a right to
    continue to reside for a purpose covered by the Treaties, once the  EEA
    principal has left the territory, as is contended in the grounds.

34.  For these reasons therefore we have concluded that there is nothing  in
    European law precluding the United Kingdom from  having  legislated  in
    the way in which it has in the Immigration Regulations in this  regard.
    It is clear that  the  appellant's  case  falls  expressly  within  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  22(2)(b)(ii)  of  those   Regulations,   and
    accordingly the decision to revoke the appellant's  residence  document
    was lawful.  We therefore conclude that there is no material  error  of
    law in the Adjudicator's determination, and his decision dismissing the
    appeal stands.







Signed                                  Date


D K Allen
Senior Immigration Judge

