
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                         AH (Notices required) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00029

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Manchester   Date of Hearing:  25 January 2006
      Date of Promulgation: 16 March 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                     Mr P W Cruthers (Immigration Judge)
                       Mr S P Alis (Immigration Judge)

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Miss M Plimmer, A S Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr M Raj, Home Office Presenting Officer

Although some of the requirements of the Notices Regulations can  be  waived
and not all of the requirements for giving Notice of Appeal  are  mandatory,
there can be no appeal without a Notice of Decision and a Notice of Appeal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh.   He  came  to  the  United
     Kingdom on 14 May 1998 with entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.   He  was
     granted leave to enter for one year.  During that period of time,  the
     marriage failed.  On 11 May 1999, however, while the  Appellant  still
     had leave, he applied for further leave to remain in order  to  enable
     him to continue his paternal role towards the son of the marriage.

  2. On 4 May 2000, the Secretary of  State  refused  his  application  for
     further leave to remain on the ground that there was no  provision  in
     the Immigration Rules for the granting of leave to remain for  such  a
     purpose;  and that he did not  consider  that  there  were  sufficient
     reasons to justify his departure from the  Rules  in  the  Appellant's
     case.  The Appellant appealed to an Adjudicator under  section  14  of
     the 1971 Act.  The grounds of appeal were as follows:

           "[The] decision is flawed.  Any steps to force me to  leave  the
           UK will breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 ECHR."

  3. The explanatory statement prepared for the purposes of the  appeal  is
     dated 22 May 2003.  It  refers  to  further  correspondence  with  the
     Appellant's solicitors in late 2002 and information submitted  on  the
     Appellant's behalf at that time.  It records  that  the  Secretary  of
     State does not accept  the  existence  of  a  subsisting  family  life
     between the Appellant and his son, and notes that the Appellant  could
     obtain entry clearance from abroad for the purpose for which he  seeks
     leave to remain.   The  following  sentences  give  the  Secretary  of
     State's conclusion on the human rights issues put to him:

           "The Secretary of State  therefore  does  not  accept  that  his
           decision breaches Article 8.  ... The  Secretary  of  State  has
           considered the further information which has been submitted, but
           can find no reason to reverse his decision."

  4. The appeal came before an Adjudicator, Mrs N  J Gladstone, on 26 April
     2004.  At the hearing, it was conceded on the Appellant's behalf  that
     the Appellant could not succeed in an  appeal  under  the  Immigration
     Rules,  because,  as  the  Secretary  of  State  had  indicated,   the
     application was for a purpose not covered by  the  Immigration  Rules.
     Mrs Gladstone was nevertheless persuaded by the  parties  to  hear  an
     appeal on human rights grounds.  Her determination  records  that  the
     Respondent's representative, having spoken  to  a  senior  caseworker,
     reported that "the view was taken that the explanatory statement of 22
     May 2003 was, in effect, a reconsideration as it addressed Article  8.
     On that basis there was  a  human  rights  appeal."   The  Appellant's
     representative agreed.  In the result, the Adjudicator considered that
     the decision to refuse to vary  was  appealable  (although  doomed  to
     failure) under the Immigration Rules as they were on 4 May  2000,  and
     was also appealable on the basis of the Appellant's  human  rights  as
     they were at the date of the hearing.  Having considered the  evidence
     and arguments before her, she dismissed the appeal.

  5. The Appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  In granting leave,  the  Vice  President
     made  it  clear  that  the  issue  of  whether  the  Adjudicator   had
     jurisdiction to deal with an appeal on human rights grounds would have
     to be addressed.  Following the commencement of the appeals provisions
     of the 2004 Act, the grant of permission  to  appeal  operates  as  an
     order for reconsideration by this Tribunal.  The matter was listed  on
     3 November 2005, but it appears that neither  the  Appellant  nor  the
     Respondent were properly prepared to argue the point, and the Tribunal
     as then constituted felt itself unable to deal with the issue in those
     circumstances.  The appeal was then relisted to be heard by us.  There
     was a suggestion that (apparently because of  the  complexity  of  the
     issues involved) the matter should be  regarded  as  reserved  to  the
     original panel of the Tribunal;  but Miss Plimmer did not persist with
     that submission before us.

  6. The difficulty arises because the date of  the  decision  refusing  to
     vary leave was before 2 October 2000, which is the date upon which the
     Human Rights Act 1998, and the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (which
     gave an appeal to an Adjudicator on human rights  grounds)  came  into
     force.  There can be no doubt  that  if  the  appeal  had  been  heard
     promptly after the date of the decision and before 2 October 2000, the
     Adjudicator would have had no jurisdiction to  consider  human  rights
     grounds.  There are provisions for situations  such  as  the  present,
     where the decision was before,  but  the  appeal  is  heard  after,  2
     October  2000.   They  are  in  paragraph  1  of  Schedule  2  to  the
     Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (Commencement No 6,  Transitional  and
     Consequential Provisions) Order 2000 (SI 2000/2444).   That  paragraph
     is headed "Transitional provisions relating  to  the  1999  Act",  and
     subparagraph 7 is as follows:

           "Section 65 (human rights appeals) is not to have  effect  where
           the decision under the Immigration Acts  was  taken  before  2nd
           October 2000."

  7. The consequences of that provision were explored by  the  Tribunal  in
     Pardeepan* [2000]  UKIAT  00006.   An  appellant's  human  rights  are
     justiciable after 2 October 2000;  but they need a new decision and  a
     new appeal as his  old  appeal  against  a  pre-commencement  decision
     cannot be argued on human rights grounds.

  8. The reason why the present case is said to be less simple than that is
     the existence of the explanatory  statement  dated  22  May  2003  and
     dealing with human rights issues.  That is  said  to  have  given  the
     Adjudicator, and to give us, jurisdiction to deal  with  human  rights
     issues because it is a decision on those issues, made since 2  October
     2000 and hence appealable on human rights grounds.  We must  therefore
     consider whether it is indeed such a decision.

  9. In our view, there are three separate reasons  why  it  is  not.   The
     first is that,  on  its  terms  which  we  have  set  out  above,  the
     explanatory statement purports to make no new immigration decision but
     merely to decline to reverse the  decision  made  in  May  2000.   The
     second is that there is a line of authorities, including R v  IAT  and
     SSHD ex parte Banu [1999] Imm AR 161 and Hanif v SSHD  [1985]  Imm  AR
     57, to the effect  that  a  review  of  a  previous  decision  by  the
     Secretary of State or an Entry Clearance Officer does not constitute a
     fresh decision.  The third reason is that there are provisions for the
     formal notification of a decision giving a right of appeal  under  s65
     in circumstances where, as s65 puts  it,  a  person  alleges  that  an
     authority has, in taking  any  decision  under  the  Immigration  Acts
     relating to his person's entitlement to enter or remain in the  United
     Kingdom, acted in breach of his human rights.  Those provisions are in
     the Immigration and Asylum  Appeals  (Notices)  Regulations  2000  (SI
     2000/2246).  The  Regulations  provide  in  general  that  notices  of
     decisions which are appealable have to be  given  in  writing  and  to
     include a number of factors including the right of appeal and  how  to
     exercise it.  Regulation 4(4) is as follows:

           "No notice of decision is required to be  given  ...  by  reason
           only of the fact that  the  decision  could  be  appealed  under
           section 65 of the 1999 Act ... if the person in question were to
           make an allegation that an authority had acted in breach of  his
           human rights in taking it;  but such notice must be  given  upon
           such allegation begin made."

 10. There is no doubt that a notice should  have  been  given  under  that
     Regulation.  The duty to do so did not arise on the submission of  the
     grounds of appeal, because the Human Rights Act was not in force then;
      but there is no doubt that the solicitors' letter of 17 October 2002,
     to which in essence the human rights  paragraphs  in  the  explanatory
     statement are  a  response,  was  an  allegation  under  s65.   As  we
     understand the matter, the Secretary of State's obligation to serve  a
     notice in response to that allegation is still unfulfilled.

 11. A further difficulty for Miss Plimmer is that even if there had been a
     new decision on 22 May 2003, there has been no appeal against it.  The
     only notice of appeal is that dated 9 May 2000,  which  cannot  be  an
     appeal under s65 of the 1999 Act, which was not  then  in  force.   An
     appeal under s65 is governed by the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Appeals
     (Procedure) Rules 2000 (SI 2000/2333).  Those Rules require  a  notice
     of appeal in the form prescribed and appended as  a  schedule  to  the
     Rules.  It is different from the form in use before  the  coming  into
     force of the 1999 Act but, even if it were  not,  the  consequence  of
     Pardeepan is that there would need to be  two  separate  appeals  (one
     against the pre-2 October 2000 immigration decision and one under s65)
     each of which would need a  separate  notice  of  appeal.   A  further
     problem is that by s58(5) of the 1999 Act:

           "For the purposes of the Immigration Acts, an appeal under  this
           part is to be treated as pending  during  the  period  beginning
           when notice of appeal is given and ending  when  the  appeal  is
           finally determined, withdrawn or abandoned."

 12. That provision applies to s65.  No appeal under s65 can have begun  to
     be pending when the only notice of appeal was given, because  s65  was
     not then in force;  no subsequent notice of appeal has been given;  it
     follows that, for the purposes of the Immigration Acts  at  least,  no
     appeal under s65 is pending.

 13. Miss Plimmer seeks to meet all these objections by advancing arguments
     relating to  waiver.   She  reminds  us  that,  although  the  Notices
     Regulations have the effect that notice of an appealable  decision  is
     not formally given until the Regulations have been complied  with  (so
     that the time limit for appealing does not until  then  begin  to  run
     against the individual) lack of compliance  does  not  always  exclude
     jurisdiction.  That is because, if, during the course of an appeal, it
     emerges that the Notices Regulations were not fully complied with, the
     Tribunal will regularly allow the appeal to proceed on  the  basis  of
     waiver.  The Regulations are made for the benefit  of  the  Appellant,
     and, in a proper case it will be right to treat an appellant  who  has
     given notice of appeal against a formerly invalid notice  of  decision
     as having waived his right to have a valid  notice  of  decision.   By
     giving the notice of appeal he demonstrates, first, that he is content
     to accept the notice as it is and, secondly, that he is aware  of  his
     right of appeal.  Miss Plimmer submits that the Appellant is similarly
     entitled to waive the right to have a notice following his  allegation
     of a breach of his human rights.  The  problem  is,  of  course,  that
     there is in this case no notice of appeal either.  Miss Plimmer  seeks
     to meet that difficulty by reference to the decision of the  Court  of
     Appeal in R v SSHD ex parte Jeyeanthan [2000] 1 WLR  354.   The  Court
     there drew a distinction between mandatory and directive  requirements
     of the Procedure Rules in relation to notices of appeal.  It held that
     a notice of appeal was not bad for failure  to  comply  with  all  the
     requirements of the Procedure Rules,  provided  that  there  had  been
     substantial compliance.  Despite Miss Plimmer's  earnest  submissions,
     however, we are unable to accept that the decision in  Jeyeanthan  can
     be understood to mean either that none  of  the  requirements  of  the
     Procedure Rules is mandatory or that the decision enables the Tribunal
     to hear an appeal when no notice of appeal has been given at all.  The
     problem is acute in the present case, because it would only be by  the
     giving of a notice of appeal that the Tribunal might be able  to  find
     that the Appellant sought to waive the lack of anything approaching  a
     notice of decision.

 14. In her written  skeleton,  Miss  Plimmer  does  not  shrink  from  the
     conclusion  that  if  her  submissions  were   right   the   statutory
     requirements of written notices of decision  and  written  notices  of
     appeal  could  simply  be  overridden  by  an  agreement  between  the
     Secretary of State and an individual that the  latter  had  an  appeal
     before the Tribunal.  That conclusion shows us (if further  persuasion
     were needed) that the arguments leading  to  the  conclusion  are  not
     sound.  The  Tribunal  receives  its  jurisdiction  not  by  agreement
     between the parties that it should  try  an  issue  but  by  a  formal
     process under  the  legislation  which  alone  give  it  jurisdiction.
     Furthermore, there are a number of consequences of the  fact  that  an
     appeal is pending before  the  Tribunal:   it  cannot  have  been  the
     intention of the  legislator  that  the  existence  or  not  of  those
     consequences should depend, merely on whether  the  parties  chose  to
     agree on them, rather than on whether the  various  statutory  notices
     had been served.

 15. For these reasons, we conclude that there is no appeal on human rights
     grounds before the Tribunal.  The Adjudicator erred in law in thinking
     that there was.  Her purported determination of it is of no effect.

 16. We are conscious that the concession, made before the  Adjudicator  on
     behalf of the Appellant, that his appeal could not succeed  under  the
     Immigration Rules, might not have been made if the Appellant  had  not
     thought that the Adjudicator had jurisdiction to  consider  his  human
     rights claim.  In the circumstances, we would not hold  the  Appellant
     to the concession, but it is nevertheless appropriate for us  formally
     to decide that the appeal could  not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
     Rules, for precisely the reason stated in the notice of decision.

 17. As we have indicated, the Respondent remains under a duty to  serve  a
     notice under  the  Regulations  responding  to  the  Appellant's  2002
     allegation about his human rights.  That notice will need to  set  out
     the right of appeal under s65:  we are not aware  that  the  statutory
     structure for giving notice of a right of  appeal  in  respect  of  an
     allegation made so long ago has changed with the 2002  or  2004  Acts.
     The allegation in the present case was made well  before  the  closing
     date of 1 July 2003 appointed by paragraph 6(5) of Schedule 2  to  the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (Commencement No 4) Order
     2003 (SI 2003/754).  It may, however, be worth pointing  out  that  an
     appeal on human  rights  grounds  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision to refuse  to  vary  the  Appellant's  leave  may  face  some
     difficulties because it is by no means clear that  the  mere  fact  of
     refusing him leave (rather  than  removing  him)  breaches  his  human
     rights.  He has, after all, been in the United Kingdom without  having
     the status of a person with leave to remain since his  leave  ran  out
     twenty-eight days after the making of the decision on 4 May 2000.  His
     present position is not absolutely clear.  His appeal under  the  1971
     Act protected him from removal while  it  was  pending.   It  arguably
     ceased to be pending when it  was  conceded  before  the  Adjudicator.
     Subsequent proceedings were confined to issues of human rights, but we
     have held that the Appellant never had  an  appeal  pending  on  human
     rights grounds, and it follows that he never  had  an  appeal  pending
     under the 1999 Act.  Fortunately, we are not called upon to  determine
     the legality of his presence in the country now;  but it  does  appear
     to us that he will have some difficulty in maintaining that  the  mere
     absence of a formal grant of  leave  to  remain  infringed  his  human
     rights when, in the circumstances, he  has,  despite  the  refusal  of
     leave, been able to remain here (and no doubt to see his  son)  for  a
     further six years at least.

 18. The Adjudicator made a material error  of  law  and  we  substitute  a
     decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal on the only grounds open to
     him.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:
