

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

    SY and Others (EEA regulation 10(1) - dependancy alone insufficient) Sri
                                                          Lanka [2006] 00024

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Promulgated                |
|On 20 January  2006                             |On  07 March 2006          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   Mr P R LANE  (SENIOR Immigration Judge)
                              SIR JEFFREY JAMES


                                   Between





                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants     Miss E Power, Solicitor, of the Windsor and Merton
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr M Montilla, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


LS (EEA Regulations 2000 - Meaning of 'Dependant') Sri  Lanka  [2005]  UKAIT
00132 is not authority for the proposition that, once  a  person  has  shown
that he is dependent on an EEA national or his spouse, the person  concerned
is entitled without more to an EEA family permit or  a  residence  document,
as the case may be. As the wording of regulation 10(1)  of  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2000 makes plain, the respondent has  a
discretion whether to grant  such  a  permit  and  that  discretion  is  not
incompatible with the underlying EEA legislation.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of Sri Lanka, born  respectively  on  3
      March 1969, 11 September 1966, 23 August 1968 and  20  November  1969.
      They are all relatives of two citizens  of  the  Netherlands,  of  Sri
      Lankan origin, to whom we shall refer as SM and JR.  SM is working  in
      the United Kingdom in a self-employed capacity and JR has been  issued
      with a residence permit as his spouse.  The  first  appellant  is  the
      sister of JR.  The fourth appellant is married to the first appellant.
        The second and third appellants are married to sisters of JR.

2.   On 23 December 2004 the appellants applied for residence  documents  to
      be issued to them under regulation 10  of  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2000 ('the 2000 Regulations").  On 22 March
      2005 the respondent decided to refuse to  issue  the  appellants  with
      such documents.  The respondent's notices of decision are in the  same
      form in respect of each of the four appellants.  The  first  appellant
      is described in her notice of decision as 'an adult aged sister  of  '
      JR, whilst the second, third and fourth appellants are each  described
      as 'an adult aged brother-in-law of' JR.   Each  notice  contains  the
      statement that the respondent was 'satisfied that you have  failed  to
      demonstrate that you are generally  dependent  upon  your  EEA  family
      member and the Secretary  of  State  is  not  prepared  to  issue  the
      confirmation  that you seek.'

3.   The appellants appealed  against  these  decisions  to  an  Immigration
      Judge, Mr N. Froom, sitting at Hatton Cross, who  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 6 October 2005 dismissed the appellants'  appeals.   On
      19 October 2005, reconsideration of the Immigration  Judge's  decision
      was ordered under section103A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002

4.   The grounds upon which reconsideration was  ordered  observe  that  the
      Immigration Judge, having  found  that  each  of  the  appellants  was
      dependent upon JR, erred in law in deciding  nevertheless  to  dismiss
      the appeals on  the  basis  that  the  decision  whether  to  issue  a
      residence permit under regulation 10 was a discretionary one, and that
      none of the appellants merited the exercise of discretion  in  his  or
      her favour.  The grounds contend that, having found the appellants  to
      be dependent on an EEA national or his spouse, that is to say, JR, the
      respondent's stated reason for refusing each of the  applications  was
      wrong and the Immigration Judge ought therefore  to  have  found  that
      residence documents should be issued to the  appellants.  The  grounds
      cite LS (EEA regulations 2000 -  Meaning  of  'Dependant')  Sri  Lanka
      [2005] UKAIT  00132  as  authority  for  the  proposition  that,  once
      dependancy has been established as a matter of fact, the appeals  fell
      to be allowed.

5.   Regulation  10 of the 2000 Regulations reads as follows:

             '10. Dependants and members of the household of EEA nationals


             (1)  If a person satisfies any of the conditions in  paragraph
                  (4), and if in all the circumstances  it  appears  to  the
                  decision-maker appropriate to do  so,  the  decision-maker
                  may issue to that person an EEA family permit, a residence
                  permit or a residence document (as the case may be).


             (2)   Where  a  permit  or  document  has  been  issued  under
                  paragraph (1), these Regulations apply to  the  holder  of
                  the permit or document as if he were the family member  of
                  an EEA national and the permit or document had been issued
                  to him under regulations 13 or 15.


             (3)  Without prejudice to regulation 22, a decision-maker  may
                  revoke (or refuse to renew) a permit  or  document  issued
                  under paragraph (1) if  he  decides  that  the  holder  no
                  longer satisfies any of the conditions in  paragraph  (4).




             (4)  The conditions are that the person is a relative  of   an
                  EEA national or his spouse and -


                  (a)  is dependent on the EEA national  or his spouse;


                  (b)  is living as part of  the  EEA  national's  household
                       outside the United Kingdom;  or


                  (c)  was living as part of the EEA  national's   household
                       before the EEA national  came to the United Kingdom.


              (5)  However, for those  purposes  'EEA  national'  does  not
                  include-


                  (a)  an EEA national  who is in the United  Kingdom  as  a
                       self-sufficient  person,  a  retired  person   or   a
                       student;


                  (b)  an EEA  national  who,  when  he  is  in  the  United
                       Kingdom,  will  be  a  person  referred  to  in  sub-
                       paragraph (a).'


 6.  Although the  appellants'  advisors  and  the  Immigration  Judge  have
      referred from  time  to  time  in  the  course  of  these  appeals  to
      'permits', it is relevant to observe that what each of the  appellants
      sought, and were refused, was a 'residence document', which is defined
      in regulation 2 of the 2002  Regulations  as follows:

             '"residence document" means a document issued to a person  who
             is not an EEA national, in accordance with regulations  10  or
             15, as proof of the holder's right to residence in the  United
             Kingdom'.

7.    Before  the  Immigration  Judge,  the  respondent  argued   that   the
      appellants' appeals should be dismissed for three reasons: first, some
      or all of the appellants were not  'relatives'  of  SM;  secondly,  at
      least some of the appellants were not 'dependent'  because  they  were
      themselves working; and thirdly, regulation 10 of the 2000 Regulations
      created a discretionary power and the exercise of that  power  in  the
      present  cases  'had  been   appropriate'   (paragraph   25   of   the
      determination).  The  Immigration  Judge  found  in  favour   of   the
      appellants in respect of the first and second issues but, as  we  have
      already observed, he found against them on the third.

8.   At paragraph 19 of his determination, the  Immigration  Judge  set  out
      the facts found by him.  Each of the appellants lived in  a  household
      comprising himself or herself, SM, JR and the children of JR  and  SM.
      All of the appellants were residing in the United Kingdom at the  time
      when SM and JR exercised their Treaty rights in coming to  the  United
      Kingdom from the Netherlands in August 2003.   The appellants are 'all
      failed asylum seekers'.  The Immigration Judge found that  the  first,
      third  and  fourth  appellants  earned  enough  to  'make   relatively
      significant contributions to the household expenses, albeit that  they
      are in low-paid employment'.

9.   In deciding whether the appellants were  'relatives',  the  Immigration
      Judge considered the determination of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
      in  PB and Others  (Goa:  EEA  discretionary  permit;  interpretation)
      India [2005] UKIAT  00082.   The  Immigration  Judge  noted  that  the
      Tribunal in that case found that 'relative' must be intended to have a
      wider  meaning   than   'family   member'   (paragraph   9   of   that
      determination). The  Immigration  Judge  also  observed  that  it  was
      sufficient for a person  to  be  a  relative,  either  of  the  person
      exercising Treaty rights or of that person's spouse.  In  the  present
      case, the appellants were related to JR. The Immigration Judge   found
      that there 'can be no question that [the first appellant] qualifies as
      her sister. The  other  three  appellants  are  JR's  brothers-in-law.
      There is no requirement for a blood relationship. I  would  find  that
      all the appellants are  relatives  for  the  purpose  of  [regulation]
      10(4)' (paragraph 21).

 10. The Immigration Judge, at paragraph  22  of  his  determination,  found
      that PB also assisted him in finding that dependancy for the  purposes
      of the 2000 Regulations 'is  a  question  of  fact  and  there  is  no
      requirement that the dependancy be  of  necessity'.   The  Immigration
      Judge found as a fact that the family comprising  the  appellants,  SM
      and JR, lived 'on the basis of a pooled income  and  shared  expenses'
      but that the house in which they lived was provided by SM and JR,  who
      had purchased the property before moving to the United Kingdom,  'with
      a view to providing a home large enough for all of them to reside in'.
      Particularly  bearing  in  mind  the  issue  of   accommodation,   the
      Immigration  Judge  found  that  'all  the  appellants  are   mutually
      dependent with each other and JR and SM'.   Although  the  Immigration
      Judge did 'not exclude an element of emotional dependancy',  he  noted
      that the evidence on that issue 'was not developed  and  I  give  most
      weight to the material dependancy.  I  find  all  the  appellants  are
      dependent'.

11.  No reply has been filed  by  the  respondent,  seeking  to  uphold  the
      dismissal of the appeals on the basis that the Immigration  Judge  was
      wrong  to  find  in  favour  of  the  appellants  on  the  issues   of
      relationship and dependancy.  At paragraph 23  of  the  determination,
      the Immigration Judge turned to 'the issue of whether the exercise  of
      discretion by the respondent not to issue permits' had been  correctly
      made.  As we shall later explain,  the  Immigration  Judge  fell  into
      error by assuming that the respondent, in the notices of decision, had
      in fact exercised  a  discretion  under  regulation  10  of  the  2000
      Regulations. In considering the issue of discretion,  the  Immigration
      Judge had regard to chapter 2 of the respondent's European Directorate
      Instructions 'Residence  Documents  (non-EEA  Family  Members  of  EEA
      Nationals)'.

12.  Paragraph 2.4 of those Instructions observes that regulation 10 of  the
      2000 Regulations 'covers more distant family members' than the spouse,
      children and dependants in the ascending line of an EEA national or of
      his or her spouse (see regulation 6 ('family member')).  Paragraph 2.4
      gives guidance  to  the  respondent's  caseworkers  on  the  practical
      operation of regulation 10.  The Immigration  Judge  set  out  in  his
      determination the following passage from chapter 2.4:

             'When  deciding  whether  it  is  appropriate   in   all   the
             circumstances   to   issue   a   residence    permit/document,
             caseworkers will need to assess whether  refusing  the  family
             member would deter the EEA national  from  exercising  his/her
             treaty  rights  or  would  create  an  effective  obstacle  to
             exercise of Treaty rights.  Each case must be assessed  on  an
             individual  basis  but  an  example  of  where  it  might   be
             appropriate to issue a residence permit/document would  be  if
             the family member were  very  elderly  or  incapacitated.   In
             assessing such  cases,  it  would  be  important  to  consider
             whether there were any relatives to care  for  them  in  their
             home country.


             Cases falling for refusal


             Where  an  applicant  has  produced  evidence  that  they  are
             financially dependent on the EEA national, (for instance  they
             may  be  currently  unemployed)  caseworkers  should  consider
             whether there is any reason to suggest that the  EEA  national
             could not send money back to the third country national's home
             country.' (authors' emphases).


         In considering cases under Article  10  (sic)  we  would  normally
             refuse those who have for example:

             -    lived in a third country  whilst  the  EEA  national  has
                  resided in another Member  State  prior  to  entering  the
                  United Kingdom;


                - lived as part of the EEA national's household  many  years
                  ago;


             -    have their own family unit (unless there  are  sufficient
                  compassionate circumstances)'.

14.  Having set out  those  extracts  from  chapter  2.4  of  the  EDI,  the
      Immigration Judge concluded as follows:

             '24.     PB India, when discussing [regulation] 10(4)(c)  also
                  considers  the  general  approach  to   interpreting   the
                  Regulations.  At paragraph 11 the  Tribunal  stated,  'The
                  purpose of the  Regulations   we  are  considering  is  to
                  enable a qualified person - that is to say, an EU national
                  exercising Treaty rights - to exercise his rights freely ,
                  without being hindered or discouraged by having  to  leave
                  family members behind when he exercises his  rights.'    I
                  do not agree with Miss Power [the  appellants'  solicitor]
                  that  the  Tribunal  were  there  solely  concerned   with
                  10(4)(c). The authors of Freedom of Movement of Persons in
                  the  Enlarged European Union,  first  edition,  suggest  a
                  similar approach. For example, at 10-78-79, they note  the
                  ECJ's consideration of whether exclusion would  constitute
                  an obstacle to free movement in Baumbast C-413/99.'


             25.  On the facts  of  this  case,  all  the  appellants  were
                  already residing in the UK, when SM and JR moved  here  in
                  exercise of  Treaty rights.  JR had lost touch with SA and
                  other family members for  many  years  after  leaving  Sri
                  Lanka. SM and JR moved as a family  with  their  children,
                  who had  been  residing  with  them  in  the  Netherlands,
                  although  [...] had  gone  ahead.  In  no  sense  can  the
                  decision be considered  as an obstacle to that exercise of
                  free movement. JR  and  SM  have  welcomed  JR's  extended
                  family into their home but that occurred  extraneously  to
                  the exercise of Treaty rights. In fact it  was  only  made
                  possible by the exercise of  Treaty rights by JR and SM.


             26. I have  balanced  all  the  circumstances,  including  the
                  dependancy.  However,  I  note  [the  first   and   fourth
                  appellants] have their own family unit.  [The  second  and
                  third appellants] are  temporarily  separated  from  their
                  wives. The appellants are all relatively young and have no
                  health problems.  I do not consider the present  situation
                  is appropriate for a positive exercise of discretion and I
                  dismiss the appeals.'

15.  For the appellants, Miss Power's primary submission was essentially  as
      follows. Once the Immigration Judge had  found  as  a  fact  that  the
      appellants were relatives of the spouse of an EEA  national  and  that
      they were dependent upon that person, or the EEA national, the  appeal
      fell to be  allowed  without  more,  and  the  Immigration  Judge  was
      accordingly wrong in law to rely upon a discretion that  does  not  in
      reality exist.  Both in the grounds accompanying the  application  for
      reconsideration and at the hearing before the Tribunal on  20  January
      2006, Miss Power sought to rely upon the reported determination of the
      Tribunal in LS, which was notified on 29 September 2005 (the  date  on
      which the Immigration  Judge  heard  the  appellants'  appeals).   The
      Tribunal in LS considered the question of whether dependancy  for  the
      purposes of regulation 10 of the 2000 Regulations required  a  finding
      of  dependancy  of  necessity.   At  paragraphs  6  and   7   of   its
      determination, the Tribunal found as follows:

             '6.   Even if dependancy of itself be required,  it  would  in
                  our view be arguable that it was satisfied in  this  case:
                  it was because British legislation prevented the appellant
                  from working that he had to rely on the sponsor.  However,
                  the only authority to which we  were  referred  by  either
                  side as to the meaning  of  'dependant'  in  the  European
                  legislation was (by Mr Mukherjee) Lebon (ECJ case 316/85,)
                  judgment 18 June 1987).  Lebon dealt not with  freedom  of
                  movement,  but  with   entitlement   to   benefits   under
                  regulation 10 of Regulation 1612/68: however, 1612/68  was
                  the foundation for our 2000 Regulations ...   There is  in
                  our view no reason to interpret 'dependent'  in  different
                  ways for the  purposes  of  the  same  piece  of  European
                  legislation.  What Lebon decided, on the  point  in  issue
                  (see ruling 2) was this:


                        "The status  of  dependent  member  of  a  workers'
                        family  ... is the result of  a  factual  situation,
                        namely the  provision  of  support  by  the  worker,
                        without  there  being  any  need  to  determine  the
                        reasons for recourse to the worker's support."


             7.    While strictly nothing we say on this point is necessary
                  to our decision, if the withdrawal of permission  to  work
                  meant that the  appellant  was  on  any  conceivable  test
                  dependent on the sponsor by the date of the decision under
                  appeal, we have to say that in our view Lebon means  that,
                  if a claimant is at the date of the decision dependent  on
                  a European Union citizen exercising Treaty rights here  as
                  an  ordinary  matter  of  fact  (and   clearly   financial
                  dependancy is what is meant here), then there is  no  room
                  for  doubt  or  for  going  into  the  reasons   for   the
                  dependancy. It follows that this appeal must be allowed.'

16.  We do not consider that  the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  7  of  the
      Tribunal's determination in LS can properly be said to be support  for
      the proposition that, once  dependency  is  found,  the  discretionary
      power  in  the  decision-maker  conferred  by  the  opening  words  of
      regulation 10(1)  must  be  disregarded.   Miss  Power,  who  was  the
      instructing solicitor for the appellant in LS, told us that this  had,
      in fact, been the thrust of the skeleton argument that  had  been  put
      before the Tribunal in LS.  That may be so but for whatever reason the
      Tribunal in that case did not have the benefit of hearing argument  on
      the matter.  Whatever may have been the respondent's stance in LS,  Mr
      Montilla, who appeared for the respondent before us, vigorously argued
      that regulation 10(1) could not be given such an interpretation.

17.   This  Tribunal  has  no  doubt  that,  as  a   matter   of   statutory
      construction, the opening words of regulation  10(1)  mean  what  they
      say.  If a person satisfies any of the three conditions  specified  in
      regulation 10(4), the decision-maker,  which,  for  present  purposes,
      means the Secretary of State (see regulation 2  (1))  may  issue  that
      person with the requisite document if  in  all  the  circumstances  it
      appears to the decision-maker appropriate to do so.  If  it  does  not
      appear appropriate, then (subject to the  Wednesbury  principle),  the
      decision-maker does not have to issue the document.  As is plain  from
      the determination in PB, a clear distinction  is  drawn  in  the  2000
      Regulations between a 'family member,' who is entitled to the relevant
      document, and those who must rely upon  regulation  10.   In  PB,  the
      decision-maker had erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  position  by
      reference to regulation 10(4)(c), as a person who had been  living  as
      part of the EEA national's household before the  latter  came  to  the
      United Kingdom:

             'It is however common ground that the Entry Clearance  Officer
             ought to have considered whether [the appellants] fall  within
             Regulations  10(4)(c)  and,  if  so,  ought  further  to  have
             considered whether to exercise his discretion in their favour'
             (paragraph 14 of the determination).

      The Tribunal in PB was, accordingly, in no doubt that satisfaction of
      regulation 10(4) was a necessary but, nevertheless, not  a  sufficient
      condition to succeed under that regulation.

18.  Miss Power's alternative submission was that, regardless  of  what  the
      wording of regulation 10(1) might be, the underlying  EEA  legislation
      confers no discretion upon the decision-maker to  refuse  to  issue  a
      permit or document to a person who satisfies regulation 10(4).

19.  It is common ground that the 2000  Regulations  are  intended  to  give
      effect to relevant  provisions of Regulation (EEC No. 1612/68) of  the
      Council of 15 October 1968 on Freedom of Movement for  Workers  within
      the Community  ("the  EEC  Regulation").   The  Preamble  to  the  EEC
      Regulation makes it plain that the purpose is  that  the  'freedom  of
      movement for workers' should be secured within  the  Community';  that
      such freedom of movement constitutes a fundamental  right  of  workers
      and their families, and that mobility of labour within  the  Community
      'must be one of the means  by  which  the  worker  is  guaranteed  the
      possibility  of  improving  his  living  and  working  conditions  and
      promoting  his  social  advancement,  while  helping  to  satisfy  the
      requirements of the economies of the Member  States';  and  that  that
      freedom of movement, in order that it  may be exercised, requires that
      'obstacles  to  the  mobility  of  workers  shall  be  eliminated,  in
      particular as regards the worker's rights to be joined by  his  family
      and the conditions for the integration of that family  into  the  host
      country'.

20.  Article 10 of the EEC Regulation reads as follows:

             'Article10


             1.   The following shall, irrespective of  their  nationality,
                  have the right to install themselves with a worker who  is
                  a national of one member state and who is employed in  the
                  territory of another member state:


                    a) his spouse and their descendants who  are  under  the
                       age of 21 years or are dependant


                  (b)  dependent relatives in the  ascending  line  of  the
                       worker and his spouse.


             2.   Member states  shall  facilitate  the  admission  of  any
                  member of the family not coming within the  provisions  of
                  paragraph 1 if dependent on the worker referred  to  above
                  or living  under his roof in the country whence he comes.


             3.   For the purposes of paragraphs 1 and 2, the  worker  must
                  have available for his family housing considered as normal
                  for native workers in the region  where  he  is  employed;
                  this  provision  must,  however  must  not  give  rise  to
                  discrimination between national workers and  workers  from
                  the other member states.'

21.  Miss Power submitted that the word 'facilitate'  in  Article  10(2)  of
      the EEC Regulation did not entitle the United  Kingdom  government  to
      confer upon itself a discretion in respect of the admission of members
      of the family not coming  within  Article  10(1).   Relying  upon  the
      dictionary definition of 'facilitate' as 'to make easy', she contended
      that, once a person showed himself to be a member of the family of the
      worker and to be dependent on that worker or  living  under  the  same
      roof in the country whence he came, there is a legal presumption  that
      that family member shall be admitted to the United Kingdom.

22.  The Tribunal does not find that paragraph 2 of Article 10  of  the  EEC
      Regulation 1612/68 is incompatible with regulation 10(1) of  the  2000
      Regulations so as to entitle us to disregard the discretionary  aspect
      of Regulation 10(1). On any reading, paragraph 2 of Article 10 of  the
      EEC Regulation is not conferring upon the member  of  the  family  any
      right of admission to a Member State. A  clear  distinction  is  being
      drawn between those falling within paragraph 1 (who have such a right)
      and those having to rely upon paragraph  2.    The  existence  of  the
      discretion in regulation 10(1) of the 2000 Regulations  is,  we  find,
      perfectly compatible with the underlying EEC Regulation.

23.  As we have already observed, the respondent has, through  its  European
      Directorate, produced  instructions  to  its  caseworkers  on  how  to
      exercise the discretion in regulation 10(1).  Immediately  before  the
      paragraph from the EDI quoted by the Immigration Judge (see  paragraph
      12 above), there is to be found the following statement:

             'The Directives (sic) refer to facilitating or  favouring  the
             admission of any member of the family who  meets  any  of  the
             above conditions providing that a person falls within  one  of
             these  categories,  you  may  issue  a  residence  permit   or
             residence document if in  all  the  circumstances  it  applies
             appropriate to do so' (authors' emphases).


      The reference  to  the  above  conditions  is  a  reference  to  those
      contained in regulation 10(4)(a) to (c).

24.  As is plain from the paragraph which follows the one just  quoted,  the
      United  Kingdom  government  has  seen  fit  to  give  effect  to  the
      requirement upon it  to  facilitate  admission  by  focussing  on  the
      underlying purpose of the EEA Regulation, as set out in its  Preamble.
      The EDI also emphasises  that  'each  case  must  be  assessed  on  an
      individual basis', although examples are  given  of  cases  where  the
      decision maker would normally refuse  an  application.   Each  of  the
      three examples given is one where, in reality,  the  EEA  national  is
      unlikely to be able to show that his exercise, or continued  exercise,
      of his rights as a worker is connected with the presence of the family
      member concerned. For our part, the Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
      wording of regulation 10(1), and that of chapter 2.4 of  the  EDI,  is
      compatible with the provisions of Article 10 of  the  EEC  Regulation.
      In any event, it is plainly not the case that an appellant is entitled
      to have his appeal allowed, regardless of regulation 10(1) of the 2000
      Regulations, provided only that he has satisfied regulation 10(4).

25.  Miss Power submitted that the issuing  of  a  residence  document  was,
      strictly speaking, immaterial in that the appellants had an  underling
      EEC right to be in the United Kingdom.   That submission is, we  find,
      erroneous.  As we have seen,  a distinction is drawn between paragraph
      1 and paragraph 2 of Article 10 of  the  EEC  Regulation.    A  person
      falling within paragraph 2 has no right of entry to the United Kingdom
      unless and until the United Kingdom  government  has  facilitated  his
      admission to this country.   That point  is  clearly  brought  out  by
      regulation 10(2) of the 2000 Regulations, which provide that a  person
      is to be treated 'as if he were the family member of an EEA  national'
      only where 'a permit or document has been issued under paragraph (1).'

26.   As  Mr  Montilla  conceded  at  the   reconsideration   hearing,   the
      Immigration Judge in the present case erred in law in that he  wrongly
      assumed that the respondent had exercised his discretion not to  issue
      the residence documents.  As is plain from  each  of  the  notices  of
      decision, the respondent never turned his  mind  to  the  question  of
      whether the appellants were entitled to the positive exercise  of  his
      discretionary power under  regulation  10(1).   This  is  because  the
      respondent took the view that each of the  appellants  had  failed  to
      demonstrate that he or she was genuinely dependant upon JR.   It might
      have been possible in the notice of decision  for  the  respondent  to
      have stated  that,  regardless  of  that  issue,  he  would  not  have
      exercised his discretion in favour of the appellants.   However,  that
      is not what he did and the Tribunal can see the logic in  refusing  to
      make what at that stage the respondent (albeit wrongly,  as  it  turns
      out) regarded as a purely hypothetical decision.

27.  The Immigration Judge was, accordingly, wrong to assume that an  appeal
      lay to him in respect of a decision under regulation  10(1)  that  had
      not been made.  The effect of  the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  on
      dependancy (which have not been challenged by the respondent) was that
      the respondent needed to consider whether to exercise  his  discretion
      under regulation 10(1) in favour of the appellants.  The fact that the
      Immigration Judge  found  that,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  the
      discretion should not be exercised did not entitle him to dismiss  the
      appeals.   The decisions, as contained in the relevant  notices,  were
      incomplete.   The Immigration Judge, ought, accordingly, to have found
      that, in the light of his findings on dependancy, those decisions were
      not in accordance with the law and remained before  the  Secretary  of
      State to reach decisions under regulation 10(1).   That  discretionary
      decision cannot be taken for the first time by the Tribunal, if it has
      not been made by the respondent.








28.  The Immigration Judge made a material error of law and  we  accordingly
      substitute for his decision, dismissing  the  appellants'  appeals,  a
      decision allowing those appeals to the extent  that  the  respondent's
      decisions are not in accordance with the law and the  applications  of
      the appellants accordingly remain outstanding before him.






Signed                                  Date: 3 March 2006

P R Lane
Senior Immigration Judge


