


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            KH (Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq
                            CG [2008] UKAIT 00023

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 28 January- 1 February 2008                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

MR C M G OCKELTON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT, ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr R Husain and Ms S Knights instructed by the Refugee
Legal Centre
For the Respondent: Mr P Saini QC, Mr S Wordsworth and Mr A Palmer
instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

   1) Key terms found in Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive are to
      be given an international humanitarian law (IHL) meaning.  Subject  to
      (3) below, the approach of the Tribunal in  HH  &  others  (Mogadishu:
      armed conflict: risk) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00022 to this  provision
      is confirmed.

   2) Article 15(c) does add to the scope of Article 15(a) and (b), but only
      in a limited way. It is limited so as to make eligible for  subsidiary
      protection (humanitarian protection) only a subset of civilians: those
      who can show that as civilians they face on  return  a  real  risk  of
      suffering certain  types  of  serious  violations  of  IHL  caused  by
      indiscriminate violence.

   3) Article 15(c) is not intended to cover threats that are by  reason  of
      all kinds of violence. It does not cover purely criminal  violence  or
      indeed any other type of non-military  violence.  Nor  does  it  cover
      violence used by combatants which targets adversaries in a  legitimate
      way.

   4) Where it is suggested that a person can qualify  under  Article  15(c)
      merely by virtue of being a civilian, the principal question that must
      be examined is whether the evidence as to the situation in his or  her
      home area shows that indiscriminate violence there is of such severity
      as to pose a threat to life or person generally. If such  evidence  is
      lacking,  then   it   will   be   necessary   to   identify   personal
      characteristics or circumstances that give  rise  to  a  "serious  and
      individual threat" to that individual's "life or person".


   5) Given that the whole territory of Iraq is in a state of internal armed
      conflict for IHL purposes (that being conceded by  the  respondent  in
      this case), a national of Iraq  can  satisfy  the  requirement  within
      Article 15(c) that he or she faces return  to  a  situation  of  armed
      conflict, but will still have to show that the other  requirements  of
      that provision are met.

   6) Neither  civilians in Iraq generally nor civilians even  in  provinces
      and cities worst-affected by the armed conflict can show they  face  a
      "serious and individual threat" to their "life or person"  within  the
      meaning of Article 15(c) merely by virtue of being civilians.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The plight of persons who flee  armed  conflicts  affronts  our  common
    humanity. But when such persons claim asylum the answer given  by  host
    states has often been that merely being a victim of armed conflict does
    not make a person a refugee: see e.g. Adan  [1999]  1  AC  293.  Claims
    based on human rights, Article 3 ECHR in  particular,  have  often  met
    with a similar negative response: see e.g. Vilvirajah v  UK  (1991)  14
    EHRR 248. The underlying question raised by this case  is  whether,  by
    virtue of  the  provisions  made  in  the  EU  Qualification  Directive
    relating to eligibility for subsidiary protection, Member States of the
    EU are obliged to take a different view. That we have  to  decide  this
    question in the context of a claim made  by  a  national  of   Iraq,  a
    country which has seen many leave in  order  to  flee  conflict  there,
    underscores how potentially important is its answer.

2.    We  refer  throughout  this  decision  to  the  EU  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the  qualification  and  status  of
    third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as  persons
    who otherwise need international protection  and  the  content  of  the
    protection granted ("the Qualification Directive"),  in  particular  to
    Article 15 of this Directive, because that  is  the  "common  text"  we
    share with courts and tribunals in other Member States. It is important
    to note, however, that our decision in this case  is  made  under  para
    339C and related paragraphs of the Immigration Rules HC395 as  amended,
    it being these rules, together with the Refugee or Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations SI 2006/2525 ("the
    Protection Regulations") which have implemented into United Kingdom law
    the provisions of the Qualification Directive concerning  international
    protection.  We  likewise  refer  for  the  most  part  to  "subsidiary
    protection", that being the term used in this Directive;  but  for  the
    purposes of the Immigration Rules and the  Protection  Regulations  the
    term is "humanitarian protection". Since we refer frequently to  "IHL",
    we should identify at the outset that this is the body of international
    law applicable to international and non-international (internal)  armed
    conflicts (formerly known as the "laws  of  war").  It  comprises  both
    treaty  law  (e.g.  the  1949   Geneva   Conventions)   and   customary
    international law. The most  widely  applicable  provision  of  IHL  is
    common Article 3 to the four 1949  Geneva  Conventions.  It  stipulates
    that in the case of international and non-international armed conflict:

         "(1)  Persons taking no active part in the  hostilities...shall  in
             all circumstances be treated  humanely,  without  any  adverse
             distinction founded on race, colour, religion or  faith,  sex,
             birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria.


                   To this end the  following  acts  are  and  shall  remain
             prohibited at any time  and  in  any  place,  whatsoever  with
             respect to the above-mentioned persons:
             (a) violence to life and person, in particular murder  of  all
                  kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture;
             (b) taking of hostages;
             (c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular  humiliating
                  and degrading treatment;
             (d)  the  passing  of  sentences  and  the  carrying  out   of
                  executions  without  previous  judgment  pronounced  by  a
                  regularly constituted court,  afforded  all  the  judicial
                  guarantees  which  are  recognised  as  indispensable   by
                  civilised peoples.
                (2)  The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.
         ..."


    According to the UK Ministry of Defence Manual  of  the  Law  of  Armed
    Conflict,  the  basic  principles  of  IHL  are  "military   necessity,
    humanity, distinction and proportionality" (p.387).

The appeal

3.   The appellant is a national  of  Iraq.   In  a  determination  notified
    following a hearing on 21 February  2007  Immigration  Judge  R  Morris
    dismissed his appeal against a decision dated 4 December 2006 to remove
    him as an illegal entrant, a decision which was made in the light of an
    earlier decision dated 30 November 2006 refusing to grant  him  asylum.
    He successfully obtained an order for reconsideration and so the matter
    comes before us.

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was born  in  Kirkuk  to
    an ethnic Arab father and an ethnic Kurdish mother.  Save for a  period
    of less than one year when he went to Baghdad to join  his  cousin  who
    was working there, he had lived all his life in Kirkuk, until  he  left
    Iraq in late July 2006.  He worked as a taxi driver but then joined the
    police in Almas, Kirkuk.  After one year and ten months  he  left  this
    job because of threats to him and his family by insurgents and  because
    his identical twin brother had been nearly killed by terrorists.

5.   The Immigration Judge did not find the  appellant's  account  credible.
    She did not accept that the appellant faced a real  risk  of  suffering
    persecution or serious harm in his home area of Kirkuk.  In  particular
    she did not  accept  that  the  appellant  would  face  a  serious  and
    individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence in  a  situation
    of international or internal armed conflict.  She stated:

         "As set out in the Supplementary Letter, the United Kingdom has not
         accepted that Iraq is in a state of civil war.  It is not  accepted
         either that the situation there amounts to internal armed conflict.
         This is in line with the findings of UNHCR. This being the case, so
         far as the appellant's past adverse experiences  are  concerned,  I
         find that the  situation  in  Iraq,  (even  in  the  turbulence  of
         Baghdad) is not one that can be  characterised  as  internal  armed
         conflict, serious though the internal strife in  that  country  is.
         In summary,  the  threat  to  the  appellant  is  not  personal  or
         'individual' to him."


6.   She did, however, accept that he was from Kirkuk,  of  mixed  Arab  and
    Kurdish ethnicity, and that:

         "given the precarious security situation  in  Iraq,  the  appellant
         might have faced dangerous and violent situations and that  members
         of his family may well have been killed in the general military and
         civilian upheaval in Iraq".

7.   Having found that the appellant was not at risk in his home  area,  the
    Immigration Judge also dealt briefly,  in  the  alternative,  with  the
    question of whether he could relocate in any event to  other  parts  of
    Iraq.  Given his mother's  Kurdish  ethnicity,  the  Immigration  Judge
    considered that "if he preferred, he would be able to relocate  to  the
    Northern Governorates" (para 22(v)).

8.   In line with these conclusions the Immigration  Judge  found  that  the
    appellant was not at real risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2  and
    3 of the ECHR.

9.   The grounds for reconsideration raised two challenges.  One was to  the
    Immigration Judge's adverse credibility findings.  The other was to the
    Immigration Judge's failure to  apply  para  339C  of  HC  395  to  the
    appellant's claim "adequately or at all". The order for reconsideration
    was confined to the second ground.

The HH appeal
10.  We heard the  appellant's  appeal  together  with  the  appeal  of   HH
    (IA/01739/2007).  In  the  event  we  decided  to  issue   a   separate
    determination in HH's case. We would emphasise, however, that  we  have
    taken fully into account in this case all  the  evidence  submitted  by
    HH's representatives, together with the submissions made on his  behalf
    by Mr M Symes (instructed by IAS (London)).

Decision as to whether material error of law

11.  Mr Saini QC did not seek to persuade us that the Immigration Judge  had
    not materially erred in law and in our view he was right not to do  so.
    The Immigration Judge concluded that the appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements  of  para  339C(iv).  This  provision  states   that   one
    subcategory of serious harm consists in  "serious and individual threat
    to a civilian's life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in
    situations of international or internal armed conflict";  this  wording
    precisely mirrors Article 15(c) of the Directive.  Leaving  aside  that
    the Immigration Judge wrongly referred to the requirement in  para  339
    (iv) as one concerned with situations of  "international  and  internal
    armed conflict" (emphasis added),  she appeared to see the  reason  why
    the relevant threat was not personal or "individual" to  him  as  being
    because the situation in Iraq was not one of internal  armed  conflict.
    We analyse the notion of a "serious and individual threat" later on  in
    this determination, but it suffices to say here  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's reasoning on this point failed to recognise that, if there  was
    no internal armed conflict, the issue of whether there was  any  threat
    individual to the appellant (within the meaning of Article  15(c))  was
    irrelevant.  Moreover, the reasons she gave for finding that  Iraq  was
    not in a state of internal armed conflict were  misconceived.   It  was
    wrong to view it as a matter settled by the  (assumed)  fact  that  the
    United Kingdom government has not accepted Iraq is in such a state.  It
    is a matter to be judicially determined  by applying legal criteria  to
    the factual situation in that country.  In any event, the  letter  from
    the respondent dated 9 February 2007, on which  the  Immigration  Judge
    relied, did not state that the United Kingdom government disputed  that
    Iraq was in a situation of internal armed conflict.  What it stated was
    that "it is a matter of  record  that  the  government  of  the  United
    Kingdom does not accept that Iraq is in a state of civil war" (emphasis
    added).  It was quite wrong to equate the concepts of  "internal  armed
    conflict" and "civil war".  Further, to the extent that the Immigration
    Judge might  be  thought  to  have  intended  simply  to  point  to  an
    evidential basis for her finding that Iraq was not in a state of  civil
    war and/or armed conflict - consisting in the view of the UNHCR -  this
    was based simply on the appellant's  representative's  acceptance  that
    UNHCR had not classed Iraq as being in a situation of international  or
    internal armed conflict. We can find nothing on file to show that UNHCR
    had taken such a view. (That in a recent report dated August 2007 UNHCR
    describes Iraq as having been in a state  of  internal  armed  conflict
    since 28 June 2004 further confirms our  belief  that  the  Immigration
    Judge, like the appellant's  representative,  was  certainly  wrong  to
    suggest that UNHCR had rejected such a view.)

12.  We consider that the Immigration  Judge's  erroneous  understanding  of
    the legal criteria she had  to  apply,  when  considering  whether  the
    appellant was at real risk of serious harm and of the evidence that was
    relevant to her decision on that issue in relation to  this  appellant,
    amounted to a material error of law.

13.  Both parties agreed that we were in a position  to  decide  the  appeal
    for ourselves without further adjournment.

The issues

14.  The appellant's asylum and human rights grounds of appeal have  already
    been rejected and it is common ground that the  only  issue  before  us
    concerns  whether  the  appellant  is  able  to  show  eligibility  for
    subsidiary protection under Article 15 of the  Qualification  Directive
    (humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C).

15.  The principal basis on which the appellant puts his  case  is  that  he
    meets the requirements of Article 15(c) by virtue of the fact  that  he
    faces return to a country which is in a  situation  of  internal  armed
    conflict and in which the indiscriminate violence there would give rise
    to a serious and individual threat to his life or person (1)  merely by
    virtue of the fact that he is a civilian from Iraq or a civilian in his
    home area (Kirkuk), and in any event (2) by virtue of  his  being  from
    Kirkuk and of mixed (Sunni) Arab/Kurdish ethnicity. Mr  Saini  for  the
    respondent contends that the appellant fails under Article 15(c) for  a
    number of reasons: that there is no internal armed conflict in Iraq  or
    Kirkuk within the meaning of Article 15(c); that even if there  is,  he
    cannot meet the other requirements of Article 15(c), in particular  the
    existence of a "serious and individual threat" and  he  cannot  succeed
    merely by virtue of being a civilian in Iraq or in Kirkuk or  a  person
    of mixed (Sunni) Arab/Kurdish ethnicity in Kirkuk.

Submissions


16.  We had lengthy written and  oral  submissions  in  this  case.  We  are
    indebted to the parties (and to Mr Symes who appeared in  the  case  of
    HH, which we heard at the same time) for the great care  and  attention
    to detail which their submissions exhibited. What progress we have made
    in clarifying the law and analysing the evidence in  this  case  is  in
    part due to the high quality of their respective preparations. However,
    partly because of their length and partly because of the fact  that  on
    some issues the parties changed their position in  the  course  of  the
    hearing, we do not propose  to  set  them  out  in  any  detail.  Where
    appropriate we shall address points they raise when setting out our own
    reasoning.


17.  An extremely important feature of this case is that it must be  decided
    in the light of a concession made during the hearing  by  Mr  Saini  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State. He stated that she accepted that  for
    IHL purposes Iraq was in a situation of  internal  armed  conflict  and
    that this situation embraced the whole territory of the state of  Iraq,
    including the Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) and that the Government
    of Iraq (GOI) is a party to it.

18.  More generally Mr  Saini  submitted  that  Article  15(c)  afforded  no
    additional scope beyond that of Article 15(a) and (b); that it would be
    wrong to endow key terms in Article 15(c) with an IHL meaning, but that
    if we did so we should accord  them  a  narrow  meaning,  since  to  do
    otherwise would fly in the face of the  fact  that  the  Member  States
    clearly did not envisage this provision as giving rise to a new species
    of international protection; that (in any event) so far  as  key  terms
    within Article 15(c) were concerned,  "the  international  humanitarian
    law cupboard is relatively bare"; that in relation  to  Iraq,  although
    the respondent accepted that for IHL purposes  there  was  an  internal
    armed conflict in Iraq, we should  find,  by  applying  a  "pragmatic",
    "autonomous" approach  to  definition  built  out  of  existing  United
    Kingdom case law on war and civil  war,  that  there  was  not  such  a
    conflict; that in any event neither the class  "civilians in Iraq"  nor
    the class  "civilians in Kirkuk" (the appellant's home area) could show
    they faced a "serious and individual  threat"  within  the  meaning  of
    Article  15(c);   and   that   none   of   the   appellant's   personal
    characteristics (being male, being of mixed ethnicity) sufficed to show
    he faced a "serious and individual threat" either. On all these matters
    Mr Husain's (and Mr Symes') submissions  and  those  by  Ms  Knight  in
    respect of the situation in Iraq, were almost precisely to the opposite
    effect.

The legal framework


19.  Article 2(e) of the Qualification Directive provides:

         "[person eligible for subsidiary protection] means a third  country
         national or a stateless person who does not qualify  as  a  refugee
         but in respect of whom substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
         believing that the person concerned, if  returned  to  his  or  her
         country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his  or
         her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of
         suffering serious harm as  defined  in  Article  15,  and  to  whom
         Article 17(1) and (2) do not apply, and is  unable,  or,  owing  to
         such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the  protection
         of that country."

20.  Article 15(c) states:

        "Serious harm consists of:


        a) death penalty or execution; or
        b) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or  punishment  of  an
           applicant in the country of origin; or
        c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person  by
           reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
           or internal armed conflict".


21.  Complementary to this provision is recital 26 which states:


         "Risks to which a population of a  country  or  a  section  of  the
         population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not   create   in
         themselves an individual threat  which  would  qualify  as  serious
         harm".

22.  Article 17 sets out who is excluded from being eligible for  subsidiary
    protection. It is not relevant to this case.

23.  Mention should also be made of recitals 25 and 11. Recital 25 states:

         "It is necessary to  introduce  criteria  on  the  basis  of  which
         applicants for international protection are  to  be  recognised  as
         eligible for subsidiary protection. Those criteria should be  drawn
         from international obligations under human rights  instruments  and
         practices existing in Member States."


24.  Recital 11 states:

         "With respect to the treatment of persons falling within the  scope
         of this Directive, Member States are  bound  by  obligations  under
         instruments of international law to which  they  are  a  party  and
         which prohibit discrimination."


25.  Implementing Articles 2(e) and 15, para 339C of the  Immigration  Rules
    provides as follows:


         "A person will be granted humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
         Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
         (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port  of  entry
         in the United Kingdom;
         (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of
         The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
         (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
         (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that  the
         person concerned, if he returned to the country  of  return,  would
         face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing
         to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of  that
         country; and
         (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.


         Serious harm consists of:
         (i) the death penalty or execution;
         (ii) unlawful killing;
         (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of  a
         person in the country of return; or
         (iv) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person
         by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
         or internal armed conflict."


Interpretive principles


26.  The methods of interpretation applied within EU  law  deviate  in  some
    respects from the rules laid down in the  1969 Vienna Convention on the
    Law of Treaties, but we do not understand there to be any  disagreement
    that when interpreting an  EU  directive  we  must  bear  in  mind  the
    following canons: that we must construe a directive as far as possible,
    in the light of its wording, context  and  purpose,  paying  particular
    regard to purpose, in order to achieve  the  result  pursued  (Case  C-
    106/89 Marleasing [1990] ECR I-4135, para 8); that a directive is to be
    construed so that its operative parts are effective; that  the  meaning
    of any particular provision of a directive must be consistent with  the
    higher legal rules of the Community under which, and in furtherance  of
    which, it was adopted; that the preamble is a  most  important  aid  in
    determining the scope and purpose of a directive, but is  of  no  legal
    force in itself, and  therefore  yields  in  the  face  of  a  contrary
    provision of the directive (Case C-184/99 Grzelcsyk [2001]  ECR  I-6193
    para 44; Case C-413/99 Baumbast [2002] ECR  I-7091);  that  preparatory
    documents  although  relevant,  are  not  of  decisive  importance   in
    identifying the intention underlying the measure ("[t]hat intention  is
    embodied and disclosed in the legislative text and essentially must  be
    gathered from the actual meaning of the words, from the function of the
    measure itself and from the system of which it  forms  part",  Case  C-
    300/89 Commission  v  Council  [1991]  ECR  I-2867,  2895);  that  less
    significance will attach to a preparatory document that is private than
    to documents that are formally required by the legislative process  and
    to which reference is made in the recitals when the measure is adopted;
    and that the Court has disapproved of a contrario reasoning (see Case C-
    9-56 First Meroni Case [1957] 162,163).

Article 15 as a whole


27.  This is only the second occasion on which the Tribunal  has  looked  in
    any depth at Article 15(c). The first  occasion  was  in  HH  &  others
    (Mogadishu: armed  conflict:  risk)  Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKIAT  00022,
    promulgated on 28 January 2008, which dealt, inter alia, with the issue
    of whether  there  was  an  internal  armed  conflict  in  Somalia,  in
    Mogadishu in particular. In that case the panel went out of its way  to
    emphasise that its conclusions were very much based on the  submissions
    made to it in that case. That determination having been made  available
    to the parties in this case, the submissions before us (understandably)
    sought to develop arguments in response. They also brought  to  bear  a
    far wider array of legal sources and materials. Having  said  that,  on
    the general approach to Article 15(c) we consider  that  (save  in  one
    respect: see below para 96) our  conclusions  are  broadly  similar  to
    those  stated in HH & others.

28.  It is the respondent's contention that Article 15  is  simply  designed
    to deal in  a  specific  way  with  three  (not  all)  aspects  of  the
    protection afforded by nonderogable ECHR rights. Article 15(b) codifies
    Article 3. Article 15(a) codifies the Sixth and  Thirteenth  Protocols.
    Article 15(c), according to this argument, merely codifies  aspects  of
    Articles 2  and  3.  Thus  Article  15's  role,  argued  Mr  Saini,  is
    essentially clarificatory,  particularising  three  existing  bases  of
    Member States' obligations under international human rights law. It was
    intended to ensure merely that a status was given to  those  who  could
    previously qualify only for  non-removability  under  ECHR  provisions.
    Article 15(c) was intended to benefit those who were able to show  that
    in a situation of armed conflict they faced a risk  personal  to  them.
    Mr Husain's opposing submission has two main  limbs.  First  he  argues
    that to treat Article 15(c) as a subcategory of Article 3 (and  Article
    2) ECHR would offend the EU principle of effet utile,  since  it  would
    mean that Article 15(c) adds nothing to Article  15(b),  whose  wording
    mirrors that of Article 3 ECHR. Second he argues that  Article  15  can
    only  be  properly  understood  as  setting  out  three  separate   but
    overlapping types of serious harm, each with its  own  distinct  scope.
    Third, it is his contention that Article 15(c) only makes sense if read
    as creating a new obligation of wider scope (at least in some respects)
    than Articles 3 and 2 of the ECHR. Before we look in depth  at  Article
    15(c), therefore, we have to consider Article 15 as a whole.  (We  have
    also to have regard to the addition within para 339C of the Immigration
    Rules of a further head of  type  of  harm,  "unlawful  killing"  (para
    339C(ii)).

29.  We are persuaded that Article 15(c) must be understood as  having  some
    scope additional to that contained in Article 15(a) and (b).   Even  if
    at some point in the drafting process it was thought  that  Article  15
    should correspond with nonderogable ECHR rights and that in  particular
    Article 15(c) should correspond with Article 3 (or Articles 2  and  3),
    it is clear that the eventual text goes further and that in doing so it
    reflects the underlying purposes behind the Directive.

30.  For Mr Saini's reading to be correct, it  would  be  necessary  to  see
    both Article 15(c) and 15(a)  as  subcategories  of  nonderogable  ECHR
    rights. But, even without reference  to  Article  15(c),  that  reading
    breaks down in relation to Article 15(a). His argument depends  on  the
    subject-matter of Article 15(a), the prohibition on the  death  penalty
    and execution (irrespective  of  whether  in  time  of  war  or  peace)
    corresponding precisely with Member States' obligations under both  the
    Sixth and Thirteenth Protocols and Article  3.  But  only  some  Member
    States have ratified the Thirteenth Protocol and so  at  present  their
    obligation is only to ensure prohibition of the death penalty  in  time
    of peace. Article 15(a) applies that prohibition  in  time  of  war  or
    peace. And as regards Article 3, it is  clear  from   Ocalan  v  Turkey
    (2005) 41 EHRR that the Court still does not consider  that  the  death
    penalty violates that article. At para 165 of this judgment  the  Grand
    Chamber stated:

         "For the time being, the fact that there are still a  large  number
         of States who have yet to sign or ratify Protocol No 13 may prevent
         the Court from finding that  it  is  the  established  practice  of
         states to regard the implementation of the death penalty as inhuman
         and degrading treatment contrary to Article 3  of  the  Convention,
         since no derogation may be made from that provision, even  in  time
         of war".

31.  In our view there is a similar lack of correspondence  between  Article
    15(c) and nonderogable ECHR rights generally. Whereas the latter  (like
    Article 15(a) and (b)) require substantial grounds for believing that a
    person would face a real risk of  the  relevant  ill  treatment  (death
    penalty, torture or inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment),
    Article 15(c) requires only that such a person would face a  threat  of
    the relevant ill treatment.  We  shall  return  to  this  feature  when
    discussing the meaning of "serious  and  individual  threat",  but  our
    point here is that it is simply not possible to  equate  ill  treatment
    and threat of ill treatment.


Meaning of Article 15(c)
    Approach to interpretation
32.  Before we can analyse the constituent  elements  of  Article  15(c)  in
    detail, we must address the general question of what approach we should
    take to interpretation of  this  provision,  a  provision  which  Dr  J
    McAdam, Complementary Protection in International Refugee Law (at p.70)
    states went through seven amendments during the drafting process.   The
    Directive's Article 2 "Definition" section does not deal with  its  key
    terms.  On  any  reading  Article  15(c)  is  tortuously  worded.  Most
    conspicuously, if it is given an  ordinary  language  reading  then  it
    would appear to contain a near contradiction in terms. On the one  hand
    it requires that the threat must be one which is "individual";  on  the
    other hand it requires that such a threat must be by reason of violence
    which is indiscriminate,  meaning,  in  ordinary  language,  random  or
    arbitrary. But if violence is  random  or  arbitrary  then  it  is  not
    individualised and so it is exceedingly difficult to  see  how  it  can
    ever give rise to an individual threat. In any  event  it  is  accepted
    that under EU principles the approach to  interpretation  must  be  one
    which has regard to context and is purposive or teleological.


          An IHL reading of Article 15(c)
33.  Once one adopts a purposive approach, the reasons for giving as far  as
    possible  an     IHL  meaning  to  key  terms  in  Article  15(c)   are
    overwhelming.

34.  One reason which could be given is that  an  IHL  approach  to  Article
    15(c) is also one which has been  taken  by  a  number  of  courts  and
    tribunals in other EU Member States: see  e.g.  French  Commission  des
    Recours des Refugies (CRR) 22 November 2005,  MA);  the  Belgian  court
    decision in  VB/05-  5833/W12.182/SB5  (27  October  2006);  the  Dutch
    Council of State judgment, Raad van Staat,  20-07-2007,200608939/1  LJN
    BB0917; the  Swedish Migration Court of Appeal 2007.9 decision (UM  23-
    06) and the Higher Administrative Court of Schleswig-Holstein (Northern
    Germany) judgment 21 November 2007, 2 LB 38/07.  Given that one of  the
    objectives of the Directive is to achieve  the  application  of  common
    criteria throughout the EU, that is  not  an  unimportant  matter.  But
    lacking as we do any full picture of the  approach  taken  by  judicial
    decision-makers throughout the EU, we shall not rely on it  to  justify
    our own reasoning.

35.    At first sight the drafting history appears to point against  an  IHL
    reading of Article  15(c).  The  draft  version  of  Article  15(c)  in
    13354/02, Asile 55, 23 October 2002, made reference to: "[in accordance
    with the 1949 Convention relating to the Protection of Civilian Persons
    in time of War,] serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or
    person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence   in   situations   of
    international or internal armed conflict"  (this  draft  was  also  the
    subject of a proposal by the Council Legal Service to "add a  reference
    to the Annexes and Protocols related  to  this  Convention").  But  the
    final version contains no such reference.

36.  However, although reference to the 1949 Geneva Convention  IV  did  not
    survive the drafting process,  the  terminology  of  IHL  did.   It  is
    abundantly clear that several of the terms used in  Article  15(c)  are
    terms of  art  within  international  humanitarian  (and  international
    criminal) law: e.g. "civilian", "life and [or] person" "indiscriminate"
    and, of course, "international or  non-international  [internal]  armed
    conflict". The only body of law in which all of these terms feature  is
    IHL (together with international  criminal  law).  The  terminology  of
    Article 15(c) thus provides a powerful reason in favour of  giving  the
    provision an IHL reading.


37.  Furthermore, the preparatory documents contain no explanation  for  the
    deletion of the reference to Geneva Convention IV  and  its  cause  can
    really only be a matter of speculation. In  one  respect  the  eventual
    text chosen logically  required  a  deletion  of  reference  to  common
    Article 3 simpliciter, since the confinement of serious harm to threats
    to a civilian's "life or person" at the very  least  excludes  acts  or
    threats covered separately by common  Article  3(1)(c)  (outrages  upon
    personal  dignity)  and  the  causal  requirement  of   "indiscriminate
    violence" is a further limit on scope. But leaving that aside, there is
    clearly a range of likely reasons, including recognition that even  all
    four of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, together with their two  Protocols
    and Annexes, comprise only part of a wider body of IHL rules,  some  of
    which have developed into customary international law as recognised  by
    the jurisprudence of international criminal tribunals  in  cases  heard
    since 1949.

38.  It can also be seen that the drafters  of  the  Directive  specifically
    recognised that  IHL  was  one  of  two  sources  of  law  (along  with
    Strasbourg  case  law)  of  particular  relevance  in  the  context  of
    formulating Article 15(c). The Explanatory Memorandum on  the  Proposal
    for a Council Directive on the minimum standards for the  qualification
    and status of third country nationals and stateless persons as refugees
    or as persons who otherwise need international protection  (COM  (2001)
    510 final), in its commentary on what became Article 15(c) stated  that
    part of the thinking behind Art 15(c) was to  draw  on  not  just  ECHR
    principles (especially Article  3)  but  also  "general  principles  of
    international humanitarian law": the commentary states  that  "[p]artly
    in response to the case law of the European Court of Human  Rights  and
    general principles of international  humanitarian  law,  Member  States
    have developed schemes of 'subsidiary' or 'complementary' protection."

39.  An IHL  approach  provides  an  objective  framework  for  interpreting
    Article 15(c) - in the form of an identifiable set of legal rules which
    exist  and  are  applied  both  EU-wide  and  internationally.   Basing
    interpretation of Article  15(c)/para  339C(iv)  on  international  law
    norms enables decision-makers to proceed on a more  objective  footing.
    As we shall see when we turn to evaluate the expert  reports  furnished
    for this appeal,   failure on the  part  of  those  seeking  to  assess
    situations of armed  conflict  in  a  particular  country  to  apply  a
    consistent IHL approach can also cause  difficulties  in  understanding
    what they mean when they seek to identify different types  of  violence
    (e.g.  "targeted"  and  "indiscriminate").  An  approach  based  on  an
    international law framework is also consonant with that  taken  by  the
    House of Lords in cases such as Horvath [2001] AC 489 per Lord Hope  at
    495C-E and 499-500D and Sepet and Bulbul [2003] UKHL 15  [2003]  1  WLR
    865 and by the Court of Appeal in Krotov [2004] EWCA Civ  69  [2004]  1
    WLR 1825 and the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in  Gurung*  [2002]  UKIAT
    04870 [2003] INLR 133 in respect of  key  terms  contained  within  the
    Refugee Convention at Article 1A(2) and Article 1F.

40.  An interrelated reason arises from the nature of the  provisions  which
    we are obliged to interpret in this case: provisions which  are  United
    Kingdom legislative  measures  taken  to  implement  the  Qualification
    Directive, one of whose principal  purposes  is  to  introduce  EU-wide
    criteria on the basis of which persons are to be recognised as eligible
    for subsidiary protection. Recital 6 states that:

         "The main objective of this Directive  is,  on  the  one  hand,  to
         ensure  that  Member  States  apply   common   criteria   for   the
         identification  of  persons  genuinely  in  need  of  international
         protection [which covers both refugee and  subsidiary  protection],
         and, on the other hand, to ensure that a minimum level of  benefits
         is available for these persons in  all  Member  States."  (emphasis
         added)

41.  If (as Mr Saini submitted)  a  UK  tribunal  or  court  could  sensibly
    construct its own notion  of  the  "autonomous  meaning"  of  the  term
    "international or internal armed conflict" without regard to any shared
    international law framework, then (except accidentally) there would  be
    nothing "common" about the criteria it devised and no basis to complain
    about other Member States adopting similarly unilateral notions.

42.  Using IHL as an aid to construction does not involve  any  recourse  to
    extraneous (non-EU) legal norms. International  obligations  (including
    treaties to which most Member States are a  party)  automatically  form
    part of  the  laws  of  Member  States  and  the  EU:  see  Case-540/03
    Parliament v Council. The rules  of  IHL  (at  least  insofar  as  they
    constitute customary international law) are likewise binding  upon  the
    Community institutions and form part of the Community legal order:  see
    C-162/96 Racke [1998] ECR 03655, paras 45-6. Using these IHL  rules  as
    an aid to construction of Article 15(c) accords with general principles
    of Community law.

43.  Further, the specific EU law basis for  asylum  measures  such  as  the
    Qualification Directive, Article 63(1) of the Treaty  Establishing  the
    European Community (TEC), recognises as a relevant source not just  the
    Refugee Convention but also "other relevant treaties". Article 63(2)(a)
    expressly treats the areas  covered  by  such  measures  as  including:
    "minimum standards for giving temporary protection to displaced persons
    from third countries who cannot return to their country of  origin  and
    for persons who otherwise  need  international  protection."  (emphasis
    added). Article 63 clearly intended, therefore, that the  deference  to
    relevant international  treaty  law  (not  specifically  restricted  to
    international human rights treaties) was to apply  to  both  protection
    regimes. It is true that nothing is specified about  IHL  treaties  but
    neither are such treaties excluded.

44.  So far as the Directive itself is concerned, recital 11 states:

         "With respect to the treatment of persons falling within the  scope
         of this Directive, Member States are  bound  by  obligations  under
         instruments of international law to which  they  are  a  party  and
         which prohibit discrimination."

45.  Whilst this provision only refers to  international  instruments  of  a
    particular kind, it is clear, and Mr Saini conceded as much, that major
    IHL instruments contains express provisions prohibiting discrimination:
    see  e.g.  Article  3(1)  of  common  Article  3  of  the  1949  Geneva
    Conventions and Article 2(1) of Additional Protocol II.

46.  Mr Saini contended that the wording of  another  recital,  recital  25,
    argued against giving Article 15(c) an IHL reading because it  confined
    the sources from which subsidiary protection criteria could properly be
    drawn to international human rights instruments. There  are  two  major
    difficulties with this contention. First,  recital 25 refers to drawing
    criteria "from international obligations under human rights instruments
    and practices existing in Member States." (emphasis added).

47.      In our view the reference to existing "practices" is to be given  a
    broad meaning and is to be understood as covering  both  national  laws
    and policies. So far as laws are concerned, the manner in which  Member
    States  give  effect  to   their   international   obligations   varies
    considerably depending on whether they adopt monist or dualist  systems
    and on the  precise  hierarchy  of  their  legal  norms,  but  all  are
    signatories to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and, so far as we are aware,
    all accept and apply  customary  international  law,  including  common
    Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions:  effect  is  given  to  those
    Conventions in the UK by the Geneva Conventions Act 1957 (as  amended).
    Accordingly "existing practices" include laws giving domestic effect to
    IHL obligations.
48.  Second, even if recital 25 were  read  as  permitting  the  drawing  of
    criteria  regarding  eligibility   for   subsidiary   protection   from
    international obligations under human rights instruments  only,  we  do
    not see that this would necessarily preclude drawing also on IHL as  an
    aid to construction of Article 15(c)'s key terms. As  is  explained  in
    one of the documents submitted by the respondent, C  Greenwood,  Essays
    on War in International Law at paras 3.27-3.40, the two bodies of law -
    IHL and international human rights law  -  share  the  same  underlying
    principles and overlap.  Within  IHL,  for  example,  the  Preamble  to
    Additional  Protocol  II  recalls  that  "international  human   rights
    instruments relating to human rights offer a basic  protection  to  the
    human person". Within international human rights law the UN  Convention
    on the Rights of the Child expressly recognises the  distinct  function
    of state obligations under IHL,  Article  38(1)  stating  that  "States
    Parties undertake to respect  and  ensure  respect  for  rules  of  IHL
    applicable to them in armed conflicts which are relevant to the child".
    When the subject area is armed  conflict  the  International  Court  of
    Justice has held that IHL is  the  "lex  specialis"  (Legality  of  the
    Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons,  Advisory  Opinion  of  8  July  1996
    [1996] ICJ Rep  66).  And  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  has
    consistently seen  the  ECHR  as  forming  body  of  a  wider  body  of
    international law, with which State parties must comply: see  Bosphorus
    Airways, Application no. 45036/98 at para 150, Al-Adsani v. the United
    Kingdom [GC], no. 35763/97, � 55, ECHR 2001-XI. Furthermore,  on  any
    reading  of  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  dealing  with  armed   conflict
    situations under Article 2 or 3 (cases such as Muslim v  Turkey  [2006]
    42 EHRR 16 paras  66-76  and  Isayeva  v  Russia  App.  nos.  57947/00,
    57948/00 and 57949/00, paras 168-200), there is nothing to suggest that
    the criteria (such as they are) that  have  been  articulated  are  any
    different from those set out (with both greater detail and clarity)  in
    IHL.
49.  We do not need to deal with Mr Saini's submission that the main  or  an
    important building-block for Article 15(c) (along with Article 3 of the
    ECHR) was Article 2 ECHR  guaranteeing  the  right  to  life  -  beyond
    pointing out that the addition within  para  339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules of an additional limb of serious harm  -   "unlawful  killing"  -
    rather undermines his argument, since  that  limb  is  quintessentially
    about Article 2 of the ECHR.  His  submission  runs  into  the  further
    difficulty that the Strasbourg Court has  dealt  with  applications  by
    persons fearing return to situations of armed conflict primarily  under
    Article 3: see  e.g.Vilvirajah v UK and Muslim v Turkey.
50.  In deciding  to  draw criteria  regarding  eligibility  for  subsidiary
    protection at least in part from EHCR norms  (see  recital  25)  Member
    States cannot have been blind to the fact  that  they  thereby  ensured
    that the meaning of Articles 15(a) and (b) could be  further  developed
    through  international jurisprudence (especially that of the Strasbourg
    Court). In similar, albeit not identical, fashion, giving Article 15(c)
    an IHL reading enables it too to be further developed by  reference  to
    the jurisprudence of the international criminal tribunals.
51.  We have left until last the reason we regard as  the  most  compelling.
    If one assumes, as we must, that the  drafters  intended  to  create  a
    regime of subsidiary protection based on rational principles  and  then
    if one looks at the eventual text of Article 15(c), it is apparent that
    one question that could be asked of the  Member  States  party  to  the
    Directive is "Since you have chosen to benefit a  subset  of  civilians
    affected by armed conflict, on what principled basis can you  do  that.
    Why should some civilians in situations of armed conflict  be  excluded
    whilst others are included?" In our view the only principled basis that
    stands scrutiny is this: that it must  be  wrong  to  seek  to  refoule
    persons who on return would face a real risk of being  the  victims  of
    international crimes caused  by  a  serious  threat  of  indiscriminate
    violence. In much the same way that Article 9(e) of the  Directive  and
    case law under the Refugee Convention has recognised that it  would  be
    persecutory to return soldiers if they would on return face  punishment
    for  "refusal  to  perform  military  service  in  a  conflict,   where
    performing military service would includes crimes or acts falling under
    the exclusion clauses as set out in Article 12(2)" (which cover,  inter
    alia, war crimes and  serious  breaches  of   IHL),  so  Article  15(c)
    reflects the view that it  cannot  be  right  in  principle  to  return
    civilians to a situation where they, likewise, would face  a  realistic
    threat of being victims of war crimes or other serious breaches of IHL.
    Even if the test imposed by Article 15(c) might still be  considered  a
    stringent one, there is a rational basis, anchored in (but  not  simply
    reflective of) existing international law obligations, for  considering
    that civilians in some situations of armed conflict can qualify  whilst
    others cannot.

52.  It remains for us to address several arguments  advanced  by  Mr  Saini
    against giving Article 15(c) an IHL reading.

53.  To give Article 15(c) an IHL reading, argued Mr  Saini,  would  wrongly
    ignore the very different context and the fact that  this  article  and
    IHL have "wholly different" purposes. Mr Saini  outlined  that  whereas
    IHL operates by way of a series of  restrictions  and  prohibitions  in
    terms of the way protagonists may behave,  Article  15(c)  by  contrast
    establishes a right of protection in a third country Member State based
    on the objective presence of factors that may lead  to  a  serious  and
    individual threat.

54.  In broad terms we can agree that IHL and Article 15(c)  have  different
    functions.  IHL  is  concerned  with  regulating  situations  of  armed
    conflicts, whereas Article 15(c) is  concerned  with  a  type  of  harm
    arising from exposure by way of refoulement to such situations. But  at
    the same time the difference can be overstated and it is  important  to
    note that both legal regimes have protective purposes:  one  underlying
    purpose of IHL being protection of civilians  in  situations  of  armed
    conflict,  the  purpose  of  Article  15(c)  being  protection   of   a
    subcategory of civilians facing return to situations of armed conflict.
     Further, the differences of  function  which  there  are  only  become
    problematic if they involve some attempt to apply the provisions of IHL
    out of context. But there is no reason to think that any  such  attempt
    is involved in drawing for interpretive purposes  on  an  existing  IHL
    framework of criteria. Furthermore, all that is at issue  here  is  the
    interpretation of specific components of Article  15(c).  There  is  no
    assertion that Article 15(c) is co-extensive with IHL in full: in  some
    respects (restriction to civilians, to a "civilian's  life  or  person"
    and to causation by "indiscriminate violence") it does not  even  cover
    the entirety of common Article 3 protection.

55.  Another argument raised by Mr Saini was  that  particular  features  of
    IHL make it hazardous to draw on it, in  particular  the  absences  and
    complexities of definition. Thus he pointed out, correctly, that  there
    is no treaty  definition  of  armed  conflict  and  that  is  has  been
    described as a "purely factual" notion (by C Greenwood in (1997) 2  Max
    Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law 97,  114-5).  In  any  event,  he
    added, since such definition as there is treats the threshold  for  the
    existence of an armed conflict as a 'low' one, that cannot  be  applied
    within Article 15(c) since the latter clearly contemplates  only  armed
    conflict in which there is a real prospect of a serious and  individual
    threat arising. A further  point  was  that  since  IHL  comprises  two
    separate sets of legal rules depending on whether the armed conflict is
    'international' or 'internal', that would lead, if these  were  applied
    within  Article  15(c)  to  anomalous  applications,   with   differing
    standards of protection being applied depending on whether the civilian
    was in one kind of armed conflict or the other.

56.  Taking each of these arguments in turn, we  find  the  gloss  which  Mr
    Saini sought to  place  on  the  reference  to  the  notion  of  "armed
    conflict" as "purely factual" misconceived. It  seems  to  us  that  in
    describing "armed conflict"  as  a  purely  factual  notion,  Professor
    Greenwood QC was simply seeking to reflect the view taken by the Pictet
    Commentary to the 1949 Geneva Conventions  that  terms  such  as  armed
    conflict are not invested with any rigid or technical meaning (we  note
    that in Essays on War in International Law at para 3.46 the same author
    stated that there was "powerful support" for the view that the  concept
    of armed conflict "should be given a very broad definition").  In  none
    of the materials before us has Professor  Greenwood or other any  other
    academic authority suggested that lack of any codified definition -  or
    the undesirability of a highly precise definition - has stripped it  of
    any  legal  content  or  prevented  it  being  the  subject  of   legal
    interpretation.  It  is  not   suggested,   for   example,   that   the
    International Criminal Tribunal  dealing  with  the  Former  Yugoslavia
    (ITFY) lacked jurisdiction or was mistaken in  deciding  whether  there
    was an armed conflict in Croatia at the relevant time by reference to a
    set of legal criteria which it enunciated. In any event,  if  Professor
    Greenwood was indeed suggesting  that  the  term  "armed  conflict"  is
    incapable of legal definition, we  cannot  agree.  The  fact  that  the
    appropriate definition to be given to a legal term is one which  treats
    it as highly fact-specific or open-textured (or very much a question of
    fact or degree) does not mean that the term is incapable of definition.
    To describe the notion of "armed conflict" as a purely  factual  notion
    only makes sense in the context of an acceptance that  there  are  some
    criteria (even if imprecise) which can assist in deciding what is as  a
    matter of fact an armed conflict.

57.  We find no substance in the argument that the  wording  or  context  of
    Article 15(c) requires the notion of "armed conflict" to be interpreted
    as having a high threshold (or at least a higher  threshold  than  (the
    low one obtaining)) under IHL.  The only reason given by the respondent
    for considering that it would be inappropriate depends on treating  the
    notion of "...armed conflict" as containing within itself  the  concept
    of "serious", whereas the latter is plainly a separate element  of  the
    Article 15(c) definition.

58.  As for the alleged anomaly that would be created if Article 15(c)  were
    to apply separate definitions for what constituted an  armed  conflict,
    depending on whether the conflict was international or internal, all we
    see as resulting from an IHL approach to defining the relevant terms is
    clarification that the relevant criteria are those identified  by  that
    body of law. If there is an anomaly in the international law  framework
    (and it is true that because of the different rules  applied  depending
    on the nature of the armed conflict it has been called -  by  Boelaert-
    Suominen -  a "two-legged  edifice"),  then  we  do  not  see  anything
    impermissible if  decisions under Art 15(c)  take  that  into  account.
    Whether properly called an anomaly or not, it is not one which guidance
    manuals issued by the International Committee of the Red  Cross  (ICRC)
    or by individual states such as the United Kingdom (in the UK Manual on
    the Law of Armed Conflict) see as an obstacle to the two sets of  rules
    being  properly  understood  and  applied  in   practice   by   serving
    soldiers/combatants.  It  should  not,  therefore,  be  beyond  persons
    charged  with  making  decisions  as  to  eligibility  for   subsidiary
    protection. Indeed on our approach eligibility should  be  expected  to
    vary precisely as the nature of the armed conflict  varies:  the  rules
    governing  what  amounts  to  an  international  crime  are   different
    depending on whether the armed conflict concerned is  an  international
    or internal one.  In any event, so far as  eligibility  for  subsidiary
    protection under Article 15(c) is concerned, it is of no consequence to
    the  individual  that  the   applicable   rules   under   international
    humanitarian law are different: what matters is  that  the  country  to
    which they fear return is one where there arise  situations  of  either
    international or internal armed conflict.

59.  We should briefly note that we were entirely unpersuaded by Mr  Saini's
    suggestion that we should seek to base our approach to Article 15(c) on
    UK cases dealing with "war" and civil war" in a commercial law context:
    one of the two cases he cited (Kawasaki Kisen Kabushiki Kaisa v Bantham
    [1939] 2KB 44) pre-dated even the 1948 UN Charter and  neither  it  nor
    the other (Spinney's v  Royal  Insurance  [1980]  1  Lloyd's  Rep  406)
    involved the issue of the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  treaty
    law.

    Consequences of an IHL approach
60.  Having established that Article 15(c) must be given an IHL reading,  it
    is important to bear in mind  that this only take us so  far.   In  the
    first place, our reasoning in the foregoing paragraphs only establishes
    that the proper approach to interpretation of Article 15(c) is that  of
    IHL. We have yet to explain why, as noted at the outset, we think  that
    Article 15(c) affords a protection which in  some  (but  only  limited)
    respects goes wider than that which Articles 3 and 2 of the ECHR  give.
    Additionally we should  emphasise that seeing Article  15(c)  as  being
    largely built out of IHL norms does not  entail  seeing  it  as  simply
    reflecting Member States' existing treaty obligations. Plainly,  if  we
    are right, it cannot, since IHL does not  guarantee  a  right  of  non-
    refoulement of any kind. IHL is solely an aid to  construction  of  key
    terms arising in Article 15(c). But whether the effect of the provision
    is, as we think, to create a  (limited)  new  type  of  non-refoulement
    obligation for Member States is an entirely separate matter.

61.   In the second place, endowing key terms in Article 15(c) with  an  IHL
    meaning does not necessarily mean accepting that this provision has the
    same material scope as IHL or customary international law as a whole  -
     or even simply common Article 3 of the 1949  Geneva  Conventions.  (We
    emphasise this point because one of the earlier drafts of Article 15(c)
    did appear to see its material scope as the same  as  the  1949  Geneva
    Convention IV.) As we have mentioned already, there are at least  three
    respects in which the scope of Article 15(c)  is  narrower  than  these
    other bodies of law. First, it only protects civilians. Second it  only
    protects civilians in respect of their "life or person"  and  not,  for
    example, in respect of their "objects" (possessions or property). Third
    it is concerned only with protecting  against  threats  that  arise  by
    reason of "indiscriminate violence". If an answer is sought as  to  why
    the drafters did not decide  to  equate  the  material  scope  of  this
    provision with IHL as a whole, then there is a clear one to hand:  that
    Member States were  concerned  not  to  create  too  broad  a  limb  of
    protection. From the preparatory  Asile  documents  there  are  several
    references to concerns being expressed by some Member States about  the
    need to avoid undue widening of the scope of this subparagraph.

62.  Nor (contrary to Mr Husain's submissions) does adopting an IHL  reading
    entail acceptance of the view that the Directive itself must be read as
    embodying any particular prior practice of  any  particular  State.  Mr
    Husain asked us to derive such a conclusion from  recital  25  read  in
    conjunction  with  the  reference  in  chapter  3  of  the  Explanatory
    Memorandum to "draw[ing] from the disparate Member  State  systems  and
    ...attempt[ing] to adopt and adapt the best ones"; and, in addition, he
    asked us to assume that "best" practice  always  means  "practice  most
    generous to applicants". However, we have no way of  ascertaining  what
    the Explanatory Memorandum authors understood by "best"  practices  and
    it is abundantly clear that, whatever the aspirations expressed in  the
    Explanatory Memorandum, later compromises were made, in part  to  avoid
    Article 15(c) having a wide or liberal application. So far as  concerns
    Mr Husain's submission that a liberal  approach  to  Article  15(c)  is
    necessitated  by  the  TEC  Art  61(b)  obligation  relating   to   the
    "safeguarding [of] the rights of nationals of third countries",  we  do
    not see that  the  interpretation  which  we  give  to  this  provision
    breaches this obligation and, in any  event,  the  Directive  was  made
    under Article 63(1(c), 2(a) and 3(a), not under Article 61(b).

    Drafting history
63.  It is not necessary for us to consider the drafting history  in  detail
    but in the light of the submissions made to  us  two  features  require
    specific comment.

64.  The original wording of the article was:

         "a threat to his or her life, safety or  freedom  as  a  result  of
         indiscriminate violence arising in situations of armed conflict, or
         as a result of systematic or generalised violations of their  human
         rights".

65.  Pointing out that this wording  was  based  heavily  on  the  Temporary
    Protection Directive of 2001 (EU Council  Directive  2001/55/EC  of  20
    July 2001 on minimum standards for giving temporary protection  in  the
    event of a mass influx of displaced persons  on  measures  promoting  a
    balance of efforts between Member States in receiving such persons  and
    bearing the consequences thereof), Mr Husain urged us to  view  Article
    15(c) as intending to treat that Directive's  protection  regime  as  a
    "template".

66.  It is beyond doubt  that  the  original  wording  cited  above  closely
    modelled itself on part  of  the  definition  given  to  protection  to
    persons fleeing armed conflict or endemic  violence  in  the  Temporary
    Protection Directive.  We  know  that  from  what  was  stated  in  the
    Explanatory Memorandum when commenting on the above wording, viz.  that
    "[t]he definition of this sub-paragraph is drawn from Article  2(c)  of
    the  Council  Directive  on  minimum  standards  for  giving  temporary
    protection in the event of a mass influx".

67.  Article 2(c) of the Temporary Protection Directive protects persons:

         "who have had to leave their country or region or  origin  or  have
         been evacuated...and are unable  to  return  in  safe  and  durable
         conditions because of the situation prevailing in that country, who
         may fall within the scope of Article 1A of the Geneva Convention or
         other international or national  instruments  giving  international
         protection, in particular: (i) persons who have fled areas of armed
         conflict or endemic violence; (ii) persons at serious risk  of,  or
         who been the victims of, systematic or  generalised  violations  of
         their human rights".

68.  The difficulty we have with Mr Husain's submission is that  it  can  be
    seen that the eventual wording of Article 15(c)) is markedly  different
    in meaning  from that in  the  Temporary  Protection  Directive;  as  a
    result we find any suggestion that that Directive represents a template
    or model, unhelpful.

     The constituent elements of Article 15(c).
69.  We turn then to look at  the  essential  components  of  Article  15(c)
    bearing in mind that several key terms mirror the wording of  the  1949
    Geneva Conventions not only in the reference to "international or  non-
    international armed conflict" (in 15(c) "...internal  armed  conflict")
    but also in the reference, already noted, to "civilian" and  "life  and
    person" (in 15(c) "life or person").  Common  Art  3  prohibits,  inter
    alia:

          "(a) violence to life and person,  in  particular  murder  of  all
         kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture".

          The term "indiscriminate" also  holds  a  special  meaning  within
    IHL.

70.  It is of course vital that we bear  in  mind  the  context  of  Article
    15(c) as a whole and recognise that its different  elements  are  to  a
    certain extent interrelated. But one  way  or  another  we  must  still
    examine each of its main elements. We doubt  that  the  best  order  in
    which to do so is that in which they appear.  The key terms in  Article
    15(c) fall into two main categories: one is person-specific; the other,
    the more general, is situational. That being so, it makes better  sense
    to deal with  the  more  general  first,  so  that  we  look  first  at
    "situations of international or internal armed conflict" and "by reason
    of indiscriminate  violence"  and  leave  until  last  looking  at  the
    individual-specific terms: "civilian's life or  person";  and  "serious
    and individual threat". If that becomes nearly a  case  of  taking  the
    order of appearance of terms backwards, it  nevertheless  reflects  the
    process which the decision-maker should usually adopt when analysing an
    individual claim.

    "International or internal armed conflict"
71.  Two initial points should be made. First, it appears from  Dr  McAdam's
    account (supra, pp.70-78)  that  the  reference  to  "international  or
    internal" armed  conflict  featured  from  the  second  draft  onwards.
    Second, Art 15(c)  is  the  only  subcategory  of  serious  harm  which
    requires conditions in the country of origin  to  be  of  a  particular
    kind. To apply there must in the country of origin  be  "situations  of
    international or internal armed conflict".

    "Armed conflict"
72.   The  term  "armed  conflict"  is  not  defined  in  any  international
    instruments but in Tadic (Jurisdiction) at para 70 it is stated that:

         "an armed conflict exists whenever there is resort to  armed  force
         between States or protracted armed  violence  between  governmental
         authorities and organised  armed  groups  or  between  such  groups
         within a State. International humanitarian  law  applies  from  the
         initiation of such armed conflicts and extends beyond the  duration
         of hostilities until a general conclusion of peace is reached;  or,
         in the  case  of  internal  conflicts,  a  peaceful  settlement  is
         achieved.  Until  that  moment,  international   humanitarian   law
         continues to apply in the whole territory of  the  warring  States,
         or, in the case of internal conflicts, the  whole  territory  under
         the control of a party, whether or not actual conflict takes  place
         there".

73.  The case law of the ITFY and  other  international  criminal  tribunals
    since Tadic has reaffirmed this formulation, which has become known  as
    the "Tadic test": see e.g. Prosecutor v Kunarac et  al.,  IT-96-23/1-A,
    Judgement, 12 June 2002 para 56.

74.   Since in this case it is not suggested by either party that  there  is
    in this case a country in  a  state  of  international  armed  conflict
    (presumably because the MNF-I are in Iraq with the consent of the GOI),
    we can limit ourselves to simply noting that: (i) for there  to  be  an
    "international armed conflict" there must be  an  inter-State  element;
    (ii) an inclusive approach is to be taken   both to  the  temporal  and
    geographical  scope  of  international  armed  conflict  (  see   Tadic
    (Jurisdiction)  at  paras  84,  70,  Prosecutor  v  Blaskic,  IT-95-14,
    judgement, 3 March 2000, Prosecutor v Kordic  &  Cerkez,  IT-95-14/2-T,
    judgement, 26 February 2001 and Prosecutor v Naletilic et al,  IT-98-34-
    T, Judgement, 31 March 2003); and (iii) the principal rules  applicable
    to "international armed conflicts" include the "law of the Hague"  (the
    1899 and 1907 Hague Conventions respecting the Laws and Customs of  War
    on Land) together  with  the  1949  Geneva  Conventions  and  its  1997
    Additional Protocol I, plus miscellaneous treaties  dealing  with,  for
    example, chemical and biological warfare and landmines

75.  As regards internal armed conflict,  the  upshot  of  the  respondent's
    concession made in the course of the hearing -  that Iraq as a whole is
    in a state of internal armed conflict for the purposes of IHL and  that
    the GOI is one of the parties to the conflict -  renders it unnecessary
    to do anything more than identify very basic features of  this  concept
    in IHL.


76.  As regards the territorial scope of the rules governing internal  armed
    conflict, the established formulation as found, once again,  in   Tadic
    (Jurisdiction ) at para 70 states  that  "  in  the  case  of  internal
    conflicts [it is]... the whole territory under the control of a  party,
    whether or not actual combat takes place there." (emphasis  added).  In
    the light of the clear distinction drawn here between  the  territorial
    scope of international armed  conflict  (the  whole  territory  of  the
    relevant  state(s))  and  the  territorial  scope  of  internal   armed
    conflicts (" the whole territory under the control  of  a  party"),  we
    would reject the submission made by both parties that in internal armed
    conflicts the territorial scope is also (as a matter of definition) the
    whole of the territory of the state. It may well be that as applied  to
    the facts of most contemporary armed conflicts,  the  Tadic  test  will
    entail a finding that the IHL rules governing armed conflict  apply  to
    the whole territory of the affected  state  (and  indeed  that  is  the
    agreed position between the parties in relation to Iraq). That reflects
    the frequent reality that, between them, the territories controlled  by
    parties to a conflict normally account for the entire territory of  the
    state. But as can be seen from the discussion  of  Somalia  in  HH  and
    others, paras 329-335, 341, there can be exceptions, where for  example
    there are parts of a state under the control of authorities who are not
    in any effective sense parties to the armed conflict.

77.  The Tadic approach to territorial scope has been widely followed,  e.g.
    by: the same Tribunal in Prosecutor  v  Kunarac  (paras  57-  58);  the
    International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda  in  Prosecutor  v  Akayesu,
    Case No. ICTR-96-4-T,Trial Chamber Judgement, 2 September  1998,  paras
    619-21; the Special Court for Sierra Leone (Prosecutor v Brima  et  al,
    Case No. SCSL-04-16-T, Trial Chamber, Special Court for  Sierra  Leone,
    judgement, 20 June 2007, paras 343-50; and the  International  Criminal
    Court in Prosecutor v Lubanga, ICC-01/04-01/06-803,  Pre-Trial  Chamber
    I, International Criminal Court, Decision on the  Confirmation  of  the
    Charges, 29 January 2007, para 233). Underscoring  the  point  made  in
    Tadic, in Prosecutor v Kunaric at para 57 the Tribunal's Appeal Chamber
    stated: "[t]here is no necessary correlation between the area where the
    actual fighting is taking place and the geographical reach of the  laws
    of war ... ".

78.  The minimum standards contained in common Article 3 of the 1949  Geneva
    Conventions were considered by the ICJ  in  Military  and  Paramilitary
    Activities against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v  United  States  of  America)
    Merits, Judgment of 27 June 1986 [1986] ICJ Reports  14  to  constitute
    norms of customary international law applicable in all types  of  armed
    conflict.  However, common Article 3 does not represent the entirety of
    the rules of  customary  international  law  applicable  to  all  armed
    conflicts, as can be gleaned from the summary by the Appeals Chamber in
    the Tadic (Jurisdiction) judgement of  the  customary  rules  governing
    internal conflicts as including:

         "protection of  civilians  from  hostilities,  in  particular  from
         indiscriminate  attacks,  protection  of   civilian   objects,   in
         particular cultural property, protection of all those  who  do  not
         (or no  longer)  take  active  part  in  hostilities,  as  well  as
         prohibition of means of warfare proscribed in  international  armed
         conflicts and ban of certain  methods  of  conducting  hostilities"
         (para 127).

79.  In the case of an internal armed conflict in which the state  on  whose
    territory it occurs has ratified Additional Protocol II, the IHL  rules
    that apply may additionally include those  set  out  in  this  Protocol
    (which confer additional protection on civilians). Whether  they  apply
    will depend on whether  the  armed  conflict  concerned  is  one  which
    involves armed groups under "responsible command"; and exercising "such
    a degree of control over a part of [the state's] territory as to enable
    them to carry out sustained and concerted military  operations  and  to
    implement this Protocol". It must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that
    significant parts  of  Additional  Protocol  II  are  seen  to  reflect
    customary international law and also to shed  light  on  the  threshold
    that needs to be reached for  there  to  be  an  internal  conflict  as
    distinct from an internal disturbance.

80.  Common article 3 contains the requirement that the armed conflict  must
    be one in which there are "[p]arties".  "The  Tadic  test  for  whether
    there exists an armed conflict has been seen by the ICTY to call for an
    examination of essentially two elements only: (1) the  organisation  of
    the parties to the conflict and (2) the intensity of the conflict  (see
    Tadic Trial Judgement, para 562; Limaj Trial  Judgement  para  54;  and
    Trial Chamber in Prosecutor v Milosevic, para 17).  However,  from  the
    examinations which the ICTY and other international criminal  tribunals
    conduct, it is  clear  that  these  two  criteria  sub-divide  further,
    depending on the factual scenario, so that  in  Milosevic  for  example
    "intensity of the conflict" is analysed under four sub-heads: length or
    protracted nature of the conflict and seriousness and increase in armed
    clashes; spread of clashes over the territory; increase  in  number  of
    governmental forces sent to Kosovo; weapons used by both  parties  (see
    paras 25-31). Further, the ICTY along with other international criminal
    tribunals has continued to conduct examination of these two elements by
    reference to the  non-exhaustive  non-obligatory  criteria  for  common
    Article 3 set out in the Pictet Commentary.

81.  From the above it  would  seem  that  the  principal  criteria  for  an
    internal armed conflict being found to exist can  be  summarised  under
    the following  main  heads:  "parties  to  the  conflict";  "degree  of
    organisation"  (only  "some  degree  of  organisation"   is   required:
    Prosecutor v Lubanga, ICC-01/04-01/06-803,  the  Pre-Trial  Chamber  I,
    International Criminal Court,  Decision  on  the  Confirmation  of  the
    Charges, 29 January 2007, Prosecutor v Milosevic, Case No.  IT-02-54-T,
    Trial  Chamber,  International  Criminal  Tribunal   for   the   former
    Yugoslavia, Decision on Motion  for  Judgment  of  Acquittal,  16  June
    2004); "level of intensity" (which has to be higher than "situations of
    internal  disturbances  and  tensions,  such  as  riots,  isolated  and
    sporadic acts of violence, or other acts of a similar nature"  (Article
    1(2)  of Additional Protocol II)); "protraction" (see Milosevic,  paras
    16-19); and "other relevant factors".

82.   Prominent  among  other  relevant  factors  is  whether  it  has  been
    formally considered of concern to the UN.  The  wording  given  in  the
    Pictet Commentary is "[t]hat the  dispute  has  been  admitted  to  the
    agenda of the Security Council or the General Assembly  of  the  United
    Nations as being a threat to  international  peace,  a  breach  of  the
    peace, or  an  act  of  aggression":  see  e.g.  Limaj,  Trial  Chamber
    Judgement, para 55; HH and others, para 338.

83.  Although strictly only an evidential consideration, it  is  also  clear
    that any official views expressed by the ICRC would be of significance,
    for the reason that, as was put by the ITFY in Tadic (Jurisdiction)  at
    para 73:

         "[o]n account of the unanimously recognised  authority,  competence
         and impartiality of the ICRC, as well as its statutory  mission  to
         promote and supervise respect for international  humanitarian  law,
         it is inconceivable that, even if there some doubt as to the nature
         of the conflict, the ICRC would promote and  endorse  an  agreement
         [that of 22 May 1992] contrary to a basic provision of  the  Geneva
         Conventions. The conclusion is therefore warranted  that  the  ICRC
         regarded the conflicts governed by the  agreement  in  question  as
         internal."


84.  In light of the above we consider that in any case in which  the  issue
    arises as to whether a  country  has  "situations  of  armed  conflict"
    within its territory, it will always be highly relevant for the parties
    to seek to obtain and produce evidence  as  to  whether  the  ICRC  has
    expressed a view on this question.


     "by reason of indiscriminate violence"
85.  This provision incorporates a dual requirement: for  Article  15(c)  to
    apply there must exist "indiscriminate violence" and the  "serious  and
    individual threat" faced must be caused by the indiscriminate violence.
    A number of commentators (including McAdam, supra at p.72)  have  found
    great difficulty with the reference to "indiscriminate violence", since
    it would appear to denote  violence  which  is  by  definition  random,
    arbitrary and haphazard. If that is the meaning to be ascribed  to  the
    term, then it would appear to negate the possibility of  the  situation
    ever being one where there could be a "serious and individual  threat",
    since the latter appears to import some notion of being  a  target  for
    the  threat  of  violence,  i.e.  of  there  being   some   act   which
    differentiates the victim from people at random.  We would  agree  that
    if that meaning is given, then the provision of Article 15(c) is  beset
    with difficulties of application. However,  we  remind  ourselves  that
    under EU law principles we must strive to interpret the provisions of a
    Directive so as  to  conform  with  the  object  and  purposes  of  the
    Directive and the clear  concern  expressed  by  recital  26  that  the
    Directive furnishes guidance on  the  proper  approach  to  risks  that
    affect the population or sections of the population as a whole.   Given
    that we know the drafters saw IHL as one source for drawing up criteria
    governing eligibility for  subsidiary  protection,  it  is  salient  to
    consider what meaning the word "indiscriminate" has in an IHL  context.
    Whilst IHL does not refer to "indiscriminate  violence"  as  such,  the
    adjective "indiscriminate" is used to designate attacks which  fail  to
    differentiate between military and civilian targets and  Article  49(1)
    of 1977 Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Conventions  (API)  expressly
    defines the term "attacks" as "acts of violence against the  adversary,
    whether in offence or in defence". Article 51(4) of the  same  Protocol
    provides that:"[i]ndiscriminate attacks are prohibited". The  provision
    goes on to define indiscriminate attacks as being:


          "(a)  Those  which  are  not  directed  at  a  specific  military
    objective;
       (b) Those which employ a method or means of combat  which  cannot  be
       directed at a   specific military objective;
       (c) Those which employ a method or means of  combat  the  effects  of
       which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol;
       And consequently, in each such  case,  are  of  a  nature  to  strike
       military  objectives  and  civilians  or  civilian  objects   without
       distinction".


   86. Article 51(5) states:


         "Among others, the following types of attacks are to be  considered
         as indiscriminate:


                   (a) An attack by bombardment by  any  methods  or  means
                   which treats as a single military objective a number  of
                   clearly  separated  and  distinct  military   objectives
                   located  in  a  city,  town,  village  or   other   area
                   containing  a  similar  concentration  of  civilians  or
                   civilian objects; and
                   (b) An attack which may be expected to cause  incidental
                   loss of  civilian life, injury to civilians,  damage  to
                   civilian objects, or a combination thereof, which  would
                   be excessive in relation  to  the  concrete  and  direct
                   military advantage anticipated."


87.  Article 8(2)(b)(xx) of the Rome Statute of the  International  Criminal
    Court proscribes

         "Employing  weapons,  projectiles  and  materials  and  methods  of
         warfare which are of  a  nature  to  cause  superfluous  injury  or
         unnecessary suffering or which  are  inherently  indiscriminate  in
         violation of the international law of armed conflict,..."

88.  The above provisions only apply to parties to  an  international  armed
    conflict, but they  have  been  seen  to  reflect  the  prohibition  on
    indiscriminate attacks is seen to be part  of  customary  international
    law. J Henckaerts and  L  Doswald-Beck,  Customary  International  Law,
    Vol.1 2005, state the rules as follows:

         "Rule 12. Indiscriminate attacks are those:


           (a)  which are not directed at a specific military objective;
           (b) which employ a method or means of  combat  which  cannot  be
           directed at a specific military objective; or
           (c) which employ a method or means  of  combat  the  effects  of
           which  cannot  be   limited   as   required   by   international
           humanitarian law."


89.  Virtually identical wording is employed in the  ICRC  publication,  The
    Law of Armed Conflict: Basic Knowledge (2002 edition).

90.  So it is a general principle of IHL that parties to  a  conflict  shall
    at all times distinguish between the civilian population and combatants
    in order  to  spare  civilian  population  and  property.  Neither  the
    civilian population as such, nor civilian persons shall be  the  object
    of attack. Attacks shall be directed solely at military objectives. The
    principle underlying the concept of "indiscriminate"  deployed  in  the
    above sources is sometimes expressed as "the principle of  distinction"
    ("distinction" itself being a word quite opposite  to  "indiscriminate"
    in the ordinary sense).

91.  Henckaerts and Doswald-Beck (supra, at pp.41-2) note that the case  law
    of international criminal tribunals has further clarified the scope  of
    the prohibition on indiscriminate attacks. And we  have  already  cited
    para 127 of the Tadic (Jurisdiction)   judgement  in  which  the  Trial
    Chamber noted  that, notwithstanding the limitation of  existing  rules
    under IHL treaties governing civil strife:

         "... it cannot be denied that customary  rules  have  developed  to
         govern internal strife. These rules, as specifically identified  in
         the  preceding  discussion,  cover  such  areas  as  protection  of
         civilians  from  hostilities,  in  particular  from  indiscriminate
         attacks, protection of civilian  objects,  in  particular  cultural
         property, protection of all those who do not (or  no  longer)  take
         active part in hostilities, as well  as  prohibition  of  means  of
         warfare proscribed in international  armed  conflicts  and  ban  on
         certain methods of conducting hostilities" (emphasis added).


 92. In international law indiscriminate  violence  also  includes  violence
    using means  and  methods  which  are  in  themselves  abhorrent,  e.g.
    chemical weapons or poisoning of water wells.  Indiscriminate  violence
    of this sort can affect combatants as well  as  civilians.   But  under
    Article 15(c) the focus must be on  indiscriminate  violence  affecting
    civilians.

93.  In the light of the above  the  concept  of  "indiscriminate  violence"
    (affecting a civilian's life or person) within Article  15(c)  is  best
    understood  as  denoting  violence  which,  by  virtue  of  failing  to
    discriminate between military and civilian targets, violates peremptory
    norms of IHL.

94.  So conceived, the  notion  of  "indiscriminate  violence"  is  still  a
    relatively broad one. It  is  capable  of  covering  violence  targeted
    against civilians directly, because that in itself demonstrates that it
    is not directed at a specific military  objective.  It  further  covers
    violence  where  the  means  and  methods   (e.g.   chemical   weapons)
    disproportionately  affects  civilians.   It   is   also   capable   of
    encompassing untargeted (or random) violence where that  amounts  to  a
    failure to discriminate between military and civilian targets.  But  in
    relation to both types of violence it can only  cover  them  where  the
    violence concerned is closely related, or has a nexus to,  the  conduct
    of military operations: we shall return to this qualification shortly.

95.   It  follows  from  the  approach  we   adopt   to   the   meaning   of
    "indiscriminate violence" that Article 15(c) is not intended  to  cover
    threats that are by reason of all kinds of violence. It does not  cover
    purely criminal violence. It does not cover domestic violence or indeed
    any  other  type  of  non-military  violence;  rather  it  is  violence
    inflicted by combatants and which is indiscriminate in one or  more  of
    the ways identified earlier.

96.  One consequence of this interpretation  is,  we  accept,  that  Article
    15(c) would not as such assist a  civilian  in  a  situation  of  armed
    conflict who faced a serious and individual threat from criminal  gangs
    who were exploiting the law  and  order  vacuum  caused  by  the  armed
    conflict to threaten the lives of many residents: take the example of a
    criminal gang who in the course of stealing oil from a pipeline  during
    an armed conflict killed innocent civilians indiscriminately. It  might
    be  said  that  such  exclusion  would  be  unjustified  because  armed
    conflicts, particularly internal armed conflicts, are often accompanied
    by significant levels of violent criminal activity and  lowered  levels
    of protection. However, we come  back  to  the  underlying  purpose  of
    Article 15(c) which in our view is to protect civilians against certain
    violations of IHL. Criminal acts would, of course, be capable of  being
    sufficiently punished within the framework of domestic criminal law  of
    the country (although this may not  necessarily  happen  in  practice),
    like any other criminal acts. There is  nothing  in  the  text  of  the
    Directive or in the preparatory documents to indicate  that  protection
    against criminal or "domestic" violence  (as  opposed  to  violence  of
    particular international concern) was intended. Recital 26,  by  making
    clear that risks to which the population are generally exposed are  not
    normally enough, reinforces the view which we have taken. (This is  the
    only point at which, with the benefit of fuller submissions  than  were
    available to the Tribunal in HH & others, we depart  from  its  general
    conclusions on Article 15(c).)

97.  That said, it will not always be possible to draw an  easy  distinction
    between military and criminal activities. We know all too well from the
    evidence before us in this case, that the line between  insurgents  and
    opportunistic  criminals  is  often  blurred  and  the  examples   from
    background evidence we were given on Iraq, of insurgents  stealing  oil
    from pipelines to fund their armed actions and  of  police  checkpoints
    which turn out to be manned by criminals in  fake  police  or  military
    uniforms, are two vivid illustrations of how hard it may be to draw the
    line in some cases. Once again, however, we believe that assistance  in
    developing workable criteria can be drawn from IHL  and  in  particular
    the case law of the international criminal tribunals.  In general terms
    civilians only lose that status if they take an "...active part in  the
    hostilities" (see common Article 3(1)) and do  acts  that  are  closely
    related to the conflict. The  ITFY  in  Prosecutor  v  Kunarac  had  to
    consider this question in the context of the second of the two  general
    conditions for the applicability of Article 3 of its Statute (that  the
    acts of the accused must be closely related  to  the  armed  conflict).
    Explaining what was meant by "closely  related  to  the  conflict"  the
    Tribunal stated at paras 58-9:

         "58. What ultimately  distinguishes  a  war  crime  from  a  purely
         domestic offence is that a war crime is shaped by or dependent upon
         the environment - the armed conflict -  in which it  is  committed.
         It need not have been planned or supported by some form of  policy.
         The armed conflict need not have been causal to the  commission  of
         the crime, but the existence  of  an  armed  conflict  must,  at  a
         minimum, have  played  a  substantial  part  in  the  perpetrator's
         ability to commit it, his decision to  commit  it,  the  manner  in
         which it was committed or the purpose for which it  was  committed.
         Hence, if it can be established, as in the present case,  that  the
         perpetrator acted in furtherance of or under the guise of the armed
         conflict, it would be sufficient to conclude  that  his  acts  were
         closely related to the armed conflict...


         59.  In  determining  whether  or  not  the  act  in  question   is
         sufficiently related to the armed conflict, the Trial  Chamber  may
         take into account, inter alia, the following factors: the fact that
         the perpetrator is a combatant; the fact that the victim is a  non-
         combatant; the fact that the victim is a  member  of  the  opposing
         party; the fact that the act may be said to serve the ultimate goal
         of a military campaign; and the fact that the crime is committed as
         part of or in the context of the perpetrators' official duties".


98.  The Chamber in Lubanga referred to the need for there to be  a  "nexus"
    between the armed conflict and the alleged war crime and stated at para
    287:

         "In  this  respect,  the  Chamber  follows  the  approach  of   the
         jurisprudence of the ICTY, which requires the conduct to have  been
         closely related to the hostilities occurring in  any  part  of  the
         territories controlled by the parties to the  conflict.  The  armed
         conflict need not be considered the ultimate reason for the conduct
         and the conduct need not have taken place in the midst  of  battle.
         Nonetheless, the armed conflict must play a substantial role in the
         perpetrators' decision, in his or her ability to commit  the  crime
         or in the manner in which the conduct was ultimately committed".

99.   Whilst these decisions apply the "nexus"  test  under  their  relevant
    Statutes (ITFY and International Criminal Court respectively), there is
    no reason to think that it is  not  a  feature  of  the  law  of  armed
    conflict generally. The above approach leaves open that acts or threats
    which are culpable in international criminal  law  (including  acts  or
    threats of indiscriminate violence) can be committed by criminals,  but
    it makes it clear that that will only arise when their acts are closely
    related to the armed conflict. The indiciae  set  out  in  para  59  of
    Kunarac above appear to suggest that in the main those  whose  acts  or
    threats are covered will be mainly combatants who use the existence  of
    an armed conflict to carry out opportunistic crimes, for example  rape,
    but it would appear that under certain  circumstances  civilians  whose
    criminal conduct amounts to active involvement in  the  armed  conflict
    will also be culpable. In the analysis we go on give as to how  Article
    15(c) is to be applied in practice -  and  in  our  assessment  of  the
    situation in Iraq - we think it prudent to take an inclusionary view of
    the extent to which violence perpetrated by criminals can  be  "closely
    related" to the armed conflict.

100. To the extent that in any particular case a decision-maker  is  looking
    at whether civilians per se face a serious  and  individual  threat  to
    their life or person by reason of  indiscriminate  violence,  what  the
    above approach requires is that the fact-finder look  at  the  evidence
    relating to the scale and frequency and  geographical  distribution  of
    indiscriminate violence.  It is not the overall  level  and  degree  of
    violence in the country or the relevant area of the  country  which  is
    key, although that will be a relevant factor. It is the extent  of  the
    violence of a particular kind and (bearing in mind the  confinement  of
    the personal scope of Article 15(c) to civilians)  the  violence  which
    disproportionately threatens  the  life  or  person  of  civilians.  In
    general, the level and degree of targeted violence should not be  taken
    into account, subject to  the  proviso  that  what  is  meant  here  by
    "targeted violence" is violence which is conducted within the IHL rules
    of armed conflict. If, however, the "targeted violence"  turns  out  to
    consist in acts carried out in the course of hostilities in a way which
    disproportionately affects civilians, then it should also be taken into
    account. Mortar attacks carried out without warning targeted on an army
    post close to a  crowded  market  would  likely  be  included,  whereas
    similar attacks carried out  with  due  warning  would  likely  not  be
    included.

    "civilian's life or person"
101. This provision, which concerns the focus of the  threat,  went  through
    five drafting amendments. Dr McAdam ( supra at  p.75)  notes  that  the
    original phrase "life, safety or freedom" was,  along  with  subsequent
    formulations based around the concept of  freedom,  eventually  deleted
    due to concern by some Member States that it  would  unduly  widen  the
    scope of the Directive.

102. Given the strong reasons for applying  an  IHL  reading  to  the  terms
    "international  or  internal  armed   conflict"   and   "indiscriminate
    violence", the phrase  "violence to life and  person"  should  also  be
    approached in the same way. Once again, there is a rational  basis  for
    such an approach, since the phrase "life and person" occurs  in  common
    Article 3 of the 1949 Conventions. That is not exactly the same as  the
    wording in Article 15(c)  (which  refers  not  to  "violence",  but  to
    "serious and individual threat to..."; and also to a "civilian's   life
    or person"), but what is clear from the  drafting  is  that  there  was
    concern to place certain  limits  on  those  aspects  of  a  civilian's
    existence which could be protected.

103. In our view there are three obvious limits imposed by the phrase  "life
    or person". One is that it clearly is not apt to cover anything  to  do
    with civilian objects. The latter is defined  by  The  UK  Ministry  of
    Defence Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict (at p.391) as including the
    following: "dwellings, shops, schools and other places of  non-military
    business, places of recreation and worship,  means  of  transportation,
    cultural property, hospitals and medical establishments and units".  We
    say that because IHL as a whole does, of course, protect - to a  degree
    -  "civilian objects". The Manual further explains that attacks on  any
    of these objects are prohibited unless they are being used for military
    purposes and they describe the prohibition on directing attacks against
    civilian objects as contrary to customary IHL: see paras 15.16.

104. Mindful, however, that  "life  or  person"  is  to  be  given  a  broad
    meaning, we would accept that the phrase must encompass the means for a
    person's survival: see the  Manual at 15.19.1.

105. The second limit  is  clear  from  the  differentiation  within  common
    Article 3(1) of (a) violence to "life and person" on the one  hand  and
    (c) "outrages upon personal  dignity,  in  particular  humiliating  and
    degrading treatment" on the other. This juxtaposition shows that within
    the IHL context the material scope of  the  phrase  "life  and  person"
    cannot  extend  to  threats  which  amount  to  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment. The inherent limitation of the concept of "life  or  person"
    within IHL is further indicated by the fact that in Additional Protocol
    II (by which time it was felt that the protection of  civilians  should
    be given a wider material scope) the wording used was  more  expansive.
    Article 4 (2) (a) proscribes:

              "violence to the life, health and physical  or  mental  well-
         being of persons, in particular murder as well as cruel  treatment,
         such as torture, mutilation or any form of corporal punishment".

106. We reject Mr Husain's  contention  that  this  new  formulation  "life,
    health and physical and mental well-being  of  persons"  was  simply  a
    spelling out of what was implicit in the notion of  "person".  If  that
    were so, we see no reason why Article 4(2)(e) would contain a  separate
    proscription of "outrages upon personal dignity...".

107. Mr Husain also submitted that "life or person" embraces moral  as  well
    as physical integrity. He argued that this provision gave effect to the
    "right to respect for the person", a phrase which appears in Article 27
    Geneva Convention  IV  (which  states  that  "[p]rotected  persons  are
    entitled, in all circumstances, to respect for their  persons...")  and
    which the Commentary to this article states is a phrase which "must  be
    understood in its widest sense: it covers the rights of the individual,
    that is, the rights and qualities which are inseparable from the  human
    being by the very fact of his existence and  his  mental  and  physical
    powers" ( (p.201). We have the greatest difficulty  in  accepting  that
    submission. It would require reading the phrase "life and  person"  out
    of context and divorced from the evident coverage  of  moral  integrity
    aspects of a civilian's life in a separate common Article 3 subcategory
    (Article 3(c)). So far as the phrase "right to respect for the person",
    as found in Geneva Convention IV is concerned, it relates solely to the
    status of "protected persons". So  far  as  concerns  the  use  of  the
    phrase in Additional Protocol II,  is clear from the ICRC Commentary on
    it that this Protocol was intended to "strengthen" i.e. to  extend  the
    contents of protection from that afforded by common Article 3 (see e.g.
    paras 4530 and 4532).

108. The third limit is that the  phrase  "civilian's  life  or  person"  is
    clearly specific to the civilian in question. It does not  extend,  for
    example, to threats to family members. What happens to a family  member
    may well be a breach of IHL, but the claimant must show a threat to his
    or her own life and person. Having said that,  it  may  often  be  that
    family members, merely due to  their  relation  with  another  civilian
    victim, will normally be vulnerable to acts of serious harm in the same
    manner (compare recital 27).

109. We turn to the phrase "serious and  individual  threat",  which  itself
    needs breaking down into its separate components.


    "serious"
110. It should not necessarily be  thought  that  the  notion  of  "serious"
    should be the subject of precise definition. It seems to us that it  is
    a descriptor which must take its meaning from the  nouns  it  prefaces:
    "threat" and "... life or person".

111. The adjective "serious" qualifies  the  concept  of  threat.  The  most
    obvious meaning in that context is that "serious" is  intended  to  say
    something about the efficacy of the threat and to convey that it  is  a
    threat which is not to be taken lightly. In  other  words,  it  imports
    that the threat is one which is credible or cogent in the sense that it
    is to be taken seriously. Mr Husain's objection to this  definition  is
    that it would amount to imposing a double-testing of  credibility:  not
    only would a person have  to  show  (under  Article  2(e))  substantial
    grounds for believing that there is a real risk; he would also have  to
    show that there was a real risk of a credible threat. We agree with  Mr
    Husain that it would be  wrong  to  blur  the  different  functions  of
    Article 2(e), which is to define the standard of proof, and Article 15,
    which is to define certain types of harm. But we do not  consider  that
    this understanding of "serious" incorporates a credibility test. It  is
    not saying what the standard is in relation to what has to  be  proved,
    but rather something about the form which the harm has to take.

112. Mr Husain submitted that "serious" denoted the gravity of the harm  and
    therefore  qualifies  the  phrase  "life  or  person".  The   principal
    difficulty with this is that the threat which the paragraph  designates
    is to a civilian's "life or person". It is not easy  to  follow  how  a
    threat to life could be anything less than grave, by its  very  nature.
    Whatever "serious" means it  must  apply  equally  to  threats  to  the
    civilian's "life" on the one hand and to the "person" on the  other.  A
    further difficulty with  the  argument  that  "serious"  qualifies  the
    gravity of the harm is that would mean accepting that  a  threat  could
    only consist  in  something  capable  of  causing  actual  (and  grave)
    consequences. It would exclude regarding a person who threatens to kill
    someone with what turns out to be a fake gun as having made a  "serious
    threat". We consider that in the context  of  protection  of  civilians
    such a definition would be too restrictive.  We bear in mind that it is
    a feature of modern internal  armed  conflicts  that  the  protagonists
    often seek to achieve their ends by instilling fear or terror  (whether
    or not they intend to follow through with the threat)  as  much  as  by
    causing actual harm. We adopt  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  word  as
    adumbrated in the previous paragraph.


    "individual "
113. We note from the Danish Presidency Note (12148/02 ASILE  2002/43)  that
    "the  vast  majority  of  Member  States  supported  the   "individual"
    requirement on the grounds that this would avoid "an undesired  opening
    of the scope of this subparagraph".

114. The concept of "individual" within Art 15(c) is clearly  the  focus  of
    recital 26: ("Risks to which a population of a country or a section  of
    the  population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not  create   in
    themselves an individual threat which would qualify  as  serious  harm"
    (emphasis added)).

115.  Mr Husain, echoing the UNHCR among others, urged us  to  either  "read
    down" or pay scant  regard  to  this  recital.  However,  there  is  no
    gainsaying the influential role of the recital or preambular  parts  to
    an EU Directive (see above para  26) , albeit they must  yield  in  the
    face of any contrary provision of the directive.

116.  We  may  begin  by  rejecting  several  possible  interpretations   of
    "individual".

117. It might be suggested that the term "individual" is  not  to  be  given
    full effect by virtue of the fact that  although  during  the  drafting
    stages virtually all Member States were in favour of including it, when
    it came to implementation some  Member States, including Belgium  (Lois
    modifiant la loi du 15 decembre 1980 sur  l'access  au  territoire,  le
    sejour, l'etablissement et l'eloignement des  etrangers  (15  September
    2006) new art 48/4(2)(c)), and Lithuania (Law on the  Legal  Status  of
    Aliens, 29 April 2004, No IX-2206, Official Gazette No 73-2539, 3 April
    2004, art 87) chose not to include it. According to  "UNHCR  Statement:
    Subsidiary protection under the EC Qualification Directive  for  people
    threatened by indiscriminate violence", January 2008, that is also true
    of Austria, Finland, Portugal  and  Sweden.  However,  it  is  a  basic
    principle of treaty law (as codified  by  Article  31(1)  of  the  1969
    Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties which states  that  a  "treaty
    shall be interpreted in good faith  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary
    meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and  in
    the light of  its  object  and  purpose")  and  also  of  EU  law  that
    interpretation of the provisions of a Directive must give  full  effect
    to their wording.  In any event, the position in the UK is that we  are
    bound to apply the law as it has been implemented in para  339C  unless
    its text is plainly contrary to the Directive. But the  two  texts  are
    indistinguishable in this particular respect.

118. Another suggestion bases itself on  the  fact  that  according  to  the
    Commission's  September  2001  Explanatory  Memorandum  a   source   of
    inspiration for the creation of Art 15(c) was the notion of  protection
    afforded by the Temporary  Protection  Directive  whose  definition  of
    "displaced persons" at Article 2(c) covered, inter alia,  "persons  who
    have fled areas of armed conflict or endemic violence" without imposing
    any requirement of individual threat. This suggestion,  which  we  have
    already commented on, maintains that Art 15(c) should be interpreted to
    reflect the same broad approach.  But  that  simply  ignores  that  the
    Directive does impose such a requirement and that  the  two  Directives
    serve different purposes: the Qualification Directive  applies  to  all
    situations giving rise to protection needs on the part of third country
    nationals and stateless persons and requires an individual  assessment;
    the Temporary  Protection  Directive  only  applies  when  collectively
    Member States have decided that there is a  situation  of  mass  influx
    enabling persons to qualify on the basis of generic criteria.

119. It has been argued that Art  15(c),  read  together  with  recital  26,
    imposes - or risks being interpreted as imposing - a  requirement  that
    individuals show they have been "singled out" for the relevant type  of
    serious harm. If so that would be reminiscent of  an  approach  to  the
    analogous concept of persecution which in  R v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department ex parte Jeyakumaran [1994] Imm AR 45 was found  by
    Taylor J  to erect far too high a threshold.  There  is  no  reason  to
    think that, in order for a threat to be "individual", it  must  be  one
    which is solely directed at the person concerned or exclusively affects
    only him or her or must be based on a completely  personalised  set  of
    facts.

120. It has been argued that Article 15(c) read with recital 26  effectively
    imposes a requirement that, in order to  show  a  relevant  threat,  an
    applicant must be able to show that he or  she  would  be  at  "greater
    risk" than is faced by the population of a country or a section of  it.
    Indeed that would appear to be the position taken in decisions  of  the
    German courts: see Asylum  in  the  European  Union:  a  study  of  the
    implementation of  the  Qualification  Directive,UNHCR,  November  2007
    pp.73-74.

121. However, the wording of recital 26 is defeasible  (...do  normally  not
    create...") and clearly allows for the  possibility  of  an  individual
    threat being created by general risks in cases outside the  normal  run
    of cases. In any event, the "greater risk" criterion is only  erroneous
    if the real risk being compared is one shared by  all  members  of  the
    relevant class: as in the  Article  3  ECHR  case  of  Salah  Sheekh  v
    Netherlands, Application No 1948/04,  Judgement  of  11  January  2007,
    which concerned a person who was  from  a  Somali  minority  clan,  the
    Ashraf.  Having  found  on  the  evidence  before  it   that  being  an
    unprotected Ashraf was enough to give rise to a real  risk,  the  ECtHR
    stated at para 148:

         "It cannot be required of the applicant that  he  establishes  that
         further distinguishing features, concerning him  personally,  exist
         in order to show that he was, and continues to  be,  personally  at
         risk...it might render the protection  offered  by  that  provision
         illusory if, in addition  to  the  fact  that  he  belongs  to  the
         Ashraf...the applicant be required to show the existence of further
         special distinguishing features".

122. (For the Tribunal's more recent assessment of  the  Ashraf,  see  HH  &
    others, paras  306-308). It has also been argued (including by UNHCR in
    its 'Note on Key Issues of Concern to UNHCR on the Draft  Qualification
    Directive' (March 2004)) that Article 15(c) effectively  precludes  the
    possibility of group persecution  or  collectively-experienced  serious
    harm. Once again, that argument  overlooks  the  defeasible  nature  of
    recital 26, which clearly allows for the possibility  that  in  certain
    (albeit abnormal) situations a relevant threat can be one which  is  at
    once general and individual.

123. Nevertheless, it seems to us that  "individual" does  require  that  it
    be shown that the threat is personal to the applicant. It seems  to  us
    that in combination with "serious" this word creates a  high  threshold
    directly analogous to  the  well-established  high  threshold  required
    under the Refugee Convention and the Human  Rights  Convention.   HH  &
    others at para 331 states that "the concept of an  "individual"  threat
    requires there to be some form of "differential impact",  of  the  kind
    recognised by  the  House  of  Lords  for  the  purposes  of  the  1951
    Convention in Adan [1999] 1 AC 293 and by the ECtHR for the purposes of
    Article 3 in Vilvirajah...". The approach we take  is  consistent  with
    that since on our view (unless civilians generally face a real risk  of
    serious harm personal to them  -and  so  differentiating  them  -  all)
    merely being a civilian will not suffice; something more,  relating  to
    the person's specific characteristics or profile or circumstances, must
    be shown.

    "threat"
124. As already noted, when considering Article  15(c)  as  a  whole  it  is
    apparent that the type of harm specified in Article 15(c) is  different
    in character  from  that specified in Article 15(a) and (b).  The  term
    "threat" shows that, so long as it is a threat which  is  serious  (and
    individual),  the  danger  alone  (if  of  a  relevant  kind)  can   be
    sufficient. If it had been intended only to cover the real risk of  the
    proscribed ill treatment itself, then we are confident  that  different
    wording would have been used, as in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b).

125. Equally, however, the threat can only constitute "serious harm"  if  it
    is one which takes a particular  form  viz,  one  which  amounts  to  a
    "serious and individual" threat and in circumstances arising by  reason
    of indiscriminate violence in situations of armed conflict.

126. So far as the IHL context is concerned, it is noteworthy that there  is
    strong recognition of the ability of threats to give  rise  to  serious
    violations. Thus Article 2 of Additional Protocol II prohibits  at  any
    time and in any place whatsoever (a) violence to the life,  health  and
    physical or mental well-being of persons' including at (h) "threats  to
    commit any of the foregoing acts"; Article  13  of  the  same  Protocol
    prohibits "acts or threats of violence the primary purpose of which  is
    to spread terror  among  the  civilian  population"  (emphasis  added).
    Henckaerts and Doswald-Beck (supra) identify threats as well as acts of
    various kinds as contrary to international humanitarian law:  see  Rule
    2. Indeed, it is a commonplace observation that many types of terrorist
    attack (whether or in the context of an armed conflict or  not)  depend
    for their effect less on actual harm than on the  perceived  threat  of
    repetition.

127. It seems to us that the only sustainable  argument  in  favour  of  the
    view that Article 15(c) has any "added value" or  scope  additional  to
    Article 15(b)  derives from this  fact:  that it is constructed  around
    what in itself is a lesser form of harm than actual harm: a  threat  of
    harm. We note in this regard that whilst our view broadly accords  with
    that expressed by H Battjes in European Asylum  Law  and  International
    Law at pp.239-240 we think his reliance upon a difference  between  the
    "real  risk"  criterion  and  the   "serious   threat"   criterion   is
    problematic. The latter, he says, is  more  lenient  than  the  former.
    That, it seems to us, is to confuse the Article 2(e)  requirement  that
    there must exist a "real risk" of serious  harm  with  the  concept  of
    serious harm (of which the "serious and individual threat" provision is
    one component). But the point he makes about the difference between the
    real risk of actual harm and the real risk of a threat of harm  remains
    in our view a valid one.

128. In our view the above analysis of the constituent elements  of  Article
    15(c) ensures that the provision has  effet  utile  whilst  paying  due
    regard to the restrictions arising from the wording chosen.

Application of Article 15(c)


129. Having analysed the constituent elements of Article 15(c)  we  need  to
    consider how the provision is to be applied in practice.

130. If the claimant's country of origin is clearly free  of  situations  of
    armed conflict, then there will be no need to consider his claim  under
    Article 15(c). He or she may have a claim under Article 15(b) or  (less
    commonly) 15(a), but Article 15(c) can be excluded.

131. If, however, the claimant's country is one in which it  might  be  said
    that there are situations of armed conflict, then (unless an  appellant
    succeeds under Article 15(b)  in  any  event)  Article  15(c)  must  be
    considered. Precisely in which order the requirements of Article  15(c)
    are best taken and in what detail (if any) will depend very much on the
    circumstances of the  particular  case.  If  the  person  concerned  is
    plainly not a civilian (e.g. a soldier who on return  faces  punishment
    for breaches of military discipline), then he is outside the  scope  of
    Article 15(c) in any event. In certain cases it  may  be  obvious  that
    even if the claimant  can  meet  all  the  other  requirements  of  the
    paragraph he or she cannot show a "serious and individual  threat";  if
    that is so, then there would be little point in making findings on  the
    other requirements. But where that is  not  the  case,  then  the  most
    logical ordering is to consider first (as we have done  when  analysing
    the law) whether there exists a situation of "international or internal
    armed conflict", next whether  it  is   "by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence" and finally whether there arises a  "serious  and  individual
    threat to a civilian's life or person". So far as concerns the question
    of whether there exists an "internal or internal  armed  conflict",  we
    have already noted the practical utility of parties to appeals  seeking
    first to ascertain whether the ICRC has taken a view on whether for IHL
    purposes there exists in the particular country concerned situations of
    international or internal armed conflict.

132. As already noted,  what  has  to  be  examined  is  whether  there  are
    "substantial grounds  for  believing  that  the  person  concerned,  if
    returned ...would face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined
    in Article 15, and  to  whom  Article  17(1)  and  (2)  [the  exclusion
    clauses] do not apply and is unable, or, owing to such risk,  unwilling
    to avail himself or herself of the protection  of  that  country":  see
    Article  2(e)  and  the  mirroring  provisions  of  para  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

    Risk to civilians per se
133. A prominent feature of this case is that the appellant has asked us  to
    find that he qualifies under Article 15(c) solely by virtue of the fact
    that he is a civilian from Iraq. It is only if we refuse  him  on  that
    basis that he asks us to go on to consider whether he  can  qualify  by
    virtue of other characteristics (being  male,  from  Kirkuk,  of  mixed
    (Sunni) Arab/Kurdish ethnicity).

134. Before we embark on evaluating the risk  to  civilians  in  Iraq  as  a
    whole, it is important that we consider what type of evidence could  be
    expected to show such a generic risk.

135. It is settled law that where it is claimed  that  a  class  of  persons
    faces a real risk it is necessary to show that there is evidence  of  a
    consistent pattern of serious harm being faced by that class of persons
    so as so meet the "generally or consistently  happening"  test  set  as
    approved in AA (Zimbabwe) [2007] EWCA Civ 149, paras 21-23.

136. Applying  this  principle  to  a  class  consisting  of  civilians,  we
    consider that in order to show that mere membership  of  such  a  broad
    class of person places one at real risk of serious harm  it  would  not
    suffice to point to evidence of the mere - or even common -  occurrence
    (or likely occurrence) of acts or incidents of indiscriminate violence.
     One would have to show that they were happening on a wide scale and in
    such a way as to be of sufficient severity  to  pose  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm (including a real risk of a serious and individual  threat
    within the meaning of Article 15(c)) to civilians  generally.  Only  if
    such violence is generally happening in this way can one treat it as  a
    strong indicator  that  the  individuals  who  make  up  the  class  of
    civilians will face a real risk of being  exposed  to  a  serious  harm
    which all in general share. Only too if such indiscriminate violence is
    generally happening in this way will it be possible to justify treating
    the situation as an exception to the general rule set  out  in  recital
    26, that "[r]isks to which a population of a country or  a  section  of
    the  population  is  generally  exposed  do  normally  not  create   in
    themselves an individual threat which would qualify as serious harm".


137.  As  already  noted,  by  virtue  of   the   meaning   we   attach   to
    "indiscriminate violence" the focus of the assessment of the nature and
    scale of the violence in a  particular  country  or  area  must  be  on
    violence with is closely related to, or has a nexus to, the conduct  of
    military operations, albeit we think it prudent to take a broad view of
    these requirements so as not to discount criminal violence which can be
    said to be  substantially  linked  to  the  conduct  of  operations  by
    combatants.

    The home area
138. When considering whether a person can qualify for refugee or Article  3
    ECHR protection the normal focus will be on whether  the  appellant  is
    able to show a risk in his or her home area or the part of the  country
    in which he or she lives: see AG and others [2006] EWCA  Civ  1342.  We
    see no reason why the approach should be any different when it comes to
    considering whether he or she can qualify under Article 15.

139. Where it is suggested that a person can  qualify  under  Article  15(c)
    merely by virtue of  being  a  civilian,  in  our  view  the  principal
    question that must be examined  is  whether  the  evidence  as  to  the
    situation in his or her home area shows that indiscriminate violence to
    civilians there is (likely  to  be)  generally  happening  in  the  way
    described above. Obviously assessing  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    indiscriminate  violence  in  the   home   area   will   require   some
    consideration of the situation in the country as a whole, but if  there
    is not a consistent pattern of  indiscriminate  violence  in  the  home
    area, then such a person will not be able to show a  real  risk  merely
    because he or she is a civilian.


140. Our analysis leaves open the possibility that a person may be  able  to
    show (when it comes to considering his or her "personal circumstances")
    that he or she faces a real risk of a serious and individual threat  to
    his or her life or person even though violations of IHL  of  this  kind
    are not generally happening in his  or  her  home  area.  But  in  this
    situation he or she will have to identify specific  characteristics  or
    circumstances personal to him/her. Sometimes such  characteristics  may
    be shared by a class of persons, e.g. if he  or  she  is  disabled  and
    faces return to an area of conflict where civilians are normally  given
    relatively short notice to leave their dwellings before mortar attacks;
    but more usually, they will be factors arising  from  the  individual's
    personal history of difficulties at the hands  of  combatants  in  that
    area.


141. Bearing  in  mind  that  a  person  is  only  eligible  for  subsidiary
    protection if he or she is not a refugee, it will be important in cases
    brought under Article 15(c) based in whole or part on claims  regarding
    discrimination on grounds of race, sex, nationality, political  opinion
    etc to demonstrate  that  it  is  the  (serious)  threat  of  the  harm
    (indiscriminate violence) rather than the actuality of it  which  gives
    rise to the individual risk.

    Internal protection (relocation)
142. For reasons given below we  did  not  need  to  address  the  issue  of
    whether  the  appellant  would  have  a  viable   internal   protection
    alternative because we did not find  that  he  faced  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm in his home area (Kirkuk).   We  wish  to  make  only  one
    observation about the relocation issue  arising  out  of  one  question
    raised during the hearing. This concerned  the  position  of  a  person
    facing return to a country in a state of internal armed conflict but in
    which there are parts of the country that are entirely  peaceful.  Does
    it make sense to say that such a person can bring  himself  within  the
    scope of Article 15(c)? We see nothing at all absurd in saying that  he
    would at least be  able  to  show  he  met  the  Article  15(c)  "armed
    conflict" requirement. But if it is safe  and  reasonable  for  him  to
    relocate to a peaceful area, then he will almost certainly be unable to
    meet the other requirements of Article 15(c), namely  that he shows  he
    will face a serious individual threat to his life or person  by  reason
    of indiscriminate violence. Thus there will be no  substantial  grounds
    for believing the presence of a real risk to him of "serious harm".

143. For completeness we would note that we  saw  no  merit  in  Mr  Saini's
    submission (based on Dr McAdam's views) that the standard of proof  set
    out in Article 2(e) of the Directive -  is  higher  than  the  standard
    contained within Art 1A(2) of  the  Refugee  Convention  ("well-founded
    fear"). The wording contained in Article 2(e)  -  "substantial  grounds
    for believing..." -  is precisely the same as arises  under  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence on Article 3  of  the  ECHR  as  applied  in  asylum  and
    expulsion cases. In relation to the latter there is  binding  authority
    which states that the standard of proof is the same  as  under  Article
    1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention:  see  Kacaj*  [2001]   INLR   354,
    Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38, [2005] INLR 422, HL.

The background evidence


144. The background country materials which the parties  produced  for  this
    case were voluminous. Inevitably our decision fails to refer to many by
    name but we would emphasise that this does not mean we have  not  taken
    all into account. Given the unusual number of academic authorities also
    placed before us, we list those in a separate appendix.


    The disclosure application
145. Before turning to  the  background  evidence  we  should  mention  that
    during  the  hearing  Mr  Husain  renewed  his   application   (refused
    previously) that the Tribunal order disclosure of materials relating to
    the situation in Iraq which were  (or  were  believed  to  be)  in  the
    possession of one or more government departments. Given the  concession
    made by Mr Saini on behalf of the Secretary of  State  mid-way  through
    the hearing that she accepted Iraq was in a  state  of  internal  armed
    conflict for the purposes of  IHL  (albeit  not  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 15(c)), it may be that some  of  Mr  Husain's  concerns  became
    superfluous. But in any event we had no  hesitation  in  rejecting  his
    application. The Tribunal has no disclosure-ordering powers  equivalent
    to those in the  Special  Immigration  Appeals  Commission  (Procedure)
    Rules 2003 (as amended). Despite being informed prior  to  the  hearing
    that the Tribunal's relevant power under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 was limited to  issuing  a  Rule  50(1)
    witness summons, the  appellant's  representatives  took  no  steps  to
    request such a summons. Having regard to the  "Schedule"  of  materials
    which were sought, we consider that the application  was  nothing  more
    than a request for authority to embark on a fishing  expedition.  There
    is a general expectation that the Secretary of State will not keep  any
    relevant materials from the Tribunal, but we saw  no  reason  to  think
    that had occurred in this case. Indeed it is apparent that both parties
    went to enormous lengths to ensure that, between them, we were supplied
    with all relevant materials.

146.  In summarising the background evidence before us we  draw  principally
    on the following documents: the US State Department Report of  6  March
    2007, the  UNHCR  paper,  "Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the
    International Protection Needs of Iraqi Asylum-Seekers",  August  2007,
    together with its Addendum of December 2007,  the expert reports of  Dr
    Glen Rangwala of 21 January 2008 and Dr Eric  Herring  of  21  and   30
    January 2008 (the latter a supplementary report),  recent  UN  Security
    Council Reports of the Secretary General on Iraq up  to  and  including
    that of 14 January 2008 and  the  Border  and  Immigration  Agency  COI
    Report on Iraq of 8 January 2008. We highlight these because  they  are
    all relatively recent and their  contents  taken  as  a  whole  broadly
    reflect the much wider body of materials which were placed  before  us.
    In respect of the UNHCR Guidelines we remind ourselves that at para 135
    they state:

         "In the context of Central and Southern Iraq where extreme violence
         and acts of serious human rights violations by state and  non-state
         actors is rife, the overall situation  is  such  that  there  is  a
         likelihood or reasonable possibility of serious harm.  While  there
         are reports that widespread human rights violations are perpetrated
         by the authorities including through use of militias, large numbers
         of religious and political groups commit extreme forms of  violence
         on a daily basis. Ordinary  civilians  are  often  the  targets  of
         violence, which includes car bombs, suicide attacks and  improvised
         explosive devices. These methods of violence are  usually  targeted
         at chosen areas where civilians of  specific  religious  or  ethnic
         groups gather, including  places  of  worship,  market  places  and
         neighbourhoods. As clarified above, even where  an  individual  may
         not have personally experienced threats or risks  of  harm,  events
         surrounding his or her areas of residence or  relating  to  others,
         may nonetheless give rise to a well-founded  fear.  There  is  also
         more specific targeting of individuals by extremist elements of one
         religious  or  political  group  against  specific  individuals  of
         another, through kidnappings and execution-style killings. Rape  is
         also increasingly being used as a means of persecution. Due to  the
         vast number of actors who could  perpetrate  violence,  an  asylum-
         seeker's failure to identify the perpetrator of violence should not
         be considered as detrimental to his/her credibility.


         ... the international protection needs of Iraqi asylum-seekers from
         the three Northern Governorates  should  be  assessed  individually
         based on the criteria of the 1951 Convention. In particular,  given
         reports of Kurdish political efforts to dominate and "kurdify"  the
         traditionally mixed areas of the Governorates  of  Kirkuk,  Ninewa,
         Salah Al- Din and Diyala, applicants  of  non-Kurdish  origin,  who
         claim discriminatory treatment in these  areas  should  have  their
         claims assessed to determine if the impact  of  treatment  they  or
         others experienced or  fear  experiencing,  would  constitute  harm
         amounting to persecution.


         In addition, there are indications of  growing  political  tensions
         and  the  overall  situation  remains  tenuous  and  unpredictable.
         Assessing the international protection needs of asylum seekers from
         the three Northern Governorates should thus  take  into  account  a
         situation which may change suddenly and dramatically."

147. The respondent having conceded that Iraq is  in  a  state  of  internal
    armed conflict for IHL purposes,  we  may  confine  ourselves  here  to
    simply  identifying  the  principal  characteristics  of   that   armed
    conflict. These are summarised by Dr Herring in his report as follows:

         "3.5 There are currently multiple  protracted  armed  conflicts  in
         Iraq between  MNF-I/GoI  forces  and  organised  armed  groups  and
         between those  groups  (principally  but  not  solely  the  Kurdish
         peshmerga; the Badr Organisation; the Mahdi Army; the Fadila  Party
         militia; the tribal, insurgent and local militias that make up  the
         Awakening Councils; the groups in the Reform and Jihad  Front;  and
         the groups under the Islamic State of Iraq umbrella).


         3.6  Those protracted armed conflicts are at their most intense  in
         central and northern Iraq, especially in Salah al Din,  Ninewa  and
         Diyala provinces and is part of an extended multi-year  and  multi-
         dimensional armed political struggle between organised actors  with
         recognisable  continuities  in  identity,  goals  and   strategies,
         personnel, internal structure and territorial control.


         3.7  The various strands of violence in  Baghdad, Kirkuk, Anbar and
         Basra provinces should still be  categorised  as  protracted  armed
         conflict even if they are comparatively less intense,  because  the
         violence is still substantial at  present,  has  been  much  higher
         recently and has the potential to become at least  as  high  again.
         Furthermore, those provinces  are  part  of  long-term  and  multi-
         dimensional armed political struggles between organised actors with
         discernible identities, goals and strategies,  personnel,  internal
         structures and territorial control.


         3.8  The remaining provinces  of  southern  Iraq  (Karbala,  Babil,
         Najaf,  Qadisyah,  Wasit,  Muthanna  and  Maysan)  are   integrated
         politically, economically and militarily into and affected by those
         protracted armed struggles in terms of violence and other forms  of
         serious harm which occur there."

148. From this and other sources we can deduce the following. The first  and
    most obvious point is  that  there  are  clearly  state  and  non-state
    parties to the conflict in Iraq.  The state party is the Government  of
    Iraq (GoI), whose military arm is the Iraqi Security Forces (ISF).  The
    ISF numbers (excluding the KRG figures) are estimated at around 115,000
    men. The ISF includes the Iraqi army (which falls under the Ministry of
    Defence)) and the Iraqi police  (which  falls  under  the  Ministry  of
    Interior (MOI)) (January 2008 COI, paras 11.03,  10.03).  Acting  under
    the consent of the GoI is the Multi-National Forces  in  Iraq  (MNF-I).
    The  MNF-I,  which  comprises  forces  from  26  countries,   currently
    totalling  around 182,000 personnel, operates  under  Security  Council
    Resolution 1546 adopted in June 2004.  Under the Constitution, although
    the Kurdish Armed Forces which operate in the KRG areas are a  separate
    organisation, they are part of the armed forces of  the  Government  of
    Iraq.  The peshmerga are thought to consist of around 100,000  men  and
    the KRG police numbers are around 60,000 (COI, para 10.67). Thus  total
    ISF figures appear to be around 215,000: that roughly accords with  the
    statement at 10.04 of the January 2008 COI that by May 2006 the ISF was
    said to have 263,400 trained and equipped men.

149. As regards non-state parties, estimates of their  overall  numbers  are
    hard to come by, but it appears to be accepted that in total  they  are
    roughly commensurate with MNF-I/ISF strength levels.  For  example  the
    Badr Brigade numbers alone are said to  consist  of  20,000  men  (COI,
    supra, 12.37). It is clear that the resistance/insurgent  movements  in
    Iraq post-28 June 2004 are fragmented. Equally clearly,  however,  they
    are composed of various armed groups (including the Sunni  fighters  in
    the "Sunni Triangle" North and West of Baghdad and the  Shi'a  fighters
    of the Mehdi Army in the South and the Badr Organisation (which is  the
    armed wing of SCIRI)). However, some of the armed violence  in  certain
    regions is not attributable to any party to an armed conflict.

150. The second point is that the parties to the conflict view their use  of
    violence as part of a struggle to take  power  at  the  centre  or  the
    region or to change government policies (see Dr Rangwala's report, para
    32).

151. The third point is that the armed conflict is one  in  which  the  main
    armed  groups  involved  have  a  significant  level  and   degree   of
    organisation. The organised character of ISF  and  MNF-I  armed  forces
    speaks for itself. As regards insurgents, they have  been  sufficiently
    coordinated, organised and equipped to successfully carry  out  regular
    armed attacks and thus to pose  an  ongoing  threat  to  the  coalition
    forces and the civilian population. In Dr Rangwala's words,  there  has
    been "a generally high degree of internal organisation within  many  of
    the armed Iraqi groups that remain in existence  in  2007.  The  groups
    have leaders and hierarchies of officials." (para 10). As also noted by
    this expert, "there is a generally high level  of  access  to  advanced
    weaponry and military expertise among combatant groups".

152. A further point is that, despite fluctuations, the conflict has  always
    been at significant levels of intensity. To repeat Dr  Herring's  words
    at para 3.6:

         "Those protracted armed conflicts are  at  their  most  intense  in
         central and northern Iraq, especially in Salah ad Din,  Ninewa  and
         Diyala provinces and is part of an extended multi-year  and  multi-
         dimensional armed political struggles between organised actors with
         recognisable  continuities  in  identity,  goals  and   strategies,
         personnel, internal structure and territorial control."


153. Dr Herring notes that the violence has affected all  of  Iraq's  ethnic
    groups and communities, including minority groups (8.13). We deal later
    with figures for violent deaths, but it suffices here to note that  the
    scale of casualties is well in excess of  the  benchmarks  set  by  all
    established bodies who study armed conflict (see e.g. the reference  in
    Dr Rangwala's report at para 31 to the University of Michigan benchmark
    of 1,000 war-related deaths per year). Even taking the lowest  estimate
    of casualties in Iraq (that by the US Department of Defence (DoD),  the
    current number of violent deaths is 8 times higher than this benchmark.

154. A  further  point  (going  to  intensity)  is  that  the  conflict  has
    sometimes involved de facto control over territory by one or  other  or
    more of the parties to the conflict. As Dr Rangwala notes at para 10:

         "At various times,  non-state  groups  have  secured  control  over
         considerable stretches of territory. For much of the  period  since
         2004, most of al-Anbar governorate, the towns of Ba'qubah (in Diyal
         governorate) and Tal Afar  (in  Ninewa  governorate),  considerable
         parts of the city of Mosul, the eastern Baghdad  suburbs  (the  so-
         called Sadr City) and Adhamiya in eastern Baghdad have  been  under
         the control of forces hostile to  the  central  government".  (para
         10).

155. Further indicative of the level of intensity of the  conflict  is  that
    it has seen large-scale movements of population within and out of Iraq,
    with around 1.9 - 2.2 million  displaced  within  its  borders  and  an
    additional two million who have fled to countries  in  the  surrounding
    region: see para 31.01 of the January 2008 COI.


156. Another notable feature is  that  the  conflict  has  been  persistent,
    having begun nearly five years ago and having been, to varying degrees,
    continuous.


157. Another obvious point is that there has  been  (and  continues  to  be)
    extensive UN Security Council oversight of the conflict in Iraq.

    Violence in Iraq
158. In order to analyse the nature and extent  of  indiscriminate  violence
    in Iraq we must first of all  look  at  what  the  background  evidence
    reveals about the broader question of violence of all kinds in Iraq. It
    is not in dispute that overall the situation has  for  some  time  been
    marked by significant and widespread levels of violence  and  that  the
    violence has an important degree of interconnectedness. As Dr  Rangwala
    notes in his report, the incidents of violence "are  to  be  understood
    not as a set of separate local  conflicts,  but  are  instead  strongly
    connected because the armed groups in Iraq are fighting in one  way  or
    another for the same goal, which is control over the Iraqi state."

159. It is also evident that the high levels of violence which have  been  a
    feature of Iraqi affairs for the past five years are considered by many
    commentators as likely to persist  for  some  time.  As  stated  by  Dr
    Herring at para 4.6:

         "The interaction of ethnic, religious,  sectarian,  tribal,  class,
         strategic and political factors with  long  and  violent  histories
         means that there  is  strong  propensity  to  resort  to  organised
         violence in Iraq by a variety of actors. This propensity means that
         stabilisation to the point at which serious levels of targeted  and
         indiscriminate violence become improbable is unlikely in the  short
         and medium term."

160.  One of the most conspicuous features of this high  level  of  violence
    generally is the alarming figures given for civilian casualties. As was
    emphasised by Dr Rangwala,  there  is  no  single  source  of  reliable
    statistics on the number of fatalities and injuries caused by  violence
    in Iraq since 2003. The main studies differ considerably (para 19;  see
    also Dr Herring's report para 5.3ff). Whereas the  study  published  in
    the Lancet in October  2006  estimated  that  there  had  been  601,000
    violent deaths in Iraq from March 2003 to July 2006,  figures  compiled
    by the Iraq Family  Health  Survey  (IFHS)  Study  Group  published  in
    January 2008 estimated that 151,000 individuals had died violent deaths
    over the same period (March 2003 - June 2006). The    Iraq  Body  Count
    (IBC), focussing on  confirmed  civilian  deaths,  has  estimated  that
    between the invasion up to the end of December 2007 there were  80,000-
    87,000 violent civilian deaths. The UNAMI report dated 1 November -  31
    December 2006 stated that during 2006 a total of 34,452 civilians  died
    through violence (averaging 94 civilians killed per  day)  with  36,685
    wounded. Dr Herring notes that official figures  produced  by  the  GoI
    Iraqi government include the estimate from the Iraqi Health Minister in
    November 2006 that 150,000 civilians had died up to  that  point  since
    the invasion, while the Iraqi Health Ministry put the total  figure  of
    deaths for 2006 at 22,950 (para 5.3). Dr Herring's report also includes
    the US data  as  contained  in  the  US  Department  of  Defence  (DoD)
    quarterly report to Congress, Measuring Security and Stability in Iraq,
    14 December 2007 (based on MNF-I figures) as well as the figures  given
    by the UK-based opinion poll agency Opinion Research Business (ORB) and
    press releases from mainly Sunni Arab Iraqi insurgent groups for  March
    2007. At para 5.7 Dr Herring also highlights the view expressed by  the
    high profile bipartisan US Congress Iraq Study Group (ISG) which in its
    2006 report states that:"[t]here is significant underreporting  of  the
    violence in Iraq".

161. According to the  UK  Opinion  Research  Business  (ORB)  in  a  survey
    reported by Aljazeera.net on 31 January 2008,  more  than  one  million
    Iraqis have died as a result of the  conflict  started  by  the  US-led
    invasion of Iraq in 2003. As a tangible way of describing the levels of
    violence to civilians in Iraq  Dr  Herring  (see  para  5.19)  compares
    2005/2006  figures for homicide in the UK and the US (in the  UK  there
    being a two in  80,000  annual  probability  of  being  the  victim  of
    homicide). By contrast, he states, the figures for the rates of violent
    civilian  deaths  in  Iraq  during  roughly  the  same  period   ranged
    (depending on which of the main estimates is used) from 17 - 545  times
    higher than in the UK.

162. Another significant statistic (albeit it has to be  considered  against
    the background that a significant portion of the Iraqi population  live
    in the larger cities) is that according to the UNHCR report for October
    2005, approximately one out of  every  five  Iraqis  lives  within  one
    kilometre of areas highly contaminated by the explosive remnants of war
    (landmines, unexploded ordnance (UXO and depleted uranium  (DU))  (COI,
    supra, 29.13- 29.16).

163. As one would expect, the precise picture varies from area to area.  The
    worst affected areas are those with mixed  populations.  These  include
    Baghdad, the towns of Balad, Dujeil  and  Samrra  in  the  Salah-ad-Din
    governorate, the towns of Baquba and Muqdadiya in  Diyala  governorate,
    Al-Anbar governorate, Basra and the northern towns of Kirkuk and  Mosul
    (COI, supra, 8.02). The 2007 Mid-Year Review, published by  IOM  on  17
    July 2007 stated that:


         "Instability due to sectarian violence,  military  operations,  and
         targeted attacks was worst in Anbar, Diyala, Salah al-Din, Baghdad,
         Ninewa, Basrah, and Kirkuk. In Anbar, military coordination between
         MNF-I/IF  and   local   tribes   shifted   displacement   dynamics,
         stabilizing some areas and  destabilizing  others.  Major  MNF-I/IF
         operations in Diyala produced new displacement mid-2007. On 13 June
         2007, the  Samarra  Al-Askari  Mosque  was  bombed  again,  further
         escalating sectarian tension." [111b] (p3) (COI, supra, 8.10)


164. In terms of civilian deaths, the Centre for  Strategic  Studies  (CSIS)
    stated in its 22 June 2006 report that:


       "Almost 80%  of  civilian  deaths  occurred  in  12  cities.  Baghdad
       accounted for almost half of the civilian deaths during this  period.
       The other cities included Fallujah, Nasiriya, Kerbala, Najaf,  Mosul,
       Basra, Kirkuk, Hilla, Tikrit, Baquba  and  Samarra  [63b] (p112  and
       115)"   (COI, supra, 8.22).

165. One matter that was specifically addressed by the two experts  was  the
    significance of the reduction in violence in the last quarter  of  2007
    and early 2008. The respondent referred us to evidence indicating  that
    in the last half of 2007 there had  been  both  a  marked  decrease  in
    civilian casualties and an improved security  situation,  traceable  to
    the US-initiated  Operations  'Fardh-al-Qanun  and  Phantom  Thunder  -
    commonly known as the "surge" policy - commencing in  early  2007.  The
    respondent also pointed to reports of  a  significant  number  of  Iraq
    refugees in surrounding countries who have begun returning. Dr  Herring
    made three main points about this. First, that he considered  that  the
    improvement is "tenuous" and has a limited  relationship  to  the  Bush
    administration's new security strategy:  it  was  more  a  function  of
    calculations and decisions by other  protagonists,  in  particular  the
    (contingent) suspension of most armed conflicts  by  Moqtada  al-Sadr's
    Mahdi Army from August 2007 onwards, an Iranian government decision  to
    rein in its support for Shi'a militias, the alliance of some tribal and
    insurgent leaders in Western Iraq with the US and GoI against  AQI  and
    the pragmatic decision of the  Awakening  Councils  to  work  with  the
    Coalition and GoI. Secondly, that even if the strands of  violence  are
    presently  less  intensive,  "the  violence  is  still  substantial  at
    present, has been much higher recently and has the potential to  become
    at least as high again" (para 3.7). He also maintained  (thirdly)  that
    the refugees who have  returned  should  be  regarded  as  having  been
    effectively  forced  to  return  by  the  governments  of   surrounding
    countries.

166. All commentators agree that the armed conflict in Iraq is taking  place
    against a backdrop of varying levels of generalised violence  in  which
    criminal organisations take advantage of the weak  security  situation.
    Dr Herring notes  this  at  paras  9.01-9.06.  The  August  2007  UNHCR
    Guidelines state at para 44(3):

         "3. Criminal Groups
         Criminal groups are also capitalizing on Iraq's instability. It  is
         increasingly  difficult  to  distinguish  common   criminals   from
         insurgents and militias, as all engage in  kidnappings  and  extra-
         judicial killings and illegal activities  such  as  trafficking  in
         weapons, drugs and oil to fund their activities. According  to  the
         Iraq Study Group, "some criminal gangs cooperate with, finance,  or
         purport to be part of the Sunni insurgency or a  Shi'ite militia in
         order to gain legitimacy".


         Criminal activities often reveal a sectarian dimension.  At  times,
         criminal gangs abduct victims in order to sell  them  to  sectarian
         groups.  Accordingly,  criminal  groups  are   fuelling   sectarian
         violence and causing displacement. Increasingly, criminal gangs are
         working in collusion with or  have  infiltrated  the  ISF,  leaving
         victims without access to protection."

167. As already noted, the violence in Iraq is commonly described  (and  was
    so described by both the experts) as made up of two main kinds. One  is
    targeted violence. The  other  is  indiscriminate  violence.  (For  the
    remainder of this section we confine ourselves to  the  usage  made  of
    these terms by the experts and background reports.)

    Targeted violence
168. The expert reports and background  sources  see  targeted  violence  as
    including a number of phenomena. It includes targeted violence  carried
    out by armed insurgent groups on MNF-I/ISF military targets.  From  the
    January 2008 COI Report we learn that those targeted by violence at the
    hands of insurgents or militias (and sometimes militia-infiltrated  ISF
    and criminals) include (more widely):  civil  servants  and  Government
    officials and members  of  the  security  forces  (7.08,7.09,7.12,7.18,
    8.108-8.112), politicians, professionals,  intellectuals,  journalists,
    doctors,  lawyers,   judges,  professors,  teachers,  students,  police
    officers, artists, gold/silversmiths, jewellers, Shi'a  bakers,  liquor
    sellers,  music  shop  owners,   ex-military   officers,   translators,
    contractors, drivers, cleaners, barbers,  media  organisation  workers,
    wealthy people, those working with the MNF-I and  foreign  construction
    companies, political, tribal and religious leaders, those suspected  of
    giving information to foreign governments, women and girls, minorities,
    religious minorities (e.g.  Christians  and  the  Sabean-Mandeans)  and
    Palestinian refugees (8.108, 7.07, 7.09). Dr Herring's report  likewise
    highlights deliberate targeting of civilians by insurgent groups.


169. Dr Herring's report  tells  us  that  the  targeted  violence  includes
    sectarian and intra-sectarian violence and violence based  on  conflict
    between political parties and ad hoc militia groups (8.10, 8.42, 21.14,
    21.ff). It is motivated  by  terrorist,  sectarian  considerations  and
    criminal activity (8.13).

170. Targeted violence also includes counterinsurgency attacks on  insurgent
    groups by the MNF-I and the  ISF.  The  total  of  MNF-I  personnel  is
    currently around 182,000. As regards MNF-I and ISF  targeted  violence,
    at para 5.11 Dr Herring states:

         "Neither the Coalition nor the GoI provide systematic  specific  or
         aggregate data on their attacks.  The US Government  reported  that
         it quadrupled its rate of air strikes in the first nine  months  of
         2007, making 1,140, compared to 229 in all of 2006. IBC indicate at
         least 394 civilians confirmed in the media as killed in 2006 by  US
         forces with no other combatants involved, and at least 669 in 2007,
         mainly from air strikes leaving at least 88 children dead in  2007.
         IBC collated news reports of 23 civilians killed by  US  forces  in
         the first two weeks of January 2008 (Appendix 4).  US  air  strikes
         continue in January 2008, such as the dropping of 40,000 pounds  of
         bombs on the town of Arab Jabour near Baghdad."

171. Dr Herring goes on to cite the  Global Policy Forum, a group of  around
    32 NGOs, which in a highly critical  report  summarised  the  risks  of
    death and serious injury from Coalition action  as  of  June  2007   by
    reference to the use of indiscriminate and especially injurious weapons
    (including napalm-type incendiary weapons, white phosphorous  munitions
    and cluster bombs); detention of tens of  thousands  without  trial  or
    charge in poor physical conditions for long periods and abuse,  torture
    and death of some of those prisoners; handing over of prisoners to  GoI
    forces despite serious violations of human  rights  in  Iraqi  prisons;
    attacks on cities  (including  Falluja,  al-Qaim,  Tal  Afar,  Samarra,
    Haditha) which cut off access to food,  water  and  medicine  and  with
    large-scale bombardment; permissive rules of engagement for US soldiers
    which prioritise US force protection, enabling them to fire  when  they
    suspect threat such as a vehicle travelling too close to  a  convoy  or
    due to its behaviour in  the  vicinity  of  checkpoints;  shootings  by
    private security contractors employed by the Coalition; atrocities such
    as the massacre, murder and/or  rape  by  US  soldiers  in  Haditha  in
    November 2005 and Mahmoudiya in  March  2006;  reconstruction  policies
    which  have  failed  to  act  sufficiently  against  fraud,  waste  and
    mismanagement among international and Iraqi contractors, so that Iraqis
    are denied vital resources at a time of great  need;  and  displacement
    due to such action and fear of such action indicated above.

    Indiscriminate violence
172. As Dr Herring's report notes (para 8.3), an important  feature  of  the
    violence in Iraq is that a  significant  proportion  affects  civilians
    disproportionately:

         "The majority of killings do not seem to be during combat  if  that
         is defined as both sides  shooting  simultaneously.  However,  one-
         sided  attacks  are  the  norm  for  what  is  variously   labelled
         unconventional, guerrilla, insurgent and counter-insurgent warfare,
         with terrorism (defined  as  political  violence  targeted  against
         civilians at least partly aimed at wider intimidation)  a  frequent
         tactic, as the irregular forces seek to avoid being targeted by the
         superior firepower of the regular forces."

173.  The  two  experts  and  the  major  reports  clearly   consider   that
    indiscriminate violence is still occurring at significant  levels.  The
    Report of the UN Secretary General of 15 October 2007 at para 36  notes
    that:

         "Ongoing violence in Iraq continues to pose human rights challenges
         to the Government of Iraq in its efforts  to  bring  under  control
         acts of violence motivated by terrorism,  sectarian  considerations
         and criminal activity. Iraqi law enforcement  personnel  are  under
         relentless attack by insurgent groups and  both  Sunni  and  Shiite
         armed groups have carried out  systematic  and  widespread  attacks
         against  civilians  through  suicide   bombings,   abductions   and
         extrajudicial executions, making no distinction  between  civilians
         and combatants..."(8.13)

174. These levels of indiscriminate  violence  have  fluctuated  but  remain
    high by reference to any date since 2004.  During  2006  the  US  State
    Department Report of 6 March 2007 noted a significant increase  in  the
    number of deliberate attacks by insurgent groups on Iraqi civilians  as
    well as counterinsurgency attacks by the MNF-I and the ISF. This report
    contains a subsection headed:  "g.Use  of  Excessive  Force  and  Other
    Abuses in Internal Conflicts" which states in part:

         "Militia and terrorist killings were the main source of violence in
         the country. Former regime elements, local  and  foreign  fighters,
         terrorists, and militias waged guerrilla warfare and  campaigns  of
         violence. According to government  data,  627  army  soldiers  were
         killed during the year. Bomb  attacks  by  Sunni  terrorist  groups
         against the government  and  densely  populated  Shi'a  areas  were
         common  and  frequently  prompted  retaliatory  attacks  by   Shi'a
         militias. Executions of  military-age  Sunni  males  became  common
         after the Samarra Mosque bombing.


         Government military and  police  forces  under  government  control
         killed armed fighters or persons planning or carrying out  violence
         against  civilian  or  military  targets.  According  to   personal
         accounts  and  numerous  press   reports,   these   forces   caused
         inadvertent  civilian  deaths.   Treatment   of   detainees   under
         government authority was poor in a number of cases.


         Insurgents and  terrorists  typically  targeted  individuals  whose
         death or disappearance  would  advance  their  cause,  particularly
         those  who  were  suspected  of  being  connected  to   government-
         affiliated  security  forces.   Bombings,   executions,   killings,
         kidnappings, shootings, and intimidation were  a  daily  occurrence
         throughout all regions and sectors of society. Al  Qa'ida  in  Iraq
         claimed responsibility for a  number  of  these  attacks,  although
         other insurgent and terrorist groups played a role."

175. In terms of overall  figures,  we  have  already  noted  the  need  for
    caution when analysing available statistics which  contain  significant
    variations and do not  lend  themselves  easily  to  precision.  As  Dr
    Rangwala has emphasised, allowance needs to be made for underreporting.
    According to him just over 50% of the deaths by violence in Iraq can be
    considered as indiscriminate in character. He states at para 23:

         "Overall, in the period up to March 2005, the IBC found that 53% of
         all civilian deaths by violence were caused by  explosive  devices:
         missiles,  suicide  attacks,  conventional  and  improvised  bombs,
         artillery and air strikes. This form of attack can  in  general  be
         considered as a  form  of  indiscriminate  violence,  in  that  the
         attacks are not designed to only cause harm to specific  person  or
         persons. No comparable study has been  conducted  since  2005,  but
         there is no reason to believe that the proportion of  Iraqis  being
         killed in an indiscriminate way will have changed since that  year.
         "

176. A related matter which the experts and background  materials  treat  as
    of  some  importance  (and  which  bears  directly  on  the  issue   of
    indiscriminate  violence)  concerns  the  extent  to  which  the  armed
    violence in Iraq has been  directed  against  military  as  opposed  to
    civilian targets. As one aspect of this, Dr Rangwala and Dr Herring  in
    their book, Iraq in Fragments had estimated that figures then available
    showed most attacks to be on Coalition forces. Dr Herring's  report  of
    21 January 2008, however, noted a change of view since their  book.  At
    para 8.6 he states:

         "Data that became available  after  the  publication  of  our  book
         (Paragraphs  5.7-5.8)  suggest  the  possibility  that   a   higher
         proportion  of  attacks  have  been  against  non-Coalition  actors
         (civilian  and  non-civilian)  than  we  had  reason   to   believe
         previously at the time of writing our book. The  data  have  always
         anyway shown complexity in that, even if the view that most attacks
         have been on Coalition forces,  most  casualties  have  been  Iraqi
         civilians  (Paragraphs  5.3-5.16)  as  they  are   generally   more
         vulnerable and grouped in larger numbers  (e.g.  in  markets)  than
         Coalition armed forces.  Furthermore,  all  sources  agree,  and  I
         concur, that the recognisably sectarian dimension  of  attacks  (as
         opposed to attacks on Coalition forces, or attacks  on  to  disrupt
         the  state  to  undermine   the   Coalition   project)    escalated
         dramatically during the first half of 2007 in Baghdad and the  rest
         of central Iraq and to a lesser extent in northern Iraq (Paragraphs
          6.17-6.40). In southern Iraq, even the  official  British  figures
         show that from the beginning of September to  the  end  of  October
         2007,  the number of attacks on Coalition  forces  had  dropped  by
         around 90%, while the number of attacks on Iraqi civilians remained
         roughly the same and about five times  those  on  Coalition  forces
         (Paragraph 6.51). On these UK Ministry of Defence attack data,  the
         conflict in southern Iraq is overwhelmingly civil armed conflict."

177. This is not easily reconcilable with Dr Herring's reference earlier  in
    the same  report  to  press  releases  from  mainly  Sunni  Arab  Iraqi
    insurgent groups in March 2007 stating  that  around  60%-80%  of  such
    attacks were directed against the Coalition Forces (see Appendix  2  of
    Dr Herring's report), but we are prepared nevertheless to  accept  that
    there has been such a change.

178.  Dr Herring's report and other sources highlight violence  directed  at
    civilian locations. For example the January 2008 COI Report  notes  the
    UNAMI report, dated 1 September -31 October 2006 as stating that:

         "Terrorist attacks and deliberate targeting of civilians  continued
         to take place in several parts of the country. The purpose  of  the
         targeted attacks has mainly been to eliminate prominent members  of
         a community, seek reprisal for  the  death  of  a  family  or  sect
         member, often sparking sectarian violence,  thus  perpetuating  the
         vicious cycle of revenge  killings.  Many  of  those  attacks  were
         random,  and  targeted  mosques,  crowded   markets,   restaurants,
         bakeries, bus stations and areas where labourers gather  to  search
         for work. Assassinations  by  drive-by  shootings  were  frequently
         recorded as well. Some of  these  attacks  appear  to  be  directed
         towards a specific group, for instance in  mixed  areas  where  the
         militants use the attacks to intimidate the members of the unwanted
         group so as to force them to leave." [39e] (p6) (8.24)

179. It  also  appears  that  the  position  of  civilians  varies  somewhat
    depending on the intensity of the sectarian violence in particular. The
    ICRC report covering 2006 entitled "Civilians Without  Protection:  the
    ever-worsening humanitarian crisis in Iraq", noted that:

          "The IBC details from December 2007 alone (Appendix 3)  show  that
         people are at risk from indiscriminate violence:
               . if they are in markets, schools, buses, their homes, police
                 stations,  detention  centres  and   in   transit   between
                 locations (effectively in most public or private places);
               . from drive  by  targeted  gunfire,  cross-fire,  'friendly'
                 fire, snipers, car  bombs,  truck  bombs,  roadside  bombs,
                 suicide  bombs,  mortars,  heavier  artillery,   unexploded
                 ordnance from cluster bombs, booby traps and air strikes;
               . from harm by insurgents, militias, criminals,  GoI  forces,
                 Coalition forces (conducting raids, protecting convoys  and
                 engaged in combat) and Turkish forces."

180. Having referred to the fact that an  estimated  11,220  civilians  were
    killed and a further 23,878 injured in 2007,  OCHA in a  December  2007
    update stated:

         "Civilians continue to suffer disproportionately in the climate  of
         violence, criminality and instability. Lack of distinction  between
         civilians  and  combatants  in  armed  security  operations  claims
         civilian victims, who in  addition  are  deliberately  targeted  by
         armed  groups  and   subjected   to   suicide   attacks,   targeted
         assassinations, abductions and extrajudicial killings. Targeting of
         civilians create a climate  of  fear  aimed  at  destabilising  and
         displacing civilian populations. The Human Rights Office  of  UNAMI
         reiterates  that  such  systematic  and  widespread   attacks   may
         constitute "crimes against humanity and violate the  laws  of  war,
         and their perpetrators are  subject  to  persecution  (UNAMI  Human
         Rights Report, 1 April -30 June 2007)".

     Indiscriminate violence and the GOI and MNF-I
181. It is clear that the background evidence read as a whole perceives  the
    majority of indiscriminate violence to emanate from  non-state  parties
    to the conflict and/or criminal elements. But it is not to  be  thought
    that all violence of this type has emanated solely from such  quarters.
    As Dr Rangwala emphasises, indiscriminate violence has been used by all
    major protagonists in the ongoing conflict (para 53).

182. The January 2008 COI Report at 10.75 states:

         "Whilst the UNAMI report, dated 1 September-31 October 2006, states
         that "Military  operations  by  MNF-I,  particularly  in  Al-Anbar,
         continued to cause severe suffering to  the  local  population  who
         also find  themselves  in  the  midst  of  cross-fire  among  rival
         insurgent and criminal groups and the security forces."...  UNHCR's
         August 2007 paper concurs "The armed conflict  between  the  Multi-
         National Forces (MNF)/ISF and the Sunni-led insurgency has resulted
         in civilian deaths,  destruction  of  property  and  displacement."
         ...".

183. There have been a number  of  incidents  of  abuse  of  detainees,  and
    deliberate killing of civilians by MNF-I forces, although  the  numbers
    are relatively small (10.76-10.82).  Private  security  companies  have
    also been implicated in human rights abuses (10.83-10.86).

184. Whilst, of course, the laws of armed conflict do not treat the  killing
    of civilians in  the  course  of  military  operations  as  necessarily
    illegitimate, it is clear that a significant number of  civilians  have
    been killed during military  operations  of  the  multinational  forces
    against insurgents or militia (8.29) and it may not be an  unreasonable
    inference that in some incidents (whether  or  not  intentionally)  the
    impact on civilian life has  been  disproportionate.  There  have  been
    large-scale military operations in all areas of Baghdad,  in  Al  Anbar
    Province in the eastern region and in Diyala, Wasit, Tamim and Salah Ad
    Dine provinces (8.36).

185. Dr Rangwala's report notes that since at least 2004 there has been  "no
    clear dividing line between the official security forces of  the  Iraqi
    state and the paramilitary forces of non-state actors" (para 6).   That
    view is supported by other sources. There are various reports (as noted
    by  the  January  2008  COI  Report)  that  the  ISF  have  experienced
    infiltration by militias and  criminal  gangs  and  political  parties,
    depending on the area in which they operate (10.02). The UNHCR advisory
    paper, dated 18 December 2006, noted that: "[the] Ministry of  Interior
    have been repeatedly accused of employing militia  members  who  commit
    gross human rights violations against those suspected of  belonging  to
    the insurgency."  (10.12). This concern was repeated in the August 2007
    UNHCR Guidelines document (10.14-10.16). The use by members of the  ISF
    of torture is said to be extensive  (10.50;  its  prevalence  has  been
    widely acknowledged as a major problem by Iraqi officials (10. 54). The
    ISF is said  to  be  responsible  for  "numerous  civilian  deaths  and
    casualties in Iraq" (10.60). Available figures as given by the IBC data
     estimated that civilian deaths  directly  attributable  to  US  forces
    totalled 669-756 in 2007.

186. Account must also be taken of the character of the military  activities
    of insurgents and other armed  groups  directed  at  the  multinational
    forces and the ISF. The targeting involved has often  been  essentially
    military: e.g. military bases and buildings associated  with  the  Iraq
    Government, attacks on  helicopters  (12.22).  Some  of  the  targeting
    appears to be part-military, part-governmental and part-civilian, as in
    the case of the frequent attacks by armed groups on  the  international
    zone (Green Zone). Checkpoints, police stations and recruitment centres
    are frequent targets (10.47). However, whilst figures  are  lacking  it
    can safely be assumed that a significant amount of  this  violence,  by
    virtue of the forms which it has taken, which has included e.g. summary
    executions, beheading of captured army and  police  personnel  (10.48),
    suicide bombings, torture and ill-treatment, has been and  is  contrary
    to IHL (12.01). 80-90% of Iraq's suicide bombings are thought  to  have
    been carried out by AQI (12.17). Car bombs, even when directed  against
    MNF-I/ISF/KRG military targets (and often the site is purely  civilian,
    being a mosque, shrine, church, bus station or other  public  gathering
    spot), tend to result in substantial civilian casualties (12.20).

187. The COI report also highlights the  fact  that  use  by  insurgents  of
    kidnapping and hostage taking continues to be a serious problem in Iraq
     (9.07-9.15), although it would seem that a significant  proportion  of
    such incidents are wholly if  not  entirely  the  work  of  opportunist
    criminal gangs.

              Kirkuk
188. With around 750,000 people,  Kirkuk  is  Iraq's  fourth  largest  city,
    behind Baghdad, Basra and Mosul. The fall of Saddam  saw  the  oil-rich
    region of  Kirkuk  (or  more  precisely  Taween  Province),  previously
    dominated by the Arabs and Turkomen, fall under the control of  Kurdish
    security forces. Taween Province is outside the KRG but, as Dr Rangwala
    notes, it has roughly equal numbers of Kurds and non-Kurds. The city of
    Kirkuk currently has a Kurdish minority of around 40%  (para  44).  The
    Kurdish parties have been encouraging the 'Arabisation Arabs' to  leave
    Kirkuk, sometimes through intimidation, and have also been  encouraging
    Kurds to move into the city. This is supported by the January 2008  COI
    report which notes that during 2006 nearly 100,000 Kurds  had  returned
    to Kirkuk (8.86). The city has become a  theatre  of  conflict  between
    various armed groups, including jihadis. The insistence of the Kurds in
    proceeding with the planned referendum on the region's status, bitterly
    proposed by the Arabs and Turkomen,  has  given  jihadis  a  permissive
    environment (8.90). As a  result  security  continues  to  be  unstable
    (8.92). The same COI report at para 8.91 states:

         "The UNHCR's Addendum to its August 2007 paper, published  December
         2007, stated that: "Various groups are vying for control  over  the
         disputed  territory,  in  particular  oil-rich  Kirkuk.  Extremists
         continue to stir sectarian violence  among  Arabs,  Kurds  and,  in
         areas such as Kirkuk and Tal Afar, Turkmen. Under pressure from the
         MNF-I/ISF and tribal alliances in Baghdad, Al-Anbar, and  parts  of
         Babel, Diyala and Salah Al-Din Governorates, AQI has  regrouped  in
         areas of Kirkuk and Ninewa Governorates. Violence  in  these  areas
         has been increasing. On 5 November 2007, the MNF-I/ISF  launched  a
         major  security  operation  ('Operation  Iron   Hammer')   in   the
         Governorates of Ninewa, Kirkuk, Salah Al-Din and Diyala to  counter
         Al-Qa'eda there."...  Car  bombings,  suicide  attacks,  shootings,
         targeted kidnappings and assassinations  of  government  officials,
         politicians, religious and  tribal  figures,  members  of  minority
         groups,  journalists,  persons  affiliated  with   the   MNF-I/ISF,
         humanitarian workers, and members of the former regime all occur at
         a regular frequency in Kirkurk. ... Civilian deaths as a result  of
         MNF-I/ISF military offences and raid  and  search  operations  have
         also been reported in Kirkurk...."

189. Explaining the need to  set  the  analysis  of  Kirkuk  in  a  national
    context, Dr Herring at para 6.6 of his report states:

         "The level of violence in Kirkuk, as captured for  example  in  DoD
         attack data, increased in 2007 in comparison with 2005 and 2006 and
         has remained roughly at that raised level. Furthermore, it  is  not
         generally appreciated that, per capita, Kirkuk has been  among  the
         most dangerous provinces in Iraq. Violence in  Kirkuk  is  strongly
         influenced by politics at the national level over its status and in
         relation to the movement of insurgents from central  Iraq  as  they
         seek to evade attack."

190. Having analysed the latest position as regards the proposed  referendum
    on the final status of Kirkuk  provided  for  in  article  58  of   the
    Transitional Administrative Law (TAL), now postponed until  June  2008,
    Dr Herring goes on to conclude that:

         "The current level of violence is high, is likely to continue as  a
         result of Kirkuk's unresolved status and ironically  is  likely  to
         escalate massively should an effort be made to resolve its  status"
         (para 6.14).

191. Dr Herring adds (para 7.14) that the surge has  had  little  impact  on
Kirkuk:

         "There was a search of Kirkuk  in  November  2007  by  3,500  Iraqi
         soldiers and hundreds of US soldiers for suspected insurgents,  but
         that has not stopped the violence (Appendices 3, 4). Similarly, the
         US Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRT), doubled as  part  of  the
         surge has had only modest goals for economic reconstruction, mainly
         in training. Kirkuk's provincial council was  limited  in  what  it
         could do because it has been boycotted  by  its  Arab  and  Turkmen
         members since autumn 2006, although the Kirkuk PRT brokered an  end
         to that boycott a year  later  and  brokered  the  deal  among  the
         political, ethnic and tribal groups to delay the referendum.

    His report contains appendices  3 and 4 listing violent civilian deaths
    reported in the media and collated by Iraq  Body  Count,  covering  the
    last quarter of 2007 and early 2008. Both give incidents  by  reference
    to areas of Iraq including Kirkuk. In his appendix 5, taken from the US
    Department of Defence figures on average  daily  attacks  by  Province,
    July-November 2007, Tamim Province is fifth in terms of rate of average
    attacks per day; a note to the bar chart states  that  the  first  four
    provinces  (Baghdad,  Salah  ad   Din,   Ninewa   and   Diyala)   "have
    approximately 42%  of  the  population  but  account  for  80%  of  all
    attacks".


192. The January 2008 COI Report states that Kirkuk is one of the  areas  in
    which kidnappings were  reported  to  occur  particularly  (along  with
    Baghdad, Ninewa and Basrah governorates) (9.15).

193. The same report at 22.05 notes that the USSD report 2006 records:

         "During the year [2006], discrimination against  ethnic  minorities
         was a problem. There were numerous reports of  Kurdish  authorities
         discriminating against minorities in the North, including  Turkmen,
         Arabs,  Christians,  and  Shabak.  According  to   these   reports,
         authorities denied services to some villages,  arrested  minorities
         without due process and took  them  to  undisclosed  locations  for
         detention, and pressured minority schools to teach in  the  Kurdish
         language. Ethnic and  religious  minorities  in  Kirkuk  frequently
         charged that Kurdish security forces targeted Arabs,  Turkmen,  and
         Shabak." ...."

194. Dr Rangwala states that according to the  International  Crisis  Group,
    the Kurdish parties who control the security of the city  have  staffed
    the security and intelligence forces with  members  of  their  militias
    (the Peshmerga) and (in his words) "have shown themselves to engage  in
    persistent  acts  of  discrimination  and  persecution  of   the   Arab
    population" (para 46).

195. At para 47 of his report Dr Rangwala notes that  according  to  the  US
    Department of Defence there was an average of six violent  attacks  per
    day by 'enemy' actors in Tamin governorate in the period from  July  to
    November 2007. "There is", he states, "persistent violence on a  medium
    scale, which occasionally becomes severe". He  predicts  that  violence
    will escalate  considerably  as  the  date  of  the  referendum  -  now
    scheduled for June 2008  -  approaches.

196. Dr Herring's assessment of the risk  to  the  appellant  (merely  as  a
    civilian) arising from the violence is stated at para 10.5 as follows:

         "Detail  of  the  steady  stream  of  indiscriminate  and  targeted
         violence in  Kirkuk  is  set  out  above  ....  The  most  commonly
         identified media-confirmed means of killing has been  gunshot  with
         car bombs, suicide bombs, roadside bombs and US raids also  killing
         people in Kirkuk in the last three months. In other words, there is
         a  substantial  risk  in  Kirkuk   of   death   and   injury   from
         indiscriminate as well as targeted violence to all civilians there.
         In Kirkuk province 80-90% were unable to state that they felt  safe
         outside of their own neighbourhood  and  yet  such  travel  can  be
         required for basic things such as employment: 20-30% were unable to
         say they felt safe even in their own neighbourhood ...."


Our decision on the factual issues

    The expert reports
197. Before  turning  to  evaluate  the  situation  in  the  light  of  this
    evidence, we need to comment briefly on the two experts,  Drs  Rangwala
    and Herring. Theirs were not the only expert reports or opinions we had
    in the materials, e.g. there was the oral  evidence  of  Dr  Dodge  and
    Professor Zubaida before the House of Commons Defence Committee in June
    2007, but it was only the former two  who  produced  reports  for  this
    hearing. Their credentials as authoritative writers and commentators on
    Iraq  are  impressive.  Although  we  considered   we   should   attach
    considerable  weight  to  their  opinions,  we  had  several  important
    reservations.

198. To explain our reservations, we begin  by  pointing  out  that  neither
    purports  to  have  any  expertise  in  matters  of  asylum-related  or
    international law. It would not appear, for example, that when in their
    co-authored book, Iraq in Fragments, 2006, they state that the conflict
    in Iraq "has remained primarily an international  conflict  throughout"
    (see Dr Herring's report, para 8.6), they do not mean to assert that as
    a  matter  of  IHL  law  Iraq  (post-June  2004)  is  in  a  state   of
    international armed conflict; or, if they do, in their reports  neither
    of them  has given any reasons for classifying it as such.

199.  This (understandable) feature of their reports is of  some  importance
    in relation to the  their own  assessments  of  risks  in  Iraq,  which
    sometimes use the same or similar terms as are used in actual decision-
    making on asylum and asylum-related claims. For  example,  Dr  Rangwala
    concludes that the appellant (and also Mr HH) "would be at serious risk
    of attack if they were to be returned to Iraq  wherever  they  were  to
    relocate" (para 53). At para 46 he states that the  Peshmerga-dominated
    security forces in Kirkuk city "have  shown  themselves  to  engage  in
    persistent  acts  of  discrimination  and  persecution  of   the   Arab
    population". Dr Herring's report refers at para 5.26 to Iraqi civilians
    being at "serious risk of death,  injury  and  other  serious  harm  in
    private or public places due to the use of indiscriminate  violence  as
    well as persecution by a wide range of parties  using  a  multitude  of
    means". At para  3.10  he  says  there  are  "substantial  grounds  for
    thinking that [the appellant] would be at real risk from indiscriminate
    violence, targeted violence and other serious harm (most notably  human
    rights abuses and health risk) were he to be returned to Iraq."

200. Two aspects of the use they make of such language concern  us.  One  is
    that whatever meaning they attach to terms such as "serious  risk"  and
    "persecution" (particularly the latter term) their reports  contain  no
    guidance or reference point for what those  terms  might  mean  and  it
    would appear they use them in a very loose  fashion.  For  example,  Dr
    Rangwala's statement at para 46 concerning  the  "persecution"  of  the
    Arab population of Kirkuk city  (as  distinct  from  discrimination  to
    which they are subjected) is  sourced  to  two  articles  only:  one  a
    relatively obscure article dated December 2005; the other a  July  2006
    International Crisis Group (ICG) piece dated 18 July 2006. Surprisingly
    the footnote does not refer to the more recent and more detailed report
    by the ICG, "Iraq and the Kurds: Resolving the Kirkuk Crisis",  No  64,
    19 April 2007, which says nothing to  support  Dr  Rangwala's  sweeping
    view: see e.g. the analysis of the treatment of the Wafadin at pp  2-4.
    Dr Rangwala's statement is not echoed  in  any  of  the  major  country
    reports.  Dr Herring's supplementary report  at  2.16  states  that  he
    considers that persons of mixed Arab/Kurdish ethnicity  currently  face
    "persecution" in Baghdad, yet the documentation he refers to in support
    relates to persons who have entered mixed  marriages,  not  persons  of
    mixed  ethnicity;  and  his  reasoning  appears  to  rely   unduly   on
    speculation as to how authorities and other  actors  in  Baghdad  would
    perceive someone of mixed ethnicity from Kirkuk in view of the upcoming
    referendum on  Kirkuk's  future  status.  So  in  comparison  with  the
    evidence  cited  in  support,  there  is  sometimes  looseness  in  the
    terminology used.

201. The other aspect is  that  whilst  we  take  fully  into  account  such
    assessments, we have to decide the issues before us by reference to the
    legal criteria contained in the relevant legal texts. We must  bear  in
    mind case law which highlights that the requisite  thresholds  to  show
    the relevant harm are high.

202. The terminology of their reports posed  a  particular  problem  for  us
    when deciding what weight to  give  to  their  opinions  regarding  the
    nature and extent of indiscriminate violence in Iraq and Kirkuk.   Both
    refer  to  two  main  types  of  violence:  "targeted   violence"   and
    "indiscriminate violence" neither defining what  they  mean  by  either
    term.  For the most part they seem to adopt an IHL meaning to the  term
    "indiscriminate violence": see e.g. what Dr Rangwala states at para  15
    of his report and what Dr Herring states at  para  2.11  and  para  4.3
    (fourth bullet point) of his report. But, consistent with that, some of
    what they identify as "targeted violence" appears to  include  fighting
    between combatants which is not obviously connected with indiscriminate
    violence contrary to the rules of armed conflict. Further, contrary  to
    Dr Rangwala's own opinion as expressed in para 53 of his  report,  some
    of what he (and Dr Herring) mean by "indiscriminate  violence"  appears
    to relate to methods and means  of  warfare  (e.g.  artillery  and  air
    strikes)  which  are  not  in  themselves  indiscriminate,  even   when
    confining matters to the effects  on  the  civilian  population.  Their
    usage of this term also appears to include  some  violence  unconnected
    with the conduct of military/combatant operations. In addition, despite
    referring to these two types of violence in tandem,  neither  of  their
    reports  clearly  analyses  the  nature  and  contents  of  each   type
    separately.

203. Doubtless this in part mirrors the approach of some of  their  sources:
    e.g. the Report of the UN Secretary-General of 14 January  2008  states
    at para 53 that "[i]ndiscriminate and targeted  violence  continued  to
    claim civilian victims, even though the  overall  numbers  of  reported
    attacks and casualties had  declined".  In  part  too  it  may  reflect
    difficulties inherent  in  trying  to  distinguish,  on  the  basis  of
    imperfectly sourced and categorised data, legitimate  and  illegitimate
    (in IHL terms) uses of violence in Iraq. For example, the  IBC  figures
    of "violent civilian deaths" (emphasis added) covering the last quarter
    of  2007  show  a  very  significant  number  of  attacks/killings   of
    policemen, who are formally part of the GoI and the ISF. There is  also
    mention of killings of security officers and Awakening Council members.
    But the result of the experts' lack of  clarity  about  terminology  is
    that we cannot assume that what they mean by indiscriminate violence is
    the same as what is meant by applying IHL criteria. Given  our  earlier
    conclusion that in applying Article 15(c) the  focus  must  be  on  the
    nature of extent of indiscriminate violence in the IHL meaning of  that
    term, the experts' use of different meanings and distinctions does  not
    assist.

    General remarks
204.  Our  decision  that  in  the  context  of  Article  15(c)  the  phrase
    "international or internal armed conflict" is to be given  an  IHL  law
    meaning simplifies our task considerably. During the hearing  Mr  Saini
    stated that the Secretary of State accepted that for IHL purposes  Iraq
    was in a situation of internal  armed  conflict,  that  this  situation
    embraced the whole territory of the state of Iraq, including  the  KRG,
    and that the GOI was one of the parties to the  conflict.  It  follows,
    therefore, since we have rejected his contention that we should apply a
    different  "pragmatic"  approach  to  the  notion  of  "internal  armed
    conflict", that we can proceed on the basis that Iraq is in a state  of
    internal armed conflict. We can also treat  the  Secretary  of  State's
    concession as rendering superfluous any response by us to  her  request
    that we make clear that our decision  on  this  matter  has  "no  wider
    ramifications".

205. As a result of the respondent's concession we can treat  all  nationals
    of Iraq who have  applied  for  international  protection  as  able  to
    satisfy the requirement of Article 15(c) that they  face  return  to  a
    country in which there are "situations of ...internal armed  conflict".
    Given the approach taken by IHL to  the  territorial  and  geographical
    application of the law governing internal armed conflicts, it is  clear
    from the evidence before us that  all  parts  of  Iraq  are  under  the
    control of one of the parties to the armed  conflict  there:  the  vast
    majority of it is under the  control  of  the  Government  (central  or
    devolved). The remaining parts not under Government control  are  under
    the control of local armed groups who are also parties to the conflict.
    (The position in Iraq is not, therefore, like  that  in  Somalia  where
    large northern parts of the state (Somaliland and Puntland)  appear  to
    be under the control of governments who are not party to  the  internal
    armed conflict(s) taking place in southern Somalia).   Neither  the  US
    nor Iraq are State Parties to the 1997 Additional Protocol II, so  that
    in relation to "internal armed conflict", the only applicable rules are
    those of common Article 3 together  with  others  which  form  part  of
    customary international law.


    Conclusions on indiscriminate violence in Iraq
206. In order to qualify under Article 15(c) a claimant must  also  show  he
    faces a serious and  individual  threat  by  reason  of  indiscriminate
    violence in situations of armed conflict. Our principal focus  must  be
    whether he faces such serious harm in his or her  home  area.  However,
    since  being  able  to  evaluate  the  situation  there   requires   an
    understanding of the situation in the country as a whole, it is salient
    that we set our several general conclusions  about  Iraq  as  a  whole.
    Drawing  together  the  various  strands  we  consider  that   although
    indiscriminate violence is indisputably at high  levels  in  Iraq,  the
    evidence  does not show that it poses  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
    (within the meaning of Article  15(c))  to  civilians  in  general.  In
    reaching that view we  take  into  account  the  following  factors  in
    particular. First, indiscriminate violence is only part of the  overall
    violence which  afflicts  Iraq;  it  does  not  include,  for  example,
    targeted violence which combatants direct against each other  which  is
    not contrary to IHL norms. Nor does it include criminal violence except
    where that is closely related to the armed conflict.

207. We emphasise the importance of properly  approaching  the  question  of
    the extent of indiscriminate violence because it  lies  behind  why  we
    find ourselves unable to accept  Dr Herring's evidence that over 50% of
    the deaths by violence in Iraq can be considered as  indiscriminate  in
    character (para 23 of his report). Contrary to what he states, there is
    nothing in international law which makes armed violence in the form  of
    "... missiles ... conventional bombs, artillery  and  air  strikes"  as
    such indiscriminate. Whether the attacks using these means are  or  are
    not sufficiently (in  his  words)  "designed  to  only  cause  harm  to
    specific persons" is a question of fact; it cannot be deduced from  the
    mere fact that such means have been employed. The means  mentioned  are
    in this respect unlike chemical or biological weapons or cluster bombs,
    which are regarded by IHL as  inherently  indiscriminate.  Further,  at
    least as regards the use of "missiles ... conventional bombs, artillery
    and air strikes" by the MNF-I, we have already noted that  the  January
    2008 COI report states available figures as given by the IBC  data   as
    estimating civilian deaths directly attributable to US forces to  total
    669-756 in 2007.

208. Secondly, without setting any particular store by the recent  reduction
    (since mid-2007) in the levels of violence and the numbers of  civilian
    casualties (because they may prove temporary), we do not consider  that
    the levels of indiscriminate violence are at significantly high  levels
    throughout Iraq. As already noted, the evidence in June 2006  was  that
    almost 80% of civilian deaths occurred in twelve  cities  and  we  have
    seen no evidence which suggests that this pattern has been the  subject
    of any major change. Thirdly, even in the cities where  the  levels  of
    indiscriminate violence are highest (including Baghdad),  the  evidence
    does not demonstrate that it is on such a scale or at such a  level  of
    frequency that it could be said that merely being there as  a  civilian
    places one at real risk of suffering serious harm caused by the  threat
    of such violence.

209. In our view much  the  same  considerations  as  led  the  Tribunal  in
    previous country guidance cases,  for  instance,  NS  (Iraq:  perceived
    collaborator: relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046,  to  decide  that
    for the purposes of the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR  more  is
    needed to show qualifying harm over and above being merely a  civilian,
    apply here, subject only to giving effect to  the  different  character
    of the Article  15(c)  test  (which  treats  as  a  qualifying  harm  a
    ("serious and individual) threat" caused by "indiscriminate violence").
    On the evidence before us, however, there is one particular  aspect  of
    the recent evidence which requires specific  attention.  This  concerns
    the number of returns that have been taking place to Iraq by "refugees"
    or displaced persons.  The parties expressed opposed  views  about  its
    significance.

          The significance of returns of displaced persons/"refugees"
210. That there have been significant numbers of returns (side-by-side  with
    significant numbers of continuing displacements) is  evident  from  the
    UNHCR December 2007 Addendum note which at para 7(b) states:

         "Although uncertainty about the number of returnees to Central Iraq
         exists, there have been reports that many IDPs  and  refugees  have
         returned to their former place or area of residence,  primarily  to
         Baghdad [a footnote refers to Prime Minister Al-Maliki's  reference
         to 7,000 families having  returned  to  Baghdad].  The  absence  of
         accurate baseline data and the lack of monitoring, information  and
         reporting about the routes of return and areas of  return  make  it
         extremely difficulty to  establish  the  extent  to  which  current
         movements  have  been  safe,  dignified  or  voluntary  [a  further
         footnote here notes that according to the MoDM  the  Government  of
         Iraq, some 3,460 IDP families  have  returned  to  Baghdad  between
         February and November  2007...and  a  further  6,000  families  are
         awaiting registration. Concerning refugees, the MoDM believes  that
         approximately 30,000 families have returned to Syria].


         Despite notable improvements in the security situation in the  past
         few months, the ongoing conflict in many parts of the  country  and
         the fluctuating levels of violence raise questions about the safety
         of  the  current  returns  and  their  sustainability.  The   Iraqi
         government and the UN  are  stepping  up  efforts  to  address  the
         immediate needs of these returnee families,  given  the  prevailing
         situation in Iraq."

211. We have no reason to query UNHCR's assessment and we  are  prepared  to
    accept that not all of these returns can be assumed  to  be  voluntary,
    given the evidence relating for example to the pressures placed by  the
    Syrian authorities on Iraqis who had fled  to  that  country.  However,
    what is equally clear is that UNHCR,  along  with  other  international
    agencies, is assisting in Iraq in programmes devoted to assisting  such
    returnees and that  there  has  been  no  UNHCR  statement  (except  in
    relation to Palestinian refugees) suggesting  or  declaring  that  such
    persons should be considered as having returned to face persecution  or
    serious harm. If such persons were facing persecution or  serious  harm
    on return we would have expected that UNHCR would have  been  the  very
    first body to have said so, for otherwise they would be acting contrary
    to their own mandate and contrary to their supervisory responsibilities
    under both their own Statute and the Refugee Convention.  Hence in  our
    view such evidence is a  significant  consideration  in  examining  the
    likely situation under Article 15 of persons facing return to Iraq.

     Violence on the basis of gender
212. Dr Herring's report also identified the issue of the  extent  to  which
    the risk to ordinary civilians was higher for adult males. At para 10.2
    he states:

         "Males face vastly higher risk of death and  injury  from  violence
         and human rights  abuses  related  to  the  armed  conflict.  While
         systematic data are not available on this, some  illustrative  data
         are available. According to the official Iraqi data gathered by the
         UN (Paragraph 5.12), out of 36,185 Iraqi civilians wounded  in  the
         violence in 2007, 33,684 were adult males, a ratio of 11 to  1  for
         adult males compared with adult women and children of  both  sexes.
         According to Hamit Dardagan of IBC, adult civilian males are vastly
         more likely than adult civilian women to be killed violently due to
         the fact that they tend be in public places  much  more  often  and
         also  are  targeted  specifically  as  potential  combatants.  This
         drastically different rate of violent  death  is  confirmed  in  my
         trawl IBC data for the first two weeks of 2008 (Appendix 4). On the
         basis  only  of  the  cases  where  the  individual  is  explicitly
         identified as an adult  male  or  female,  the  civilians  reported
         killed violently were 38 male and 6 female, a ratio  of  6:1.  This
         ratio sets aside even those cases where the  person  occupying  the
         position was not specified as male but almost certainly  was  (e.g.
         Awakening Council member). The category of 'military-age male'  has
         been used as justification  by  Coalition  forces  for  killing  or
         detaining Iraqi adult males..."

213. Whilst we do not doubt these figures, we note first of  all  that  they
    cover both indiscriminate violence and violence used by  (predominantly
    male) combatants in the conduct of military operations; and,  secondly,
    that, even confining ourselves to male civilians, we do  not  see  that
    they  demonstrate  that  the  levels  and   extent   and   geographical
    distribution of indiscriminate violence are such as to give rise  to  a
    real risk of serious harm to persons in this subcategory generally.

    Conclusions regarding indiscriminate violence in Kirkuk
214. The background sources  do  not  always  differentiate  between  Kirkuk
    meaning the Province (Tamim) and Kirkuk meaning the city: for  example,
    some of Dr Herring's references to the levels of violence and danger in
    Kirkuk appear to relate to the Province.  But  taking  that  difficulty
    into account and considering the evidence relating to both the city and
    the Province of Kirkuk, we reach the following conclusions. First,  the
    level of incidents of violence in both Tamim  and  in  Kirkuk  city  is
    significantly lower than in Baghdad, Salah ad Din, Ninewa  and  Diyala:
    the latter provinces between them are considered to account for a  high
    percentage of attacks in Iraq (possibly as high as 80% if one takes  US
    Department of Defence Figures). By contrast, Dr  Rangwala  at  para  47
    found the violence there "persistent ... on a medium scale"  and  noted
    that according to the US Department of Defence there was an average  of
    six violent attacks per day by 'enemy' actors in Tamin  governorate  in
    the period from July to November 2007. Of course that information  only
    relates to violence by insurgents, but, even so, we do not consider  it
    a striking figure relative to the size  of  population.   Secondly,  we
    must bear in mind (as with Iraq as a whole) that not all  the  violence
    taking place in Tamim and Kirkuk city (or likely to take  place  there)
    is comprised of indiscriminate  violence:  some  is  targeted  violence
    between different armed groups, not all of which is  indiscriminate  in
    nature. Thirdly, we are not persuaded that the levels of indiscriminate
    violence occurring in that province and that city, in  the  context  of
    the conduct of fighting between combatants, is  widespread  or  can  be
    described as generally happening.

215. That, we accept, is contrary to the opinion of Dr Herring whose  report
    appears to consider that even leaving to one side targeted violence and
    confining  oneself  to  the  risk  from  indiscriminate  violence,  the
    appellant, just by virtue of being a civilian in the province  or  city
    of Kirkuk, would be at risk. At para 3.10 he states:

         "Once in Kirkuk [the appellant] would be  at  substantial  risk  of
         kidnap, arbitrary detention, torture or death  from  indiscriminate
         violence by MNF-I, GoI, insurgent and criminal groups ... ".


216.  However,  this  assessment   appears   to   aggregate   targeted   and
    indiscriminate violence and, in any event,  we  have  to  consider  the
    evidence before us as  a  whole,  including  the  UNHCR  December  2007
    Addendum at pp.68-7 and those items contained  in  his  own  appendices
    regarding attacks and incidents in recent months. We have also to  bear
    in mind  the size of the civilian population of the  Province  and  the
    city of  Kirkuk  (the  latter  whose  population  is  around  750,000).
    Considering matters  thus,  we  do  not  find  that  the  incidents  of
    indiscriminate violence can be said to be widespread or  as  forming  a
    consistent pattern.

217. In reaching the above  conclusions  we  have  taken  into  account  the
    experts' opinion that the forthcoming  (postponed)  referendum  on  the
    future of Kirkuk is likely to lead to a serious worsening of the  armed
    conflict in the Province and city. Whilst we  are  prepared  to  accept
    that this factor is causing and may cause increased levels of  violence
    - and indiscriminate violence  - in the city in the next period, we  do
    not find that the evidence as a  whole  shows  that  such  levels  will
    result in indiscriminate violence causing a real risk for the  civilian
    population of Kirkuk (province or city) as a whole.  Hence an appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of Article 15(c) merely by establishing he
    is a civilian whose home area is Kirkuk (province or city). Nor  do  we
    find the evidence to establish that a real risk would arise in the case
    of (Sunni) Arab civilians in Kirkuk or Kurdish civilians in Kirkuk.

    Return via Baghdad
218.  We do not consider that the facts of this case require us to make  any
    findings on the issue of the safety of internal travel within Iraq. The
    appellant is from Kirkuk. The Secretary of State has indicated  that  -
    if and when returned - the appellant will be returned via Baghdad.  She
    has also confirmed that currently no  involuntary  returns  are  taking
    place to Baghdad. However, she has made no removal  directions  against
    the appellant as yet and in our  view  the  route  of  travel  (in  the
    appellant's case, from Baghdad to Kirkuk) is properly to be regarded as
    a contingent factor outside  our  jurisdiction  when  deciding  if  the
    appellant faces a real risk of serious  harm  on  return:  see  AG  and
    others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1342.  Whilst we recognise that  in  that  case  Hooper  LJ  noted  the
    desirability of the Tribunal giving its opinion on such matters in  the
    context of country guidance, we do not consider that he  intended  that
    such opinion should be given in all  circumstances.  We  bear  in  mind
    also, to paraphrase Hooper LJ's comment at para 15 of the same judgment
    that "a week is not only a long time in politics but it is also a  long
    time in the life of a country as sad and war torn as [Iraq]".  Further,
    although we did have evidence specific to this issue, most notably  the
    detailed supplementary report from Dr  Herring,  the  parties  did  not
    address the issue specifically in their skeleton  arguments  and  their
    submissions during the hearing treated it as an  incidental  issue.  We
    would add that we do not take Mr Husain to have suggested that  on  any
    return to Baghdad the GoI authorities would consider that the appellant
    was of adverse interest simply because he  was  of  mixed  Arab/Kurdish
    ethnicity and from Kirkuk. In any event,  the  appellant's  asylum  and
    Article 3 grounds in this case have fallen away and so  risk  from  the
    authorities at the point of return in Baghdad would only  be  relevant,
    in terms of obiter comment from us, in the context of deciding  whether
    a returning civilian in transit from Baghdad to  Kirkuk  would  face  a
    serious and individual threat by reason of indiscriminate violence.

    Internal relocation
219. It is unnecessary for us to consider  whether  the  appellant  in  this
    case would have a viable internal  relocation  alternative  because  we
    have not found he faces a real risk of serious harm in his home area.

220. In the light of our earlier analysis of the law  (see  paras  142-143),
    we would only add this. It has been conceded by the respondent that for
    IHL purposes the nature of the internal armed conflict in Iraq is  such
    that it exists throughout the whole territory of the  state,  including
    the KRG. It follows in our view that an Iraq national who is  found  to
    face a real risk of serious  harm  in  his  home  area  of  Central  or
    Southern Iraq would be entitled to contend that the KRG would not be  a
    safe place of internal protection (relocation) because of the existence
    of such an internal armed conflict. Whether,  however,  such  a  person
    could also show that in the KRG there is  indiscriminate  violence  and
    that he or she as a civilian faces a serious and individual  threat  to
    his or her life or person as a result, will depend  on  the  particular
    circumstances of the case.

The Appellant's appeal: conclusions

221. As noted earlier, the only issue before us in  the  appellant's  appeal
    is whether he is eligible for subsidiary protection under Article 15(c)
    (humanitarian protection under para 339C(iv)) by virtue  of  fearing  a
    real risk of a "serious and individual threat to [his] life  or  person
    by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international  or
    internal armed conflict".  As noted earlier, the appellant's asylum and
    human rights grounds of appeal have already been rejected.  Given  also
    that the appellant has been found not credible, his position stands  to
    be assessed solely on the basis that he is a  civilian,  who  is  male,
    from Kirkuk of mixed (Arab/Kurdish) ethnicity who (in  the  Immigration
    Judge's words, " might may have faced dangerous and violent situations"
    and [had] "members of his family or his acquaintances  [who]  may  well
    have been killed in the  general  military  and  civilian  upheaval  in
    Iraq".

222. Earlier we reached a finding that Iraq is in a  situation  of  internal
    armed conflict within the meaning of the  Directive,  informed  by  the
    respondent's concession that Iraq is in a situation of  internal  armed
    conflict within the meaning of IHL.

223. We also found that the situation in Iraq as a whole is  not  such  that
    merely being a civilian establishes that a person faces a "serious  and
    individual threat" to his or her "life or person".

224. From our earlier findings it will also be apparent that  the  appellant
    cannot succeed merely on the basis of being  an  Iraqi  civilian  whose
    home area is Kirkuk: the nature and level  of  indiscriminate  violence
    there is not sufficient to establish the requisite threat  set  out  in
    para 339C(iv). That is true of both males and females and of both Arabs
    and Kurds in Kirkuk.

225. It remains to consider whether the appellant is  nevertheless  entitled
    to succeed by virtue of his personal  history  and/or  characteristics.
    It seems to us that here we should begin by examining  the  appellant's
    situation at the time he left Kirkuk.  Leaving aside his claim to  have
    been threatened by insurgents (which has been found not  credible)  the
    appellant in his statement of 18 December 2006 made no mention of  any
    difficulties he faced as a result of his mixed ethnicity.  He described
    his  schooling  and  his  family  life   without   reference   to   any
    discrimination  on  the  basis  of  his  mixed  ethnicity.   The   only
    difficulties he mentioned arising out of his  work  as  a  taxi  driver
    related  to  the  general  incidence  of  "explosions   and   terrorist
    activities". It was not accepted that he worked  as  a  police  officer
    but, even on his own account regarding  this,  he  described  going  to
    cafes and markets in different areas of Kirkuk without mention  of  any
    incidents or difficulties.  In his oral evidence before the Immigration
    Judge he described "mix[ing] generally with  the  population  and  then
    report[ing] his findings to the police station in Almas".   Nowhere  in
    his screening interview, his statement, his grounds of appeal or in his
    oral evidence  at  the  hearing  is  there  any  mention  of  any  past
    difficulties arising out of his mixed ethnicity.  Nor has the appellant
    sought by way of a Rule 32(2) notice to say that, even though  he  made
    no mention of such  difficulties  in  the  past,  he  would  face  such
    difficulties now.

226. In our view these considerations point heavily  to  a  conclusion  that
    the appellant's own circumstances, past and present,  do  not  indicate
    that such difficulties would apply to him.

227. This assessment of the appellant's situation is disputed by  Mr  Husain
    and specific reliance is placed on the opinion of Dr  Herring  at  para
    10.5 headed "Insecurity in Kirkuk" that:

         "Presuming that [the appellant's] family have  not  come  to  harm,
         accepting that cannot  reasonably  be  taken  as  proof  that  [the
         appellant] would be safe or indeed that [his] family  are  or  will
         continue to be safe, as it implies  that  serious  harm  must  have
         occurred to them for it to be accepted that there is a serious risk
         of harm. This is not reasonable. If the issue is  substantial  risk
         of death or serious harm, then they are at risk and he would be  at
         risk, in Kirkuk. Detail of the steady stream of indiscriminate  and
         targeted violence in Kirkuk is set out above..."

228. In the previous paragraph (10.4) he had also highlighted risk arising
    to the appellant as a result of his mixed ethnicity:


         "Risk due to ethnicity. With an Arab father and Kurdish mother in a
         patriarchal society and  speaking  fluent  Arabic  but  not  fluent
         Kurdish,  [the appellant] would be most readily identifiable as  an
         Arab and would face  a  serious  risk  of  persecution  by  Kurdish
         actors. Arabs per se may be persecuted  as  potential  anti-Kurdish
         insurgents or by those seeking to secure a Kurdish  majority  ahead
         of the anticipated referendum on the future status of  Kirkuk.  The
         risk  of  harm  may  escalate  dramatically  in  Kirkuk  for   [the
         appellant]  due  to  the  dispute  over   its   unresolved   status
         (Paragraphs 6.6-6.21). Ironically, [the appellant] may also  be  at
         risk because of his mixed ethnicity. Ethnic conflicts  per  se  are
         focused on establishing and maintaining ethnic  purity  and  ethnic
         boundaries, and so someone  whose  identity  mixes  ethnicities  is
         automatically liable to be treated with suspicion by extremists  on
         either  side  of  the  ethnic  boundary.  Earlier  in  this  report
         (Paragraph 5.25), I detailed the vulnerability of Coalition and GoI
         electronic information management to abuse  that  would  facilitate
         such persecution."

229. Despite  Dr  Herring's  reference  in  para  10.5  to  the  appellant's
    individual and family circumstances, it seems to us that his  reasoning
    relies exclusively on the general insecurity in Kirkuk, not on anything
    specific to the appellant's individual family circumstances  there.  In
    our view the fact that the  appellant  made  no  mention  of  any  past
    difficulties faced by his family (apart from  those  at  the  hands  of
    insurgents,  which  were  found  not  credible)  is  a  very   relevant
    consideration in assessing the appellant's  current  situation  on  the
    assumption he is back with his  family  in  Kirkuk.   We  have  already
    rejected the view that for civilians in Kirkuk such  insecurity  is  in
    general sufficient to establish the requisite risk under Article 15(c).



230. As to Dr Herring's observations on the appellant's mixed ethnicity,  we
    note (in addition to the point that the appellant made  no  mention  of
    any  difficulties  arising  from  his  mixed  ethnicity  prior  to  his
    departure from Iraq) that his family also  has  residence  in  what  is
    described by Dr Herring as a Kurdish area of Kirkuk,  where  previously
    he had no  difficulties  and  where  it  can  be  assumed  he  will  be
    recognised on return as  a  former  inhabitant  (as  distinct  from  an
    outsider). On the appellant's own account (albeit this  was  not  found
    credible) he was offered and obtained employment at  the  local  police
    station, which is not easily squared with the view  that  he  would  be
    perceived as a potential anti-Kurdish insurgent.  We  would  next  note
    that Dr Herring's own language here  is  significantly  more  tentative
    than in other areas of his report: he refers more  than  once  to  what
    "may" be the case, rather than by reference  to  any  words  suggesting
    reasonable degree of likelihood.

231. The assertion by Dr Herring  that  persons  identifiable  as  Arabs  or
    Sunni Arabs would be "per se" at risk of persecution by virtue of being
    perceived as potential anti-Kurdish insurgents, is not supported by any
    references in the major country reports and, in  our  view,  is  unduly
    speculative. Whilst the background evidence (and  in  this  context  we
    consider that the 9 April 2007 ICG report mentioned at para  200  above
    is a particularly well-informed and balanced report) demonstrates  that
    such persons experience discrimination and that attempts to reverse the
    arabisation process have resulted in substantial amounts  of  violence,
    it falls well short of establishing that there is  generic  persecution
    or that Kirkuk Arabs generally have been fleeing from Kirkuk to  escape
    a threat of persecution. Insofar as it is an assertion  about  what  is
    foreseeable, we note that it envisages a threat  of  persecution  of  a
    very large proportion (indeed a majority) of the population of  Kirkuk.
    On the available evidence it is reasonably likely that there will be  a
    significant increase in levels of violence as a result of  the  pending
    referendum issue, but it is not reasonably likely that it will lead  to
    a major escalation in the  level  of  armed  conflict  there  or  cause
    threats of persecution of the kind predicted by Dr Herring.

232. For the above reasons we substitute a  decision  that  the  appellant's
    appeal be dismissed. Not only has he failed to show an asylum or  human
    rights basis for his claim but he has not shown that he is eligible for
    humanitarian protection.  He cannot succeed under Article 15(c) of  the
    Qualification Directive or under para 339C of the Immigration Rules.





Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Storey

























  APPENDIX I: LIST OF achedemic SOURCES BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL APPEAL NUMBER:
                                AA/14353/2006


|    |Circa 1997        |  |Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations    |
|    |                  |  |Law: Prof. C Greenwood QC, The           |
|    |                  |  |Development of International Humanitarian|
|    |                  |  |Law by the International Criminal        |
|    |                  |  |Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia       |
|    |January 2000      |  |Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts (pp. |
|    |                  |  |39-49) ,D Fleck                          |
|    |March 2001        |  |Michigan Guidelines on Nexus to a        |
|    |                  |  |Convention Ground  (para 17) - J         |
|    |                  |  |Hathaway                                 |
|    |2002              |  |Bruylant Brussels: Subsidiary protection |
|    |                  |  |of refugees in the European Union:       |
|    |                  |  |complementing the Geneva Convention?,-T  |
|    |                  |  |Spijkerboer                              |
|    |2004              |  |International and Comparative Law        |
|    |                  |  |Quarterly: Subsidiary Protection and     |
|    |                  |  |Primary Rights -(2004) 53, p.109, fn13 - |
|    |                  |  |R Piotrowicz & C van Eck                 |
|    |July 2004         |  |ECRE: Complimentary/Subsidiary Forms of  |
|    |                  |  |Protection in the EU Member States, An   |
|    |                  |  |Overview                                 |
|    |2005              |  |ICRC: J Henckaert and L  Doswald-Beck -  |
|    |                  |  |Customary International Humanitarian Law,|
|    |                  |  |Volume 1: Rules 15-18                    |
|    |2005              |  |"Subsidiary Protection under the EC      |
|    |                  |  |Qualification Directive" - C Costello    |
|    |2006              |  |European Asylum Law and its Relation to  |
|    |                  |  |International law, 2006 - Paragraphs     |
|    |                  |  |41-45, 721 - H Battjes                   |
|    |May 2006          |  |The Humanization of Humanitarian Law, T  |
|    |                  |  |Meron (94 AJIL 239, 260)                 |
|    |June 2006         |  |The European Union Qualification         |
|    |                  |  |Directive: The Creation of a Subsidiary  |
|    |                  |  |Protection Regime -, IARLJ/ILPA London   |
|    |                  |  |Conference, section 2.2, J McAdam. June  |
|    |                  |  |2006                                     |
|    |September 2006    |  |Essays on War in International Law (Pp.  |
|    |                  |  |72 - 98), C Greenwood                    |
|    |November 2006     |  |Convention Refugee Status and Subsidiary |
|    |                  |  |Protection Working Party First Report    |
|    |                  |  |(IARLJ 7th World Conference), J McAdam   |
|    |November 2006     |  |The Sixth Sir David Williams Lecture:    |
|    |                  |  |Lord Bingham, The Rule of Law, Cambridge |
|    |2007              |  |The Qualification Directive: Central     |
|    |                  |  |Themes, Problem Issues, and              |
|    |                  |  |Implementation in Selected Member States |
|    |                  |  |- K Zwaan (ed.)                          |
|    |22 March 2007     |  |The Refugee in International Law, 3rd    |
|    |                  |  |Edition -(pp. 126.9). G- Goodwin-Gill    |
|    |November 2007     |  |UNHCR: Asylum in the EU, A Study of the  |
|    |                  |  |Implementation of the Qualification      |
|    |                  |  |Directive (pp.67-82)                     |
|    |December 2007     |  |UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)|
|    |                  |  |Addendum: UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines |
|    |                  |  |for Assessing the International          |
|    |                  |  |Protection Needs of Iraqi Asylum-seekers |
|    |                  |  |(pp.7-8)                                 |
|    |January 2008      |  |UNHCR: Statement Subsidiary protection   |
|    |                  |  |under the EC Qualification Directive for |
|    |                  |  |people threatened by indiscriminate      |
|    |                  |  |violence.                                |







    APPENDIX II: LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL APPEAL
                            NUMBER: AA/14353/2006


|    |                  |  |Ancestery.com: 'Hamed' Name Meaning and  |
|    |                  |  |Origin                                   |
|    |                  |  |Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ):  |
|    |                  |  |Middle East and North Africa News Alerts,|
|    |                  |  |Letters, Reports, Country Summaries,     |
|    |                  |  |Archives.                                |
|    |                  |  |Correlates of war                        |
|    |                  |  |Extract AIT Practice Directions          |
|    |                  |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office:         |
|    |                  |  |Departmental Report 2006/07 - SP3        |
|    |                  |  |Preventing and resolving conflict through|
|    |                  |  |a strong international neighbourhood     |
|    |                  |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Overview|
|    |                  |  |of Human Rights in Iraq, see FCO Human   |
|    |                  |  |Rights Annual Report 2006 (pp. 66-77     |
|    |                  |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office:         |
|    |                  |  |Statement in response to ICRC report on  |
|    |                  |  |Civilians without Protection             |
|    |                  |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Iraq    |
|    |                  |  |neighbours Conference.                   |
|    |                  |  |Herring and Rangwala: Iraq in Fragments  |
|    |                  |  |(p.53)                                   |
|    |                  |  |House of Commons Foreign Affairs         |
|    |                  |  |Committee: Third Report Session 2006-07: |
|    |                  |  |Annual Report on Human Rights 2006       |
|    |                  |  |House of Commons Foreign Affairs         |
|    |                  |  |Committee: Eighth Report 2006 - 07: Iraq |
|    |                  |  |Home Office: '"Homicide" - Long-term     |
|    |                  |  |National Recorded Crime Trend'.          |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Body Count (IBC): Civilian Deaths.  |
|    |                  |  |On maxima and minima                     |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Body Count: 'Documented civilian    |
|    |                  |  |deaths from violence'                    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Coalition Casualties: Coalition     |
|    |                  |  |Casualty Count                           |
|    |                  |  |Middle East Transference: Iraq's         |
|    |                  |  |Governing Council                        |
|    |                  |  |Oxford Dictionary: Extracts - "War" and  |
|    |                  |  |"Zone"                                   |
|    |                  |  |Terrorism Knowledge Base (TKB): Memorial |
|    |                  |  |Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism|
|    |                  |  |(MIPT) - 'Group Profile - Mujahideen     |
|    |                  |  |Shura Council                            |
|    |                  |  |UK Border and Immigration Agency:        |
|    |                  |  |Immigration Rules Paragraph 339C         |
|    |                  |  |UNHCR: Iraq Situation Supplementary      |
|    |                  |  |Appeal                                   |
|    |                  |  |Wikipedia: Extract - Baron King          |
|    |                  |  |(Secretary of State of Defence)          |
|    |                  |  |Wikipedia: Extract - Bombing of Dresden  |
|    |                  |  |in World War II                          |
|    |Circa 2003        |  |Middle East Journal: 'The United States  |
|    |                  |  |and Shi'ite religious factions in post   |
|    |                  |  |Ba'thist Iraq'                           |
|    |7 April 2003      |  |Human Rights Watch: 'The war in Iraq and |
|    |                  |  |international humanitarian law:          |
|    |                  |  |frequently asked questions'              |
|    |25 August 2003    |  |International Crisis Group (ICG):        |
|    |                  |  |Governing Iraq (pp.10-12)                |
|    |11 December 2003  |  |Official Journal of the European         |
|    |                  |  |Communities: Opinion of the European     |
|    |                  |  |Parliament OJ C 300 E/25                 |
|    |13 December 2003  |  |Daily Star: 'Baghdad blast brings        |
|    |                  |  |sectarian divide to surface'             |
|    |Circa 2004        |  |ICRC: Annual Report 2004 'Iraq'          |
|    |Circa 2004        |  |Middle East Report: 'Castles built of    |
|    |                  |  |sand: U.S. governance and exit strategies|
|    |                  |  |in Iraq'                                 |
|    |7 January 2004    |  |Middle East Report Online: The Spectre of|
|    |                  |  |Sectarian and Ethnic Unrest in Iraq      |
|    |1 February 2004   |  |BBC News: 'Twin Blasts Slaughter Iraqi   |
|    |                  |  |Kurds'                                   |
|    |19 February 2004  |  |Al-Zaman                                 |
|    |7 March 2004      |  |Chicago Tribune: 'Ethnic strains imperil |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk: As Kurds stake a claim to their  |
|    |                  |  |former city, Arabs and Turkmens are ready|
|    |                  |  |to fight back'                           |
|    |8 March 2004      |  |The Coalition Provisional Authority: Law |
|    |                  |  |of Administration  for the State of Iraq |
|    |                  |  |for the Transitional Period              |
|    |10 March 2004     |  |The Times: 'Ethnic tension threaten to   |
|    |                  |  |erupt in oil-rich Kirkuk'                |
|    |18 March 2004     |  |Asia Times: 'Muqtada's powerful push for |
|    |                  |  |prominence'                              |
|    |8 April 2004      |  |International Crisis Group (ICG): Iraqi  |
|    |                  |  |Kurds: Towards a Historic Compromise?    |
|    |21 May 2004       |  |The Guardian: '"US Soldiers Started to   |
|    |                  |  |Shoot Us, One by One'"                   |
|    |24 May 2004       |  |CounterPunch: 'Open Season in Iraq: MAMs |
|    |                  |  |(Military-Age Males) are Back'           |
|    |4 June 2004       |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: 'A      |
|    |                  |  |survey of armed groups in Iraq'          |
|    |8 June 2004       |  |The Coalition Provisional Authority:     |
|    |                  |  |Letter from US Secretary of State Colin  |
|    |                  |  |Powell to the President of the Security  |
|    |                  |  |Council, 5 June 2004, annexed to Security|
|    |                  |  |Council Resolution 1546                  |
|    |14 June 2004      |  |Seattle PI: 'WMD? Iraq is Teeming with   |
|    |                  |  |Conventional Arms'                       |
|    |28 June 2004      |  |ICRC: Iraq post 28 June 2004: protecting |
|    |                  |  |persons deprived of freedom remains a    |
|    |                  |  |priority                                 |
|    |5 July 2004       |  |New Yorker: 'Home rule'                  |
|    |8 July 2004       |  |The Guardian: 'Oil Town Looks to Property|
|    |                  |  |Tribunal for Justice'                    |
|    |14 July 2004      |  |Knight Ridder Newspapers: 'Cleric's army |
|    |                  |  |quietly takes control'                   |
|    |August 2004       |  |Human Rights Watch: Claims in Conflict:  |
|    |                  |  |Reversing Ethnic Cleansing in Northern   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |6 September 2004  |  |Knight Ridder Newspapers: '7 U.S. marines|
|    |                  |  |killed in attack near Fallujah'          |
|    |9 September 2004  |  |The Economist: 'Iraq: is it getting      |
|    |                  |  |safer?'                                  |
|    |15 September 2004 |  |Associated Press: 'Kurdish exiles pouring|
|    |                  |  |back into northern Iraqi city they once  |
|    |                  |  |fled'                                    |
|    |18 September 2004 |  |Asia Times: US Bombing of its Brethren   |
|    |11 October 2004   |  |The Lancet: Mortality before and after   |
|    |                  |  |the 2003 invasion of Iraq: cluster sample|
|    |                  |  |survey - Roberts, Lafta, Doocy and       |
|    |                  |  |Roberts                                  |
|    |14 October 2004   |  |The Times: 'US troops poised to move     |
|    |                  |  |against desert town spared by war'       |
|    |27 October 2004   |  |ICRC: Iraq - indiscriminate violence     |
|    |                  |  |increases civilian distress              |
|    |17 November 2004  |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Written |
|    |                  |  |Ministerial Statement Responding to a    |
|    |                  |  |Lacent Study On Iraqi Casualty Figures   |
|    |18 November 2004  |  |The grant of Exceptional Leave to Remain |
|    |                  |  |(ELR) 211 to asylum applicants from      |
|    |                  |  |particular countries on a country basis  |
|    |                  |  |Hansard (Column 2049W)                   |
|    |20 November 2004  |  |The Lancet: 'Mortality before and after  |
|    |                  |  |2003 invasion of Iraq: Cluster Sample    |
|    |                  |  |Survey' - vol 364 no.9448 (pp. 1857-64)  |
|    |21 November 2004  |  |Karbala News: 'Shi'is are bought and sold|
|    |                  |  |in Latifiyah'                            |
|    |24 November 2004  |  |Financial Times: 'Iraq's Sunni accuse    |
|    |                  |  |Shia of selling out Islam'               |
|    |25 November 2004  |  |The Guardian: 'Insurgents Step up the    |
|    |                  |  |Battle for Mosul                         |
|    |16 December 2004  |  |London Review of Books: Diary - Charles  |
|    |                  |  |Glass (pp. 34-5                          |
|    |31 December 2004  |  |Karbala News: 'Participation of the      |
|    |                  |  |Sunnis in the government: a recorded     |
|    |                  |  |message'                                 |
|    |Circa 2005        |  |Freedom House: Women's Rights in the     |
|    |                  |  |Middles East and North Africa - 2005:    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |Circa 2005        |  |ICRC: Annual Report 2005 'Iraq'          |
|    |Circa 2005        |  |Iraq Body Count: 'A dossier of civilian  |
|    |                  |  |causalities, 2003-2005'                  |
|    |January 2005      |  |Human Rights Watch: 'The New Iraq?       |
|    |                  |  |Torture and ill-treatment of detainees in|
|    |                  |  |Iraqi custody'                           |
|    |January 2005      |  |Wikipedia: Iraqi Governorate Election    |
|    |                  |  |2005                                     |
|    |3 January 2005    |  |Alnajafnews.net: 'Why the Sunni Arabs are|
|    |                  |  |working to sabotage the Iraqi elections' |
|    |4 January 2005    |  |Times Online: 'Iraqi Insurgence Now      |
|    |                  |  |Outnumber Coalition Forces'              |
|    |25 January 2005   |  |Los Angeles Times: 'A loss of faith in   |
|    |                  |  |the city of Shiites'                     |
|    |2 March 2005      |  |International Crisis Group (ICG):        |
|    |                  |  |'Understanding Islam'                    |
|    |16 March 2005     |  |House of Commons Defence Committee:      |
|    |                  |  |'Iraq: An initial assessment of post     |
|    |                  |  |conflict operations', Sixth Report of    |
|    |                  |  |Session 2004-2005, Volume 1              |
|    |7 May 2005        |  |Washington Post: 'To the dismay of local |
|    |                  |  |Sunnis, Shiites arrive to police Ramadi' |
|    |23 May 2005       |  |Times: 'Fear of civil war grows as Shia  |
|    |                  |  |start to retaliate'                      |
|    |9 June 2005       |  |Council on Foreign Relations: 'Iraq:     |
|    |                  |  |Militia Groups'                          |
|    |20 June 2005      |  |Al-Mada: 'Karbala governor: the interior |
|    |                  |  |minister did not order the governorates  |
|    |                  |  |chief of police to stay in his post'     |
|    |22 June 2007      |  |McClatchy Washington Bureau: 'Chilling   |
|    |                  |  |Stories from the Mahdi Army'             |
|    |27 June 2005      |  |Los Angeles Times: 'Islamic law controls |
|    |                  |  |the street of Basra'                     |
|    |July 2005         |  |Ministry of Defence: Manual of the Law of|
|    |                  |  |Armed Conflict (pp.27-33, 381-408)       |
|    |5 July 2005       |  |The New York Times: 'One by one, killing |
|    |                  |  |off of Sunnis'                           |
|    |8 July 2005       |  |The New York Times: 'Shiite theocracy    |
|    |                  |  |takes hold in Iraqi oil city'            |
|    |15 July 2005      |  |Daily Telegraph: 'British keep out of    |
|    |                  |  |Basra's lethal Islamic take-over'        |
|    |20 July 2005      |  |House of Commons Defence Committee:      |
|    |                  |  |'Iraq: an initial assessment of post     |
|    |                  |  |conflict operations: government response |
|    |                  |  |to the Committee's Sixth Report of       |
|    |                  |  |session 2004-2005', First Special report |
|    |                  |  |of session 2005-2006                     |
|    |1 August 2005     |  |Conflicts Forum: 'Assessing the Iraqi    |
|    |                  |  |resistance movement' - Briefing Paper    |
|    |1 August 2005     |  |The New York Times: 'The Islamists who   |
|    |                  |  |patrol Basra's streets'                  |
|    |20 August 2005    |  |Washington Post: 'Militias wresting      |
|    |                  |  |control across Iraq's north and south'   |
|    |7 September 2005  |  |The Guardian: 'Al-Qaeda in Iraq seizes   |
|    |                  |  |border town as it mobilises against poll'|
|    |2 October 2005    |  |Al Jazeera: Associated Press - 'Cracks in|
|    |                  |  |Iraqi Shia-Kurd coalition'               |
|    |12 October 2005   |  |Washington Post: Constitution of Iraq    |
|    |                  |  |October 2005 - Articles 109, 110 and 149 |
|    |30 October 2005   |  |The New York Times: U.S. Quietly Issues  |
|    |                  |  |Estimate of Iraqi Civilian Casualties    |
|    |5 November 2005   |  |Christians of Iraq: 'Assyrian Killed in  |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk's Car Bombing'                    |
|    |16 November 2005  |  |The Independent: 'Raid on Torture Dungeon|
|    |                  |  |Exposes Iraq's Secret War'               |
|    |27 December 2005  |  |Knight Ridder Newspapers: 'Kurds in Iraqi|
|    |                  |  |army proclaim loyalty to militia'        |
|    |Circa 2006        |  |Ahmad Hashim: Insurgency and             |
|    |                  |  |Counter-Insurgency in Iraq (London:      |
|    |                  |  |Hurst, pp. 170-76)                       |
|    |Circa 2006        |  |Eric Herring and Glen Rangwala, Iraq in  |
|    |                  |  |Fragments: The Occupation and its Legacy |
|    |                  |  |(Cornell University Press and Hurst)     |
|    |                  |  |(Chapters 1 and 4)                       |
|    |Circa 2006        |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Human   |
|    |                  |  |Rights Annual Report 2006: Iraq          |
|    |Circa 2006        |  |Herring and Rangwala, Iraq in Fragments: |
|    |                  |  |The Occupation and its Legacy (Cornell   |
|    |                  |  |University Press and Hurst) (Chapters 1  |
|    |                  |  |and 3)                                   |
|    |Circa 2006        |  |IISS: Flashpoint newsletter of the IISS  |
|    |                  |  |armed conflict database                  |
|    |2 January 2006    |  |USAID: 'Focused stabilisation in         |
|    |                  |  |strategic cities initiative - request for|
|    |                  |  |application' (annex F, p. 60)            |
|    |12 January 2006   |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: 'Kurds  |
|    |                  |  |to Agree to Unify Administrations        |
|    |21 January 2006   |  |Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG):     |
|    |                  |  |Kurdish Regional Government Unification  |
|    |                  |  |Agreement                                |
|    |15 February 2006  |  |International Crisis Group: 'In their own|
|    |                  |  |words: reading the Iraqi insurgency',    |
|    |                  |  |Middle East Report Number 50             |
|    |16 February 2006  |  |BBC News: 'Iraq Death Squad "Caught in   |
|    |                  |  |Act"'                                    |
|    |6 March 2006      |  |International Herald Tribune: 'U.S. faces|
|    |                  |  |latest trouble with Iraqi forces:        |
|    |                  |  |loyalty'                                 |
|    |12 March 2006     |  |San Francisco Chronicle: Civil war a     |
|    |                  |  |reality, experts say, Anna Badkhen       |
|    |28 March 2006     |  |Terrorism Focus: 'Mujahideen Shura       |
|    |                  |  |Council in Iraq'                         |
|    |20 March 2006     |  |Middle East Online: 'Iraq in             |
|    |                  |  |low-intensity civil war'                 |
|    |1 May 2006        |  |Time Online: 'Militias Steal New Recruits|
|    |                  |  |With Better Pay and Perks'               |
|    |24 May 2006       |  |Ministry of Defence: Speech by Des Browne|
|    |                  |  |PM to Royal United Services Institute    |
|    |31 May 2006       |  |Citizenship and Immigration Canada:      |
|    |                  |  |Temporary Suspension of Removals         |
|    |15 June 2006      |  |Congressional Research Service: Iraq:    |
|    |                  |  |Elections, Government and Constitution,  |
|    |                  |  |Congressional Research Service Report for|
|    |                  |  |Congress                                 |
|    |21 June 2006      |  |House of Commons Foreign Affairs         |
|    |                  |  |Committee: 'Foreign Policy Aspects of the|
|    |                  |  |War against terrorism', Fourth Report o  |
|    |                  |  |Session 2005-2006,                       |
|    |July 2006         |  |House of Commons Defence Committee:      |
|    |                  |  |'Operations in Iraq', Evidence given by  |
|    |                  |  |experts.                                 |
|    |11 July 2006      |  |International Crisis Group (ICG): 'Iraq's|
|    |                  |  |Muqtada al-Sadr: Spoiler or Stabiliser?' |
|    |18 July 2006      |  |International Crisis Group (ICG): Iraq   |
|    |                  |  |and the Kurds: the Brewing Battle over   |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk                                   |
|    |21 July 2006      |  |MSNBC: Associated Press- 'Accused Troops:|
|    |                  |  |We Were Under Orders to Kill'            |
|    |24 July 2006      |  |Washington Post: '"It Looked Weird and   |
|    |                  |  |Felt Wrong"'                             |
|    |28 June 2006      |  |Hansard: Committee of Public Accounts    |
|    |August 2006       |  |Border & Immigration Agency: Iraq Country|
|    |                  |  |Policy Bulletin                          |
|    |15 August 2006    |  |BBC News: Guide groups in Iraq           |
|    |24 August 2006    |  |Washington Post: '"Shiite Giant" Extends |
|    |                  |  |its Reach'                               |
|    |25 August 2006    |  |Washington Post                          |
|    |29 August 2006    |  |The New York Times: 'Radical Militia and |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Army in Fierce Battle'              |
|    |6 September 2006  |  |The New York Times: 'To Stay Alive,      |
|    |                  |  |Iraqis Change Their Names'               |
|    |12 September 2006 |  |International Herald Tribune: 'Armed     |
|    |                  |  |Groups Propel Iraq Toward Chaos'         |
|    |15 September 2006 |  |US Department of State: United States    |
|    |                  |  |Department of State: International       |
|    |                  |  |Religious Freedom Report 2006            |
|    |25 September 2006 |  |The Independent: 'A journey in to the    |
|    |                  |  |'Taliban republic' where the militias    |
|    |                  |  |rule unchallenged'                       |
|    |26 September 2006 |  |Excerpts from Home Page of White House   |
|    |29 September 2006 |  |Washington Post: 'At Checkpoints in      |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad, Disguise Is a Lifesaving Ritual |
|    |October 2006      |  |Bloomsberg School of Public Health: John |
|    |                  |  |Hopkins University - The Human Cost of   |
|    |                  |  |War                                      |
|    |October 2006      |  |Home Office: Country of Origin           |
|    |20 October 2006   |  |The New York Times: 'Attack on Iraqi City|
|    |                  |  |Shows Militia's Power'                   |
|    |3 October 2006    |  |Times Online: 'Beatings, Abductions,     |
|    |                  |  |Shootings: On Patrol With the al-Mahdi   |
|    |                  |  |Army'                                    |
|    |10 October 2006   |  |House of Commons Defence Committee: 'UK  |
|    |                  |  |operations in Iraq: Government response  |
|    |                  |  |to the Committee's Thirteenth Report of  |
|    |                  |  |session 2005-06', Twelfth Special Report |
|    |                  |  |of session 2005-2006                     |
|    |11 October 2006   |  |Iraq Body Count (IBC): Reality Checks:   |
|    |                  |  |Some Reponses to the Latest Lancet       |
|    |                  |  |Estimates                                |
|    |11 October 2006   |  |The Lancet: 'Mortality after the 2003    |
|    |                  |  |invasion of Iraq: a cross-sectional      |
|    |                  |  |cluster sample survey'                   |
|    |16 October 2006   |  |Iraq Body Count: Press release 14:       |
|    |                  |  |Reality checks: some responses to the    |
|    |                  |  |latest Lancet estimates                  |
|    |16 October 2006   |  |Intelligence and Security Committee      |
|    |                  |  |Report, Australian Parliament            |
|    |18 October 2006   |  |Speech from Australian Parliament        |
|    |27 October 2006   |  |'As violence grows, oil-rich Kirkuk could|
|    |                  |  |hold key to Iraq's future'               |
|    |29 October 2006   |  |'Iraq: End Interior Ministry Death       |
|    |                  |  |Squads: Police Must be Held Accountable  |
|    |                  |  |for Killings                             |
|    |30 October 2006   |  |The Last Super Power: 'Talabani: Visit of|
|    |                  |  |Barzani to White House is Recognition of |
|    |                  |  |Identity of Iraqi Kurdistan              |
|    |November 2006     |  |Department of Defence: Measuring         |
|    |                  |  |Stability and Security in Iraq           |
|    |November 2006     |  |UNHCR: Country Report Iraq 11th European |
|    |                  |  |Country of Origin Information Seminar    |
|    |6 November 2006   |  |AliveinBaghdad.org: 'Insecurity breeds   |
|    |                  |  |distrust in Adhamiya' video essay        |
|    |12 November 2006  |  |The New York Times: 'Sectarian rifts     |
|    |                  |  |foretell pitfalls of Iraqi troops' taking|
|    |                  |  |control'                                 |
|    |30 November 2006  |  |Department of Defence: Measuring         |
|    |                  |  |Stability and Security in Iraq (p.21)    |
|    |December 2006     |  |Iraq Study Group Report                  |
|    |December 2006     |  |UNHCR: UNHCR - Aide-M�moire: Protecting  |
|    |                  |  |Palestinians in Iraq and Seeking         |
|    |                  |  |Humanitarian Solutions for Those Who Fled|
|    |                  |  |the Country                              |
|    |December 2006     |  |UNHCR: Addendum to UNHCR's Eligibility   |
|    |                  |  |Guidelines for Assessing the             |
|    |                  |  |International Protection Needs of Iraqi  |
|    |                  |  |Asylum-Seekers                           |
|    |December 2006     |  |United States Institute of Peace: The    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Study Group - The Iraq Study Group  |
|    |                  |  |Report - New York: Vintage books. (pp.   |
|    |                  |  |94-95)                                   |
|    |6 December 2006   |  |The Guardian: 'Horrors of closet civil   |
|    |                  |  |war played out in no man's land'         |
|    |7 December 2006   |  |Motion in Australian Parliament          |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |Ali A. Allawi, The Occupation of Iraq:   |
|    |                  |  |Winning the War, Losing the Peace (Yale  |
|    |                  |  |University Press) (Chapter 18)           |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |Iraq Commission:  Report - Foreign Policy|
|    |                  |  |Centre 2007                              |
|    |2007              |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): Iraq Displacement 2007 Mid-Year   |
|    |                  |  |Review                                   |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): 'Iraq Displacement, 2007: year in |
|    |                  |  |review (p.2)                             |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |Home Office: Asylum Statistics - 3rd     |
|    |                  |  |Quarter 2007: United Kingdom             |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |House of Commons - Select Committee on   |
|    |                  |  |Defence (SCD): UK Lad Operations in Iraq |
|    |                  |  |2007, HC 110, Evidence (pp.43-48)        |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |Relief Web: Accepting Realities in Iraq: |
|    |                  |  |Middle East Programme Briefing Paper,    |
|    |                  |  |Chatham House, Dr Gareth Stansfield.     |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |Reporters sans Fronti�res (RSF): Middle  |
|    |                  |  |East press releases: 2007 Archives       |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |UN Security Council: Report of the       |
|    |                  |  |Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6|
|    |                  |  |of resolution 1770 (2007)                |
|    |Circa 2007        |  |UNAMI: 'Human rights report: 1 April - 30|
|    |                  |  |June 2007 (p.18)                         |
|    |Summer 2007       |  |Middle East Quarterly: 'Iraqi Kurdistan's|
|    |                  |  |Downward Spiral                          |
|    |January 2007      |  |US National Security Council: 'Highlights|
|    |                  |  |of the Iraq strategy review'             |
|    |1 January - 31    |  |UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI):  |
|    |March 2007        |  |Human Rights Report                      |
|    |8 January 2007    |  |'Iraq: US Plan Must Rein in Death Squads:|
|    |                  |  |Iraqi Government Should Prosecute        |
|    |                  |  |Security Forces for Abuses'              |
|    |10 January 2007   |  |White House Press Office: 'Iraq: The new |
|    |                  |  |way forward'                             |
|    |17 January 2007   |  |The New York Times: 'Iraqi Death Tolls   |
|    |                  |  |Exceed 34,000 in '06, UN Says'           |
|    |18 January 2007   |  |Congressional Research Service: The Iraqi|
|    |                  |  |Security Forces: The Challenge of        |
|    |                  |  |Sectarian and Ethnic Influences,         |
|    |                  |  |Congressional Research Service Report for|
|    |                  |  |Congress                                 |
|    |28 January 2007   |  |Reuters: 'Security Developments in Iraq  |
|    |30 January 2007   |  |Hansard Vol 456 Part 36                  |
|    |February 2007     |  |Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ):  |
|    |                  |  |Attacks on the Press in 2007             |
|    |3 February 2007   |  |The Guardian: US Intelligence Services.  |
|    |5 February 2007   |  |The Journal of Turkish Weekly: 'Profile: |
|    |                  |  |The PKK' Associated Press - 'PKK-PEJAK   |
|    |                  |  |Militants Train For Battle Against Iran' |
|    |10 February 2007  |  |Daily Telegraph: 'Iraqi Arabs revolt over|
|    |                  |  |cash offer to quit Kirkuk'               |
|    |12 February 2007  |  |Border & Immigration Agency: Country     |
|    |                  |  |Specific Asylum Policy Team (CSAPT)      |
|    |                  |  |Operation Guidance Note - Iraq           |
|    |15 February 2007  |  |European Parliament: Resolution of 15    |
|    |                  |  |February 2007 on the humanitarian        |
|    |                  |  |situation of Iraqi refugees              |
|    |15 February 2007  |  |The Guardian: 'Mahdi Army Commanders     |
|    |                  |  |Withdraw to Iran to Lie Low During       |
|    |                  |  |Security Crackdown'                      |
|    |16 February 2007  |  |McClatchy Washington Bureau: 'In Iraq,   |
|    |                  |  |Kurdish Militia Has the Run of Oil-Rich  |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk'                                  |
|    |19 February 2007  |  |Reuters: 'Militias and Security Forces in|
|    |                  |  |Iraq'                                    |
|    |20 February 2007  |  |Kuwait News Agency (KUNA): 'Muqtada Sadr |
|    |                  |  |Office Bombarded'                        |
|    |6 March 2007      |  |US Department of State: Country Reports  |
|    |                  |  |on Human Rights Practices - 2006 - Iraq  |
|    |7 March 2007      |  |United Nations Security Council (UNSC):  |
|    |                  |  |Report of the Secretary-General pursuant |
|    |                  |  |to paragraph 30 of resolution 1546 (2004)|
|    |15 March 2007     |  |Hansard: Debate in House of Lords - Iraq:|
|    |                  |  |Security                                 |
|    |20 March 2007     |  |House of Commons: Written Answer, Hansard|
|    |                  |  |Debate - Column 827W                     |
|    |22 March 2007     |  |The Independent: 'Oli-rich Kirkuk at     |
|    |                  |  |melting point as factions clash'         |
|    |22 March 2007     |  |IRIN: 'Insurgency paralyzes life in      |
|    |                  |  |Diyala'                                  |
|    |26 March 2007     |  |BBC News: Iraqi deaths survey 'was       |
|    |                  |  |robust'                                  |
|    |30 March 2007     |  |Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre  |
|    |                  |  |(IDMC): A displacement crisis; a profile |
|    |                  |  |of the internal displacement situation.  |
|    |March/April 2007  |  |Foreign Affairs: 'Iraq's civil war'      |
|    |April 2007        |  |Border & Immigration Agency: Country of  |
|    |                  |  |Origin Information (COI) Service - Iraq  |
|    |                  |  |COI report                               |
|    |1 April - 30 June |  |UN Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI):  |
|    |2007              |  |Human Rights Report                      |
|    |2 April 2007      |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Iraq's Sectarian and     |
|    |                  |  |Ethnic Violence and Its Evolving         |
|    |                  |  |Insurgency                               |
|    |4 April 2007      |  |ICRC: Press Release, 'Iraq: violence     |
|    |                  |  |continues to plague civilians'           |
|    |10 April 2007     |  |International Crisis Group (ICG): Iraq   |
|    |                  |  |and the Kurds: Resolving the Kirkuk      |
|    |                  |  |Crisis, Middle East Report No.46         |
|    |11 April 2007     |  |ICRC: Report, 'Civilians without         |
|    |                  |  |protection: the ever worsening           |
|    |                  |  |humanitarian crisis in Iraq',            |
|    |16 April 2007     |  |The Guardian: 'Sadr Loyalist Ministers   |
|    |                  |  |Quit Iraq Government'                    |
|    |17 April 2007     |  |DfID: Supporting Humanitarian Work in    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |17 April 2007     |  |ICRC: Statement  - Address by Angelo     |
|    |                  |  |Gnaedinger, ICRC Director-General        |
|    |17 April 2007     |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: 'Iraq:  |
|    |                  |  |Al-Qaeda Tactics Leads to Split Among    |
|    |                  |  |Insurgents                               |
|    |17-18 April 2007  |  |UN High Commissioner Guterres: Figures   |
|    |                  |  |taken from the text of the UNHCG' closing|
|    |                  |  |statement: 'Chairman's summary,          |
|    |                  |  |International Conference on Addressing   |
|    |                  |  |the Humanitarian Needs of Refugees and   |
|    |                  |  |Internally Displaced Persons inside Iraq |
|    |                  |  |and in Neighbouring Countries' Geneva    |
|    |19 April 2007     |  |Amnesty International: Unjust and unfair:|
|    |                  |  |The death penalty in Iraq                |
|    |19 April 2007     |  |International Crisis Group: Iraq and the |
|    |                  |  |Kurds: Resolving the Kirkuk Crisis       |
|    |30 April 2007     |  |United States Department of State:       |
|    |                  |  |Country Reports on Terrorism             |
|    |May 2007          |  |Amnesty International: UA in Focus:      |
|    |                  |  |Mightier than the sword: The struggle for|
|    |                  |  |press freedom                            |
|    |May 2007          |  |UNHCR: Amnesty International - Amnesty   |
|    |                  |  |International Report 2007 - Iraq         |
|    |May 2007          |  |United States Commission on International|
|    |                  |  |Religious Freedom: Annual Report 2007    |
|    |1 May 2007        |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: 'Iraq:  |
|    |                  |  |Al-Qaeda in Iraq Leaders Struggles With  |
|    |                  |  |Native Insurgents                        |
|    |2 May 2007        |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Iraqi Perceptions of the |
|    |                  |  |War: Public Opinion by City and Region   |
|    |3 May 2007        |  |The Daily Mail: 'The Moment a Teenage    |
|    |                  |  |Girl was Stoned to Death for Loving the  |
|    |                  |  |Wrong Boy'                               |
|    |10 - 11 May 2007  |  |Iraq Body Count (IBC): Methods, 2.1, 2.3,|
|    |                  |  |3.1 John Sloboda, Hamit Daragan and Peter|
|    |                  |  |Bagnall - How can the Utility of Press   |
|    |                  |  |Reports be Assessed?, Based on a         |
|    |                  |  |Presentation to Iraq Mortality Meeting,  |
|    |                  |  |World Health Organisation, Geneva.       |
|    |23 May 2007       |  |Kurd Net: 'Iranians Shell Anti-Iranian   |
|    |                  |  |Kurdish PEJAK Guerrillas in Kurdistan    |
|    |                  |  |Region'                                  |
|    |30 May 2007       |  |BBC News: 'Who Are Iraq's Mehdi Army?'   |
|    |June 2007         |  |Forced Migration Review: Iraq's          |
|    |                  |  |displacement crisis: the search for      |
|    |                  |  |solutions                                |
|    |June 2007         |  |Forced Migration Review: A tragedy of    |
|    |                  |  |increasing proportions: internal         |
|    |                  |  |displacement in Iraq                     |
|    |June 2007         |  |Freedom House: Freedom in the World -    |
|    |                  |  |2007: Iraq                               |
|    |June 2007         |  |Global Policy Forum: War and Occupation  |
|    |                  |  |in Iraq                                  |
|    |June 2007         |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iraqi   |
|    |                  |  |Insurgent Media: The War of Images and   |
|    |                  |  |Ideas - A Special Report by Kimmage and  |
|    |                  |  |Ridolfo (pp. 9-10)                       |
|    |June 2007         |  |United States Department of State:       |
|    |                  |  |Background Note Iraq                     |
|    |June 2007         |  |US Committee on Refugees and Immigrants  |
|    |                  |  |(USCRI): World Refugee Survey 2007: Iraq |
|    |5 June 2007       |  |United Nations Security Council (UNSC):  |
|    |                  |  |Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph  |
|    |                  |  |30 of resolution 1546 (2004)             |
|    |8 June 2007       |  |Human Rights Watch: Iraq: Execution of   |
|    |                  |  |Captive Soldiers Violates the Law of War |
|    |                  |  |Iraq Insurgent Group Claims to Have      |
|    |                  |  |Executed Two Missing US Soldiers         |
|    |10 June 2007      |  |Submission to the Iraq Commission:       |
|    |                  |  |Co-authorised submission with Glen       |
|    |                  |  |Randwala to independent Iraq Commission  |
|    |12 June 2007      |  |Christian Science Monitor: 'U.S.         |
|    |                  |  |Civilians Drive Iraq's Other Surge'      |
|    |16 June 2007      |  |BBC News: 'The Uniformed Kidnappers of   |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad'                                 |
|    |20 June 2007      |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Still Losing? The June   |
|    |                  |  |2007 Edition of "Measuring Stability in  |
|    |                  |  |Iraq"                                    |
|    |21 June 2007      |  |Iraq Update: 'Head of al-Sadr's Office   |
|    |                  |  |Killed Northwest of Hilla' - Voice of    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |22 June 2007      |  |Border & Immigration Agency: Entry       |
|    |                  |  |Clearance Bulletin                       |
|    |22 June 2007      |  |Human Rights Watch: The Poisoned Chalice |
|    |                  |  |- A Human Rights Watch Briefing Paper on |
|    |                  |  |the Decision of the Iraqi High Tribunal  |
|    |                  |  |in Dujail Case                           |
|    |24 June 2007      |  |Reuters: 'Iraq Sunni Blocs Boycott       |
|    |                  |  |parliament Over Speaker'                 |
|    |25 June 2007      |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Iraq, Baquba, Arrowhead  |
|    |                  |  |Ripper, and the Real Elements of         |
|    |                  |  |"Victory"                                |
|    |25 June 2007      |  |International Crisis Group (ICG): Where  |
|    |                  |  |is Iraq heading? Lessons from Basra      |
|    |July 2007         |  |House of Commons Defence Committee:      |
|    |                  |  |Operations in Iraq                       |
|    |3 July 2007       |  |Human Rights Watch: Caught in the        |
|    |                  |  |Whirlwind - Torture and Denial of Due    |
|    |                  |  |Process by the Kurdistan Security Forces |
|    |6 July 2007       |  |New York Sun: 'Iraqi Political Crisis    |
|    |                  |  |Near End as Tawafuq Chief Quits'         |
|    |6 July 2007       |  |UNHCR: 'Iraq Displacement: Host Countries|
|    |                  |  |Left in the Lurch'                       |
|    |9 July 2007       |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Success or Failure?      |
|    |                  |  |Iraq's Insurgency and Civil Violence and |
|    |                  |  |US Strategy: Developments through June   |
|    |                  |  |2007                                     |
|    |12 July 2007      |  |European Parliament:  Resolution of 12   |
|    |                  |  |July 2007 on the humanitarian situation  |
|    |                  |  |of Iraqi refugees                        |
|    |12 July 2007      |  |USA Today: U.S is Building Database on   |
|    |                  |  |Iraqis                                   |
|    |16 July 2007      |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Iraq's Sunni Insurgents: |
|    |                  |  |Looking Beyond Al-Qaeda                  |
|    |19 July 2007      |  |House of Commons Defence Committee: 'UK  |
|    |                  |  |Operations in Iraq', Thirteenth Report of|
|    |                  |  |Session 2005-2006                        |
|    |19 July 2007      |  |United States Senate: US Senate Committee|
|    |                  |  |on Foreign Relations, Opening Statement  |
|    |                  |  |by Senators Lugar and Biden and response |
|    |                  |  |of Ambassador Crocker                    |
|    |19 July 2007      |  |Washington Post: Al-Qaeda in Iraq is in  |
|    |                  |  |US custody                               |
|    |25 July 2007      |  |House of Commons Foreign Affairs         |
|    |                  |  |Committee: 'Global Security: The Middle  |
|    |                  |  |East' - Eighth Report on Session 2006 -  |
|    |                  |  |07                                       |
|    |27 July 2007      |  |Electronic Privacy Information Centre    |
|    |                  |  |(EPIC): Human Rights Letter to Robert    |
|    |                  |  |Gates                                    |
|    |August 2007       |  |The NEFA Foundation: 'Sate of Sunni      |
|    |                  |  |Insurgency in Iraq'                      |
|    |August 2007       |  |UN High Commissioner for Refugees        |
|    |                  |  |(UNHCR): UNHCR's Eligibility Guidelines  |
|    |                  |  |for Assessing the International          |
|    |                  |  |Protection Needs of Iraqi Asylum-seekers |
|    |                  |  |(p.151)                                  |
|    |August 2007       |  |UNHCR: Iraq Update on IDP Emergency      |
|    |                  |  |Assistance                               |
|    |7 August 2007     |  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting:   |
|    |                  |  |Checkpoints - Baghdad's Russian Roulette |
|    |7 August 2007     |  |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq: Sectarianism Splits Security in    |
|    |                  |  |Diyala                                   |
|    |15 August 2007    |  |Department of Defence Bloggers           |
|    |                  |  |Roundtable: 'The Role of Biometrics in   |
|    |                  |  |Counterinsurgency                        |
|    |15 August 2007    |  |MSNBC: Associated Press - 'Bombings are  |
|    |                  |  |Deadliest Since Iraq War Began'          |
|    |16 August 2007    |  |BBC News: Timeline: Iraq                 |
|    |16 August 2007    |  |The Randi Rhodes Show (LA Times) -       |
|    |                  |  |Messageboards: 'Shiite Militia           |
|    |                  |  |Infiltrates Iraqi Forces'                |
|    |17 August 2007    |  |Electronic Privacy Information Centre    |
|    |                  |  |(EPIC): Iraqi Biometric Identification   |
|    |                  |  |System'                                  |
|    |17 August 2007    |  |Iraq Updates: 'Kurdish Peshmerga Force   |
|    |                  |  |Deployed to Sinjar District for          |
|    |                  |  |Protection' - Voice of Iraq              |
|    |22 August 2007    |  |Centre for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies: Iraqi's Insurgency and Civil    |
|    |                  |  |Violence: Developments through Late      |
|    |                  |  |August 2007                              |
|    |23 August 2007    |  |National Intelligence Council: Prospects |
|    |                  |  |for Iraq's Stability: Some Security      |
|    |                  |  |Progress But Political Reconciliation    |
|    |                  |  |Elusive (p. 3)                           |
|    |24 August 2007    |  |Iraq Updates: 'Sadr's Offices in Muthanna|
|    |                  |  |Come Under Attack' - Voices of Iraq      |
|    |31 August 2007    |  |WIRED: Iraqi Diary: Fallujah's Biometric |
|    |                  |  |Gates (Updated)                          |
|    |September 2007    |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Iraqi Force Development. |
|    |                  |  |Conditions for Success. Consequences of  |
|    |                  |  |Failure                                  |
|    |September 2007    |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Autumn  |
|    |                  |  |Performance Report - 1 April-30 September|
|    |                  |  |2007: Iraq                               |
|    |September 2007    |  |Opinion Research Business (ORB): More    |
|    |                  |  |Than 1,000,000 Iraqis Murdered           |
|    |September 2007    |  |UN High Commissioner for Refugees        |
|    |                  |  |(UNHCR): Governorate Assessment Report - |
|    |                  |  |Sulaymaniyah Governorate                 |
|    |September 2007    |  |United States Senate: US Government      |
|    |                  |  |Accountability Office, Securing,         |
|    |                  |  |Stabilising and Rebuilding Iraq: Iraqi   |
|    |                  |  |Government has not met Most Legislative, |
|    |                  |  |Security and Economic Benchmarks,        |
|    |                  |  |September 2007: Testimony of David M     |
|    |                  |  |Walker                                   |
|    |September 2007    |  |United States Senate: The report of the  |
|    |                  |  |independent Commission on the Security   |
|    |                  |  |Forces of Iraq                           |
|    |2 September 2007  |  |O&P.com: Civilian Casualties From Iraq:  |
|    |                  |  |Caring for the Forgotten Wounded         |
|    |5 September 2007  |  |CRS Report for Congress: Iraqi Civilian  |
|    |                  |  |Deaths Estimates - Hannah Fischer        |
|    |6 September 2007  |  |CNN: ' Independent Commission on the     |
|    |                  |  |Security Forces of Iraq, Report to       |
|    |                  |  |Congress, General James L. Jones, USMC   |
|    |                  |  |(Ret.), Chairman (p.30)                  |
|    |6 September 2007  |  |Report of the Independent Commission on  |
|    |                  |  |the Security Forces of Iraq              |
|    |6 September 2007  |  |The New York Times: 'To Stay Alive,      |
|    |                  |  |Iraqis Change Their Names                |
|    |8 September 2007  |  |BBC News: 'Sunni Bloc Ends Boycott in    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq'                                    |
|    |10 September 2007 |  |Gen. David Petraeus: 'Report to Congress |
|    |                  |  |on the situation in Iraq (p.3)           |
|    |10-11 September   |  |Gen. David Petraeus: Charts to accompany |
|    |2007              |  |the testimony of Gen. David H. Petraeus  |
|    |                  |  |(pp.4-5)                                 |
|    |10 September 2007 |  |United States Department of State: Report|
|    |                  |  |to US House of Representatives on the    |
|    |                  |  |situation in Iraq - General Petraeus     |
|    |11 September 2007 |  |Centre for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies: Iraqi Force Development -       |
|    |                  |  |Conditions for Success, Consequences of  |
|    |                  |  |Failure                                  |
|    |12 September 2007 |  |Department of Defence: Measuring         |
|    |                  |  |Stability and Security in Iraq (p. 17)   |
|    |13 September 2007 |  |White House Press Office: 'Address by the|
|    |                  |  |President to the nation on the way       |
|    |                  |  |forward in Iraq'                         |
|    |15 September 2007 |  |BBC News: Sadr groups quits Iraq ruling  |
|    |                  |  |bloc                                     |
|    |16 September 2007 |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks |
|    |                  |  |News (IRIN): Diyala the worst province   |
|    |                  |  |for basic services                       |
|    |18 September 2007 |  |Medialens: The Media Ignore Credible Poll|
|    |                  |  |Revealing 1.2 Million Violent Deaths in  |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |19 September 2007 |  |United States House of Representatives:  |
|    |                  |  |Hearing before the Committee on Foreign  |
|    |                  |  |Affairs, House of Representatives:       |
|    |                  |  |Assessment of the Administration's       |
|    |                  |  |September Report of the Status of US     |
|    |                  |  |Political and Military Efforts in Iraq   |
|    |22 September 2007 |  |ICRC: Interview, 'Iraq: a desperate      |
|    |                  |  |situation'                               |
|    |24 September 2007 |  |Amnesty International: Iraq: Millions in |
|    |                  |  |flight - The Iraqi refugee crisis        |
|    |24 September 2007 |  |IRIN: Iraq: IDPs in Baghdad Suburb Stage |
|    |                  |  |Protest, Demand Protection               |
|    |24 September 2007 |  |Reuters: 'Iraq Oil Min: Recent Oil Deal  |
|    |                  |  |With Kurds are Illegal'                  |
|    |26 September 2007 |  |Transparency International: Corruption   |
|    |                  |  |Perception Index (CPI) 2007              |
|    |27 September 2007 |  |Associated Press: 'Sunnis may stop work  |
|    |                  |  |with US in Diyala'                       |
|    |27 September 2007 |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: David   |
|    |                  |  |Miliband speech to the UN General        |
|    |                  |  |Assembly                                 |
|    |28 September 2007 |  |Council on Foreign Relations: "The Iraq  |
|    |                  |  |Data Debate: Civilian Casualties from    |
|    |                  |  |2006 to 2007"                            |
|    |2 October 2007    |  |BBC News: Syria restores Iraqi visa      |
|    |                  |  |limits                                   |
|    |2 October 2007    |  |Human Rights Watch: Q&A: Private Military|
|    |                  |  |Contractors and the Law", News Release,  |
|    |2 October 2007    |  |IRIN: SYRAI - UNHCR Presses for          |
|    |                  |  |"humanitarian visas" as Syria closes     |
|    |                  |  |borders to Iraqis                        |
|    |3 October 2007    |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks |
|    |                  |  |News (IRIN): Difficult to access the     |
|    |                  |  |needy in Diyala Province, say aid workers|
|    |3 October 2007    |  |Iraq Body Count (IBC): A Very Misleading |
|    |                  |  |Exercise                                 |
|    |5 October 2007    |  |The Long War Journal: 'U.S. Kills 25     |
|    |                  |  |Special Groups Fighters in Diyala'       |
|    |6 October 2007    |  |BBC News: Iraq Shia leaders sign truce   |
|    |                  |  |deal                                     |
|    |7 October 2007    |  |The Washington Monthly: 'The Myth of AQI'|
|    |9 October 2007    |  |House of Commons: Hansard Debates        |
|    |10 October 2007   |  |BBC News: Doors closing on Iraqi         |
|    |                  |  |displaced                                |
|    |15 October 2007   |  |BBC News: Profile: 'The PKK'             |
|    |15 October 2007   |  |United Nations Security Council (UNSC):  |
|    |                  |  |Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6|
|    |                  |  |of resolution 1770 (2007)                |
|    |15 October 2007   |  |Washington Post: Al-Qaeda in Iraq        |
|    |                  |  |reported crippled                        |
|    |19 October 2007   |  |Centre for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies: Iraq, the Surge, Partition, and |
|    |                  |  |the War: Public Opinion by City and      |
|    |                  |  |Region                                   |
|    |21 October 2007   |  |IRIN: IRAQ - Violence-related deaths drop|
|    |                  |  |'remarkably', say authorities and UN     |
|    |24 October 2007   |  |BBC News: Turkish raids along Iraq border|
|    |24 October 2007   |  |Christian Science Monitor: Bin laden     |
|    |                  |  |lambastes Iraqi insurgents               |
|    |25 October 2007   |  |Integrated Regional Information Networks |
|    |                  |  |News (IRIN): Iraq: Mental problems and   |
|    |                  |  |stress disorders increase                |
|    |28 October 2007   |  |BBC News: Turkish troops 'kill PKK       |
|    |                  |  |rebels'                                  |
|    |29 October 2007   |  |BBC News: US hands over Karbala to Iraqis|
|    |30 October 2007   |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Iraq    |
|    |                  |  |Locally Engaged Staff Assistance Scheme, |
|    |                  |  |Ministerial Statement (David Miliband)   |
|    |November 2007     |  |Center for Strategic and International   |
|    |                  |  |Studies (CSIS): Fixing Iraq's Internal   |
|    |                  |  |Security Forces - Why is reform of the   |
|    |                  |  |Ministry of the Interior so Hard?        |
|    |1 November 2007   |  |BBC News: Deaths in Iraq 'continue to    |
|    |                  |  |falls'                                   |
|    |2 November 2007   |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iraq -  |
|    |                  |  |Al-Anbar initiative makes progress, but  |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad remains wary                     |
|    |4 November 2007   |  |ABC News: 'Kurdish Rebels Free Abducted  |
|    |                  |  |Turkish Soldiers'                        |
|    |5 November 2007   |  |BBC News: US 'to help combat rebels'     |
|    |5 November 2007   |  |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq -  Millions Trapped in Their Own    |
|    |                  |  |Country                                  |
|    |5 November 2007   |  |IRIN: IRAQ - Families flees home near    |
|    |                  |  |Turkish Border                           |
|    |6 November 2007   |  |The Guardian: "2007 is deadliest year for|
|    |                  |  |US army in Iraq"                         |
|    |8 November 2007   |  |BBC News: Civilian toll                  |
|    |8 November 2007   |  |BBC News: Iraq violence, in figures      |
|    |8 November 2007   |  |The Long War Journal: Why the violence   |
|    |                  |  |has declined in Iraq                     |
|    |9 November 2007   |  |International Herald Tribune: 'Clash     |
|    |                  |  |Between Ex-Insurgents, Al-Qaeda in Iraqi |
|    |                  |  |Kills 18 in Terror Group'                |
|    |10 November 2007  |  |Council on Foreign Relations:            |
|    |                  |  |Teleconference with the Council on       |
|    |                  |  |Foreign Relations                        |
|    |10 November 2007  |  |The Guardian: 'Meet Abu Abed: the US's   |
|    |                  |  |new ally against Al-Qaeda'               |
|    |11 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Is Iraq getting better?        |
|    |12 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Iraq rocket fire 'falls sharply|
|    |12 November 2007  |  |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq - A Tale of One City, Now Two       |
|    |13 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Turkey 'bombs PKK Iraq targets'|
|    |13 November 2007  |  |United Nations Assistance Mission for    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq: Humanitarian Crisis in Iraq; Facts |
|    |                  |  |and Figures                              |
|    |15 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Baghdad voices: Improved       |
|    |                  |  |security                                 |
|    |15 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Basra militants targeting women|
|    |15 November 2007  |  |International Crisis Group (ICG):  Shiite|
|    |                  |  |Politics in Iraq: The Role of the Supreme|
|    |                  |  |Council, Middle Eastern Report No.7      |
|    |15 November 2007  |  |Kurd Net: 'Ansar al-Islam Terrorist Group|
|    |                  |  |lead by Mullah Krekar Linked to Bomb     |
|    |                  |  |Attack in Kurdish City'                  |
|    |18 November 2007  |  |IRIN: Diyala desperately needs doctors   |
|    |19 November 2007  |  |New Yorker: 'Inside the surge'           |
|    |20 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Foreigners held for Iraq       |
|    |                  |  |shooting                                 |
|    |20 November 2007  |  |House of Commons Defence Committee: 'UK  |
|    |                  |  |Land operations in Iraq 2007', First     |
|    |                  |  |Report of Session 2007-2008              |
|    |20 November 2007  |  |IRIN: IRAQ: Extremists fuel anti-women   |
|    |                  |  |violence in Basra                        |
|    |22 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Iraqi militants attack villages|
|    |23 November 2007  |  |UNHCR News: "UNHCR says time not right   |
|    |                  |  |for large-scale Iraq repatriation"       |
|    |24 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Raids target militants in      |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk                                   |
|    |24 November 2007  |  |BBC News: 'Shia militia' behind Iraq     |
|    |                  |  |blast                                    |
|    |25 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Iraq security improving, PM    |
|    |                  |  |says                                     |
|    |25 November 2007  |  |Times Online: 'American Backed Killer    |
|    |                  |  |Militias Strut Across Iraq'              |
|    |27 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Iraqi refuges being journey    |
|    |                  |  |home                                     |
|    |28 November 2007  |  |BBC News: Sunni militia brings calm to   |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad area                             |
|    |28 November 2007  |  |IRIN: IRAQ-SYRIA: More Iraqi refuges     |
|    |                  |  |leaving Syria than entering              |
|    |30 November 2007  |  |The New York Times: 'Iraq Lacks Plan on  |
|    |                  |  |the Return of Refugees, Military Says'   |
|    |December 2007     |  |Amnesty International: Annual Report     |
|    |                  |  |2007: Covering events of January to      |
|    |                  |  |December 2006                            |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): Kirkuk , Nenewa, and Salah al-Din |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles: Post February 2006 |
|    |                  |  |IDP Needs Assessments                    |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): 'Anbar, Baghdad and Diyala        |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles: Post - February    |
|    |                  |  |2006 IDP Needs Assessments               |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): Missan, Wassit and Qadissiya      |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles: Post - February    |
|    |                  |  |2006 IDP Needs Assessments               |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): 'Kirkuk, Ninewa and Salah al-Din: |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles                     |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): Babylon, Karbala and Najaf:       |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles                     |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): 'Dahuk, Erbil and Sulaymaniyah:   |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles                     |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): Basrah, Muthanna and Thi-Qar      |
|    |                  |  |Governorate Profiles: Post - February    |
|    |                  |  |2006 IDP Needs Assessments.              |
|    |December 2007     |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): IOM Emergency Needs               |
|    |December 2007     |  |UNHCR: Country Briefing Folder on Iraq   |
|    |December 2007     |  |US Department of Defence: Measuring      |
|    |                  |  |Stability and Security in Iraq           |
|    |1 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Turkish army fires on PKK in   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |1 December 2007   |  |International Organisation for Migration |
|    |                  |  |(IOM): IOM Emergency needs assessments,  |
|    |                  |  |post February 2006                       |
|    |1 December 2007   |  |UN Office for the Coordination of        |
|    |                  |  |Humanitarian Affairs: Iraq Humanitarian  |
|    |                  |  |Update                                   |
|    |3 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Iraq army 'retakes Shia        |
|    |                  |  |village'                                 |
|    |3 December 2007   |  |BBC News: UK' failed to make Basra safe' |
|    |3 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Red crescent confirms Iraq     |
|    |                  |  |trend                                    |
|    |3 December 2007   |  |The Guardian: "Iraqi insurgents          |
|    |                  |  |regrouping, says Sunni resistance leader"|
|    |4 December 2007   |  |Human Rights Watch: Rot Here or Die      |
|    |                  |  |There: Bleak Choices for Iraqi Refugees  |
|    |                  |  |in Lebanon.                              |
|    |5 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Car bomb rocks centre of       |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad                                  |
|    |5 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Eight killed as Gates visits   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |6 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Heading back home to Iraq      |
|    |6 December 2007   |  |International Herald Tribune: 'Pushed out|
|    |                  |  |of Baghdad, insurgents move north',      |
|    |                  |  |Michael Gordon                           |
|    |6 December 2007   |  |IRIN: IRAQ: "Honour killings" persist in |
|    |                  |  |Kurdish north                            |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Double bombing in Iraqi        |
|    |                  |  |province                                 |
|    |7 December 2007   |  |National Public Radio Morning Edition:   |
|    |                  |  |Iraqi Civilian Disabled By War Struggles |
|    |                  |  |to Find Aid                              |
|    |8 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Al-Qaeda suspects in Iraq      |
|    |                  |  |killed                                   |
|    |8 December 2007   |  |BBC News: UN warns returning Iraqi       |
|    |                  |  |refuges                                  |
|    |9 December 2007   |  |BBC News: Fragile success for US Iraq    |
|    |                  |  |surge                                    |
|    |9 December 2007   |  |Council on Foreign Relations: "Iraq: Can |
|    |                  |  |we guard what we've gained?"             |
|    |10 January 2008   |  |BBC News: New Study says 151,00 Iraqi    |
|    |                  |  |dead                                     |
|    |10 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Sunni Arabs power struggle in  |
|    |                  |  |Iraq                                     |
|    |11 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Bombing near Iraq ex-PM's      |
|    |                  |  |office                                   |
|    |11 December 2007  |  |BBC1 Panorama Transcript: The Battle for |
|    |                  |  |Basra Palace                             |
|    |11 December 2007  |  |The Christian Science Monitor:  "Iraq's  |
|    |                  |  |Sadr uses lull to rebuild army"          |
|    |11 December 2007  |  |Christian Science Monitor: 'Iraq's Sadr  |
|    |                  |  |uses Lull to Rebuild Army'               |
|    |12 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Cable attacks 'disaster of     |
|    |                  |  |Iraq'                                    |
|    |12 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Who is behind south Iraq       |
|    |                  |  |bombings?                                |
|    |13 December 2007  |  |EUROPA Press Release: European Commission|
|    |                  |  |allocates E50 million to alleviate plight|
|    |                  |  |of Iraqi refugees in Syria and Jordan    |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Basra's new era brings new     |
|    |                  |  |fears                                    |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) USA:  |
|    |                  |  |Profile: Al-Qaeda in Iraq (a.k.a.        |
|    |                  |  |Al-Qaeda in Mesopotamia)                 |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |Department of Defence: Measuring         |
|    |                  |  |Stability and Security in Iraq (p. 21)   |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |Fox News: Associated Press - 'U.S.       |
|    |                  |  |General Says Iraq Violence at Lowest     |
|    |                  |  |Levels Since 2004'                       |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |McClatchy Washington Bureau: 'Survey:    |
|    |                  |  |Many Iraqis' in Syria Fled During U.S.   |
|    |                  |  |Troop Build-up'                          |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |McClatchy Washington Bureau: IPSOS -     |
|    |                  |  |Second IPSOS Survey on Iraqi Refugees    |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: "Iraq:  |
|    |                  |  |Military, Tribal Successes Could Be      |
|    |                  |  |Forcing Al-Qaeda To Change Tactics"      |
|    |14 December 2007  |  |US Department of Defence: Measuring      |
|    |                  |  |Security and Stability in Iraq, Report to|
|    |                  |  |Congress                                 |
|    |16 December 2007  |  |BBC News: David Miliband interviewed     |
|    |                  |  |about Iraq by BBC News                   |
|    |17 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Iraqis demand better life amid |
|    |                  |  |new calm                                 |
|    |17 December 2007  |  |Border & Immigration Agency: Iraq Country|
|    |                  |  |Policy Bulletin                          |
|    |17 December 2007  |  |UK Border & Immigration Agency: Iraq     |
|    |                  |  |Country Policy Bulletin (para. 3.6)      |
|    |17 December 2007  |  |UK Border and Immigration Agency: Iraq   |
|    |                  |  |Country Policy Bulletin (p.7 para 4.2.12)|
|    |19 December 2007  |  |The Guardian:  Pentagon reports drop in  |
|    |                  |  |Iraq violence                            |
|    |19 December 2007  |  |Washington Post: 'All Iraqi Groups Blame |
|    |                  |  |U.S. For Discord, Study Shows'           |
|    |20 December 2007  |  |IBD Editorials: 'Surge's Success in Iraq |
|    |                  |  |Builds, Block by Block'                  |
|    |20 December 2007  |  |Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), USA:  |
|    |                  |  |The World Factbook: Iraq                 |
|    |20 December 2007  |  |The Guardian: A surge of their own:      |
|    |                  |  |Iraqis take back the streets             |
|    |22 December 2007  |  |BBC News: 'Iraq warning over Sunni       |
|    |                  |  |patrols'                                 |
|    |22 December 2007  |  |The New York Times: Awakening Councils by|
|    |                  |  |Region                                   |
|    |22 December 2007  |  |Washington Post: 'Iran Cited in Iraq's   |
|    |                  |  |Decline in Violence'                     |
|    |23 December 2007  |  |The New York Times: 'In a Force for Iraqi|
|    |                  |  |Calm, Seeds of Conflict'                 |
|    |23 December 2007  |  |Sunday Times: 'Iraqi villagers battle to |
|    |                  |  |hold off Al-Qaeda'                       |
|    |26 December 2007  |  |Al Jazeera; Sunni militias 'aim to stem  |
|    |                  |  |Iraq'                                    |
|    |26 December 2007  |  |CounterPunch: Rebuilding Violent Tyranny |
|    |                  |  |in Iraq; Charles Tripp                   |
|    |26 December 2007  |  |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS):   |
|    |                  |  |Iraq - 'Awakening' Forces Arouse New     |
|    |                  |  |Conflicts                                |
|    |27 December 2007  |  |Los Angeles Times: 'Iraqi Kurds delay    |
|    |                  |  |Kirkuk vote'                             |
|    |27 December 2007  |  |The New York Times: 'Turkish Jets Strike |
|    |                  |  |Kurdish Rebels'                          |
|    |27 December 2007  |  |The New York Times: '9 U.S. soldiers     |
|    |                  |  |killed in Sunni stronghold'              |
|    |27 December 2007  |  |Xinhuanet: 'Obstacles Diminish fir the   |
|    |                  |  |Sunnis' Return to Iraqi Government'      |
|    |28 December 2007  |  |BBC News: 'Car Bomb Hits Busy Baghdad    |
|    |                  |  |Market'                                  |
|    |28 December 2007  |  |BBC News: Crunch year ahead for Iraq     |
|    |28 December 2007  |  |Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG):     |
|    |                  |  |'Kurdistan's Parliament Approves Kirkuk  |
|    |                  |  |Referendum Delay'                        |
|    |28 December 2007  |  |The Baltimore Sun: Associated Press -    |
|    |                  |  |'U.S. Troops Kill 11 Members of Mahdi    |
|    |                  |  |Army Splinter Group'                     |
|    |31 December 2007  |  |Yahoo! News: 'Civilian Casualties Drop   |
|    |                  |  |Dramatically in Iraq' - Reuters          |
|    |1 January 2008    |  |Iraq Body Count: Civilian deaths from    |
|    |                  |  |violence in 2007                         |
|    |1 January 2008    |  |Kurdish Globe: 'Two civilians killed in  |
|    |                  |  |southwest Kirkuk'                        |
|    |1 January 2008    |  |Reuters: 'Suicide Bomber Kills 30 at Iraq|
|    |                  |  |Funeral'                                 |
|    |2 January 2008    |  |Agence France Presse: "24,000 civilian   |
|    |                  |  |Iraqi deaths in 2007: independent group" |
|    |2 January 2008    |  |Financial Times: US Deaths in Iraq Hit   |
|    |                  |  |Four-year Low                            |
|    |2 January 2008    |  |US News and World Report: 'Refugees feel |
|    |                  |  |pressure to go home'                     |
|    |3 January 2008    |  |CBS News: Rival Shiite Leaders Meet,     |
|    |                  |  |Eyeing Peace                             |
|    |3 January 2008    |  |Millitary.com: US National Security      |
|    |                  |  |Council, Highlights of the Iraq Strategy |
|    |                  |  |Review                                   |
|    |4 January 2008    |  |Institute for War and Peace Reporting:   |
|    |                  |  |Life after the Islamic state             |
|    |4 January 2008    |  |National Journal: Data Bomb              |
|    |5 January 2008    |  |PUKmedia: 'Kirkuk...Releasing 2 Kidnapped|
|    |                  |  |Girls'                                   |
|    |7 January 2008    |  |BBC News: Iraq bombs hit Sunni stronghold|
|    |7 January 2008    |  |AdnKronos International (Italy): 'Rocket |
|    |                  |  |attack on Kirkuk TV in latest violence'  |
|    |7 January 2008    |  |Financial Times: 'Iraq Surge Brings a    |
|    |                  |  |Lull in Violence But No Reconciliation'  |
|    |7 January 2008    |  |National Journal: Letters: Researchers   |
|    |                  |  |Respond to National Journal Article      |
|    |8 January 2008    |  |Reuters: White House Press Office - 'Fact|
|    |                  |  |Sheet: Helping Iraq Achieve Economic and |
|    |                  |  |Political Stabilisation' - Business Wire |
|    |8 January 2008    |  |Reuters: 'Red Crescent says 46,000       |
|    |                  |  |refugees return Iraq end 2007'           |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |Informed Comment: - Juan Cole            |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |The New England Journal of Medicine: Iraq|
|    |                  |  |Family Health Survey Study Group,        |
|    |                  |  |"Violence-Related Mortality in Iraq from |
|    |                  |  |2002 to 2006"                            |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |Los Angeles Times: 'A renewed push in    |
|    |                  |  |Diyala'                                  |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty:         |
|    |                  |  |Awakening Councils face political,       |
|    |                  |  |terrorist pressure                       |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |Reuters: 'Two more churches bombed in    |
|    |                  |  |Iraqi: police'                           |
|    |9 January 2008    |  |US Department of State: US Department of |
|    |                  |  |State: Iraq Weekly Status Report         |
|    |10 January 2008   |  |BBC News: US launches massive Iraq air   |
|    |                  |  |raid                                     |
|    |10 January 2008   |  |Informed Comment: Thoughts on the Middle |
|    |                  |  |East, History, and Religion - Juan Cole  |
|    |10 January 2008   |  |McClatchy Washington Bureau: 'In Iraq,   |
|    |                  |  |U.S. Air strikes Target Insurgences Near |
|    |                  |  |Supposedly Safe Zone'                    |
|    |10 January 2008   |  |USA Today: U.S. Military Step up War-zone|
|    |                  |  |Air strikes Target Insurgents Near       |
|    |                  |  |Supposedly Safe Zone                     |
|    |13 January 2008   |  |BBC News: Lord Malloch Brown interviewed |
|    |                  |  |by BBC News                              |
|    |13 January 2008   |  |Kuwait News Agency (KUNA): 'Motorbikes   |
|    |                  |  |Banned in Baghdad to Prevent Ashoura     |
|    |                  |  |Attacks'                                 |
|    |14 January 2008   |  |BBC News: Senior Judge shot dead in      |
|    |                  |  |Baghdad                                  |
|    |14 January 2008   |  |International Herald Tribune:            |
|    |                  |  |'Uncertainty Surrounds New Iraqi         |
|    |                  |  |de-Baathification Law'                   |
|    |14 January 2008   |  |LA Times: 'U.S. shifts Sunni strategy in |
|    |                  |  |Iraq'                                    |
|    |14 January 2008   |  |PUKmedia: 'Assassinating a Member from   |
|    |                  |  |al-Sadr Movement in al-Basra'            |
|    |16 January 2008   |  |BBC News: Woman Bomber Kills 11 in Iraq  |
|    |16 January 2008   |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Travel  |
|    |                  |  |Advice by Country - Iraq                 |
|    |16 January 2008   |  |The Guardian: 'Iraq's Healthcare Left in |
|    |                  |  |Disarray After the Invasion' - Quoted in |
|    |                  |  |Sarah Bosely                             |
|    |16 January 2008   |  |Medact: Rehabilitation Under Fir: Health |
|    |                  |  |Care in Iraq 2003-07                     |
|    |16 January 2008   |  |United Nations Assistance Mission for    |
|    |                  |  |Iraq: Attacks in Iraq decrease but       |
|    |                  |  |insufficient progress on political front,|
|    |                  |  |UN reports                               |
|    |17 January 2008   |  |Al Jazeera: Suicide blast hits Iraq      |
|    |                  |  |worshippers                              |
|    |17 January 2008   |  |US Department of State: US Department of |
|    |                  |  |State, Travel Warning: Iraq              |
|    |18 January 2008   |  |Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Travel  |
|    |                  |  |Advice by Country                        |
|    |19 January 2008   |  |The York Times: Despite Deadly Clashes in|
|    |                  |  |Iraq, Shiite Pilgrims Spared             |
|    |21 January 2008   |  |Iraq Body Count (IBC)                    |
|    |22 January 2008   |  |Foreign Affairs and International Trade  |
|    |                  |  |Canada: Travel Warning Iraq              |
|    |31 January 2008   |  |Al Jazeera: 'Iraq death tool 'over one   |
|    |                  |  |million'                                 |
|    |31 January 2008   |  |New England Journal of Medicine::        |
|    |                  |  |'Violence-related mortality in Iraq from |
|    |                  |  |2002 to 2006' (pp. 484-93 and p. 486)    |





