

  SS (s104(4)(b) of 2002 Act = application not limited) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT
                                                                       00026

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2006                           |On 27 February 2007          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     MR C M G OCKELTON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                   OF THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Fadina of Fadina & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                       NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT OF APPEAL
            UNDER SECTION 104(4) OF THE NATIONALITY, IMMIGRATION
                             AND ASYLUM ACT 2002


Section 104(4)(b) of the 2002 Act is not limited in its application.  Hence
a claimant who has entry clearance as a visitor and attends his appeal
hearing against a decision refusing entry clearance for the purpose of
study, abandons that appeal when he leaves the United Kingdom. (Note: with
effect from 13 November 2006, s.9 of the Immigration, Asylum and
Nationality Act 2006 amends s.104(4) so that it applies only to in-country
appeals).


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He appealed to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal of entry  clearance
    for the purpose of study, the date of decision being 21 December  2005.
     In a determination promulgated on 25 July 2006 the Immigration  Judge
    allowed   the   appeal.     The   Entry   Clearance   Officer    sought
    reconsideration  of  this  decision  on  the  basis  firstly  that  the
    appellant's appeal was, it was  contended, abandoned  by  statute;  and
    secondly that the appellant did not  have  the  right  to  appeal  from
    within the United Kingdom.   The grounds were both regarded as properly
    arguable by the Senior Immigration Judge, who  ordered  reconsideration
    on 9 August 2006.

2.   The hearing before the Tribunal took place on 28 November 2006.   Mr  A
    Fadina of Fadina & Associates appeared on behalf of the appellant.   Mr
    C Avery appeared on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

3.   At the hearing before the Immigration Judge  the  appellant  gave  oral
    evidence since he was in the United Kingdom  on  a  visit  visa.    The
    Immigration Judge clearly derived  assistance  from  his  evidence  and
    concluded as a consequence of his assessment of the evidence as a whole
    that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules, or,
    as he described it, practices that ought  to  have  been  applied,  and
    allowed the appeal.

4.   In the grounds it was  argued  that  under  Section  104(4)(a)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  appeal  fell  to  be
    treated as abandoned if the appellant was granted  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom.

5.   It was also argued that Section 92(2) of the same Act only  allowed  an
    appeal from within the United Kingdom if an appellant fell  within  the
    particular provisions contained within Section 82 of the Act,  and  the
    appellant did not fall within any of these, it was said.

6.   At the outset we drew to Mr  Fadina's  attention  paragraph  7  of  the
    chronology with which he had provided us.   There it is said  that  the
    appellant left the United Kingdom as a visitor in October 2006  as  his
    two year multiple entry visit visa expired on 24  November  2006.    We
    suggested to Mr Fadina that it appeared that the appeal  was  abandoned
    under  the  provisions  of  Section  104(4)(b)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

7.   Mr Fadina referred us to rule 18 of the Procedure Rules.   This  was  a
    point that he had also made at paragraph 4 of  his  skeleton  argument.
    He argued that there had been a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to notify the  Tribunal  of  an  event  specified  in
    section 104(4) of the 2002 Act having  taken  place.   Mr  Fadina  also
    referred us to the copy of the appellant's passport in  the  bundle  at
    page 8 and made the point that the appellant had to go back to  Nigeria
    since his visa was shortly to come to an end.   He  said  that  at  the
    date of the reconsideration application the appellant had not left  the
    United Kingdom but he had had to leave because he would  have  been  in
    breach of his leave if he had remained.   If he had  not  come  to  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and was not here today the appeal would  be
    decided today and it had been sought to expedite the hearing though  he
    accepted that the Home Office had not been asked for  an  extension  of
    the appellant's leave.

8.   In his submissions Mr  Avery  referred  us  to  the  terms  of  Section
    104(4)(a) and relied upon what was said there.   The appellant's  entry
    clearance specified the conditions of entry, but he  still  had  to  be
    admitted by an Immigration Officer with  the  conditions  attached  and
    this was for the time limit and any other condition to apply.   Section
    104(4)(a) was meant to apply in this particular circumstance.  It  also
    must be the case that section 104(4)(b) applied.  He could have  sought
    to extend his stay and had not done so.  If the section had meant to be
    restricted to leave to enter or remain with regard  to  the  appeal  in
    question then it would have said so.

9.   With  regard  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  he  did  not  place
    particular reliance on this but argued that  by  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant could not pursue an appeal in any  event.   There
    was no scope for any different conclusion.

10.  Mr Fadina referred to a letter sent to the  court  on  23  August  2006
    asking for the appeal to be expedited.   The appellant had  been  aware
    that his leave was running out.  It was also the case as pointed out by
    the Senior Immigration Judge who ordered reconsideration that the point
    in the grounds had not been taken before the Immigration  Judge.    The
    Presenting Officer had had an  opportunity  to  raise  the  abandonment
    point.   The appellant had been allowed to enter the United Kingdom for
    the purposes of the appeal despite Section 104(4)(b).  He  referred  to
    the decision of Patel v Entry Clearance Officer Bombay  [1991] IAR 273.



11.  At the date of  application  for  entry  clearance  as  a  student  the
    appellant had entry clearance as a visitor, this having been granted on
    24 November 2004.   The student refusal had been on 21  December  2005.
    At the date of refusal the Immigration Officer  had  not  curtailed  or
    cancelled the appellant's leave to enter as a visitor.    He  had  come
    within the terms of the entry clearance in January 2006 and returned to
    Nigeria in late January 2006 and returned  in  July  2006,  going  back
    again to Nigeria in October 2006.   He had been granted leave to  enter
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom in January and again in July  for
    the purpose of a visit.   The rule 18 issue had never  been  addressed.
    He accepted that neither he nor the Presenting Officer had raised it at
    the hearing.

12.  We reserved our determination.

13.  Section 104(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    reads as follows.

    (4)  An appeal under Section 82(1) shall be treated as abandoned if the
        appellant -


        (a)  is granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or


        (b)  leaves the United Kingdom."


14.  This is an appeal under Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act, being a  refusal
    of entry clearance within the definition of "immigration  decision"  in
    Section 82(2)(b).

15.  The relevant parts of Section 92 of the 2002 Act state as follows:

    (1)  A person may not appeal under Section 82(1) while  he  is  in  the
        United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this section
        applies.


    (2)  This section applies to an appeal against an immigration  decision
        of the kind specified in Section 82(2)(c),(d),(e),(f) and (j).


16.  We deal first with the abandonment point.  It seems from  what  we  are
    told by Mr Fadina that the appellant was granted a two year visit entry
    clearance  on  24 November  2004.    Documentation  supporting   that
    submission is to be found at page 8 of the bundle.   As we pointed  out
    to Mr Fadina, the appellant did not have leave to enter  at  that  time
    but had been granted entry clearance which could lead to leave to enter
    if, as he did, he came to the United Kingdom.   He  did  not,  however,
    have leave to enter as Mr Fadina argued he had on 21 December  2005  at
    the time when he was refused entry clearance for the purpose  of  study
    in the United Kingdom.  He was granted leave to enter when he  came  in
    January 2006 and thereafter returned to Nigeria towards the end of that
    month.   He was again granted leave to enter when he  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom in July 2006 and we understand he returned to Nigeria in
    October 2006.

17.  In our view the wording of the statute is clear.  An appellant  who  is
    granted leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  or  leaves  the
    United Kingdom is to have an appeal  under  Section  82(1)  treated  as
    abandoned.  In particular we can see no limitation on  the  application
    of section 104(4)(b).  An appellant who leaves the United Kingdom  will
    find his appeal under Section 82(1) treated as abandoned.    Though  no
    doubt in this case there has been a failure by both those  representing
    the Entry Clearance Officer and those  representing  the  appellant  to
    fulfil the mandatory requirements set out in rule 18 of the Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 requiring any  party  to  a
    pending appeal to notify the Tribunal if they are  aware  of  an  event
    specified in section 104(4) of the  2004  Act  has  taken  place,  that
    amounts to no more than a failure to observe a procedural  requirement.
    We are concerned with an issue of jurisdiction in this case and rule 18
    and its operation or failure to observe it can have no effect on  that.
    The wording of section 104(4) is mandatory.   We are satisfied that the
    appeal is abandoned by statute and we have no jurisdiction to determine
    it.   The Immigration Judge materially erred in allowing the appeal.

18.  It is perhaps appropriate  for  us  to  deal  briefly  with  the  other
    ground, however for the sake of completeness.  This  is  a  refusal  of
    entry clearance and therefore it falls under Section  82(2)(b)  of  the
    2002 Act, as we have set out above.   The appellant put in a notice  of
    appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on the proper form, dated
    31 December 2005.  He was not in the United Kingdom at that time,  and
    gave his contact address as his home in Lagos. That  document  and  the
    accompanying letter with  it  is  his  appeal.   It  follows  that  his
    appearance at the hearing before the  Immigration  Judge  was  not  his
    appeal, but was simply his attendance at  the  hearing  of  the  appeal
    which had earlier been made on 31 December 2005.  Accordingly,  we  see
    no merit in the Entry Clearance Officer's second ground in  this  case.
    The appellant was not precluded by Section 92 from  appearing  to  give
    evidence at the hearing of  his  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision.   The point is no  doubt  an  academic  one,  since
    unless he had arrived in the United Kingdom illegally and attended  the
    hearing it would have to have been the case that  he  would  have  been
    granted leave to enter and  therefore  as  set  out  above  would  have
    abandoned his appeal in any event.

19.  As stated above, we conclude  that  the  Immigration  Judge  materially
    erred in allowing this appeal. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction in this
    case.




Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Allen
