
EN and AN (EEA reg 12: British citizens) Kenya [2008] UKAIT 00028

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Belfast                                       Date of Hearing:
19 February 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Deans

                                   Between

                                     EN
                                      &
                                     AN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellants:          Miss F. O'Hagan of Law Centre (NI)
For the Respondent:          Mr. P. Laverty, Home Office Presenting Officer


A British  citizen,  not  being  subject  to  any  of  the  restrictions  on
residence in the UK implicit and explicit in the EEA Regulations, cannot  be
regarded as "residing in the UK in accordance with  these  Regulations"  for
the purposes of reg 12, even if he has citizenship of another  Member  State
as well.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Kenya.  They appealed  to  the  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent Entry Clearance Officer refusing
    to issue them with family permits  under  Reg  12  of  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006   (SI/2006/1003).    The
    Immigration Judge allowed the appellants'  appeals  and  directed  that
    entry clearance be granted.  The  respondent  sought  and  obtained  an
    order for reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The basic facts are not in dispute.  The appellants are the sons  of  a
    woman who sought asylum in Eire.  During the course of  seeking  asylum
    in Eire she met and married a man of  dual  Irish/British  nationality.
    The marriage took place in Eire and following it she moved with him  to
    Northern Ireland: thus they now reside together in the United  Kingdom.
    The man whom she married was a farmer.  He is now unable  to  work  and
    receives Disability Living Allowance.  It is not suggested that he will
    be able to work again.

 3. The appellants' application was as the family members of the spouse  of
    an EEA national, and thus fell for consideration under reg  12  of  the
    EEA Regulations.  The relevant paragraph is  para  1,  which  reads  as
    follows:

        "12. -(1) An entry clearance  officer  must  issue  an  EEA  family
           permit to a person who applies for one if the person is a family
           member of an EEA national and -
        a) the EEA national -
            i) is residing in the UK in accordance with these  Regulations;
               or
             (ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom within six months
               of the date of the application and will be an  EEA  national
               residing in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
               Regulations on arrival in the United Kingdom; and
        b) the family member will be accompanying the EEA national  to  the
           United Kingdom or joining him there and -
            i) is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
             (ii) would meet  the  requirements  in  the  immigration  rules
               (other than those relating to entry clearance) for leave  to
               enter the United Kingdom as the family  member  of  the  EEA
               national or, in the case of direct descendants or  dependent
               direct relatives in the ascending line of his spouse or  his
               civil partner, as the family member of  his  spouse  or  his
               civil partner, were the EEA national or the spouse or  civil
               partner a person present and settled in the United Kingdom".



 4. There is no doubt that each of the appellants is "a family member of an
    EEA national", because "family member" is defined in reg 7 as including
    the direct descendents of the person or his spouse who  are  under  21,
    and "EEA national" is defined in reg 2 in such a way as  to  include  a
    person who has nationality of a member State  of  the  European  Union,
    other than the United Kingdom.

 5. In view of what follows, we should point out that there is  nothing  in
    the definition of "EEA national" that prevents a person  being  an  EEA
    national if he has dual nationality, one  of  the  nationalities  being
    nationality of the United Kingdom.

 6. The Immigration Judge considered the evidence before her  in  order  to
    determine whether the appellants were members of the  family  of  their
    mother's husband.  Her conclusions have enabled us to set out the facts
    as we have done.  Having reached those conclusions she wrote simply  as
    follows:

        "29. In light of my findings I am satisfied that the Appellants are
             the direct descendents aged under 21 of the Sponsor who is  the
             spouse of a 'Qualified person'.  I am therefore satisfied  that
             they  meet  the  requirement  of  Regulation  7  of  the   2006
             Regulations.
        Decision
                   30. I allow the appeal
         31. I direct that entry clearance be granted and as this is an  EEA
             appeal that the grant be expedited."

 7. Even in the absence of  a  representative  of  the  respondent  at  the
    hearing, we find this very surprising.  In order  to  have  the  relief
    which they sought, which was not entry clearance but  the  grant  of  a
    family permit under reg 12, the appellants had to do rather  more  than
    show that they were  family  members  of  an  EEA  national.   Further,
    however, they did not  need  to  show  that  the  EEA  national  was  a
    "qualified person".  Some  of  the  EEA  Regulations  require  the  EEA
    national to be a "qualified person", but reg 12 does  not.   It  has  a
    different requirement, which we shall have to examine in some detail.

 8. The application for reconsideration, even more surprisingly,  makes  no
    reference to  this  error.   Instead,  it  challenges  the  Immigration
    Judge's  assumption  that  the  appellants'  mother's  husband  was   a
    "qualified person", pointing out that as his income  was  derived  from
    Disability Living Allowance he was not a "worker",  the  only  category
    within the definition of "Qualified person" in reg  6  which  could  be
    applicable to him.  In submissions before us Miss O'Hagan attempted  to
    persuade us that because the appellants' mother's husband falls  within
    the definition in reg 5 of a "worker or self-employed  person  who  has
    ceased activity" he is necessarily to be regarded as a "worker"  within
    reg 6.  That submission is completely untenable.  The  purpose  of  the
    separate definition in reg 5, with its own sub-interpretation  in  para
    7, applying only to reg 5, is to define the  phrase  "worker  or  self-
    employed person who has ceased activity" where it occurs  elsewhere  in
    the  Regulations  (for  example  regulation  15(1)(c)).   If  the  word
    "worker" in reg 6 included such a person, it would  be  unnecessary  to
    make special provisions for him; it would also be unnecessary  to  make
    special privileges for workers who have temporarily ceased activity, as
    reg  6  does.   To  that  extent  we  agree  with   the   grounds   for
    reconsideration: the appellants' mother's husband was not and is not  a
    "qualified person".  But, as we have said, he does not need to be.

 9. What he needs to be is an EEA national who "is residing in  the  UK  in
    accordance with these  Regulations".   It  is  on  this  point,  as  we
    indicated at the hearing, by alluding to him as  a  "qualified  person"
    the Immigration Judge entirely failed to apply the relevant law.  There
    is, however, room for  doubt  about  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  "in
    accordance with these Regulations".   Miss  O'Hagan  submitted  that  a
    person who meets the requirements of the Regulations has to be regarded
    as residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  Regulations.
    The appellants' mother's husband does  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations in that he is a "worker or  self-employed  person  who  has
    ceased activity".  He must therefore be regarded  as  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations.

10. We are unable to accept  that  submission.   The  reason  needs  to  be
    unfolded step by step.

11. First, reg  12  is  not  required  by  European  Law  as  part  of  the
    implementation of the Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC.  As  the  Tribunal
    has pointed out in CO [2007] UKAIT 00070, reg 12 deals  solely  with  a
    process akin to the grant of entry clearance, rather than any right  of
    entry or residence as such.  Secondly, the feature of the present  case
    which raises these issues is that the appellants' mother's husband  has
    British nationality as well as nationality  of  another  member  State.
    Thirdly, for many of the  purposes  of  the  Regulations,  as  we  have
    indicated, what is required is that the person on whose rights  others'
    entry or residence depends be an EEA national  as  defined,  for  those
    purposes including a British citizen who  has  nationality  of  another
    country as well.  But the Directive itself does not  require  as  much,
    because it provides in Article 3(1) that:

            "This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens  who  move  to
        or reside in a member State other than that of  which  they  are  a
        national, and to  their  family  members...who  accompany  or  join
        them"(emphasis added).

    We do not need to consider precisely the implications of that  form  of
    words: suffice it to say again that reg 12 is different.  Regulation 12
    requires not merely an EEA  national,  but  an  EEA  national  who  "is
    residing in the UK in accordance with these Regulations".

12.   Fifthly, the Regulations contain provisions relating to the  admission
    and residence  of  EEA  nationals  as  well  as  to  their  removal  or
    expulsion.  The Regulations place limits on the length of time  an  EEA
    national may be in the United Kingdom and the purposes for which he may
    be here.  They permit the expulsion of the EEA national, but only under
    certain conditions.  They provide for certain documentation to evidence
    the rights of the EEA national to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Miss
    O'Hagan's submission is that a person who has  (together  with  another
    nationality) British citizenship is to be regarded as residing  in  the
    United  Kingdom  "under  these  Regulations"  by  right  of  his  other
    citizenship.  But that involves the  argument  that  his  residence  is
    subject to the restrictions in the Regulations: otherwise it would  not
    be residence "under these Regulations".  But a British citizen  has  no
    restrictions on the purposes for which he may be in the United  Kingdom
    or the length of time for which he may be here, nor can he be  removed.
    For these reasons we think that a person  who  is  a  British  citizen,
    although by virtue of some other citizenship he may be an EEA  national
    residing in the United Kingdom,  cannot  be  properly  described  as  a
    person residing in the United Kingdom "under these Regulations".


12.  That conclusion is entirely consistent with the view that reg 12 is  a
    matter of pure United Kingdom law, outside the requirements of European
    Law, because it has the effect of ensuring, for these purposes akin  to
    entry clearance, that a British citizen resident in the United  Kingdom
    is treated as such rather than as a national merely of a member  State.



13. For the forgoing reasons it appears to us that  the  appellants  cannot
    succeed in meeting the requirements of para  12(1)(a).   Their  appeals
    ought to have been dismissed rather than being allowed.

14. Even if they  could  have  met  the  requirements  of  that  paragraph,
    however, there appears to have been no consideration given  to  whether
    they could meet  the  requirements  of  reg  12(1)(b).   They  are  not
    currently in an EEA state, so they need to meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  family
    members of their mother and her husband.  Those rules  have  provisions
    as to maintenance and accommodation, and also (because their father  is
    apparently still alive and living in Kenya) they need to show under the
    requirements of para 297(i)(e) or (f) of the Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration  Rules  HC395,  either  that  their  mother  has  had  sole
    responsibility for their upbringing  or  that  there  are  serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  reasons  which  makes  their   exclusion
    undesirable.  No attention at all appears to have been given  to  these
    issues, presumably because  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  making  the
    decision was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  were  related,  as
    claimed, to  their  mother.   Whatever  the  reason  for  the  lack  of
    consideration, however, it is very difficult to see why the Immigration
    Judge regarded herself as entitled to ignore the matter altogether.

15. As we have said, the grounds for reconsideration raise  none  of  these
    issues.  There are,  however,  the  plainest  possible  faults  in  the
    Immigration Judge's determination.  The only assistance the Immigration
    Judge had in the absence of a Presenting Officer, was  that  from  Miss
    O'Hagan who appears before us.  Miss O'Hagan has not suggested that  we
    should limit ourselves to the matters  mentioned  in  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration: it would in our view be quite improper to do so, given
    that she did not take the Immigration Judge fully or accurately through
    the relevant issues at the  hearing.   For  that  reason,  because  the
    errors are so obvious, and because in any event the Immigration Judge's
    direction, being also inaccurate, could have no effect, it seems to  us
    that we should decide this reconsideration in accordance with  the  law
    as we have set it out, rather  than  feeling  obliged  to  confirm  the
    incorrect position made by the Immigration Judge.

16. For the reasons we have given the Immigration Judge materially erred in
    law.  We substitute a determination dismissing the appellants' appeals.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


