
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

    HK (Discrimination - refugees' family policy) Somalia [2006] UKAIT 00021


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  29 November 2005
                                        Date of Promulgation: 27 January
2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                   Mr J Freeman (Senior Immigration Judge)
                Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr T K Mukherjee, instructed by Islington Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

Even if dependency is a 'status,' the Secretary of State's  policy  for  the
admission of certain members of a refugee's  family  does  not  discriminate
unlawfully against other family members.  It is for the Secretary of  State,
not the courts, to decide policy on refugees' family reunion  R  (Carson)  v
SSWP HL applied

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  She appealed to an Adjudicator
     against the decision of the Respondent on 6 December 2001 refusing her
     entry clearance.  In a determination sent to the parties on 1 May 2003
     an Adjudicator, Ms Sarvanjan Kaler, dismissed her appeal.  She applied
     for and was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal, which dismissed her appeal in a decision sent to the parties
     on 11 June 2004.  She applied for permission to appeal to the Court of
     Appeal.  Permission was refused by the Tribunal, but  granted  by  the
     Court, which ordered by consent on 13 July 2005  that  the  Tribunal's
     decision be quashed and that the Appellant's appeal to the Tribunal be
     reheard.  By the time the consent order was  made,  the  Tribunal  had
     ceased to exist but there  is  no  doubt  that  the  quashing  of  the
     Tribunal's decision leaves undecided an appeal to it, which, following
     the commencement of the appeals provisions  of  the  2004  Act,  takes
     effect as  an  order  for  reconsideration  by  this  Tribunal.   Four
     children of the Appellant had claimed and have  appeals  dependent  on
     hers.

  2. The sponsor is also the Appellant's daughter.  She came to the  United
     Kingdom on 17 February 1999 and applied for asylum.  On 17  June  2000
     she was given indefinite leave to remain as a refugee.  The  sponsor's
     father appears to have remained in Somalia.  The sponsor's mother  and
     siblings, who are the Appellants in this appeal, went to  Uganda.   It
     has been the feature of the Appellant's case as put by Mr  Mukherjee's
     predecessor, Mr Taghavi, that  they  were  in  Uganda  illegally.   He
     asserted this in submissions to the  Adjudicator,  and  emphasised  it
     specifically in his  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal ("the Appellants (who were and continue to
     unlawfully reside in Uganda)"), before the Tribunal, where he asserted
     that there had been evidence to that effect  before  the  Adjudicator,
     and in his grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal ("her  family  are
     living illegally in Uganda").  We regarded these assertions as  rather
     unlikely, given that the sponsor's recognition as a refugee was  based
     on her clan membership and that Uganda  is  a  party  to  the  Refugee
     Convention and has a long record of acting as  a  haven  for  refugees
     from Somalia.  We therefore asked Mr Mukherjee what the  evidence  was
     that the Appellant and her children were in Uganda illegally.  He  was
     unable to point to any evidence:  on the  contrary,  he  showed  us  a
     grant of refugee status to them in Uganda which,  although  relatively
     recent, does nothing to show that their  earlier  presence  there  was
     illegal.  It is  no  doubt  unfortunate  that  counsel  has  at  three
     separate levels argued this appeal on the basis of a factual assertion
     which was both unlikely and apparently unsupported by evidence.

  3. The principal argument presented on behalf of the Appellant before the
     Tribunal and the Court of Appeal was that a letter from Barbara  Roche
     MP, apparently to one of her Parliamentary colleagues, amounted  to  a
     formal change  to  the  government's  policy  on  refugees'  families,
     sufficient to mount a "not in accordance with the  law"  challenge  to
     the immigration decision in this case.  There can be little doubt that
     this ground of appeal was entirely unfounded.   Although  it  was  not
     advanced  before  us,  we  put  it  on  record  because  the  previous
     determination of the Tribunal has  been  set  aside.   The  letter  in
     question reads, so far as relevant, as follows:

           "Under the Family Reunion  Concession,  a  minor  who  has  been
           recognised as a refugee can immediately apply  for  his  parents
           and any of their other minor dependent children to join them  in
           the United Kingdom.  Any application must be made at  a  British
           diplomatic post abroad."

  4. As the Tribunal noted in its previous decision, so far  from  changing
     existing  practice,  this  letter  merely  states  it.   There  is  no
     indication in the letter that any such application will be successful.
      What is being pointed out in the letter is that where the  person  in
     the United Kingdom has been  recognised  as  a  refugee  there  is  no
     necessary delay before an application by other family members will  be
     considered:  this distinguishes a refugee from others  who  have  been
     granted limited leave.

  5. Mr Mukherjee's submissions were now confined to two  discrete  points.
     First, he submitted that the decision of the  Respondent  was  not  in
     accordance with  the  law  because  he  had  not  followed  applicable
     declared policy;  secondly, the considerations  he  had  applied  were
     unlawfully discriminatory and so a breach of Article 14.  In order  to
     do justice to Mr Mukherjee's submissions, we need to set out the terms
     of the explanatory statement at some length.  It is dated  23/12/2002,
     and after summarising the sponsor's  immigration  history  it  records
     that an application was made on behalf of the Appellants and  that  HK
     was interviewed by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who  referred  the
     application to the Home Office, mentioning that she was looking  after
     the other  Appellants  and  that  one  of  them  had  cerebral  palsy.
     Paragraphs 3.1 to 3.7 of the explanatory statement give the  Secretary
     of State's  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  Appellants  were  not
     admissible under the Immigration  Rules.   The  explanatory  statement
     continues as follows:

           "3.8  The Secretary of State then considered if the  refusal  of
                 entry clearance was in breach of Article  8.   However  she
                 had been living with her cousin in the UK who had cared for
                 her and she had been apart from the  family  from  1999  to
                 2001 before they applied to her.  The  Secretary  of  State
                 was not satisfied that Article 8 would be breached.


           3.9   The Secretary of State  then  considered  the  application
                 exceptionally outside the Immigration Rules  in  accordance
                 with the Family Reunion  policy.   Under  this  policy  the
                 existing spouse and minor children are to  be  admitted  to
                 join a recognised  refugee  if  they  formed  part  of  the
                 refugee's  family  unit  before  she  fled  to  the  United
                 Kingdom.  In  compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances
                 consideration may also be given to the admission  of  other
                 dependant relatives.  Also the sponsor is not  expected  to
                 meet the maintenance and accommodation requirements of  the
                 Immigration Rules.


           3.10  It was stated also that the sponsor was suffering  illness
                 and worry about her family abroad (Annex B11) but there was
                 no  independent  medical  report  to  verify   this.    The
                 Secretary of State could still not be satisfied that  there
                 were sufficient compelling and compassionate  circumstances
                 to justify him exercising his discretion in the appellants'
                 favour and exceptionally grant entry clearance outside  the
                 Immigration Rules.


           3.11  The Secretary of State respectfully submits that by virtue
                 of paragraph 21 of Schedule 4 of the Immigration and Asylum
                 Act 1999 it is not open to the Adjudicator to consider  the
                 merits of this exercise of discretion.


             12. The Secretary of State therefore refused  the  applications
                 (Annex E).


             13. Although the Secretary of  State  was  satisfied  that  his
                 refusal decision was correct and  the  refusal  notice  was
                 valid he noted that the reasons given for his  decision  in
                 the notice  were  not  wholly  appropriate.   He  therefore
                 amends the notice to read as follows:

           Decision:


              1. On 6/12/2002 to refuse the first appellant entry  clearance
                 under   Paragraph   319   with   reference   to   paragraph
                 317(i)(e)(iv) of HC 395.
              2. On 6/12/2002 to refuse appellants 2 to  5  entry  clearance
                 under Paragraph 299 with reference to  paragraph  297(i)(f)
                 of HDC 395.

                 To:

           You have applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK as  the
           dependant of your daughter/sister who is present and settled  in
           the UK.  However in view of the fact that you have  been  living
           with your children/siblings in your own country  and  in  Uganda
           the Secretary of State is not  satisfied  that  you  are  living
           alone outside the  UK  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
           circumstances.  Also  that  there  are  serious  and  compelling
           family or other considerations which make  your  exclusion  from
           the UK undesirable.


           Furthermore the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you are
           financially wholly or mainly dependant upon your daughter/sister
           who is settled in the UK.


           Furthermore the Secretary of State is  not  satisfied  that  you
           can, and will be maintained and accommodated adequately  without
           recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  your  relative
           owns or occupies exclusively  as  we  understand  that  Ms  Jama
           receives   income   support   and   child   benefit   for   your
           daughter/sister Miss K.


           The Secretary of State has also considered your  application  on
           compassionate grounds outside the Immigration Rules  but  he  is
           not satisfied that there are sufficient  grounds  to  treat  the
           application in your favour."


  6. In submitting that the decision was not in accordance with the law, Mr
     Mukherjee referred us to an extract from a website which  is  appended
     to the decision of Collins J in R (Hamfi) v IAT and SSHD  [2004]  EWHC
     939 (Admin), whose reference he was unable to give us.   The  appendix
     is chapter 16 of  the  Diplomatic  Service  procedures,  dealing  with
     family reunion.  It is  dated  7  January  2004.   Mr  Mukherjee  both
     asserted that it was the policy applicable to this case  and  that  it
     was the policy upon which he relied.   Its  introduction  makes  clear
     that it is addressed to  Entry  Clearance  Officers.   Paragraph  16.2
     reads, so far as relevant, as follows:

           "16.2 - Eligibility of applicants for family reunion


           Only pre-existing families are eligible for Family  Reunion,  ie
           the spouse and minor children who form part of the  family  unit
           prior to the time  the  sponsor  fled  to  seek  asylum.   Other
           members of the family (eg elderly parents)  may  be  allowed  to
           come  to  the  UK  if  there   are   compelling,   compassionate
           circumstances (see below).


           The parents and siblings of a minor who has been recognised as a
           refugee are not entitled to family reunion.   Such  applications
           are considered under  the  criteria  above,  ie  there  must  be
           compelling, compassionate circumstances in order for the  family
           to be granted entry to the UK."

  7. Paragraph 16.3 is headed "Eligibility of sponsoring  family  members",
     and the relevant  part  is  headed  "Where  the  sponsor  has  refugee
     status".  The position relating to the sponsor's spouse  and  children
     is set out first, and the guidance continues as follows:

           "Other dependent relatives"


           Dependent children over the age of eighteen and other  dependent
           relatives (eg  mother,  father,  brother,  sister  etc)  do  not
           qualify for Family Reunion under  this  section  of  the  Rules.
           However, if there are  compelling  compassionate  circumstances,
           which warrant consideration of  the  application  'outside'  the
           Rules, ECOs have discretion to refer applications  to  the  Home
           Office for a decision on compassionate grounds.   However,  ECOs
           must be satisfied that the applicant was genuinely dependent  on
           the sponsor before his flight to seek asylum.


           If there are no compelling  compassionate  circumstances,  which
           warrant a referral to the Home Office, other dependent relatives
           should be considered under paragraph  317  of  the  Rules.   The
           usual settlement fees are payable.


           Other dependent relatives and over-aged children must also  meet
           the requirements of paragraph 317."

  8. Mr Mukherjee also referred us to the comments of Collins J in Hamfi at
     paragraph 53, where he points out that the hurdle in the policy is not
     necessarily as high as that in the Immigration Rules, for there is  in
     the policy no requirement that the  "compassionate  circumstances"  be
     "most exceptional", although they do have to be "compelling".  He said
     that the Appellant's position is similar to  that  recognised  by  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal in AH (Somalia) [2004] UKIAT 00027 in that
     there were circumstances which could be regarded as  compelling  which
     the Respondent had not  properly  examined.   He  submitted  that  the
     appeal should be allowed in the same way as it was in AH, so that  the
     Respondent could look properly at the circumstances in question.

  9. As we remarked at the hearing, it is very difficult indeed to see that
     those submissions have any force in this case.  On  the  face  of  the
     explanatory statement, this is clearly not a case where the  Secretary
     of State did not have regard to the questions posed by the  policy  to
     which reference has been  made.   On  the  contrary,  he  specifically
     investigated the circumstances and reached the  conclusion  that  they
     were not sufficient to merit the grant  of  entry  clearance  in  this
     case.  Nothing more could be required.

 10. (For the avoidance of doubt, we note that  the  word  "compelling"  as
     used in the policy is a term of art:   it  does  not  imply  that  the
     circumstances so described are such as to compel the  grant  of  entry
     clearance.  If it did, there would  obviously  be  no  scope  for  the
     exercise of discretion once "compelling  compassionate  circumstances"
     (whether with or without a comma after the first word) were  detected.
     The wording of the policy and the procedure under it, and the  wording
     of the explanatory statement makes it clear that the word is  intended
     to indicate that the circumstances are such as  to  compel  compassion
     rather than to compel entry clearance.)

 11. It is our clear view that the Secretary of State followed his  policy.
     He considered whether to exercise his discretion and decided not to do
     so.  It is not open to us to review the exercise of his discretion  on
     the ground that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

 12. Mr Mukherjee indicated that he had a further argument based on Article
     8 but conceded that it could not succeed if we were against him on his
     principal  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  grounds.    In   the
     circumstances, we do not need to consider it further:  we  pause  only
     to  point  out  that  arguments  mounted  on  Article  8  in  previous
     considerations of this appeal have  no  doubt  been  affected  by  the
     assertion that the Appellants were living in Uganda illegally  and  so
     could not be joined by the sponsor there.

 13. We pass now to Mr Mukherjee's second principal  submission  which  was
     that the decision in this case  was  unlawfully  discriminatory.   The
     starting point is the  fact  that  if  the  relationship  between  the
     principal Appellant and the sponsor were reversed - that is to say if,
     at the date of the application, the sponsor had been  the  mother  and
     the  Appellant  her  minor  child  -  there  would  have  been  little
     difficulty in securing the Appellant's admission under paragraphs 352D-
     F of HC 395 and associated declarations of policy, to one  example  of
     which we have made reference  earlier.   Similar,  but  not  identical
     arguments, can be raised in the case of the Appellants  whose  appeals
     are dependent upon that of their mother  and  who  are  the  sponsor's
     siblings.  Thus, it is said, the reason or one of the reasons why  the
     Appellants' application has failed is that they are not related to the
     sponsor  as  her  spouse  or  dependent  children  and   that   is   a
     discrimination against them prohibited by Article 14 of  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights, which provides as follows:

           "The enjoyment of the rights and  freedoms  set  forth  in  this
           Convention shall be secured without discrimination on any ground
           such as sex, race,  colour,  language,  religion,  political  or
           other opinion, national or social  origin,  association  with  a
           national minority, property, birth or other status."

 14. It appears to be accepted, and it is certainly clear to  us,  that  Mr
     Mukherjee's argument cannot succeed except by reference to Article 14.
      For the  purpose  of  considering  it,  however,  we  assume  without
     deciding first, that the Appellants all have rights "secured  by"  the
     Convention to be with the sponsor, and that their not being her spouse
     or minor children is a difference of "other status" within the meaning
     of Article 14.

 15. Mr Mukherjee's starting point was that the United Kingdom had a policy
     on family reunion and that there would be no purpose in such a  policy
     unless it had the aim of securing the co-location of all members of  a
     refugee's family in the country where the refugee had obtained refuge.
      He referred us to statements of family reunion made by the UNHCR  and
     submitted that in the general context of the  desirability  of  family
     reunion a distinction between different sorts of relationship  to  the
     refugee made no sense.

 16. We cannot accept that submission.  Family reunion is not a part of the
     Refugee Convention.  The views of the UNHCR, although always  entitled
     to the highest respect, are not part of UK law.  The Immigration Rules
     and the policy which we have been considering  embody  a  precise  and
     quite detailed, but  limited,  right  of  family  reunion  for  family
     members of a refugee granted asylum in the  United  Kingdom.   Neither
     the urgings of the UNHCR nor any other general views on what a  family
     reunion policy might be can override the precise terms which  we  have
     to apply.

 17. Within those terms, Mr Mukherjee's submission was that provisions  for
     family reunion that are confined to those in a particular relationship
     to the  sponsor  and  do  not  include  those  who  have  the  reverse
     relationship with the sponsor, are necessarily illogical and so cannot
     be either proportionate or justifiable.  Again, we  cannot  accept  Mr
     Mukherjee's submission.

 18. So far as it  concerns  the  present  appeal,  the  matter  is  almost
     concluded by a recommendation of the Council of  Europe  (the  parent-
     body of the European Convention on Human Rights) which is conveniently
     set out in paragraph 20 of AH.  It is in the following terms:

           "(1)  Member states hosting refugees and other persons  in  need
                 of international protection who have no other country  than
                 the country of asylum or protection  in  order  to  lead  a
                 normal  family  life  together,  should   promote   through
                 appropriate measures family reunion taking into account the
                 relevant case-law of the European Court of Human Rights.
           (2)   Members of the family of the refugee or  other  person  in
                 need  of   international   protection   covered   by   this
                 recommendation are the  spouse,  dependent  minor  children
                 and, according to domestic legislation or  practice,  other
                 relatives."

 19. That recommendation is, in our view, a clear  demonstration  that  the
     Council of Europe would not regard  a  policy  in  the  terms  we  are
     examining as one which was contrary to Article 14 of the Convention.

 20. Looking more widely at Mr Mukherjee's submissions,  however,  it  does
     not appear to us that there could be  any  basis  for  saying  that  a
     policy  based  on  marriage  or  dependancy  could  be   unlawful   or
     discriminatory.  The difference between those who are  dependent  upon
     others and those who are not is one which, particularly in the case of
     minor children, is at the heart of many areas of  law  of  the  United
     Kingdom and no doubt of most other countries.  Dependancy itself is an
     asymmetric relationship:  if A is dependent on B it  does  not  follow
     (although it may occasionally be the case) that B is dependent  on  A.
     Thus a policy based on dependancy is itself likely  to  be  asymmetric
     but  does  not  for  that   reason   breach   provisions   prohibiting
     discrimination.  Legal rules allowing a dependent daughter to be  with
     a mother who has obtained a particular civil status do  not  therefore
     entitle a mother to be with a daughter who has obtained the same civil
     status.

 21. During the course of argument, we referred Mr Mukherjee to R  (Carson)
     v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2005] UKHL 37, [2005] 2WLR
     1369.  At paragraphs [15]-[17], Lord Hoffmann  (with  whose  reasoning
     Lord Nicholls, Lord Rodger and Lord Carswell  expressly  agreed)  said
     this:
           "15.  Whether cases  are  sufficiently  different  is  partly  a
                 matter of values and  partly  a  question  of  rationality.
                 Article 14 expresses the  Enlightenment  value  that  every
                 human being is entitled to equal respect and to be  treated
                 as an end and not a means. Characteristics  such  as  race,
                 caste, noble birth, membership of  a  political  party  and
                 (here a change in values since the  Enlightenment)  gender,
                 are seldom, if ever, acceptable grounds for differences  in
                 treatment.  In  some  constitutions,  the  prohibition   on
                 discrimination is confined to grounds of this  kind  and  I
                 rather suspect that article 14 was also intended to  be  so
                 limited. But the Strasbourg  court  has  given  it  a  wide
                 interpretation, approaching that of the 14th Amendment, and
                 it is therefore necessary, as  in  the  United  States,  to
                 distinguish between those grounds of  discrimination  which
                 prima facie appear to offend our notions of the respect due
                 to the individual  and  those  which  merely  require  some
                 rational justification: Massachusetts Board of Retirement v
                 Murgia (1976) 438 US 285.
           16.   There  are  two  important  consequences  of  making  this
                 distinction. First, discrimination in  the  first  category
                 cannot be justified merely on utilitarian grounds, eg  that
                 it is rational to prefer to employ men  rather  than  women
                 because more women than men  give  up  employment  to  look
                 after childen. That offends the  notion  that  everyone  is
                 entitled  to  be  treated  as  an  individual  and  not   a
                 statistical  unit.  On  the  other  hand,  differences   in
                 treatment in the second category (eg on grounds of ability,
                 education,  wealth,   occupation)   usually   depend   upon
                 considerations of the general  public  interest.  Secondly,
                 while  the  courts,  as  guardians  of  the  right  of  the
                 individual to equal respect,  will  carefully  examine  the
                 reasons  offered  for  any  discrimination  in  the   first
                 category, decisions about the general public interest which
                 underpin differences in treatment in  the  second  category
                 are very much  a  matter  for  the  democratically  elected
                 branches of government.
           17.   There may be borderline cases in which it is not  easy  to
                 allocate the ground of discrimination to  one  category  or
                 the other and, as I have observed, there are shifts in  the
                 values of society on these matters. Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza
                 [2004] 2 AC 557 recognised that discrimination  on  grounds
                 of sexual orientation was now firmly in the first category.
                 Discrimination on grounds of old age may be a  contemporary
                 example of a borderline  case.  But  there  is  usually  no
                 difficulty about deciding whether one  is  dealing  with  a
                 case in which the right to respect for the individuality of
                 a human being is at stake or merely a question  of  general
                 social policy. In the present case, the answer seems to  me
                 to be clear. "
 22. Similar considerations, it seems to us, apply to the family reunion of
     refugees.  That is not a matter in which a right to  respect  for  the
     individuality for the human being is at stake.  The family reunion  of
     refugees is a question of general social policy,  provided  of  course
     that refugees themselves are afforded appropriate protection.  It is a
     matter which can properly be left to Parliament and the executive.

 23.  For  the  foregoing  reasons,  we  conclude  that  the  Adjudicator's
     determination contained no material error  of  law  and  we  therefore
     order that it shall stand.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:
