
MC (ss 88: meaning of "a passport") Gambia [2008] UKAIT 00030

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Glasgow                                       Date of Hearing:
14 December 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                           Immigration Judge Corke

                                   Between

                                     MC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BANJUL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. S. McDonald of IAS
For the Respondent:          Mr. A. Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer

In relation to an application for entry clearance, "a passport" in s
88(3)(b) of the 2002 Act means a valid passport satisfactorily establishing
the holder's identity.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Gambia, appealed to  the  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the respondent on 27 December 2006 refusing  him  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as the husband of a person present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.  The Immigration Judge held that in  the
    circumstances of this case the appellant had only a  limited  right  of
    appeal and he dismissed the appeal on  the  grounds  available  to  the
    appellant.   The  appellant  sought   and   obtained   an   order   for
    reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  apparently  in  2004.   He
    travelled from Gambia to Senegal and then from Senegal  to  the  United
    Kingdom on a false Liberian identity card and a Guinean passport  in  a
    name which is different from that which he now uses.  He claimed asylum
    in the United Kingdom using a story  that  was  false.   Following  the
    refusal of his claim, an attempt was made to remove him to Senegal, the
    country in which he had embarked for the United Kingdom.   In  Senegal,
    apparently for the first time, he told a small part of what is now said
    to be the truth,  that  is  to  say  that  he  was  from  Gambia.   The
    Senegalese authorities refused to accept him and he was returned to the
    United Kingdom.  He was granted temporary admission but failed to  obey
    the terms on which it was granted and absconded.  He started a business
    as a trader in jewellery in Edinburgh.

 3. In the course of that business he met the woman who is  now  his  wife.
    In March 2006, when the appellant had been  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom for nearly two years, they became engaged to be married.   They
    travelled to Gambia for the marriage, which took place on  19  December
    2006.  Although no question has been raised  about  it  previously,  we
    should point out that the appellant travelled on the document  that  he
    says is his own passport.  It was issued on 9 April 2003.   The  reason
    why that may be surprising is that according  the  appellant's  witness
    statement he gave his Gambian passport in April 2004 to the  agent  who
    supplied him with the false identity, false documents and  false  story
    that he used for his asylum claim.

 4. Following the marriage the appellant's  wife  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom, and he made the  application  which  is  the  subject  of  the
    present  appeal.   The  appellant's   application   was,   of   course,
    accompanied by  his  passport.   The  notice  of  decision  is  in  the
    following terms:

      "You have applied for entry clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
husband
      BUT:
        I am not satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  meet
        the requirements of paragraph 320(3) of the Immigration  Rules,  in
        particular:


            . I am not satisfied that you have  not  failed  to  produce  a
              valid national passport or other document that satisfactorily
              establishes your identity and nationality
      Because
        I have  considered  your  application  on  the  evidence  you  have
        provided.  This includes your responses to the minimum 57 questions
        on the visa application form and the documents you have  submitted,
        as well as any additional information provided by you in section 10
        of the visa application form.  The onus is on you,  the  applicant,
        to provide satisfactory information to evidence that you  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules.
        Home Office records indicate that you applied for leave  to  remain
        in the UK outside of the Immigration Rules in 2004.  At  that  time
        you did so under a different name, date of birth and nationality to
        the ones that you have now applied under.  I  cannot  therefore  be
        satisfied of your true identity and therefore I  am  not  satisfied
        that  you  have  provided  a  passport  or  other   document   that
        satisfactorily establishes your identity and nationality.
      I therefore refuse your application.
        Your application does not attract a  full  right  of  appeal  under
        section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
        Your right to appeal is limited  to  any  or  all  of  the  grounds
        referred to  in  section  84(1)(b)  and  (c)  of  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002" [that is to say that the  decision
        is unlawful by virtue of section 19B of the Race Relations Act 1976
        or section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998]."

    (The reference to an application for leave to remain outside the  Rules
    is unexplained.  It is not very obviously  a  reference  to  an  asylum
    application; but, for the  purposes  of  this  determination,  we  must
    assume that the information the Entry Clearance Officer had related  to
    the asylum application described by the appellant).

 5. The appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  Tribunal  were  simply  "the
    appellant meets the requirements of para 320(3)".  This is  perhaps  an
    unpromising ground, given the words of that sub-paragraph which we  set
    out below.  The ground was, however, expanded by  a  skeleton  argument
    before the Immigration Judge, which makes  two  substantive  arguments.
    The first is that, because para 320 includes the words "in addition  to
    the grounds of refusal of entry clearance", the respondent was  obliged
    to consider the application under the relevant substantive  Immigration
    Rules and to give his view on them as well as on para 320 itself.   The
    second is that the respondent had produced no evidence  supporting  his
    assertion that para 320(3) applied to this case.  The skeleton argument
    submits that the passport produced in connection with  the  application
    is indeed the appellant's own genuine passport.  Neither the grounds of
    appeal nor the skeleton argument deals specifically with  the  question
    whether the appellant had only a restricted right  of  appeal,  nor  do
    they  raise  any  of  the  grounds  which  would  be  arguable  if  the
    appellant's right of appeal is restricted.


 6. The Immigration Judge  dealt  with  that  issue.   He  found  that  the
    appellant's  right  of  appeal  was  limited.   He  noted   that   race
    discrimination was not  an  issue  in  this  case  but  considered  the
    appellant's human rights.  He found that the appellant's wife, who  had
    given oral evidence before him, was "wholly credible and  reliable"  as
    to the matters on which she had personal  evidence  and  that  she  was
    therefore able to corroborate the appellant's account of those matters.
     Because he accordingly found that the appellant had given  a  truthful
    account of his relationship with his wife he "gave weight", as  he  put
    it, to the rest of the appellant's account of his history, a matter  of
    which the appellant's wife  can  have  no  knowledge  except  from  the
    appellant.  The Immigration  Judge  said  that  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that any of the documents produced before him were  other  than
    genuine: he accepted them as genuine.  He gave little weight,  however,
    to one particular letter which merely asserted that inquiries had  been
    made as to the appellant's identity with a satisfactory result.

 7. Looking at the matter as a whole he concluded that  the  appellant  had
    established his identity to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Tribunal.   He
    nevertheless dismissed the appeal insofar as it relied  on  Article  8,
    because there was no basis for saying that the appellant's family  life
    with his wife could not reasonably be enjoyed in Gambia.  There was  no
    evidence that the appellant could not continue to live in  Gambia,  and
    his wife had said that she would go and live there  if  necessary.   He
    did not consider whether the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules relating to the admission of a spouse, because of the
    limitation on the rights of appeal.  He noted that it was open  to  the
    appellant to make a new application.

 8. The grounds  for  reconsideration  do  not  challenge  the  Immigration
    Judge's  conclusion  on  human  rights  issues.   They  are   concerned
    exclusively with the  question  whether  para  320(3)  applied  to  the
    appellant  and  whether  the  right  of  appeal  was  removed  by   the
    respondent's opinion of the genuineness of the passport.

 9. Paragraph 320 of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395
    reads, in part, as follows:

        "320. In addition to the grounds for refusal of entry clearance  or
        leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, and subject  to
        paragraph 321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry
        clearance or leave to enter apply:


        Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
        Kingdom is to be refused
        ...
        (3) failure by the person seeking entry to the  United  Kingdom  to
           produce to the Immigration Officer a valid national passport  or
           other document  satisfactorily  establishing  his  identity  and
           nationality;
        ...".

10. Section 88 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 reads in
    part as follows:


            "88. Ineligibility
        1) This section applies  to  an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind
           referred to in section 82(2)(a), (b), (d) or (e). [The  decision
           under appeal is a refusal of entry clearance within the  meaning
           of section 82(2)(b).]
        2)  A  person  may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an
           immigration decision which is taken on the grounds that he or  a
           person of whom he is a dependant -
           ...
           (b) does not have an immigration document of a  particular  kind
              (or any immigration document)
           ...
        3) In subsection (2)(b) 'immigration document' means -
           ...
           (b) a passport,
           ...
           (d) a document which relates to a national of  a  country  other
              than the United Kingdom and which is designed  to  serve  the
              same purpose as a passport.
        (4) Subsection (2) does not prevent the bringing of  an  appeal  on
           any or all of the grounds referred to in section  84(1)(b),  (c)
           and (g).

11. The grounds for reconsideration, and the skeleton argument  before  us,
    expanded by Mr. McDonald in his oral submissions, take the  point  that
    the wording of s  88(3)(b)  does  not  specify  that  the  passport  in
    question must be in any sense a valid one, and that no such requirement
    should be implied into the section.  It is submitted on the appellant's
    behalf that it would  be  wrong  in  principle  if  an  appellant  were
    deprived of a right of appeal  merely  by  the  respondent's  assertion
    about the documents produced in connection with the application; and it
    is further asserted that an applicant who produces a  passport  is  not
    caught by s 88 merely by the  respondent's  view  of  the  validity  or
    genuineness of the passport.


12. These submissions must be rejected.  It is clear from the terms of s 88
    that the point of reference is the reasons for  the  refusal,  not  the
    accuracy or validity of those reasons.  If the ground for  the  refusal
    is one of those specified in s 88(2), the appeal  to  the  Tribunal  is
    limited to the grounds specified in s 88(4).

13. The question then is whether refusing an application on the ground that
    a passport tendered by the  appellant  is  not  "a  passport  or  other
    document   that   satisfactorily   establishes   your   identity    and
    nationality", with an explanation that the supporting  reason  is  that
    the appellant had previously dealt with the United Kingdom  authorities
    in a different name and identity, is "the grounds  that  the  applicant
    does not have a passport", to take the appropriate words from s 88.

14. Mr. McDonald supported his submission that the appellant was not caught
    by s 88 by reference to other statutory provisions, showing that  there
    is sometimes a specific requirement of a valid passport.   He  referred
    us also to R (NA) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 759, in  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal examined para 320(3) in the context of a person who  produced  a
    passport of a type that the  Secretary  of  State,  in  an  attempt  to
    regulate the decisions of Entry Clearance Officers, had decided was not
    to be accepted as evidence of validity.  We have found the decision  in
    NA to be of little assistance in this  appeal.   The  Court  there  was
    concerned with a phrase in the Immigration Rules referring specifically
    to a "valid" passport, and  was  concerned  with  a  question  entirely
    different from that which we have to answer.

15. We recognise that there are provisions in the  statutes,  in  statutory
    instruments, and in the Immigration Rules which are more specific  than
    the simple phrase "a passport" used in s 88.  We do not, however,  find
    that that fact is of assistance to the appellant in  this  appeal.   If
    the appellant's submission were to be accepted, it would follow that  s
    88 would not restrict the appellant's rights of appeal if any  document
    being, or purporting to be, a passport were produced in connection with
    the application.  For example,  an  appellant  might  produce  a  valid
    passport  belonging  to  somebody  else:  that  would  undoubtedly   be
    providing a passport, but  it  is  inconceivable  that  being  able  to
    produce someone else's passport was intended by the legislature  to  be
    of any relevance in this context.  It therefore follows that there must
    be some implied restriction on the general  words  "a  passport".   The
    appellant's submission that there is no restriction  simply  cannot  be
    right.

16. Paragraph 4(2)(a) of  Schedule  2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  in
    relation to the examination of passengers by an immigration officer  on
    their arrival in the United Kingdom,  provides  that,  if  required,  a
    person shall "produce either a valid passport with photograph  or  some
    other document satisfactorily establishing his identity and nationality
    or citizenship".  Mr. McDonald referred us to that as an example of the
    type of statutory wording which he sought to contrast with that used in
    s 88.  Although we reject his argument that s 88 contains  no  inherent
    or implied qualification at all, para 4(2)(a) of Schedule 2 is of  some
    interest, because it provides an indication of  the  sort  of  document
    that might be demanded from a successful applicant for entry  clearance
    on his arrival in the United Kingdom.  More specifically to  the  point
    is para 24 of the Immigration Rules.  That is as follows:

        "The following must produce to  the  Immigration  Officer  a  valid
        passport or other identity document endorsed with a United  Kingdom
        entry clearance issued to him for the purpose for  which  he  seeks
        entry:
                  i) a visa national;
                 ii)  any  other  person  (other  than  British   Nationals
                     (Overseas), a British overseas territories citizen,  a
                     British Overseas citizen, A British  protected  person
                     or a person who under the British Nationality Act 1981
                     is a British subject)  who  is  seeking  entry  for  a
                     period exceeding six months or is seeking entry for  a
                     purpose for which prior entry  clearance  is  required
                     under these Rules.
      Such a person will be refuse leave to enter if he has no such  current
        entry clearance.  Any other  person  who  wishes  to  ascertain  in
        advance whether he is eligible for admission to the United  Kingdom
        may apply for the issue of an entry clearance."

17. It is clear  from  that  paragraph  that  an  entry  clearance,  to  be
    effective, must be endorsed in "a  valid  passport  or  other  identity
    document".  A person who applies for entry clearance must be  intending
    to obtain an effective entry clearance, and so  must  be  intending  to
    obtain an entry clearance which complies with the requirements of  para
    24.  Similarly, an Entry Clearance Officer can  be  concerned  only  to
    provide entry clearance by way of endorsement on a document of the sort
    described in para 24, because endorsement on any other  document  would
    be ineffective for the purpose of giving entry clearance.

18. For these reasons it appears to us that  para  24  of  the  Immigration
    Rules sheds a great deal of light on what must be meant by "a passport"
    in s 88.  Insofar as it applies to decisions on  entry  clearance,  the
    requirement of a passport must be seen  as  a  requirement  to  have  a
    passport of the sort which, if an entry clearance was endorsed  on  it,
    would meet the requirements of para 24.  It therefore  needs  to  be  a
    valid passport.  Further, because on arrival in the  United  Kingdom  a
    person may  be  subject  to  examination  under,  amongst  others,  the
    provisions of para 4(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act,  it  must  be  a
    passport which establishes his identity.

19. We therefore conclude that insofar as s 88 refers to refusals of  entry
    clearance, the phrase "a passport" in s 88(3)(b) is to be  taken  as  a
    reference to a passport, the endorsement of which with entry clearance,
    would enable the appellant to meet the requirements of para 24  of  the
    Immigration Rules and, if required to do so, para 4(2)(a) of Schedule 2
    to the 1971 Act.  For those purposes it needs to be a passport which is
    valid and which satisfactorily establishes his identity.   The  refusal
    of entry clearance on the ground that a passport is not valid or on the
    ground that the passport produced does not  establish  the  applicant's
    identity is a refusal on a ground specified in s 88 and, in  accordance
    with the provisions of that section, the applicant's  right  of  appeal
    against the adverse decision is limited.

20. The Immigration  Judge  treated  the  appeal  as  so  limited  and  our
    conclusion is that he was right to do so.  He did also  find  that  the
    passport was genuine and that the appellant's identity is as  indicated
    in it.  In case there should be further litigation on  this  matter  we
    ought perhaps to indicate that we might not have been so ready to reach
    that conclusion.  The appellant himself is abroad and thus gave no oral
    evidence before the Immigration Judge.  The evidence  of  the  sponsor,
    which the Immigration Judge accepted as credible, can have very  little
    force in relation to the appellant's identity: the sponsor can know  no
    more than the appellant has told her.  The Immigration Judge was  shown
    the passport.  The  very  fact  that  a  passport  has  travelled  over
    national boundaries without its holder is itself  a  matter  which  our
    view calls for explanation, particularly where there  is  an  assertion
    that the holder is in fact someone different from the person  named  in
    the passport.  Further, it is noticeable that the appellant appears  to
    have given, for different purposes, three different addresses in a very
    short period of time.  His address as given to the  registrar  for  the
    district of Edinburgh in order to obtain a certificate of no impediment
    to the sponsor's marriage to him  was  an  address  in  Edinburgh;  his
    address given to the registrar  in  Banjul  some  six  days  later  was
    "Kololi K.S.M.D.  The  Gambia";  but  in  his  own  certificate  of  no
    impediment, dated a few days before either of these, he is described as
    "ordinarily residing at Siffoe Village in the Western Division  of  the
    Republic of the Gambia".

21. We, however, are not required to reach  any  view  on  the  appellant's
    identity or on the validity of his passport.  As we have said, the only
    matter before us is related to the  question  whether  the  Immigration
    Judge was correct in regarding his rights of  appeal  as  limited.   We
    have concluded that the Immigration Judge was correct.  It follows that
    (no race discrimination claim having been made) the  appellant's  right
    of appeal was limited to human rights grounds.  There is no  reason  to
    cast any doubt on the Immigration Judge's conclusions  on  that  issue,
    summarised in para 7 of this determination.

22. For the foregoing reasons, having found that the Immigration Judge made
    no material error in law, we order that his  determination,  dismissing
    this appeal, shall stand.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
