
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                OS (10 years' lawful residence) Hong Kong [2006] UKAIT 00031


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Bennett House, Stoke    Date of Hearing:  1 March 2006
      Date of Promulgation: 20 March 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                 Mr A A Wilson(Designated Immigration Judge)
                      Mr J W H Law (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Vokes, instructed by Nelsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mrs K Heath, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraphs 276A-D of HC 395 stand  alongside  the  published  concession  in
long residence cases.  The terms of the concession are not to be used as  an
aid to interpretation of the rules.  The rules mean  what  they  say  and  a
person who does not meet the requirements of the rules may have the  benefit
of the Secretary of State's exercise of discretion in his favour  under  the
concession.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a British National (Overseas)  from  Hong  Kong.   He
     appealed against the decision of the Respondent on  7  September  2005
     refusing to grant him indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom
     on the grounds of ten years' lawful residence here.   His  appeal  was
     allowed by an Immigration Judge, Mr D Taylor, but reconsideration  was
     ordered at the instance of the Respondent on the ground  that  it  was
     arguable that the Immigration Judge had erred in his interpretation of
     paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules HC 395.  Thus  the  matter  is
     before us.

The facts

  2. There is no doubt about the facts.  The Appellant has been engaged  in
     education in the United Kingdom since 1995 when he came here aged  ten
     in order to attend school.  He has been absent from the United Kingdom
     for a number of short  periods  associated  with  school  and  college
     holidays.  It is not suggested that  as  a  whole  those  periods  are
     sufficient to prevent him being regarded as having  been  continuously
     resident in the United Kingdom since early 1995.  There are,  however,
     three periods of absence which cause a particular difficulty.   First,
     in the summer of 1996 (when he was aged twelve) he had leave to remain
     until 30 June.  He did not depart until 3  July.   He  returned  on  9
     September, and was granted  leave  to  enter  apparently  without  any
     difficulty.  Secondly, in the summer of 1997 he had  leave  to  remain
     until 31 October.  He did not depart until 6 December.  On his  return
     on 5 January 1998 he was granted  leave  to  enter,  again  apparently
     without any difficulty.  Thirdly, in the summer of 2002 he  had  leave
     to remain until 3 September.  He  appears  to  have  remained  in  the
     United Kingdom until some time in December.  When he  returned  on  14
     January 2003, he was granted leave to enter, again apparently  without
     any difficulty.

The law

  3. The grant of indefinite leave to remain to  those  who  have  had  ten
     years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom has its origin in a long-
     standing concession outside the Immigration Rules.  On 1  April  2003,
     paragraphs 276A-276D were inserted in HC 395 under the general heading
     "Long Residence".  We  shall  set  out  only  those  parts  which  are
     relevant  to  this  appeal.   Paragraph  276A  contains   definitions.
     "Continuous Residence" is defined as meaning:

           "Residence in the United Kingdom for an unbroken period, and for
           these purposes a period shall not be  considered  to  have  been
           broken where an appellant is absent from the United Kingdom  for
           a period of six months or less at any one  time,  provided  that
           the applicant in question has existing limited leave to enter or
           remain upon their departure and return",

      but the  paragraph  goes  on  to  provide  that  continuity  shall  be
      considered to have been broken in a number of circumstances,  none  of
      which is said to apply to this Appellant.  By the terms  of  paragraph
      276A(b), "lawful residence" means:


           "residence which is continuous residence pursuant to:


              i) existing leave to enter or remain;  or
             ii) temporary admission within s11 of the 1971 Act where  leave
                 to enter or remain is subsequently granted;
           ..."


  4. Paragraph 276B  provides  that  the  requirements  to  be  met  by  an
     applicant for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
     residence in the United Kingdom are that he has had at least ten years
     continuous residence in the United Kingdom and that "having regard  to
     the public interest there are no reasons why it would  be  undesirable
     for him to be given indefinite leave to remain", various grounds being
     there set out.

  5. As we have indicated, the practice of  granting  indefinite  leave  to
     remain  originated  in  a  concession.   At  the  hearing  before  the
     Immigration Judge, the Home Office Presenting Officer stated that  the
     concession  had  been  withdrawn  when  the  rules  relating  to  long
     residence were introduced.  That was  not  true.   Not  only  had  the
     concession not been withdrawn then, but we were told by  both  parties
     before us that on 28 February 2006 the concession  still  appeared  on
     the  Home  Office  website,  within  the   Immigration   Directorate's
     instructions.  The chapter in question is Chapter 18, headed "The Long
     Residence Concession" and the version we have seen is dated  September
     2004.  It begins, rather surprisingly, as follows:

           "1.   Introduction
                 There is no provision within the Immigration  Rules  for  a
                 person to be granted indefinite leave to remain  solely  on
                 the basis of the length of his or her residence.  The grant
                 of indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  lengthy
                 continuous residence is discretionary, each case should  be
                 considered on its merits."

  6. There is a note on background and  there  are  further  provisions  of
     which we give edited extracts for present purposes as follows:

           "2.   Considerations
                 When considering an application,  where  a  person  has  10
                 years or more continuous lawful residence,  ...  indefinite
                 leave to remain should normally be granted in  the  absence
                 of any strong countervailing factors  [none  of  which  are
                 said to exist in the present case].


                 Applications from people who have not  completed  10  years
                 continuous lawful residence  should  normally  be  refused,
                 unless there are very strong compelling circumstances. ...

           3.    Lawful Residence
                 Where a person has completed  10  years  continuous  lawful
                 residence, he should normally be granted  indefinite  leave
                 to remain without enquiry.


                 When considering whether  a  person  has  remained  in  the
                 United  Kingdom  lawfully  for  10  years,  the   following
                 breaches of  conditions  made  for  the  purposes  of  this
                 concession be considered as lawful:


                    . A short delay in submitting an  application,  provided
                      the application is subsequently granted;
                 ...

           5.    What constitutes Continuous Residence
                 Continuity need not be broken by a small  number  of  short
                 absences abroad of up to six months at any one time  during
                 the 10 year period.   These  absences  should  normally  be
                 ignored, unless such trips are frequent. ... In  each  case
                 the strengths that the ties  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                 reason for, and effect of the absence should be taken  into
                 account.


           ...


             10. Refusal of Indefinite Leave to Remain
                 Applications that do not meet the criteria set out  in  the
                 above paragraphs should  normally  be  refused  unless  the
                 circumstances are particularly exceptional and it would, in
                 view of those exceptional circumstances be unreasonable  to
                 consider removal.  Any case where it is proposed to  refuse
                 the application despite the  lengthy  residence  should  be
                 referred to a senior officer.


                 Applications for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of
                 long residence which fall for  refusal  should  be  refused
                 under Paragraph 322(1) of  HC  395  (no  provision  in  the
                 Rules)."

The Immigration Judge's determination

  7. Despite the Presenting Officer's assertion, the Immigration Judge  had
     the terms of the concession before him as it  was  produced  by  those
     acting for the Appellant, and he therefore took  it  into  account  in
     making his determination.  It is not suggested that he was wrong to do
     so.  He accepted the Appellant's evidence  that  his  overstaying  was
     accidental.  The Immigration  Judge  noted  that  there  had  been  no
     difficulty in the Appellant's obtaining leave to enter  on  his  three
     returns after the periods when he had departed without existing leave.



  8. Paragraphs 16 and 17 of the Immigration Judge's determination  are  as
     follows:

           "16.   As  to  the  interpretation  of  paragraph  276A  of  the
                 Immigration Rules I  concur  with  the  submission  of  the
                 appellant's Counsel that, for the purposes  of  considering
                 whether there has been continuous lawful residence for  the
                 requisite ten years, the requirement under 276A(a) for  the
                 applicant to have existing leave to enter  or  remain  upon
                 departure and return must be read in the  context  of  sub-
                 paragraph (b)(ii) which provides that there  is  continuous
                 residence which becomes lawful  where  leave  to  enter  or
                 remain is subsequently granted.  In other words the  hiatus
                 is cancelled  retroactively  by  the  subsequent  grant  of
                 admission.


           17.   As to the respondent's declared policy in such  matters  I
                 find it to be highly relevant that the Immigration  Officer
                 did not seek to apply paragraph 320(11) of the  Immigration
                 Rules on any of the three occasions in question.  Paragraph
                 320(11), as I have stated above,  provides  that  leave  to
                 enter where there has been an earlier breach of time limits
                 should normally be refused.  But this appellant was granted
                 leave to enter on each of the three occasions  without  any
                 difficulty at all.  It was only on the third occasion  that
                 the  problem  was  pointed  out  to   him   but   he   was,
                 nevertheless, given leave to enter.   I  am  reinforced  in
                 that view by the respondent's declared policy  on  the  IND
                 website at chapter 18 to which I have referred  above.   It
                 is abundantly clear  that  the  respondent's  policy  takes
                 account of breaches of conditions  in  the  ten  year  long
                 residence  rules  where  an  application  is   subsequently
                 granted.  The respondent's policies may equally be  deduced
                 from the document prepared by  the  appellant's  solicitors
                 setting out 20 similar cases.  Those decisions support  the
                 appellant's position and I note that no answer or  evidence
                 in reply was given on this issue by the respondent."

  9. The Immigration Judge concluded that the Immigration  Officer  dealing
     with the applicant's leave to enter on each of the three occasions had
     effectively  waived  the  immediately  previous  non-compliance.    He
     decided as a result that the  decision  against  which  the  Appellant
     appealed was one which was not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
     Rules as he interpreted them and that, in addition, the  Secretary  of
     State had not applied his own policy.

The application for review and the reconsideration hearing

 10. The Secretary of State sought reconsideration on the  basis  that,  on
     the facts as found, the Appellant did not meet the requirements of the
     Immigration  Rules  and  that,  if  application  of  a   discretionary
     concession was in issue, the Immigration Judge ought to  have  allowed
     the Secretary of State to exercise his discretion by holding that  the
     application was still outstanding before him.

 11. At the hearing, Mr  Vokes,  for  the  Appellant,  submitted  that  the
     differences between the concession and the Immigration Rules  amounted
     to direct contradiction unless the concession was used as  an  aid  to
     interpret the Rules.  His case  was  therefore  that  the  Immigration
     Judge's use of the concession to assist in interpreting the  rule  was
     correct and that the Appellant had indeed  been  entitled  to  succeed
     under the Immigration Rules.  Mrs Heath, for the Respondent, submitted
     that the Rules were clear and that the  existence  of  the  concession
     would at best only justify  the  Immigration  Judge  in  allowing  the
     appeal in order that the Secretary of State could consider whether  to
     apply the concession to the Appellant.

Discussion

 12. There is no doubt that the difficulties that have arisen in this  case
     arise at least partly from the co-existence of the concession and  the
     Rules.  There is no reason in principle why a rule  and  a  concession
     should not exist side by side, but two matters in this case  cause  us
     considerable concern.

 13. The first is the Presenting Officer's denial at the hearing  that  the
     concession was still in force.  We do not suggest that the  Presenting
     Officer was acting in anything other than entire good faith (and it is
     right to say that Mrs Heath readily accepted the error and  apologised
     for it) but it is troublesome.

 14. Secondly, the concession denies the existence of relevant  Immigration
     Rules.  It does so specifically in its opening sentences, and it  does
     so again in its closing  sentences  when  it  suggests  that  refusals
     should be made under paragraph 322  (appropriate  for  situations  for
     which there is no Immigration Rule) rather than paragraph 276D,  which
     has been the appropriate rule since 1 April 2003.  Immigration law  is
     in any event far from simple.  Everyone involved in it ought, however,
     to be able to have some confidence that the system of immigration  law
     promoted  and  administered  by  the   Immigration   and   Nationality
     Department of the Home Office is coherent.  It is  difficult  to  take
     that view when one finds  that  the  draftsman  and  revisers  of  the
     Immigration  Directorate's  instructions  are  so   unaware   of   the
     Immigration Rules as to deny the existence of  individual  Immigration
     Rules and that Home Office Presenting Officers (who  know  the  Rules)
     are so ignorant of the Immigration Directorate's  instructions  as  to
     deny the existence of individual concessions.  As Mr Vokes  submitted,
     members of the public and lawyers who are trying to discover what  the
     law and practice is are entitled to a better service than that.

 15. That said, however, we do not accept Mr  Vokes'  submission  that  the
     concession in the Immigration Directorate's instructions  is  properly
     used as an aid to the interpretation of the Rules.  We  say  that  for
     three reasons.  The first is that it pre-dates the Rule;   the  second
     is that it specifically distances itself from the Rule (by denying the
     latter's existence).  The third is that if it is so used  it  has  the
     effect of contradicting the Rule by not requiring  existing  leave  in
     circumstances in which the Rule  does  require  existing  leave.   For
     reasons which we explain below, there is no need to  interpret  either
     the Rule or the concession in a way which would diminish the effect of
     both.

 16. The Immigration Judge accordingly made an error of law  in  using  the
     concession as an aid to the interpretation of the Rule.

 17. The Immigration Judge also erred in law in his approach  to  paragraph
     276A(b).  We cannot  understand  quite  how  experienced  counsel  who
     appeared before the Immigration Judge came to make the submission that
     the effect of paragraph  276A(b)(ii)  was  to  cause  the  Appellant's
     overstaying in the present case to be regarded  as  lawful  residence.
     He must have been aware that the Appellant had never been granted  any
     temporary admission.  Nevertheless, it is clear that  the  Immigration
     Judge accepted his submission to that effect.  The  Immigration  Judge
     erred in law in so doing.

 18. In our judgment, those errors were material because  as  a  result  of
     them the Immigration Judge imposed a meaning on paragraph 276B  which,
     properly interpreted, it cannot bear.

 19. Despite the errors to which we have drawn attention in the wording  of
     Chapter 18 of the Immigration Directorate's instructions, it seems  to
     us that the co-existence of the Rules and the concession  is  entirely
     understandable.  The Rules give, in essence,  a  right  to  indefinite
     leave to remain after ten years' lawful residence, but that  right  is
     contingent  on  there  having  been  no  illegality.   The  concession
     survives the introduction of the Rule to  lay  out  the  terms  of  an
     exercise of discretion to grant indefinite leave to remain  after  ten
     years residence which has not been entirely lawful.  It is  better  to
     have a  right  than  to  have  the  possibility  of  benefit  under  a
     discretion.  That is why, as the Tribunal held in HS (Long Residence -
     effect of IDI September 2004) Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00169,  the  Rules
     should be applied first.

 20. Absences from the United Kingdom are treated differently under the two
     systems.  Under the Rule, a period of absence associated with no taint
     of illegality is not considered to break the continuity of  residence.
     A period of absence following a period of overstaying  does  not  have
     that advantage, so it no doubt is  to  be  regarded  as  breaking  the
     period of continuity.  The effect of that is that, under the Rule, the
     absence resets the clock, enabling a continuous period of  ten  years'
     lawful residence to  be  restarted.   The  right  under  the  Rule  to
     indefinite leave to remain after ten years'  lawful  residence  arises
     only when all the residence during the ten years has been lawful.

 21. Under the concession, in contrast, there is  no  absolute  requirement
     that every day of residence during the ten years be a  day  of  lawful
     residence.  The comments in the concession about  absences  impose  no
     such requirement, and the statement of policy under "Lawful Residence"
     in the concession indicates the possibility of condoning short  delays
     in submitting applications for leave to  remain.   A  person  who  has
     overstayed for one day may fail to meet the requirements of the Rules,
     but he may well have a strong case under the concession.

 22. Thus, although we have held that the terms of the concession cannot be
     used as an  aid  to  interpreting  the  Rule,  the  existence  of  the
     concession helps to make it clear that the Rule means exactly what  it
     says.  Cases that fall outside the Rule are amply dealt  with  by  the
     concession.

 23. In the present appeal, it is clear from the notice of refusal  in  the
     explanatory statement, and was we think accepted on both  sides,  that
     no attention had been given to the application of the concession.  (In
     view of what we have said above, it may well be that  the  Immigration
     Officer dealing with the application had, like his Presenting  Officer
     colleague, a view that the concession did not exist.)  The application
     of the concession in an individual case is a matter for the  Secretary
     of State's discretion and it would not be right for us to  attempt  to
     make the decision for him.  What  we  do  say,  however,  is  that  it
     appears to us that the Appellant  has  an  exceptionally  strong  case
     under the  concession.   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  5  of  the
     concession, there has been no break  in  the  continuity  of  his  ten
     years' residence;  for the purposes of paragraph 3 of the  concession,
     the delays after the expiry of existing  leave  have  all  been  quite
     short and two of them were when the Appellant was  a  minor;   and  we
     cannot see that there are any strong  countervailing  factors  against
     the grant of indefinite leave to remain.

 24. We have found that the Immigration Judge materially erred in law.   We
     substitute a determination allowing the appeal on the ground that  the
     Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  in
     that it failed to apply existing policy.  We direct that the Secretary
     of State now consider the Appellant's application for indefinite leave
     to remain  under  his  policy  as  contained  in  Chapter  18  of  the
     Immigration  Directorate's  instructions  and  in  the  light  of  the
     contents of this determination.
                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
