

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT
                                 00038(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2011                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NICOSIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             lindita papajorgji
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Hopkin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


i) There is no burden at the outset of  an  application  on  a  claimant  to
demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience.

ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  establishes  only
that there is an evidential burden  on  the  claimant  to  address  evidence
justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is entered  into  for  the
predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

iii) The guidance of the EU Commission is noted and appended.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1.       The  claimant  (the  respondent  before  us)  is  an  Albanian
       national born in 1970. She married a Greek national, Mr Papajorgi in
       1996 in Greece.


    2.       In July 2010 she applied to the British  consular  authorities
       in Athens for a document enabling her to accompany her husband on  a
       visit to the United Kingdom for a few weeks returning to  Greece  in
       September 2010. She downloaded from the  appropriate  web  site  and
       completed the 115 questions in the entry clearance application form.
       In accordance with the guidance accompanying the form she  submitted
       her marriage certificate, her passport and evidence confirming  that
       her husband was both a Greek national and intending to accompany her
       on the visit.

    3.      On 3  August  2010  she  received  a  decision  notice  in  the
       following material terms:


         "You have applied for admission  to  the  United  Kingdom...as  the
         family member of a European Economic Area national...but I consider
         this to be a marriage of convenience because apart from your  Greek
         marriage certificate and a copy of your  husband's  Greek  passport
         you have not provided any documentary evidence  of  your  marriage,
         such as photographs of  your  wedding  or  your  life  together  or
         agreements in joint names such as  a  bank  account  or  a  tenancy
         agreement. ...I have refused your EEA family permit application  on
         this occasion because I am not satisfied  that  you  meet  all  the
         requirements of Regulation 12 of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006."


    4.        She  appealed   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   expressing
       disappointment that her marriage had been characterised  as  one  of
       convenience and pointing out that she had not been asked to  provide
       such documents but that the telephone  bill  was  in  her  husband's
       name. She offered to show her album  of  photographs  but  expressed
       surprise that a marriage of 14 years standing of  which  there  were
       two children with everyone living in a common household should be so
       treated. She had in fact provided information to this effect on  the
       application form.


    5.     On 19 October 2010 the Entry Clearance  Manager  maintained  the
       refusal decision. She said that:

         "the  appellant  was  advised  in  extensive  publicity  from  this
         Consulate of the required documents needed in order for  his  (sic)
         application to be assessed, the marriage  certificate,  certificate
         of family circumstances and a telephone bill in Greek were seen but
         not retained but the appellant has still failed to provide evidence
         to satisfy me that the marriage is not a marriage of convenience".

    6.       The First-tier judge determined the appeal on the  papers  and
       allowed it on 4 February 2011.  In a brief  decision  he  cited  the
       decision of the AIT in VK (Marriage  of  convenience)  Kenya  [2004]
       UKIAT 305 for the proposition that:


         "where the respondent alleges that the appellant's marriage is  one
         of convenience the burden of proof lay on him to show on a  balance
         of probabilities that the marriage was  one  of  convenience.  Good
         evidence was needed to establish the allegation".


       He noted what the claimant said about her marriage and there was  no
       evidence from the ECO to support his assertion and found that he had
       no reason to disbelieve her.

    7.       The ECO obtained permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       because the Judge had not realised that the decision  in  VK  [2004]
       UKIAT 305 was no longer authoritative. In 2008 the AIT  decided  the
       case of IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  where
       it concluded that where there is a dispute on the issue  the  burden
       of  proving  that  the  claimant  was  a  family  member  under  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations and not  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
       convenience fell on her.


    8.      The appeal was adjourned on  one  previous  occasion  when  her
       husband  attended  the  hearing  in  person  but  his  English   was
       insufficient to enable him to communicate. A Greek  interpreter  was
       booked for the subsequent hearing but he did not travel over  for  a
       second time and so no live evidence was taken.

    9.       We note in passing that the Entry Clearance manager  submitted
       that  in accordance with the case of  DR*38 (Morocco) (by  which  we
       conclude she was  referring  to  DR  (ECO:  post-decision  evidence)
       Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038) the Tribunal should  not  receive  any
       further evidence in the case. We shall comment on this in due course
       and note that in July 2011 the claimant submitted a clip  of  family
       photographs and the birth certificates of her children.

   10. When Mr Hopkin  opened  his  submissions  for  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer, we indicated that we were very  surprised  at  the  refusal
       decision, which seemed to be based on a failure  to  understand  the
       relevant principles of European Union law and the material parts  of
       the determination in IS.


   11. Mr Hopkin realistically acknowledged that the refusal of  the  entry
       clearance was indefensible on its facts, although  he  reserved  the
       right to argue that a failure to  produce  relevant  evidence  could
       justify the refusal of an EEA  application,  and  submitted  IS  was
       properly decided when it placed the burden of proof on the claimant.

   12. We indicated that we would dismiss the ECO's appeal from the Judge's
       decision to allow the claimant's appeal. We now give our reasons for
       doing so.

   The law


   13. The Citizens Directive (EP and Council  Directive  2004/38/EC)  sets
       out the basic rules of European Union law regulating  the  admission
       of spouses of EU citizens  who  are  not  such  citizens  themselves
       (third  country  nationals).  The  pertinent   principles   may   be
       summarised as follows:


              i. A visa or similar pre-entry document  may  be  required  of
                 third country national family members who  do  not  hold  a
                 residence card, but there must be facilities  for  granting
                 the visa without charge as  soon  as  possible  and  in  an
                 accelerated procedure  (Art 5  (2)).
             ii. Where a third country spouse travels without the  necessary
                 visa, the Member State shall not  turn  them  away  without
                 first affording every reasonable opportunity to obtain  the
                 necessary documents or prove that they are covered  by  the
                 right of free movement and residence (Article 5(3)).
            iii. A residence card operates as a visa and the documents  that
                 a Member State issuing a visa or residence card can ask for
                 in order to issue are set out by the  Directive  (Art  5(2)
                 and Art 10). In the case of a wife the  documents  are  her
                 passport, her marriage certificate and  evidence  that  her
                 husband is an EU national exercising Treaty rights (in this
                 case the right of entry for a short visit) (Art 10(2)).
             iv. Member States can take action to prevent abuse of rights or
                 fraud including action to prevent residence being  obtained
                 by a marriage (Article 35).
              v. Measures taken to prevent abuse of rights or fraud must  be
                 proportionate and subject to the procedural  safeguards  in
                 Article 30 and 31 (Article 35).
             vi. These safeguards include a reasoned decision on the  public
                 policy grounds on which  the  decision  is  based  (Article
                 30(2)), a right of  appeal to examine the  facts   and  the
                 legality of the decision to ensure that it is proportionate
                 and based on considerations in Article  28,  including  the
                 personal conduct of the claimant (Article 31 (3)).


   14. The United Kingdom has  taken  measures  to  prevent  parties  to  a
       marriage of  convenience  from  taking  advantage  of  the  Citizens
       Directive by providing in the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,
       regulation 2(1) that "spouse does not include a party to a  marriage
       of convenience".  No definition is given of marriage of  convenience
       but that phrase has been construed in the context of the immigration
       rules  as  a  marriage  entered  into  without  the   intention   of
       matrimonial cohabitation and for  the  primary  reason  of  securing
       admission to the country (our emphasis).  The  Minister  appears  to
       have applied this approach when introducing  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Order  1994  that  preceded  the  2006  Regulations  (see  Macdonald
       "Immigration Law and Practice "(Eighth Edition) 2010 at 7.100). Even
       on this approach intent to cohabit as man and wife  is  inconsistent
       with a marriage of convenience.

   15. In its decision in IS the AIT recognised the importance of EU law in
       this regard.  It found three reasons for  its  conclusion  that  the
       burden of proof lies on the claimant to demonstrate that  she  is  a
       qualified person under the Regulations. We quote the whole passage:


           "10. The third reason is to be found in the relevant  provisions
           of EU law.  So far as concerns the Citizens Directive,  although
           "spouse"  is  not  defined  so  as  to  exclude   marriages   of
           convenience, there is no doubt that "spouse" in EU law  bears  a
           meaning excluding marriages of convenience.  Article 35  of  the
           Directive is as follows:

                           "Abuse of rights
             Member States may adopt  the  necessary  measures  to  refuse,
             terminate or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive in
             the case of abuse of rights or fraud,  such  as  marriages  of
             convenience.  Any such  measure  shall  be  proportionate  and
             subject to the procedural safeguards provided for in  Articles
             30 and 31."

                     Preamble 28 is as follows:

            "To guard against abuse of rights or fraud, notably marriages of
             convenience or any other form of relationships contracted  for
             the sole purpose of enjoying the right of  free  movement  and
             residence, Member States should have the possibility to  adopt
             the necessary measures."


          11. The problem of marriages of convenience has  been  recognised
              by  the  community  authorities  for  many  years.    Council
              Resolution 12337/97 includes the following  text,  which  has
              never replaced or superseded:

                       "...
                 Noting that marriages of convenience constitute a means of
               circumventing the rules on entry  and  residence  of  third-
               country nationals,
                       ...
                       Whereas this  resolution  is  without  prejudice  to
               Community law,
                       ...
                 3.  Where there are factors which support  suspicions  for
               believing that the marriage is one  of  convenience,  Member
               States shall issue a residence permit  or  an  authority  to
               reside to the third-country national on  the  basis  of  the
               marriage only after the authorities competent under national
               law  have  checked  that  the  marriage  is   not   one   of
               convenience, and that the other conditions relating to entry
               and  residence  have  been  fulfilled.   Such  checking  may
               involve a separate interview with each of the two spouses.
                 4.  Should the authorities competent  under  national  law
               find the marriage to be one of  convenience,  the  residence
               permit or authority to reside granted on the  basis  of  the
               third-country national's marriage shall as a general rule be
               withdrawn, revoked or not renewed."

       12. As the Tribunal  remarked  in  Chang  (EEA  Nationals,  Spouses)
           Malaysia [2001] UKIAT 12 (at paragraph 37):

             "Of course a Resolution ... cannot  override  any  legislative
             provision:  indeed  this  one  is  specifically   subject   to
             Community law.  We are, however,  entirely  unable  to  accept
             [the appellant's representative's]  submission  that  it  'has
             nothing to do with European law'.  It is a statement by one of
             the legislative bodies, and as such is  entitled  to  respect.
             It relates to a subject covered by Council  Directives,  which
             are themselves not entirely clear.  In addition, it  would  be
             surprising if (as [the appellant's representative] essentially
             has  to  claim)  the  Council  was  so  ignorant  of  its  own
             legislation that it was capable of passing  a  Resolution  the
             whole contents of which were contrary to  Community  law.   We
             decline to accept that thesis."

       13. It is clear that the terms  of  the  Citizens'  Directive  allow
           national law to make regulations to prevent  abuses  founded  on
           marriages of convenience.  So  far  as  the  detection  of  such
           marriages is concerned, it is clear from the Council  Resolution
           that the relevant residence documents are not to  be  issued  if
           there are "factors which support suspicions for  believing  that
           the marriage is one of convenience", until  the  suspicions  are
           resolved in the applicant's favour.  That appears to us to be  a
           clear indication that, so far as EU law is concerned, the burden
           of proof,  as  it  is  called  in  English  law,  rests  on  the
           appellant, because, the suspicions  having  arisen,  the  matter
           will be resolved against him unless the suspicions are  resolved
           in his favour.   The  Resolution  clearly  indicates  that  what
           Wigmore calls "the risk  of  non-persuasion"  is  borne  by  the
           appellant.

       14. As we have said, these three reasons taken together lead  us  to
           the view that the burden of proving that a marriage is  not  one
           of convenience lies on the appellant.  We would,  however,  also
           associate ourselves with the wording of the  Council  Resolution
           to this extent.  Not every applicant needs  to  prove  that  his
           marriage is not one of convenience.  The  need  to  do  so  only
           arises where there are  factors  which  support  suspicions  for
           believing the marriage is one of convenience.   Translated  into
           the technical language of  the  English  law  of  procedure  and
           evidence, that means that there is an evidential burden  on  the
           respondent.  If there  is  no  evidence  that  could  support  a
           conclusion  that  the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience,   the
           appellant does not have to deal with the issue.   But  once  the
           issue is raised, by evidence capable of pointing to a conclusion
           that the marriage is one of convenience, it is for the appellant
           to show that his marriage is not one of convenience.

       15. If the burden of proof were on the respondent,  there  would  be
           room for argument that the standard should be  higher  than  the
           standard of the balance of probabilities.  As we have noted, the
           Tribunal in Chang thought that there was no reason in  principle
           to apply a higher  standard.   R(CPS)  v  Registrar  General  of
           Births, Deaths and Marriages [2002] EWCA Civ 1661, to which  Mr.
           O'Callaghan referred us, suggests the same.  As the burden is on
           the appellant, however, there  can  be  no  reason  at  all  for
           supposing that the standard is higher than that of a balance  of
           probabilities."

    16. Following this decision of the AIT,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  TC
        (Kenya) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]  EWCA
        Civ 543, 17 April 2008 affirmed that a marriage of  convenience  is
        an abuse of rights within the meaning of EU law and that meant that
        not every one of the factors set out in Article 28 of the  Citizens
        Directive such as length of residence is relevant in the assessment
        of whether the claimant is a party to a  marriage  of  convenience.
        Incidentally, we conclude  that  Macdonald   "Immigration  Law  and
        Practice" (Eighth Edition) at 7.144A  misrepresents  the  Court  of
        Appeal decision when it says that  the  Court concluded none of the
        Article 28 factors are in play in such a case. Pill LJ at [18] said
        that not every Article 28 factor would be relevant in  marriage  of
        convenience cases.

    17. The question of the burden of proof did not  arise  in  TC  (Kenya)
        where the  behaviour  of  the  spouses  was  suspicious  and  their
        evidence was disbelieved. The Court of Appeal at [16] had noted the
        earlier decision of the European Court of  Justice in the  case  of
        C-16/05 R (on the application of Veli Tum and Mehmet Dari)  v  SSHD
        where at paragraph 64 it said:

             "it must be borne in mind that, according to settled  case-law,
             Community law cannot be relied on  for  abusive  or  fraudulent
             ends (Case C-255/02  Halifax  and  Others  [2006]  ECR  I-1609,
             paragraph 68) and that the national courts may, case  by  case,
             take account -- on the basis of objective evidence -- of  abuse
             or fraudulent conduct on the part of the persons  concerned  in
             order, where appropriate, to  deny  them  the  benefit  of  the
             provisions of Community law on which they seek to rely":

    18. We entirely agree with the AIT in IS that EU law permits states  to
        take measures against marriages of convenience; that such marriages
        are regarded as a form of abuse and fraud,  and  that  the  Council
        Resolution suggests  that  where  there  is  reason  to  suspect  a
        marriage of convenience a visa need not be granted but  the  matter
        proceeds to investigation and a conclusion reached.   A  reason  to
        suspect a marriage of convenience would be part  of  the  objective
        evidence in the case to which Tum and Dari refers.


    19. The important point note however, is that there must be  reason  to
        suspect a marriage of convenience before  the  application  can  be
        suspended  pending  further  investigation.   We   emphasise   this
        important passage of the AIT's reasoning:

             "Not every applicant needs to prove that his  marriage  is  not
             one of convenience. The need to do so only arises  where  there
             are factors which support suspicions for believing the marriage
             is one of convenience.  Translated into the technical  language
             of the English law of procedure and evidence, that  means  that
             there is an evidential burden on the respondent.  If  there  is
             no evidence that could support a conclusion that  the  marriage
             is one of convenience, the appellant does not have to deal with
             the issue."

    20. This passage indicates that the AIT concluded  that  there  was  no
        burden on an applicant in an EU case until  the  respondent  raised
        the issue by evidence. If there was such evidence it  was  for  the
        applicant to produce evidence to address  the  suspicions.  In  our
        judgment such an approach can be described as one of an  evidential
        burden in the first place on the respondent and  then  shifting  to
        the claimant in the light of the relevant information rather than a
        formal legal burden. We agree with that approach.


    21. The impression we have obtained from various  parts  of  the  ECO's
        original reasons for the decision is that the  ECO  has  applied  a
        general policy of requiring applicants to prove that their marriage
        is  not  one  of  convenience,  and  in  this  context  treats  EEA
        applications in the same way as ordinary  immigration  applications
        under the Rules. The  ECO's  reliance  on  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
        evidence) Morocco * at least suggests this. That was an immigration
        case concerned with  the  Immigration  Rules  rather  than  a  free
        movement case under EU law. The AIT (Ouseley J presiding) concluded
        that, whereas s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
        2002 ("the 2002 Act"), as it was then drafted,  precluded  evidence
        of post-decision facts, it did not prevent the admission of further
        evidence to establish what the true picture was at the time of  the
        decision, and neither did it prevent post-decision evidence adduced
        to  demonstrate  the  reliability  of  an  assessment   of   future
        intentions.

    22. However, the AIT in IS concluded  at  [25]  that  an  EEA  case  is
        outwith the exclusionary scope of s.85(5) as the family  permit  is
        not an ordinary entry clearance within the meaning of s.82 and s.85
        of the 2002 Act[1].  In any event evidence to rebut  an  allegation
        of marriage of convenience is admissible under s.85 for the reasons
        given in DR (Morocco)*. Further the scope of an appeal  in  an  EEA
        case needs to reflect the  procedural  safeguards  referred  to  in
        Article 35 of the  Citizens  Directive  rather  than  national  law
        restrictions on the evidence to be admitted.  We have received  and
        noted the further evidence submitted by the claimant in July  2011.
        We would emphasise that EEA rights of entry are  not  exercises  of
        discretion generally afforded to Member States to  formulate  rules
        for the admissions of aliens, but the exercise of Treaty rights  to
        be recognised by states subject to the substantive  and  procedural
        provisions for preventing abuse and fraud.

    23. We asked Mr Hopkin whether  there  were  any  factors  which  would
        support such a suspicion in the present case. He could not point to
        any, and recognised that there were none. The consequence  is  that
        the application should have been granted when received and did  not
        require further investigation.

    24. What the ECO seems to have done is to reason as follows:-

    25. IS establishes that the burden is on the claimant to show that  the
        marriage was not one of convenience.


       i)  She did not produce  any  evidence  as  to  the  quality  of  the
          marriage such as photographs, letters etc,  when  she  could  have
          done so to discharge the burden;
      ii) The failure to produce such evidence justifies refusal because the
          burden  has  not  been  discharged,  and  /or  is  the  source  of
          reasonable suspicion

    26. The Entry Clearance Manager appears to have  agreed  this  implicit
        line of reasoning as she endorsed the  decision.  In  our  judgment
        each step in the reasoning was flawed.


    27. First, there is no burden on the claimant in an application  for  a
        family permit to establish that she was not party to a marriage  of
        convenience unless the circumstances known to  the  decision  maker
        give reasonable ground for  suspecting  that  this  was  the  case.
        Absent such a basis for suspicion the application should be granted
        without more on production of the documents set out in  Article  10
        of the Directive. Where there is such suspicion the matter requires
        further investigation and the claimant should be invited to respond
        to the basis of  suspicion  by  producing  evidential  material  to
        dispel it.

    28. Second, a suspicion cannot  arise  by  the  claimant's  failure  to
        produce photographs and the like.  The application form did not ask
        for such material to be submitted. So far as our own researches and
        those of Mr Hopkin are concerned neither did the published guidance
        note. If the ECO Nicosia has  been  publishing  local  guidance  to
        applicants, we have not seen it, and cannot  therefore  comment  on
        its contents. It is elementary that to draw an inference  from  the
        absence of something that was not asked for is  wholly  unfair  and
        perverse. Even if there was local guidance that did ask all spouses
        for such material to  be  produced  in  every  case,  it  would  be
        inconsistent with the application form itself, and in our  judgment
        would also be contrary to the provisions of the Citizens Directive.
        The documents that can be insisted on are set out  in  Article  10,
        and  the  claimant  produced  them.  Other  documents  only  become
        relevant  if  there  is  a  case  for  an  investigation.  National
        authorities cannot set up their own general criteria for  documents
        to support a claim for family membership in EU law. To do so  would
        risk distorting the application of  the  Directive  throughout  the
        European Union.


    29. Third, in any event, in this case by answering the questions in the
        form the claimant had produced the evidence that the marriage was a
        genuine one and could  not  be  considered  to  be  a  marriage  of
        convenience. As the Judge noted:

       i) The marriage had not been contracted shortly before  and  for  the
          purpose of entry to the UK, it had lasted some  12  years  at  the
          date of decision.
      ii) The application form revealed that both husband and wife lived  at
          the same address and shared a common telephone number as  well  as
          incidentally  informing  the  diligent  reader  that  there   were
          children of the marriage.
     iii) The claimant was not coming for an indefinite stay but a visit.

    30. Although neither the Directive nor the Regulations define it, as  a
        matter of ordinary parlance and the past  experience  of  the  UK's
        Immigration Rules and case law, a marriage of convenience  in  this
        context is a marriage contracted for the sole or  decisive  purpose
        of gaining admission to the host state.  A  durable  marriage  with
        children and  co-habitation  is  quite  inconsistent  with  such  a
        definition.


    31. These points are so obvious that we are  dismayed  that  the  Entry
        Clearance Manager approved the flawed decision  in  this  case  and
        that there was an appeal  from  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision.
        Although he quoted the wrong  case,  he  got  the  basic  principle
        right.  Of course, the application form need not be decisive if the
        ECO is in  possession  of  some  intelligence  or  background  data
        suggesting  lies  are  being  told.  In  those   circumstances   an
        investigation is both permissible and necessary  and  would  almost
        certainly involve an interview with one  or  both  parties  to  the
        marriage for an opportunity to be given for doubts to be dispelled.
        But that is not this case. The ECO did not challenge the claimant's
        answers to the questions in the form. If there had been  any  doubt
        about them, a telephone call to  the  landline  and  mobile  number
        given in the form as a point of contact might  well  have  resolved
        it.

    32. The visa should be issued promptly on application  unless  the  ECO
        has reasonable grounds to suspect a marriage  of  convenience.  The
        evidential onus of showing there are such reasonable grounds in the
        first place rests on the decision maker. It is a matter  of  regret
        that the claimant has had to wait 18 months to obtain her visa  and
        has only done so now by way of appeal and considerable  expenditure
        of public time and resources. There have been three hearings and  a
        number  of  case  management  decisions.   On  the  face   of   the
        information in the application  form  a  belief  that  this  was  a
        marriage of convenience is simply ludicrous. There  was  simply  no
        material to justify suspicion or an investigation.

Further observations on the burden of proof

    33. We have already expressed our agreement with the AIT in IS  that  a
        failure on the claimant to participate  in  the  investigation  and
        contribute information to dispel the reasonable suspicion may  lead
        to a lawful refusal of the application. If the AIT was intending to
        go further than this and decide that once  evidence  of  reasonable
        suspicion has been raised, there is a legal burden on the applicant
        to demonstrate that it is more probable than not  the  marriage  is
        not one of convenience, we would have reservations  about  such  an
        approach and the whole issue will need  further  examination  in  a
        future case where the nature of  the  dispute  requires  it  to  be
        decided.  In our judgment the first two reasons given for  the  AIT
        for its conclusion are unpersuasive of such a proposition  and  the
        third reason does not lead to such a conclusion.


    34. The first reason the AIT  gave  for  the  burden  of  disproving  a
        marriage of convenience being on the claimant was that it  fell  on
        the claimant to establish that she was a family member.   We  agree
        that the claimant must establish that she is a family  member;  but
        in the ordinary case she does this by producing the basic documents
        set out in the Directive.  Where there is no reason to suspect that
        the claim is fraudulent, or the marriage one of  convenience,  that
        is conclusive of the matter. Regulation 12 of the Immigration (EEA)
        Regulations 2006 does not in terms require the claimant to prove  a
        negative. She must prove that she is  married,  but  that  marriage
        will not avail if it turns out to be one of convenience.

    35. The second reason given was rule 53 of the Asylum  and  Immigration
        Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. This provision does not appear  to
        us to be relevant. It places the burden of  proof  on  someone  who
        claims an exemption from  an  immigration  decision  by  reason  of
        status, usually British nationality. That has no purchase here. The
        claimant is not claiming an exemption, she seeks the issue  of  the
        document that proves her right of admission because she is a family
        member and there is no reason to suspect fraud.

    36. It is clear that the justification for exclusion  of  marriages  of
        convenience from those otherwise entitled to a  residence  document
        under the Directive is to be found in the EU law principle of fraud
        or abuse of rights. That very much suggests that in any dispute  on
        appeal as to the nature of the  marriage,  it  would  in  the  last
        instance be for the respondent to satisfy the judge of the  factual
        basis of the personal conduct of the claimant relied on to  exclude
        her from the entitlement.  Thus if the respondent  were  to  allege
        that the claimant were a spy or a drug runner or involved in  other
        conduct detrimental to public policy,  on  the  ordinary  principle
        that he who  alleges  must  substantiate,  it  would  fall  on  the
        respondent to make that suggestion good, although the  Judge  would
        be alive to the difficulties of proof (see the recent  decision  by
        SIAC in SC/103/2010  Ekaterina  Zatuliveter  v  SSHD,  29  November
        2011.)

    37. It is not enough that the ECO honestly suspects there is a marriage
        of convenience; the claimant will only be  disqualified  if  it  is
        established that it is.  Adverse  inferences  may  be  drawn  by  a
        claimant's failure to provide data reasonably open to  her  in  the
        course of the investigation or appeal; but  that  cannot  form  the
        sole or decisive reason for the conclusion.  We  observe  that  the
        guidance of the  European  Commission  issued  in  respect  of  the
        Citizens Directive  COM 2009 313 2 July 2009 is explicit in placing
        the burden of proof on the state and invites the state to  set  out
        indicative criteria  for  and  against  the  proposition  that  the
        marriage is one  of convenience. We reproduce what we  consider  to
        be the material part  of  that  guidance  at  Appendix  A  to  this
        determination. We consider this guidance is likely to prove helpful
        for Judges who have to decide such questions in the future although
        it is not binding as a piece of EU legislation.

    38. Finally, at paragraph 15, the AIT thought that any  burden  on  the
        respondent would have been a high one, to the criminal standard. It
        is now established that in civil proceedings,  there  is  only  one
        civil standard, although proof of criminal acts such as fraud  will
        be considered less likely on  such  a  standard  than  of  ordinary
        matters. See: In Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35.

Conclusions

    39. In summary, our understanding is that, where the issue is raised in
        an appeal, the question for the judge will  therefore  be  'in  the
        light of the totality of the information before me,  including  the
        assessment of the claimant's answers and any information  provided,
        am I satisfied that it is more probable than not this is a marriage
        of convenience?'.

    40. In our judgment  this  case  from  first  to  last  never  had  any
        appearance  remotely  suggesting  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
        convenience. The decision was flawed and not in accordance with the
        law. The First-tier Judge reached the right result on the  evidence
        before him.

    41. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is accordingly  dismissed.  We
        direct that the family permit be issued promptly on receipt of this
        determination as it should have been eighteen months ago.




                               Signed




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber




                               Date:    21 December 2011







                               APPENDIX A


Commission of the European Communities

PART 4 (page 14)
Communication from  the  Commission  to  the  European  Parliament  and  the
Council  on  guidance  for  the  better  transposition  and  application  of
Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of citizens of the Union and their  family
members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States

Brussels
2 June 2009
COM (2009) 313 Final



4. ABUSE AND FRAUD

Community law cannot be relied in case of abuse55.

Article 35 allows Member States to take effective and necessary measures  to
fight against abuse and fraud in areas falling within the material scope  of
Community law on free  movement  of  persons  by  refusing,  terminating  or
withdrawing any right conferred by the Directive in the  case  of  abuse  of
rights or fraud, such as marriages of convenience. Any such measure must  be
proportionate and subject to the procedural safeguards provided for  in  the
Directive56.

Community law promotes the mobility of EU citizens and  protects  those  who
have made use of it 57.

There is no abuse where EU citizens and their family members obtain a  right
of residence under Community law in a Member State other than  that  of  the
EU citizen's nationality as they are benefiting from an  advantage  inherent
in the exercise of the right of free movement protected by  the  Treaty  58,
regardless of the purpose of their move to that State59. By the same  token,
Community law protects EU citizens who return home  after  having  exercised
their free movement rights.

4.1. Concepts of abuse and fraud

4.1.1. Fraud

For the purposes of the  Directive,  fraud  may  be  defined  as  deliberate
deception or contrivance made to obtain  the  right  of  free  movement  and
residence under the Directive.

In the context of the Directive, fraud is likely to be  limited  to  forgery
of documents or false representation  of  a  material  fact  concerning  the
conditions attached to the right of residence.
Persons who have been issued with a residence document only as a  result  of
fraudulent conduct in respect of which they have been  convicted,  may  have
their rights under the Directive refused, terminated or withdrawn60.

4.1.2. Abuse

For the purposes of the Directive, abuse may be  defined  as  an  artificial
conduct entered into solely with the purpose of obtaining the right of  free
movement and residence under
Community law which, albeit formally observing of the conditions  laid  down
by Community rules, does not comply with the purpose of those rules61.

4.2. Marriages of convenience

Recital 28  defines  marriages  of  convenience  for  the  purposes  of  the
Directive as marriages contracted for  the  sole  purpose  of  enjoying  the
right of free movement and residence under the Directive that someone  would
not have otherwise. A  marriage  cannot  be  considered  as  a  marriage  of
convenience simply because it brings an  immigration  advantage,  or  indeed
any other advantage. The quality of the relationship is  immaterial  to  the
application of Article 35.

The definition of marriages of convenience can be  extended  by  analogy  to
other forms of relationships contracted for the  sole  purpose  of  enjoying
the right of free movement and residence, such as  (registered)  partnership
of convenience, fake adoption or where  an  EU  citizen  declares  to  be  a
father of a third country  child  to  convey  nationality  and  a  right  of
residence on the child and its mother, knowing that he  is  not  its  father
and not willing to assume parental responsibilities.

Measures taken by Member States to fight against  marriages  of  convenience
may not be such as to deter  EU  citizens  and  their  family  members  from
making use of their right to free  movement  or  unduly  encroach  on  their
legitimate rights. They must not undermine the  effectiveness  of  Community
law or discriminate on grounds of nationality.


When interpreting the notion of abuse in the context of the  Directive,  due
attention must be given to the status of the EU citizen. In accordance  with
the principle of supremacy of  Community  law,  the  assessment  of  whether
Community law was abused must be carried out in the framework  of  Community
law, and not with regard to national migration laws.

The Directive does not prevent Member States from  investigating  individual
cases where there is a well-founded suspicion of abuse.  However,  Community
law prohibits systematic checks62.

Member States may rely on previous analyses and experience showing  a  clear
correlation between proven cases of abuse  and  certain  characteristics  of
such cases.

In order  to  avoid  creating  unnecessary  burdens  and  obstacles,  it  is
possible to identify a set of indicative criteria suggesting that  there  is
unlikely to be an abuse of Community rights:
           - the third country spouse would  have  no  problem  obtaining  a
             right of residence in  his/her  own  capacity  or  has  already
             lawfully resided in the EU citizen's Member State beforehand;
           - the couple was in a relationship for a long time;
           - the couple had a common domicile/household for a long time63;
           -  the  couple  have  already   entered   a   serious   long-term
             legal/financial   commitment   with   shared   responsibilities
             (mortgage to buy a home, etc);
           - the marriage has lasted for a long time.

Member States may  define  a  set  of  indicative  criteria  suggesting  the
possible intention to abuse the rights conferred by the  Directive  for  the
sole  purpose  of   contravening   national   immigration   laws.   National
authorities may in particular take into account the following factors:

           - the couple have never met before their marriage;
           - the couple are inconsistent  about  their  respective  personal
             details, about the circumstances of  their  first  meeting,  or
             about other important personal information concerning them;
           - the couple do not speak a language understood by both;
           - evidence of a sum of money or gifts handed over  in  order  for
             the marriage to be contracted (with the exception of  money  or
             gifts given in the form of a dowry in cultures  where  this  is
             common practice);
           - the past history  of  one  or  both  of  the  spouses  contains
             evidence of previous marriages of convenience or other forms of
             abuse and fraud to acquire a right of residence;
           - development of family life only after the expulsion  order  was
             adopted;
           - the couple divorces shortly after the third country national in
             question has acquired a right of residence.

The  above   criteria   should   be   considered   possible   triggers   for
investigation, without any automatic inferences from results  or  subsequent
investigations. Member States may  not  rely  on  one  sole  attribute;  due
attention has to be given to all the circumstances of the  individual  case.
The investigation may involve a separate interview  with  each  of  the  two
spouses.

|                                                                            |
|S., a third country national, was ordered to leave in one month as she had  |
|overstayed her tourist visa. After two weeks, she married O., an EU national|
|who had just arrived to the host Member State. The authorities suspect that |
|the marriage might have been concluded only to avoid expulsion. They contact|
|the authorities in O.'s Member State and find out that after the wedding his|
|family shop was finally able to pay a debt of 5000 EUR, which it had been   |
|unable to repay for two years.                                              |
|                                                                            |
|They invite the newly-weds for an interview, during which they find out that|
|O. has meanwhile already left the host Member State to return home to his   |
|job, that the couple is not able to communicate in a common language and    |
|that they met for the first time one week before the marriage. There are    |
|strong indications that the couple may have married with the sole purpose of|
|contravening national immigration laws.                                     |

The burden of proof lies on the authorities of the Member States seeking  to
restrict rights under the Directive. The authorities must be able  to  build
a convincing case while respecting all the material safeguards described  in
the previous section. On appeal, it is for the  national  courts  to  verify
the existence of abuse in  individual  cases,  evidence  of  which  must  be
adduced in accordance with the rules of  national  law,  provided  that  the
effectiveness of Community law is not thereby undermined64.

Investigations must be carried out in accordance  with  fundamental  rights,
in particular with Articles 8 (right  to  respect  for  private  and  family
life) and 12 (right to marry) of the ECHR  (Articles  7  and  9  of  the  EU
Charter).

On going investigation  of  suspected  cases  of  marriages  of  convenience
cannot justify derogation from the rights of third  country  family  members
under the Directive, such as the prohibition of the right to  work,  seizure
of passport or delay of the issue of a  residence  card  within  six  months
from the date of application. These rights can be withdrawn at any  time  as
a result of subsequent investigations.



53 AG Stix-Hackl in case C-441/02 Commission v Germany
54 Case 36/75 Rutili (paras 37-39)
55 Cases 33/74 van Binsbergen (para 13), C-370/90 Singh  (para  24)  and  C-
212/97 Centros (paras 24-25)
56 Case C-127/08 Metock (paras 74-75)
57 Cases C-370/90 Singh, C-291/05 Eind and C-60/00 Carpenter
58 Cases C-212/97 Centros  (para  27)  and  C-147/03  Commission  v  Austria
(paras 67-68)
59 Cases C-109/01 Akrich (para 55) and C-1/05 Jia (para 31)
60 Cases C-285/95 Kol (para 29) and C-63/99 Gloszczuk (para 75)
61 Cases C-110/99 Emsland-St�rke (para 52  et  seq.)  and  C-212/97  Centros
(para 25)
62 The prohibition includes not  only  checks  on  all  migrants,  but  also
checks on whole classes of migrants
(e.g. those from a given ethnic origin).
63 Community law does not require third country family spouses to live  with
the EU citizen to qualify for
a right of residence - case 267/83 Diatta (para 15 et seq.).
64 Cases C-110/99 Emsland-St�rke (para 54) and C-215/03 Oulane (para 56)

-----------------------
[1]  But see Schedule 1 paragraph 4(7) of the 2006 Regulations.

