
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                   MJ and ZM (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
On 15 November and 19 December 2007


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
                      Senior Immigration Judge Spencer
                Sir Jeffrey James KBE CMG (Non-Legal Member)



                                   Between

                                     MJ
                                     ZM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr T Cooray
                       Instructed by Thompson & Co, solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr J Hall,
                       Instructed by Treasury Solicitor


   1. The finding in IA and Others  (Ahmadis:  Rabwah)  Pakistan  CG  [2007]
      UKAIT 00088 that the existence  of  a  majority  Ahmadi  community  in
      Rabwah does not justify dismissing an appeal which would otherwise  be
      allowed remains valid.  Rabwah is no safer than elsewhere in  Pakistan
      for Ahmadis, but the question whether it is  an  appropriate  internal
      relocation option for an Ahmadi will always depend on  the  particular
      circumstances and facts of that individual's situation.

   2. In Pakistan as a whole, whilst it is clear  that  from  time  to  time
      local pressure is exerted to  restrict  the  building  of  new  Ahmadi
      mosques, schools and cemeteries, and  that  a  very  small  number  of
      Ahmadis are arrested and charged with blasphemy or behaviour offensive
      to Muslims, the number of problems recorded is small and has  declined
      since the Musharraf Government took power.  Set against the number  of
      Ahmadis in Pakistan as a whole, they are very low indeed.  The  courts
      do grant bail and all appeals against blasphemy convictions in  recent
      years have succeeded.

   3. There is very sparse evidence indeed of harm to Ahmadis from non-state
      agents (though rather more  anecdotal  evidence  of  difficulties  for
      Christians).   The general  risk  today  on  return  to  Pakistan  for
      Ahmadis who propagate the Ahmadi faith  falls  well  below  the  level
      necessary to show a real risk of persecution,  serious  harm  or  ill-
      treatment and thus to engage any form of international protection.

   4. Where, exceptionally, the facts  of  a   particular  appellant's  case
      indicate that such an appellant cannot be  returned  safely  to  their
      home area, the existence of an internal relocation option,  either  to
      Rabwah or elsewhere in Pakistan, is a question of fact  in  each  such
      appeal.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Tribunal in this determination reconsiders  (on  the  application  of
   the appellants) determinations which have been the subject of appeals  to
   the Court of Appeal resulting in remittal by  consent.   Both  appellants
   are Pakistani nationals and members of the Ahmadi faith from  the  Punjab
   (the first appellant is from Sargodha and the second appellant  from  the
   Jhelum area).

2. The first appellant is an Ahmadi convert;  the  second  has  always  been
   Ahmadi.  Although there have  been  concerns  about  the  credibility  of
   aspects of their accounts, at the beginning of the  present  hearing,  Mr
   Hall indicated that the Secretary of State did not propose  to  take  any
   credibility points on the core account of either appellant, save such  as
   might emerge during his cross-examination of  the  appellants  and  their
   witnesses or in clarificatory questions from the Tribunal in the  present
   proceedings.

Procedural history of these appeals

3.  In  each  appeal,  the  Tribunal  initially  dismissed  the  appellant's
   challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions  to  refuse  refugee
   recognition and leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  and  to  set
   removal directions to Pakistan.  In both  cases,  determinations  of  the
   Tribunal dismissing the appellant's respective appeals on reconsideration
   were quashed by the Court of Appeal and the appeals were remitted to  the
   Tribunal for re-determination. In the case of the  first  appellant,  the
   appeal was remitted:

      "For re-determination on the issues of whether the appellant would  be
      at risk if he were returned to Pakistan"

   and in the case of the second appellant, on two bases, first, whether the
   appellant would  be  at  risk  if  he  were  returned  to  Pakistan,  and
   alternatively:

      "Whether the appellant can be  expected  to  relocate  to  Rabwah  (to
      include consideration of the general safety of Rabwah for Ahmadis,  as
      well as whether it would be unduly harsh to relocate there)."

4. These appeals were listed to follow the Tribunal's consideration  of  the
   general safety of Rabwah in IA and Others (Ahmadis: Rabwah)  Pakistan  CG
   [2007] UKAIT 00088 the ratio of which  is  summarised  in  the  following
   pr�cis:

      "Contrary to what is said in KM  (Pakistan)  [2004]  UKAIT  00302,  MM
      (Pakistan) CG [2002] UKIAT 05714, KK (Pakistan) [2005] UKIAT 00033, MC
      (Pakistan) [2004] UKIAT 00139,  and  AZ  (Pakistan)  CG  [2002]  UKIAT
      02642, Rabwah does not constitute a safe haven for any Ahmadi at  risk
      of persecution elsewhere in Pakistan and should not, without more,  be
      treated as an appropriate place of internal relocation."


5. Questions of internal relocation  and  undue  harshness  in  relation  to
   Rabwah are therefore questions of fact  in  relation  to  the  particular
   circumstances  of  each  appellant.   In  the  first  appellant's   case,
   Immigration Judge Billingham held (in May 2005) that he was not satisfied
   that the appellant was a preacher and Ahmadi convert as alleged, and that
   the risk to him  fell  below  the  standard  required  for  international
   protection.  He dismissed the appeal under  the  Refugee  Convention  and
   under Articles 2, 3 and 9 ECHR.  On 5 October 2005, the Tribunal  ordered
   full reconsideration on the basis that the Immigration Judge  had  failed
   to consider and weigh the oral evidence of a witness who claimed to  have
   been  converted  to  the  Ahmadi  faith  by  the  first  appellant.   The
   Immigration Judge had  also  failed  to  consider  a  good  deal  of  the
   documentary evidence in the first appellant's bundle.  The resultant lack
   of anxious scrutiny was a  material  error  of  law  and  fatal  to  that
   determination.

6. The appeal was heard afresh before Immigration Judges Shaerf and  Glossop
   on 28 November 2005.  They were satisfied that the appellant  was  indeed
   an Ahmadi  convert  but  not  that  he  was  a  preacher.   The  Tribunal
   considered that the appellant had not demonstrated  (to  the  appropriate
   standard) a "credible record of active preaching" and doubted whether his
   learning in the Ahmadi faith was sufficient for the activities he claimed
   to  have  undertaken.  In  any  event,  they  considered  that   internal
   relocation to Rabwah was appropriate, though they noted that "Rabwah  may
   not be the haven previously believed by some".

7. The first appellant now appealed to the Court of Appeal.   He  criticised
   the Tribunal's assessment  of  his  documentary  and  other  evidence  on
   grounds of perversity, and in particular a finding  that  there  was  "no
   evidence" that he had been involved in preaching  or  hit  on  the  head.
   There is no doubt that there  was  some  evidence  to  that  effect,  the
   appellant's own oral evidence at the hearing. The proper  approach  would
   have been for the Tribunal to indicate whether that evidence was credible
   and what weight the Tribunal attached to it.  The  first  appellant  also
   challenged the Tribunal's finding that he had not  preached  at  or  near
   Ahmadi mosques and that this part of his account was an exaggeration.

8. The first appellant gave particulars of his human rights  claim  at  this
   stage, now under Articles 2, 3, 5, 9, 10, 11 and 14  ECHR,  arguing  that
   his attempts to practise his faith in  the  past  had  met  with  extreme
   opposition requiring international protection.  His  case  was  that  any
   Ahmadi who dared to practise his religion ran a real risk  of  persistent
   human rights breaches and that return to  Pakistan  would  place  him  at
   grave risk of breaches of all those Articles.   He reserved the right  to
   augment his grounds of appeal later.

9. In the appeal of the second appellant, the  first  determination  was  of
   Adjudicator Boyd, promulgated  on  2  September  2004.   The  Adjudicator
   accepted to the lower standard that the appellant had been the subject of
   some detentions by the Pakistani police and some adverse  attention  from
   Khatme Nabuwwat but not that he was of particular interest to either, nor
   that he was at risk entailing international protection in consequence  of
   his previous experiences.  The second appellants' Article  8  ECHR  claim
   was considered "weak to say the least".  The appeal was dismissed and the
   appellant appealed to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, as  was  then  the
   procedure.  His grounds  of  appeal  were  lengthy  and  rather  diffuse,
   reasserting the second  appellant's  claim  and  challenging  Adjudicator
   Boyd's findings of fact and  credibility.   On  7  December  2004,  Vice-
   President Drabu (as he then  was)  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
   granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Adjudicator's
   credibility findings were arguably flawed.

10. The reconsideration hearing took place before  Immigration  Judge  Aujla
   and Mr C Thursby, Non-Legal Member,  on  3  March  2006.   That  Tribunal
   accepted the appellant's account of attacks by mullahs on  two  occasions
   and two arrests by the Pakistani police.  The core account was  accepted,
   with some reservations, having regard to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
   appropriate  to  international  protection  claims.   Nevertheless,   the
   Tribunal considered the appellant to be an "unexceptional Ahmadi" as  set
   out in KK (Ahmadi, unexceptional, risk on return) Pakistan  [2005]  UKAIT
   00033, and not to be at risk of persecution on return.

11. In the alternative, the Tribunal considered that the  appellant  had  an
   internal relocation option to Rabwah and that  it  would  not  be  unduly
   harsh to expect him to exercise it,  especially  as  it  found  that  the
   appellant would not, whether openly or discreetly, engage in preaching if
   returned. The Article 8 ECHR decision had not been  challenged,  but  for
   completeness, the Tribunal affirmed the  approach  taken  by  Adjudicator
   Boyd in the 2004 determination.

12. The second appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal.   The  grounds  of
   appeal were filed out of time.   He  argued  that  the  question  of  his
   preaching on return had never been put to him and that the  Tribunal  had
   failed to consider up-to-date evidence on the risk on return  to  Rabwah.
   The second appellant relied on his previous history  of  harm  from  both
   State and non-State actors and contended that there was no change in  the
   safety situation for Ahmadis who publicly manifested  their  religion  in
   Pakistan.  The Tribunal should not have dismissed the appeal, he argued.

Court of Appeal decisions

13. The Court of Appeal granted permission on both appeals. They were  heard
   and considered together, along with other appeals, some of which  in  due
   course formed the basis of the Tribunal's country guidance decision in IA
   and others (Ahmadis: Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088 as to whether
   Rabwah was a suitable internal relocation option.

14. On 22 September 2006, by consent of all  parties,  the  present  appeals
   were allowed and remitted to the AIT for hearing afresh.  In the case  of
   the first appellant, no findings of fact or credibility  were  preserved.
   In the case of the second appellant, the favourable findings in  relation
   to his past history of attacks by the mullah and arrest by the  Pakistani
   police were preserved but otherwise questions  of  fact  and  credibility
   were at large.   In the first  appellant's  case,  the  Court  of  Appeal
   ordered that:

      "3.   The matter be  remitted  back  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal for re-determination, on the issues of whether the  appellant
      would be at risk if he were returned to Pakistan."

15. in the second appellant's case, the remittal  was  in  identical  terms,
   with the addition of an alternative issue:

      "...whether it is open to the  appellant  to  internally  relocate  to
      Rabwah as well as whether it would be unduly harsh to do so."

16. In the agreed Reasons accompanying those decisions,  the  challenges  to
   the Tribunal's approach were summarised  in  each  case.   In  the  first
   appellant's case, the reasons related to the safety  of  the  credibility
   findings.   In the second appellant's case, the AIT, having accepted  the
   fact of past persecution, there were three areas of concern:  first, that
   the Tribunal had not put to the appellant the issue of  future  risk  and
   had not considered a possible breach of Article 9  ECHR  if  it  was  the
   AIT's view that his previous experiences would  cause  the  appellant  to
   desist from manifesting his religion; second, that the  appellant  should
   not have been treated as a KK "unexceptional Ahmadi" on these facts;  and
   third, that the Tribunal had  given  insufficient  consideration  to  new
   evidence of risk on return within Rabwah.

17. In each case, the Secretary of  State  agreed  that  on  the  particular
   factual circumstances of the  case  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  and
   remitted. In the second appellant's case, the respondent considered  that
   there was merit in the  appellant's  contention  that  the  AIT  had  not
   properly considered submissions and objective evidence about  the  safety
   of Rabwah and had erred in its application of KK.

Safety of Rabwah for internal relocation

18. The decision in  KK  was  reviewed  when  the  Tribunal  considered  the
   question of safety in Rabwah in IA and  others.  The  Tribunal  concluded
   that it was inappropriate  to  regard  Rabwah  as  a  reliable  place  of
   internal relocation for Ahmadis with problems elsewhere in Pakistan.   At
   paragraph 28 of the  IA  determination,  the  Tribunal  encapsulated  its
   position thus:

      "28.  It is wrong to assume  that  Rabwah,  because  of  its  majority
      Ahmadi population, is either accessible or safe for those who, on  the
      evidence, need a place of safety. Each case will depend on  its  facts
      but in no wise can the existence of Rabwah be regarded generally as  a
      reason for dismissing an appeal that would otherwise be allowed."

19. The question of the safety  of  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  as  a  whole  was
   expressly reserved for a future determination; the Tribunal had  in  mind
   the present appeals.

Documentary evidence before the Tribunal

20. The Tribunal had the benefit of  the  following  documents:   the  April
   2007 Country of Origin Information Report for Pakistan;  a  Human  Rights
   Watch report dated 6 May 2007 entitled "Pakistan: Pandering to  Extremism
   Fuels Persecution of Ahmadis";  from  the  United  States  Commission  on
   International  Religious  Freedom,  the  section  of  its  annual  report
   relating to Pakistan dated May 2007 and a press  release  dated  11  June
   2007; from the IRB of Canada, two reports, one dated 31  August  2005  on
   the situation of members of the Ahmadiyya movement in Islam and one of 25
   May 2005 on the availability of Pakistani  passports  for  those  with  a
   First Information Report or an  outstanding  warrant  of  arrest  against
   them; an Amnesty International report of 15 May 2001 entitled  "Pakistan:
   insufficient protection of  religious  minorities";  the  United  Kingdom
   Parliamentary Human Rights Group report "Rabwah:  A Place  for  Martyrs";
   the United Kingdom OGN for 19 June 2006;  the  Freedom  House  report  on
   Pakistan for 20006; the US State Department Religious Freedom Reports for
   2006 and 2007; and  a  report  from  the  US  State  Department  entitled
   "Democracy, Authoritarianism  and  Terrorism  in  Contemporary  Pakistan"
   dated 7 November 2007.

21. We have had regard to  all  of  this  evidence,  as  well  as  the  oral
   evidence which we heard.  We have paid particular attention to the  parts
   of the bundle to which the parties drew our attention in oral or  written
   argument.  The Tribunal heard oral evidence on the first day  of  hearing
   and then  received  written  submissions  from  both  parties,  which  by
   agreement we considered in chambers  with  the  documents  filed  by  the
   parties (in particular those to which our  attention  was  drawn)  before
   reaching the present decisions.  The Secretary of State did not challenge
   the religious affiliation of either appellant  and  we  approached  these
   appeals on that basis.

Facts and chronology - first appellant

22. The first appellant is an Ahmadi  convert.   There  are  no  credibility
   issues in relation to his core account.  He was born in the Punjab into a
   Sunni family, but  his  maternal  grandfather  and  maternal  uncle  were
   Ahmadis.  In 1972, the first appellant converted to the Ahmadi  religion,
   was disowned by his family and went to live with his Ahmadi relations.

23. In 1980 he settled in Sargodha and started a  small  business  there  in
   the Azad Market, where there were 450 stalls which the  appellant  refers
   to as "shops". Initially he rented three shop units in an  L-shape.   The
   business, supplying electrical goods wholesale, was very  successful  and
   he was able to buy the shop units. He used to   display Ahmadi literature
   such as newspapers journals and leaflets in his shop and people  came  to
   know that he was an Ahmadi.

24. The first  appellant  also  became  integrated  into  the  local  Ahmadi
   community.  He held various positions in his local Ahmadi mosque and  the
   wider community:  Motamid in 1997; Nazim (health and  physical  care)  in
   1992; Vice-Nazim in 2001; Sardar in 2002 and Nazim  again  in  2004.   He
   used to preach and on occasions he was insulted and beaten.  In 1987  two
   mullahs and their associates visited the shop in his absence and beat his
   employees, who were then detained by the police for 27 days, and released
   on payment of bribes.

25. In 2000, the first appellant attended a conference held jointly  by  the
   Azad Market traders and members of the Khatme Nabuwwat, at  which  highly
   charged speeches were made against him, in particular,  pronouncing  that
   as an apostate he deserved  to  be  killed  (the  "fatwa").  Following  a
   complaint, his shop was forcibly closed by the police. A local  newspaper
   reported the alleged "fatwa", stating that if the first appellant did not
   stop preaching, he would be arrested and severely  punished.   The  first
   appellant kept his shop closed and his business suspended for many  days,
   but the situation calmed down  and  he  resumed  trading.  There  was  no
   trouble then for three years.

26. In March 2003, Khatme Nabuwwat mullahs  and  their  associates  attacked
   his family home, causing damage to it.  The first appellant complained to
   the police but they refused to help, saying that he was an  apostate  and
   deserved it.  In 2004 the first appellant's  sister's  husband,  who  was
   among the top Khatme  Nabuwwat  mullahs  imprisoned  two  of  his  wife's
   brothers.  On 15 October 2004, an Islamic cleric and some associates came
   to the first appellant's shops and threatened him. If he were still there
   by 1 December 2004, they told him that he would be killed.  The appellant
   was concerned:  on August 21 2004, unknown assailants had shot and killed
   Barkatullah Mangla, an Ahmadi advocate, at his home in Sargodha.  No  one
   had been arrested in the case.

27. The  first  appellant  opted  to  relocate  to  Rabwah,  35  miles  from
   Sargodha, although he later said that given the proximity, he  was  known
   there too.  He tried to live in Rabwah but suffered hardship and  had  no
   protection as a convert.  He did not try for long:  the  threats  to  the
   first appellant which caused his flight occurred on 15 October  2004  and
   he left for the United Kingdom on 26 October  2004,  eleven  days  later.
   His wife and children remain in Rabwah, where the children attend  Ahmadi
   schools.  It emerged at the hearing before us that the first  appellant's
   wife rents out the stalls in Sargodha and their family home there,  which
   provides more than enough money to keep the family in comfort in  Rabwah,
   as the house in Sargodha gets a better rent than  they  have  to  pay  in
   Rabwah.

28.  The  reconsidering  panel  found  that  the  first  appellant  was   an
   'unexceptional Ahmadi" with no real propagation history and  that  Rabwah
   was a suitable refuge  for  him.   Following  IA,  that  finding  is  now
   insufficient.

First appellant's evidence

29. We heard oral evidence from the first appellant.   He  began  testifying
   in a mix of Urdu and English but it was rapidly clear that  he  was  more
   comfortable in Punjabi. Both the first appellant and the interpreter were
   satisfied  that  they  had  understood   one   another   and   that   the
   interpretation had  been  satisfactory  in  both  languages.   The  first
   appellant adopted his original witness statement of (probably) 9  October
   2004, dated on its face 9 September 2004; the  first  appellant  did  not
   arrive in the United Kingdom until October 2004 and he says the statement
   is wrongly dated.  Nothing turns on that.

30. The first  appellant  provided  the  following  additional  evidence-in-
   chief:  he had not received payment for the various posts he held in  the
   Ahmadiyya community.  The missionary in charge  and  a  clerical  officer
   received payment but others who held community offices did so, like  him,
   unpaid.  They did not have personal offices within the Ahmadi mosque  but
   there were a number of small rooms which were available for  the  use  of
   the officers of the Ahmadiyya community as and when  required,  and  they
   were contactable at and through the Ahmadi mosque.  The  preaching  teams
   propagated the Ahmadi faith  to  receptive  non-Ahmadis.   If  the  first
   appellant were now returned, he said that he would preach and never cease
   to do so.

31. In cross-examination, the first appellant confirmed that his  faith  had
   remained at the same level throughout since his conversion in 1972,  when
   he was  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  old.   The  first  appellant  then
   explained the function of the various offices he held during his time  in
   Pakistan:

      (a) Motamid - a Motamid keeps a record of the  community's  activities
      and progress, in this case the community in Sargodha.   To  the  first
      appellant's recollection, there were between 500 and 1000  members  of
      this community.  The first appellant served  two  or  three  terms  as
      Motamid, each of five years.  He was the only Motamid for Sargodha.

      (b) Nazim - the first appellant was a Nazim  from  1992.   His  duties
      included forming preaching teams and trying to improve the  health  of
      the community, including arranging physical games to keep them in good
      shape (Sihat-e-Jismani).  They played Kabaddi  and  badminton  in  the
      grounds of the Ahmadi mosque every three or six months, as directed by
      the community.  By 2001, the first appellant  was  Vice-Nazim  of  the
      larger Absa Ullah  Ahmadi  mosque  which  covered  a  larger  area,  a
      district comprising 66 majlis, involving well over 1000  people.   His
      job was to collect reports from throughout the district,  finding  out
      where the next preaching venue would be.

      (c)  Sardar - A Sardar is an Ahmadi community leader.

32. The first appellant's evidence was that his propagation activities  were
   always prearranged:  Ahmadi literature would be handed out in advance  of
   preaching meetings, and usually they would preach in a house, having sent
   the individuals a letter and a text to read and study, then the preaching
   team would meet them there. Those attending read the texts and then asked
   questions.   Preaching was always by prearrangement  and  to  people  who
   were receptive to the possibility of Ahmadi conversion,  though  not  yet
   Ahmadis.  There were usually some refreshments, perhaps  a  cup  of  tea.
   The first appellant told us that the preaching teams  had  permission  to
   enter the potential converts' private homes; they would not enter without
   such an invitation, otherwise they would be  at  risk  of  being  killed.
   Sometimes, they also preached out of doors  after  distributing  leaflets
   (for example, in his shop).

33. The first appellant explained more about his shop in  Sargodha.  It  was
   one of about 450 shops in the Azad Market and sold electrical goods  (the
   raw materials for switches).  The shop was  very  successful.  The  first
   appellant was the only Ahmadi with  such  a  shop  in  Azad  Market.   He
   propagated his faith openly from 1980 - 2004 at  that  shop,  renting  at
   first and later buying the shop.  In the end he had three big  stalls  on
   three streets in an L-shape.  Although the shops were briefly closed down
   by the mullahs, the first appellant reopened them almost immediately  and
   after he left in 2004, his wife was able to  rent  them  out  to  another
   shopkeeper, which provided part of her income in his absence.  That is  a
   rather different picture from that given to the previous Tribunal,  which
   was told that the mullahs had closed down the shop, with  the  impression
   that the closure was permanent.

34. The first appellant's children remain at school in Rabwah in  an  Ahmadi
   school, where they pay a nominal fee  for  Ahmadi-run  education.   There
   were several Ahmadi schools in Rabwah.  Two  names  the  appellant  could
   remember were the Musrat Academy and the Al-Sadiq  Academy;  it  was  the
   latter which the children attended.   Both  head  teachers  were  Ahmadi.
   His wife lived in Rabwah, renting out the former family home in  Sargodha
   as well as the shops; she was able to rent a property in Rabwah for  less
   money than she received for the Sargodha house and she also had the  shop
   income so she was quite well off.   Although also an Ahmadi convert,  the
   appellant's wife did not propagate the Ahmadi faith.

35. If the first appellant relocated to Rabwah instead of returning  to  his
   home in Sargodha, he remained of the view that he was under an obligation
   (da'wa) to propagate the Ahmadi faith, to non-Ahmadi friends.  There were
   local  Ahmadi  administrative  offices  and  people  would  come  for  an
   appointment. The preaching teams would then assess whether a  person  was
   suitable for preaching, or was  a  trouble  maker.   If  the  person  was
   suitable, the first appellant would be able to invite him to his home and
   preach over a cup of tea.  There  was  always  a  risk  that  they  might
   misjudge a particular individual but the risk had to be taken; it  was  a
   duty and obligation of the Ahmadi faith. Not every Ahmadi was a preacher.



36. The first  appellant  reminded  the  Tribunal  of  the  fate  of  Sardar
   Barkatullah Mangla, stating that it was his understanding that Mangla  he
   was martyred at the hands of the mullahs but he said that  he  understood
   that no one had ever been arrested for the shooting.

Facts and chronology - second appellant

37. The second appellant lived  and  worked  in  Karachi  where  he  had  no
   problems until 1992, when he was 41 years old.  His parents  and  younger
   sister came to the United Kingdom  in  1991  and  in  1995,  his  younger
   brother came too; all of them have been recognised  as  refugees  on  the
   basis of problems with Khatme Nabuwwat. Another brother is now  a  German
   national.  The second appellant had a successful business  in  running  a
   health and fitness club.  He told the Tribunal that  there  were  to  his
   knowledge 20-25000 Ahmadis in Karachi.

38. In the winter of 2001, the second appellant's profile  was  raised  when
   the President of his local Ahmadi  community  invited  him  to  head  the
   security  team  (Qhuddams)  for  the  local  Ahmadi  mosque  and   Ahmadi
   community.  His job would be to supervise six young men who patrolled the
   local Ahmadi mosque.  In July 2002, two Khatme Nabuwwat mullahs  attacked
   the second appellant, punching and kicking him and warning  him  off  his
   security duties.  He went to the police but they  would  not  register  a
   First Information Report although the second appellant provided  evidence
   of the attack.

39. In October 2002, the second appellant was  accused  of  preaching  to  a
   Sunni Muslim, giving him books about the  Ahmadi  faith  and  seeking  to
   convert him over a period of four months.  He was arrested  and  detained
   for 14 hours, then released after payment of a bribe.    He  returned  to
   his gym and his security patrolling.  In April 2003, the second appellant
   was staying with a Sunni friend in Karimabad (in  context,  a  suburb  of
   Karachi, although there is another Karimabad in  Pakistan  near  Lahore).
   He took his friend to an Ahmadi mosque in Karimabad for  Friday  prayers.
   The man's family complained to the local Mullahs, who  came  looking  for
   the second appellant to beat him up, but he evaded them.

40. The second appellant then moved back to his ancestral  village,  Khewra,
   where his cousins lived.  That city has a  very  ancient  Ahmadi  Library
   which is a centre for the community and  where  children  can  learn  the
   faith.  At his cousins' request, the appellant  taught  one  (or  perhaps
   two) children's classes. A  resident  nearby  complained  to  the  Khewra
   Mullahs.  In October 2003, following that complaint,  the  Khewra  police
   arrested the second appellant  and  detained  him  for  two  days.   When
   released, the second appellant fled, first to Lahore where he hid  for  a
   little over two months, and then to Karachi, where with the assistance of
   an agent he arranged travel to the  United  Kingdom  almost  immediately.
   His wife and four children remained in Karachi, either in the family home
   or with the appellant's in-laws.

Second appellant's evidence

41. We heard oral evidence from the second appellant,  which  was  given  in
   Urdu.  Both he and the interpreter confirmed they  could  understand  one
   another and  there  were  only  minor  interpreter  problems  during  the
   hearing, raised and resolved at the time. At the end of the  hearing,  Mr
   Cooray  confirmed  that  he  had  no  outstanding   objections   to,   or
   difficulties with, the interpretation  and  that  he  was  satisfied  the
   Tribunal had an accurate record of the second appellant's evidence.   The
   second appellant adopted his witness statement of 18 May  2004  and  gave
   the following additional evidence in  chief.   If  returned  to  Pakistan
   today, he would face the same difficulties which had caused him to  leave
   Pakistan.  He was dedicated to his faith and would continue to  propagate
   it, wherever he was.

42. In cross-examination, he said that his adherence  to  the  Ahmadi  faith
   had been at a constant level throughout his life, neither more  nor  less
   with the passage of time.  The second appellant  gave  the  name  of  the
   Ahmadi mosque he had helped guard in  Karachi,  an  ancient  building  of
   average size, with about 500 people attending Friday  prayers,  including
   those who came from surrounding areas.  He was its  security  guard  from
   2001-2002 and an Ansarullah or Khuddam, two descriptions for a person who
   is a full member of the Ahmadi community, signifying an ordinary  Ahmadi.
   The only position he had held in the Ahmadi community was as  a  security
   guard.  There were quite a few other Ahmadi mosques in  Karachi,  perhaps
   15.  He was aware that there were  reputed  to  be  20-25000  Ahmadis  in
   Karachi but had no personal knowledge of the statistics.

43. The second appellant explained how  his  security  duties  worked.   The
   President of the Ahmadi mosque had appointed him to run security  and  he
   had five or six young men reporting to him.   During  the  service,  they
   would stand outside on the street  and  keep  an  eye  open;  the  second
   appellant was out there too. Other Ahmadi mosques  had  guards  as  well.
   They wore their own clothes; they had no particular uniform. In  relation
   to his propagation of the Ahmadi faith,  the  second  appellant  said  he
   would invite people to his family home or visit the houses of friends  or
   people he knew, who were interested in  knowing  more  about  the  Ahmadi
   faith.  People would put questions to him and he would answer them.

44. His fitness and bodybuilding  studio  (which  he  also  described  as  a
   health club) was in the same road as the Ahmadi mosque and he had run  it
   from 1999 until he came to the United Kingdom.   His  parents  owned  the
   premises then and still did, although they were  in  the  United  Kingdom
   now.  Business was good while he was in charge of the studio but once  he
   had to leave it in the hands of a manager because of  his  troubles,  the
   business failed.  It was closed down now.

45. The second appellant's wife and his  children  still  lived  in  Karachi
   with her in-laws.  His children were at school there;  his  father-in-law
   had recently retired from a Government  post,  though  he  was  not  sure
   exactly what.  He had not seen much of his in-laws  since  the  marriage.
   They were not Ahmadis.  Neither was his wife when they married,  but  she
   had converted in 2002 and his children were all  considered  Ahmadi.   He
   did not know where she or her  parents  worshipped  now.   He  could  not
   return and live with his  in-laws;  he  would  not  be  welcome.   If  he
   returned, he feared Khatme Nabuwwat would pursue  him  again.   He  could
   only relocate safely if his  hands  were  tied  and  his  eyes  and  ears
   covered, otherwise he would feel the need to propagate his faith.

46. The second appellant was asked if he  had  preached  or  propagated  the
   Ahmadi faith outside Karachi.  He mentioned only the teaching of children
   in the Khewra Library, which was entirely run by Ahmadis. His cousin  had
   invited him to go to Khewra, which is between Lahore and Sargodha,  about
   600 miles from Karachi.  The purpose of the invitation was to enable  the
   appellant to preach in the Khewra Library.   Other than that, his  duties
   had been all security based; on one occasion he accompanied the President
   of his Ahmadi mosque on a preaching trip to Sindh, as part of a  team  of
   four or five.  The President and the  team  would  propagate  the  Ahmadi
   faith in a house to which they had been invited, as  they  could  not  do
   that in the open; the second appellant took part in the preaching but  it
   was all indoors and to an invited and receptive audience.

47. In the United Kingdom, he was taking  active  part  in  propagating  the
   Ahmadi  faith;  preaching  stalls  were  set  up  near  Tooting  Broadway
   underground station, and the second appellant attended and preached  with
   the teams about once a week.  He also preached a bit on his own  account.
   If returned he would feel obliged  to  continue  propagating  the  Ahmadi
   faith and considered that he would be at risk.  The extent to  which  one
   propagated the faith was individual; some did  more  than  he,  and  some
   less.

Skeleton arguments

48.  There were no oral submissions, by  agreement  with  the  parties.   We
   received written submissions from both sides, with  Mr  Cooray  having  a
   right of reply to the Secretary of  State's  submissions.    The  parties
   submitted as follows.

Mr Cooray's submissions

49. For both appellants, Mr Cooray argued that  both  appellants  should  be
   treated as credible and that  no  real  issue  of  credibility  arose  in
   relation to  their  evidence.  The  first  appellant  was  continuing  to
   propagate his faith in the United Kingdom and would do so on return.  The
   documentary evidence in relation to a fatwa against him should have  been
   accepted and the absence of a supporting First Information Report was not
   fatal to its genuineness (Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UK IAT 00439 Imm A R 318).



50. Mr Cooray argued strongly, as he had done before the Tribunal in IA  and
   others,  that  the  use  of  the  Western  descriptions  "preaching"  and
   "proselytising" was linguistically too narrow to reflect   the  range  of
   activities in which an Ahmadi could engage and that "propagation"  was  a
   better  description.   We  agree  with  that.  When  cross-examined  both
   appellants had obvious difficulty in explaining "preaching" and  we  have
   adopted "propagation" instead as a description of the range of activities
   they undertook.

51. Mr Cooray's skeleton argument conceded that  'the  reality  is  that  no
   sane Ahmadi would preach [sic] in  public"  and  thus  that  distinctions
   between private and public preaching were otiose.  He contended that  the
   oral evidence of both appellants supported  that  analysis.    Mr  Cooray
   relied on charges laid against 4 Ahmadis  under  paragraph  298C  of  the
   Pakistan Penal Code for watching Ahmadiyya religious  television  in  the
   home of one of the four accused.  Mr Cooray asked the  Tribunal  to  find
   that the first appellant had been hounded by the Khatme Nabuwwat for  his
   religious activities, both as an apostate and  as  a  practising  Ahmadi.
   There  was  no  meaningful  remedy  from  the  police  or  the  Pakistani
   judiciary.

52. In relation to the second appellant, Mr Cooray adopted paragraphs 2  and
   4 of his 13  November  2007  skeleton  argument.   The  only  credibility
   concern in relation  to  this  account  was  the  extent  of  the  second
   appellant's teaching of children in the Khewra Ahmadi  Library.   On  the
   oral evidence the second appellant gave to this Tribunal, that appears to
   have been limited to one occasion or a very  short  period.    Mr  Cooray
   highlighted various parts of the  background  evidence  bundle  which  we
   consider below.

53.  In  response  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  submissions,  Mr  Cooray
   summarised the core of his arguments in the following helpful way:

      "7.   Response to the preliminary submissions of the Respondent

      (a) The  risk  of  persecution  and  the  risk  on  return  cannot  be
      determined solely on the issue of preaching or proselytizing.  In  any
      event the religious obligation of Ahmadis (as indicated in the case of
      Mohammed Suleiman Malik and referred to in the case of Iftikhar  Ahmed
      -  at  page  282  of  the  bundle)  is  to  "propagate"  their  faith.
      Propagation can take place in many ways. The idea that only those  who
      preach or proselytize are at risk is a gloss put on the obligation  of
      Ahmadis by the Tribunal. Objective evidence indicates that Ahmadis who
      merely wear a badge with Koranic verse or watch Ahmadi TV  can  be  at
      risk.

      (b) Nor can the risk of  persecution  be  assessed  by  a  statistical
      exercise. In any event different reports give  different  figures  and
      the data relied on by the Respondent are not necessarily accurate.  It
      is not clear how the information has been gathered. Furthermore, it is
      important to take note of unreported incidents particularly where such
      incidents occur in remote areas. In any event the  Appellants  do  not
      claim that every person who is an Ahmadi by birth is at risk. The most
      reasonable test is whether the person  in  question  is  a  practising
      Ahmadi.

      (c)  Although  the  words  "exceptional"   and   "unexceptional"   are
      unhelpful, some of the categories referred to in KK are  certainly  at
      risk.  However, the categories are too restrictive. Thus  Ahmadis  who
      are  targeted  by  [Khatme  Nabuwwat]  because  they  regularly  watch
      Ahmadiyya TV or those  who  are  engaged  in  distribution  of  Ahmadi
      literature may not fall within the KK test unless they can be  covered
      by the term "other particular feature".

Mr Hall's submissions

54. For the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Hall  accepted  that  both  appellants
   should be treated as credible in their accounts with specific  exceptions
   which he set out.  He also  accepted  that  the  phrase  "preaching"  had
   caused misapprehension in the earlier evidence, not going to credibility.
   He agreed that the word "preaching" should not be used and throughout his
   submissions referred to "proselytising" instead.  Mr Hall contended  that
   the Tribunal should make  the  following  specific  negative  credibility
   findings:

      "(i)  The first appellant had not put forward a  credible  explanation
      as to why he could not relocate to Rabwah or another part of Pakistan,
      or why the mullahs would track  him  down  at  a  new  address.  Other
      aspects of his account now gave cause for concern:  his evidence about
      his shop was discrepant and the position appeared to  be  much  better
      than  he  had  originally  stated.   The  first  appellant   had   not
      satisfactorily explained why he could  not  return  to  his  shops  in
      Sargodha, or go elsewhere in Pakistan, for example Rabwah.

      (ii)  The first appellant's evidence about the persecutory motive  for
      the killing of Sardar Barkatullah Mangla  was  not  supported  by  the
      First Information Report from Mr Mangla's son , stating  that  he  had
      been murdered by "some unknown assailants" and that the family had "no
      animosity with anyone".   The evidence did not support  a  finding  of
      martyrdom of an Ahmadi Sardar as the first appellant had alleged.

      (iii) The first appellant's propagation  activities  were  not  risky;
      they were on an invitation-only basis to willing listeners.

      (iv)  It appeared that the first  appellant's  wife  and  family  were
      living openly and without difficulty  in  Rabwah  which,  although  no
      safer than elsewhere, did have an established Ahmadi population and on
      the particular facts  was  an  internal  relocation  option  for  this
      appellant."

55. The second appellant's assertion that he could not return and live  with
   his wife without tying his hands and covering his  ears  and  mouth  went
   much too far.   In the light of his earlier evidence, a narrower position
   should be taken.  Otherwise, his account was entirely credible and should
   be accepted, but would not meet the standard for international protection
   under either Convention.  On the general issues before the Tribunal,  the
   Secretary of State  structured her submissions  against  the  second  and
   third questions raised at paragraph 13 of IA and others, namely:

      (a)   The distribution of Ahmadis in  Pakistan,  there  being  only  a
      small minority of all Ahmadis in Rabwah;

      (b)    Whether  Ahmadis  have  a  duty  to  preach   and   proselytise
      (propagate) the Ahmadi faith that is particular to  them,  and  if  so
      what is its effect in claims of this kind, bearing in  mind  that  all
      Muslims have the duty of da'wa (the  invitation  to  believe)  and  it
      might not be right to  assume  that  an  Ahmadi  was  more  likely  to
      propagate his faith than an ordinary Muslim.

56. The Secretary of State also asked the Tribunal to consider the scale  of
   the  Ahmadi  population  of  Pakistan,  and  a  question  posed  in   the
   Respondent's preliminary submissions, namely -

      (c)    If all Ahmadis must propagate the Ahmadi faith,  and  preaching
      entails ill-treatment from State and non-State agents, how  could  one
      explain the large number of Ahmadis who remained in Pakistan  (between
      2,000,000 and 5,000,000)?

(a)    Distribution of Ahmadis in Pakistan

57. Mr Hall submitted that whilst the country background  evidence  did  not
   assist in identifying places in Pakistan outside Rabwah with  a  majority
   of Ahmadis, or where historically there was greater tolerance of  Ahmadis
   than in Pakistan as a  whole,  the  oral  evidence  of  these  appellants
   reflected background evidence showing  the  existence  of  active  Ahmadi
   communities in villages, town and  cities  of  all  sizes,  from  Khewra,
   Sargodha, Pind Thatha, Bhalwal, Khushub, Shahpur, to  large  cities  like
   Lahore, Karachi, and Gujaranwala. Khewra, although only a village, had  a
   long-established Ahmadi Library.  On the appellants' evidence, there were
   over 1000 Ahmadis in Sargodha alone, and in  Karachi  15  Ahmadi  mosques
   serving 20-25000 Ahmadis.  The Ahmadi mosque where the  appellant  was  a
   member was so well-established that he  described  it  as  "ancient"  and
   attracted 500  regular  worshippers.  Lahore  and  Gujaranwala  also  had
   significant Ahmadi populations. As to Rabwah,  the  appellants'  evidence
   was that it had at least two Ahmadi-run schools with Ahmadi  headmasters.



58. In each  of  these  towns,  the  Ahmadi  communities  had  an  organised
   structure, with office holders,  paid  and  unpaid.   Motamids  kept  the
   written records;  Nazims  performed  a  variety  of  functions  including
   propagation of the faith and  supervision  of  the  community's  physical
   health; Sardars were area Presidents.  Office holders' r�les and  spheres
   of influence were proportionate to the population and  the  size  of  the
   area covered, including the surrounding countryside.  Qhuddams  organised
   the security for the  Ahmadi  mosques  and  their  officials,  especially
   during Friday prayers and when the preaching teams were travelling.

(b)   Scope of the duty to propagate the Ahmadi faith

59. This was the crucial question, in the Secretary of  State's  submission.
   Both appellants had indicated that individual Ahmadis took the duty  more
   or less seriously according to their own views and the strength of  their
   devotion.  Paragraphs 3  and  4  of  the  appellants'  13  November  2007
   skeleton argument were now unacceptably general.  It was clear  from  the
   evidence of both witnesses that considerable care was  taken  to  protect
   Ahmadis when at the  Ahmadi  mosque  or  propagating  their  religion  in
   people's homes.  Mr Hall accepted that this did demonstrate  a  level  of
   threat to the Ahmadi community but argued  that  the  propagation  system
   operated by the preaching teams was capable of protecting  them  and  did
   not necessitate international protection.

60. The evidence was that some literature was handed out on street  corners,
   but it would of course depend which street corner was chosen.  The  first
   appellant had used his own three stalls in the Azad Market  in  Sargodha.
   He described Rabwah as an open town and the vetting of possible  converts
   in the local Ahmadi administrative office  before  any  propagation  took
   place, to exclude troublemakers. On that basis, risk would be a  question
   of fact based on the individual behaviour of particular  members  of  the
   Ahmadiyya community and it should not be  assumed  that  the  da'wa  duty
   imposed  on  the  community  meant  that  individuals  would  necessarily
   propagate the Ahmadi faith at all, let alone in a manner likely to entail
   a risk of persecution or a breach of the  United  Kingdom's  humanitarian
   protection and human rights obligations.

(c)   The size of the Pakistani Ahmadi population and safety

61. Estimates of the Ahmadi population ranged from 2 million  to  5  million
   individuals in Pakistan, as Mr  Hall  noted.   286000  were  prepared  to
   declare themselves Ahmadi on the census, but most did not.  Not every non-
   Ahmadi Muslim would view the Ahmadiyya community  with  equal  hostility;
   considerations of kinship, business, relative secularity, indifference or
   even sporting interests might lead some to  overlook  faith  differences.
   Both appellants had spent a long time in  Pakistan  without  encountering
   problems before the difficulties which caused them to come to the  United
   Kingdom.

62. The  respondent  would  rely  on  the  US  State  Department  Report  on
   Religious Freedom in Pakistan (September 2007) at pages  252-274  of  the
   bundle.  That Report reflected the following events -

         . 8 arrests in 2004, many on blasphemy charges;
         . 1 murder between 2005 and 2006, despite noting that Ahmadis  and
           Christians were the  primary  targets  of  religious  attack  in
           Pakistan in that period;
         . 25 blasphemy arrests in the reporting period  (presumably  2005-
           6);
         . 11 blasphemy arrests or grants of bail in 2006;
         . an incident in June 2006 which led to  2  injured,  11  arrested
           (presumably the same 11) and 75 moved for their own safety;
         . 1 death in 2006 and 5  attacks,  whether  or  not  on  religious
           grounds; and
         . 2 murdered (one with torture) in 2007.

   The respondent contended that although every one of  these  examples  was
   deplorable, taken together (and allowing for some overlap in the figures)
   the percentage of the 2-5 million  Ahmadis  who  experienced  difficulty,
   injury, or death in that three-year period was minute.

63. Mr Hall relied upon an observation in the  US  State  Department  Report
   Religious Freedom Report that  "the  Government  took  steps  to  bolster
   religious freedom" during the period covered by the  report,  albeit  not
   always successfully.  In January 2007, the report records a pro-Christian
   judgment in the Peshawar High Court.  The respondent relies in particular
   on the following passage from the Religious Freedom Report:

      "Ahmadi  individuals  and  institutions  long  have  been  victims  of
      religious violence,  much  of  which  organised  religious  extremists
      instigated. Ahmadi leaders charged that in  previous  years,  militant
      Sunni mullahs and their followers staged sometimes violent anti-Ahmadi
      marches through the streets of Rabwah, a predominantly Ahmadi town and
      spiritual centre in central Punjab.  Backed by crowds of  between  100
      and 200 persons, the mullahs reportedly denounced  Ahmadis  and  their
      founder, a situation that  sometimes  led  to  violence.  The  Ahmadis
      claimed that police generally were present during  these  marches  but
      did not intervene to prevent violence.   In contrast with the previous
      reporting period, there were no such  reports  during  this  reporting
      period."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

64. Mr Hall relied on paragraph 23 of KK and  on  paragraph  26  of  IA  and
   others, and asked the Tribunal to find that for Ahmadis in difficulty  in
   their home area internal relocation was a realistic option; that systemic
   discrimination against Ahmadis, which she accepts exists in Pakistan, did
   not in general translate  into  ill-treatment  amounting  to  persecution
   and/or Article 3 ECHR breaches; and that, in contrast with  the  position
   of the Ahmadiyya community in Pakistan in general, those Ahmadis who were
   at real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  requiring  international
   protection would have a  profile  or  past  history  with  specific  risk
   factors making them very different from that community.

65. Mr Hall accepted the IA and others finding that Rabwah provided no  more
   protection  than  elsewhere.  Nevertheless,  he  argued,  it  retained  a
   sizeable established Ahmadi population and  the  first  appellant  could,
   without undue harshness, be expected to join his wife and children there.
    The second appellant had accepted that it was a possibility for  him  to
   return to Karachi where his  wife,  also  an  apostate,  was  living  and
   worshipping in apparent safety.

66. The Secretary of State accepted that the concept of  the  "unexceptional
   Ahmadi" in KK was no longer a useful test.  Analysis of the  position  of
   Ahmadis in Pakistan had been complicated by the  "preaching"  test  which
   both representatives and the Tribunal now agreed was an unhelpful way  of
   viewing a  wider  obligation  to  propagate  the  Ahmadi  faith  (da'wa).
   Similarly, the evidence did not support a finding that occupying  one  of
   the Ahmadi community r�les such as Nazim, Motamid,  Sardar,  or  being  a
   Quddam was risk-free.  Each case would turn on the risk factors  for  the
   individual Ahmadi and his profile with Khatme Nabuwwat or other potential
   persecutors.  The right question, Mr  Hall  argued,  was  not  whether  a
   person was an official, a preacher, or a convert, but whether he  had  in
   fact been targeted and if so, whether that was likely to  have  persisted
   in his absence or be soluble by internal  relocation.   Past  persecution
   was a factor but was not determinative.

Discussion

67. The Tribunal considered that on the evidence  before  us  in  these  two
   leading cases, it is time to revisit the analysis of  Ahmadi  da'wa  (the
   obligation to propagate) and the profile of those Ahmadis who  would  now
   be at risk.  We have been greatly assisted  by  the  much  more  detailed
   picture of the daily life  of  an  Ahmadi  in  Pakistan  which  the  oral
   evidence of these appellants provided.

68. We considered  the  materials  in  the  country  background  bundle,  in
   particular those to which the parties directed  us,  beginning  with  the
   Country of Origin Information Report for Pakistan of  April  2007.   That
   remains the most up-to-date country report prepared by the  Secretary  of
   State today, although another is due this month.  Much  of  the  material
   reviewed in that report is now rather old.  The country  evidence  bundle
   included several versions of the US State Department Report on  Religious
   Freedom,   all   of   which   highlighted   societal   difficulties   and
   discrimination against Ahmadis but recorded very low levels  of  reported
   arrest and harm from non-state actors.  Ahmadis had only  limited  access
   to Government jobs and universities  and  also  found  the  court  system
   frustratingly slow.  Ahmadis attended Ahmadi-run schools where  possible,
   to avoid being forced to study mainstream Islam.  Ahmadis were  prevented
   in some places from building new Ahmadi mosques, but, as the evidence  in
   this case shows, there were  many  long-established  Ahmadi  mosques  and
   religious facilities all across Pakistan.

69. The latest Religious Freedom Report, which covers 2007,  says this:

      "The Government took steps to bolster  religious  freedom  during  the
      period covered by this Report... The Government continued  to  include
      human   rights   awareness   as   part   of   its   police    training
      program...Relations  between  the  country's   religious   communities
      remained tense. Violence  against  religious  minorities  and  between
      Muslim sects continued. Most  believed  that  a  small  minority  were
      responsible for attacks; however, discriminatory laws and the teaching
      of religious intolerance created a permissive environment for attacks.
      Police often refused to prevent violence and harassment or refused  to
      charge persons who commit such offenses.

      Mobs occasionally attacked individuals  accused  of  blasphemy,  their
      family, or their religious  community  prior  to  their  arrest.  When
      blasphemy and other religious cases were brought to court,  extremists
      often  packed  the  courtroom  and  made  public  threats  against  an
      acquittal. Religious extremists continued to threaten  to  kill  those
      acquitted of blasphemy charges.  High-profile  accused  persons  often
      went into hiding or emigrated after acquittal.

      ...Ahmadi individuals and  institutions  long  have  been  victims  of
      religious violence,  much  of  which  organized  religious  extremists
      instigated. Ahmadi leaders charged that  in  previous  years  militant
      Sunni mullahs and their followers staged sometimes violent anti-Ahmadi
      marches through the streets of Rabwah, a predominantly Ahmadi town and
      spiritual center in central Punjab. Backed by crowds  of  between  100
      and 200 persons, the mullahs reportedly denounced  Ahmadis  and  their
      founder, a situation that  sometimes  led  to  violence.  The  Ahmadis
      claimed that police generally were present during  these  marches  but
      did not intervene to prevent violence. In contrast with  the  previous
      Report, there were no such reports during this reporting period."

70.  The  Report  contains  examples  of  problems  for  Ahmadis  with   the
   Government and non-state actors, but which are somewhat  chaotically  and
   anecdotally set out.  Put in order, they come to this:

     i) In 2004 the police seized land on which a makeshift  Ahmadi  mosque
        had formerly stood.  They still hold it.  In  the  second  half  of
        that year, there were at least eight arrests of  Ahmadis,  many  on
        blasphemy charges, but -

           "In most cases, police released  the  victim  or  dismissed  the
           charges without trial."

    ii) In 2005, there were no Ahmadi examples given.

   iii) In 2006, four Ahmadis were arrested in Sialkot and police prevented
        construction of a new Ahmadi school there, destroying the partially
        erected building. The  same  happened  with  another  small  Ahmadi
        mosque on the land of an Ahmadi President  (but  the  area  is  not
        indicated).

        At the end of April 2006, four Ahmadis were in prison on  blasphemy
        charges; one was in prison and two more were  out  on  bail  facing
        murder charges that the Ahmadiyya community  claimed  were  falsely
        brought due to their religious beliefs.

        Seven more criminal cases, ranging from murder  to  destruction  of
        property, were  filed  against  prominent  members  of  the  Ahmadi
        community in 2006. The cases remained unprosecuted and the  accused
        were allowed to post bail.

        Eight more Ahmadis, two of them journalists, were released on  bail
        charged with various offences.

        In December 2006, relatives of one woman in an unspecified  village
        had difficulty  getting  permission  to  bury  her  in  the  common
        graveyard. The local mullah in that  village  persuaded  police  to
        close a local Ahmadi mosque.

        There were six  attacks  by  non-state  actors  on  Ahmadis  across
        Pakistan (against a national total of 2-5 million Ahmadis)

    iv) In 2007, the local clerics in Lahore prevented  construction  of  a
        new Ahmadi cemetery and pressed police into destroying it.  One man
        who ran an Ahmadi prayer centre at his home was killed by non-state
        actors, and one apostate was murdered by a former police officer.

71. Those are  all  the  incidents  reported  in  the  US  State  Department
   Religious Freedom Report as at December 2007.  They do not come to  much,
   either in total or annually; there are  significantly  more  examples  of
   serious problems for Christians and Hindus.

72. The next document relied on by the appellant  is  a  Report  from  Human
   Rights Watch of May 6 2007 entitled "Pakistan:  Pandering  to  Extremists
   fuels Persecution of Ahmadis" (pp. 98-99 of the  bundle).   We  have  not
   been greatly assisted by this.  It contains the same  anecdotal  evidence
   already summarised above,  together  with  general  statements  that  the
   Pakistani authorities continue to arrest, jail  and  charge  Ahmadis  for
   blasphemy and other offences because  of  their  religious  beliefs.   An
   example is given of an incident in the Punjab in June 2006  where  a  mob
   burned down Ahmadi shops and homes, and over 100 Ahmadis fled,  with  the
   police standing by.  The Ahmadis had subsequently returned home  although
   the situation remained tense.  On October 7 2005, there was  an  incident
   in which masked gunmen attacked an Ahmadi mosque in the Punjab.

73. The Human Rights Watch Report stated that since 2000, an  estimated  350
   Ahmadis were charged in criminal cases, including blasphemy.  That is not
   a particularly useful statistic since presumably the criminal  courts  in
   Pakistan deal also with matters other than blasphemy.   The  Report  does
   not say how many of  the  cases  were  blasphemy  as  opposed  to  normal
   criminal charges, nor how many Sunni Muslims  were  charged  in  criminal
   cases for the same period.  The Report states  that  'several  have  been
   convicted' but not how many.  It is very difficult to assess real risk in
   a population of millions of Ahmadis based on an unspecified proportion of
   an unspecified level of blasphemy charges out of about 50  cases  a  year
   against persons who are Ahmadis.  The  risk  identified  in  that  report
   appears to us to fall well below the standard required for  international
   protection.

74. The Amnesty International Report of 23 May 2007  (at  page  115  of  the
   bundle) does not mention Ahmadis  at  all.   It  does  mention  that  the
   blasphemy laws were "used to persecute members of  religious  minorities"
   but nothing more specific than that.  It also states that 446 people were
   sentenced to death "mostly for murder" and 82 executed, mostly in  Punjab
   province, but there is no indication in this Report  that  any  of  those
   convicted  or  executed  were  Ahmadis,  still  less  charged  under  the
   blasphemy laws.

75. A list of prisoners of conscience is given in an  Amnesty  International
   Report of 15 May 2001 (page 120-126), which is seriously out of date now.
   Three Ahmadis had been convicted in 2000 of religious  offences,  serving
   terms between one and two years. Two more, convicted before the change of
   Government, had appeals pending  (which  subsequently  succeeded).  Sixty
   other religious offence  charges  were  pending,  some  of  them  against
   Ahmadis, some against Christians.  Some at least of the  charges  related
   to Ahmadi mosque building. Examples of several Ahmadis to whom  bail  was
   refused are given.  Details of a blasphemy case in Sargodha in  2000-2001
   are interesting:  four Ahmadis were charged.  The supposed convert denied
   on oath that he had been converted.   All  four  were  bailed.  Bail  was
   revoked for two but Amnesty International did not know whether  they  had
   been arrested.   In another case, three men were accused of blasphemy and
   offending the feelings of Muslims (watching an Ahmadi television  channel
   in the garage where they worked, with the door open because it was a  hot
   day).  One man was not  even  present;  he  was  released.  Charges  were
   pending against the other two.

76. In the 2001 Amnesty International Report  (page  130-131),  details  are
   given of local problems between Ahmadis and Khatme Nabuwwat in that year.
    Given the US State Department Report comment that in 2007 the Government
   was seeking to improve religious freedom, the 2001 Amnesty evidence is of
   only limited assistance now. Page 134 sets out  the  application  of  the
   blasphemy law before General Musharraf came to power; it  also  sets  out
   his publicly declared intention in April  2000  to  introduce  procedural
   changes to ensure that a  First  Information  Report  was  registered  on
   blasphemy matters "only after a preliminary investigation and scrutiny by
   the Deputy Commissioner [of Police]".   After threats  of  a  countrywide
   strike by Islamists, that pledge was retracted, but the strike  proceeded
   anyway.  It is clear that  there  were  considerable  tensions  with  the
   change of Government over that year.

77.  At  p159-164  of  the  appellant's  bundle  is  the   report   of   the
   Parliamentary Human Rights Group which visited  Pakistan  in  early  2007
   (Rabwah:  A Place for Martyrs? 26 January 2007).  That Report deals  only
   with Rabwah and was the subject  of  oral  evidence  in  IA  and  others,
   leading to the following conclusions by that panel:

      "14.  ...The principal and  perhaps  most  important  element  of  the
      documentary evidence is a Report dated 26 January 2007 by the  (United
      Kingdom) Parliamentary Human Rights Group entitled  "Rabwah:  A  place
      for martyrs". There is no doubt about the purpose of that  report.  It
      was designed to meet the Tribunal's conclusion that Rabwah was a place
      of safety for Ahmadis because of its majority Ahmadi population.

      15.   Dr Ensor, who gave oral evidence  before  us,  was  one  of  the
      researchers. He did not purport to be an expert  on  Ahmadiyya  or  on
      Rabwah. He put himself forward as an expert  in  research  techniques;
      and it was very noticeable and very creditable that he was clear about
      the purposes of the research and did not attempt to take the  evidence
      which had been obtained further  than  it  was  intended  to  go.  For
      example, he was asked about the process by  which  he  had  identified
      individuals to talk about their experiences  in  Rabwah,  having  come
      there from other parts of Pakistan. He indicated clearly  and  frankly
      that he had not attempted to survey such individuals  and  he  agreed,
      that so far as that element of the report is concerned,  the  material
      is purely anecdotal. What he did say was that the report was  designed
      to examine the governmental structure of Rabwah. Was it right  to  say
      that because there was a large majority  of  Ahmadis  a  person  could
      obtain protection in Rabwah that was  unavailable  elsewhere?  Was  it
      right to assume, as the Tribunal had  assumed  in  previous  guidance,
      that a large majority in Rabwah necessarily meant a  local  government
      and local officials who were Ahmadis? The  research  embodied  in  the
      report is directed to  informing  conclusions  on  that  issue.  Other
      issues came to mind but the report was not designed to deal with  them
      and Dr Ensor did not pretend that it did deal with them. "

78. Pages 211-217 of the bundle, to which Mr Cooray referred  us,  are  part
   of the 2006 Religious Freedom  US  State  Department  Report.   There  is
   nothing additional there.

Decision

79. The Court of Appeal last considered the question of internal  relocation
   for Ahmadis within Pakistan in Secretary of State for the Home Department
   v Ahmed [1999] EWCA Civ 3003. Simon Brown LJ set out  the  basis  of  the
   conflict between Sunni and Ahmadi Muslims concisely, thus:

      "Put at its very simplest, the  Ahmadis  have  been  in  long-standing
      dispute with mainstream Sunni  Islam  on  the  question  of  religious
      authority. The majority of Islam regards Mohammed as the last prophet:
      the Ahmadis claim to have received divine revelation since.  Professor
      Friedmann records that:

           "One of the essential  differences  between  [the  Ahmadis]  and
           other contemporary Muslim movements is that the Ahmadis consider
           the peaceful propagation of their version of Islam among Muslims
           and non-Muslims alike to be an indispensable activity;  in  this
           they are persistent and unrelenting."

      On 26th April 1984 the President of Pakistan published  an  Ordinance,
      No XX of 1984, imposing severe curbs on the  practice  of  the  Ahmadi
      religion. The most important prohibition reads as follows:

           "Any person of the Quadiani group or the Lahori group (who  call
           themselves Ahmadis or by  any  other  name),  who,  directly  or
           indirectly, poses himself as a Muslim, or calls, or  refers  to,
           his faith as Islam, or preaches  or  propagates  his  faith,  or
           invites others to accept his faith by words,  either  spoken  or
           written,  or  by  visible  representations,  or  in  any  manner
           whatsoever, outrages the religious feelings of Muslims, shall be
           punished with imprisonment of  either  description  for  a  term
           which extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine."

      A further paragraph prohibits the sect from using any title or form of
      address appropriate  to  the  Muslim  religion  in  any  part  of  its
      hierarchy. The decree was obviously directed to  preventing  the  sect
      either practising the Muslim religion, calling themselves  Muslim,  or
      seeking converts on the basis that they were themselves Muslims."

80. The Court of Appeal in Iftikhar Ahmed was  considering  an  appeal  from
   the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,  which  reversed  the  decision  of  an
   Adjudicator allowing the appellant's appeal without (at least on the face
   of the determination) dealing  with  the  question  whether  an  internal
   relocation option was available and if so, whether it was  reasonable  to
   expect him to exercise it.  There, as here, the appellant had come to the
   United Kingdom, leaving a wife and family in Pakistan and apparently  not
   in danger.

81.  The  Immigration  Appeal   Tribunal   criticised   and   reversed   the
   Adjudicator's determination; Simon Brown LJ presumed  that  the  internal
   relocation argument had been considered and rejected.

      "The present case, however, seems to  me  strikingly  different.  This
      appellant, it is common ground, has suffered persecution  in  his  own
      country, often daily, over a period of years.  His  religion  requires
      him to proselytise, although it is true not all - indeed, perhaps  few
      - Ahmadis carry that obligation to the lengths he does. His  assertion
      that "If he returned to Pakistan and went to live in a different  part
      of the country he would still follow  the  command  of  his  spiritual
      leaders and still be vocal in his proclamation of Ahmadis beliefs"  is
      in these circumstances highly likely to be true.  After  all,  had  he
      wished to avoid persecution in the past he could  always  simply  have
      ceased his activities. Moreover, not only is his assertion  inherently
      credible, but in any event his evidence was accepted  by  the  special
      adjudicator and, as I understand it, was assumed to be truthful by the
      IAT.


      I return finally to the IAT's determination, the critical paragraph of
      which I have already quoted. To my mind it simply never addresses  the
      all-important question as to whether, if returned, the appellant would
      indeed act in such a way as to be persecuted. ..."


82. The Iftikhar Ahmed  decision  was  published  just  a  few  weeks  after
   General Musharraf came to power in Pakistan.   The  evidence  before  us,
   nine years later, indicated that  the  propagation  question  would  more
   properly be approached on a case-by-case basis with the risk dependent on
   the lengths to which an individual Ahmadi carried his  da'wa  observance.
   We remind ourselves of the Tribunal's finding in IA and others:

      "26.  That is not to say that every Pakistani Ahmadi  is  at  risk  of
      persecution and is a refugee. As Mr Waite pointed out, the evidence of
      serious harm to Ahmadis  in  Rabwah  is  relatively  sparse.  ...  The
      incidence of actual harm to Ahmadis is, on the evidence, not  high  in
      Rabwah, and, on the evidence, is not high elsewhere in Pakistan. ...

      27.   The Tribunal will  look  in  due  course  at  the  other  issues
      relating to Ahmadis. In the meantime, however, we  draw  attention  to
      one comment in particular in the evidence given by  the  Human  Rights
      Commission of Pakistan to the Parliamentary  Human  Rights  Group  and
      recorded at paragraph 4.1 of the latter document.

           "... The HRCP stated that safety in Rabwah depends on the nature
           of the persecution and/or the influence of the  persecutor.  For
           example, if a neighbour wishes to take over an Ahmadi's business
           by capitalising on anti-Ahmadi sentiment, then the  job  of  the
           persecutor is complete  once  the  Ahmadi  has  left  the  local
           community.  However,  should  the  persecutor  be  a  person  of
           influence or means, they may use this to follow their target  to
           Rabwah as well. ... ."

      There is therefore a difference between  those  who  are  targeted  or
      pursued, in  particular  those  in  respect  of  whom  there  is  some
      institutional pursuit on the one hand, and those who  are  merely  the
      victims of local Sunnis who want to take advantage of restrictions  on
      Ahmadis in order to secure  some  financial  or  other  advantage  for
      themselves.

      28.   It is wrong to assume  that  Rabwah,  because  of  its  majority
      Ahmadi population, is either accessible or safe for those who, on  the
      evidence, need a place of safety. Each case will depend on  its  facts
      but in no wise can the existence of Rabwah be regarded generally as  a
      reason for dismissing an appeal that would otherwise be allowed."

83. On the evidence before us, that analysis remains  good.   Whilst  it  is
   clear that local pressure is exerted to  restrict  the  building  of  new
   Ahmadi mosques, schools and  cemeteries  from  time  to  time,  and  some
   Ahmadis are arrested and charged with blasphemy  or  behaviour  which  is
   offensive to Muslims, the numbers recorded are small  and  have  declined
   since the Musharraf Government took power.  Set  against  the  number  of
   Ahmadis in Pakistan as a whole, they are very low indeed.

84. There is very sparse evidence indeed of harm to Ahmadis  (though  rather
   more anecdotal evidence of difficulties for  Christians).   We  note  the
   great care exercised by the preaching teams who operate  out  of  private
   homes, by invitation only and after careful vetting of those to whom they
   propagate the Ahmadi faith.  We remind ourselves of the number  of  small
   Ahmadi mosques with established officers and security guards in the towns
   about which we heard evidence, large and small.  We remind ourselves that
   the first appellant was able to hand out leaflets  on  his  stall  openly
   without harm for many years.  We note that the courts do grant  bail  and
   that all appeals against blasphemy convictions have succeeded  in  recent
   years.  We consider that the risk today on return to Pakistan for Ahmadis
   who propagate the Ahmadi faith falls well below the  level  necessary  to
   show a real risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment  and  thus
   to engage any form of international protection.

85. It may be, as  the  Tribunal  said  in  IA  and  others,  that  in  some
   individual cases the level of  risk  can  be  shown  to  be  sufficiently
   enhanced on the particular facts to indicate that that individual  cannot
   be returned safely to their home  area.   Whether  or  not  there  is  an
   internal relocation option, either to Rabwah or  elsewhere  in  Pakistan,
   will then be a question of fact in relation to that  individual.   Rabwah
   is no safer than elsewhere in Pakistan  for  Ahmadis,  but  the  question
   whether it is an appropriate internal relocation option for an individual
   Ahmadi will always depend on the particular circumstances  and  facts  of
   that individual's situation.

86.  We  therefore  consider  the  individual  situation  of  each  of   the
   appellants below.

First appellant

87. Mr Hall accepted that the first appellant's account  was  credible  save
   in certain respects. We share his concern  about  the  first  appellant's
   contradictory position on the  shops  in  the  Azad  Market.   The  first
   appellant's case now is that he had reopened the shops himself before  he
   came to the United Kingdom and that his wife rented them out and lived in
   Rabwah on the rent from the shops and his house. That contrasts with  his
   earlier clear position that the shops had been closed down for  good;  it
   indicates that the appellant was prepared to exaggerate  the  seriousness
   of his position.

88. Although we accept the general  credibility  of  the  first  appellant's
   account, we consider that he exaggerated the seriousness of the threat to
   his safety overall. Despite a degree of intermittent  opposition  he  had
   been able to run a very successful business for  24  years  in  Sargodha.
   Periodically, the first appellant attracted the adverse interest of local
   mullahs, probably on account of his openly displaying  Ahmadi  literature
   on his shop premises. Although his  shop  was  closed  after  the  Khatme
   Nabuwwat and Azad Market traders' conference in  2000,  and  despite  the
   publication of the newspaper "fatwa", the first  appellant  was  able  to
   reopen his shops very soon afterwards, and to continue trading just as he
   had done before.  We consider that he would not have done this if he  had
   believed that there was a serious threat against his life.

89. Four years later in October 2004, and despite the threats that  he  then
   received, the first appellant reopened his shops before leaving  Pakistan
   so that his wife was able to let them and use the rent  for  her  support
   while living in Rabwah. We take  the  view  that  had  the  mullahs  been
   serious in seeking his death as an apostate they would not  have  allowed
   him to leave Sargodha alive or to re-open his  shops  so  that  his  wife
   could let them.  On the first appellant's own account he did not actually
   experience any difficulties in Rabwah. He was hardly there long enough; a
   few days at most.   We have no reason to think  that  if  he  had  stayed
   longer, there would have been any greater risk, especially in view of the
   safety in Rabwah of the first appellant's wife and children thereafter.

90. The assertion that Barkat Ullah Mangla was murdered by Sunni Muslims  is
   not borne out by the FIR dated 21 August  2004  filed  by  Mangla's  son,
   which referred to his being killed by unknown  assailants  and  confirmed
   that the Mangla family had no animosity with any one.  In our view it  is
   significant that apart from his claim in relation to Barkat Ullah  Mangla
   the first appellant has not suggested that any of the  other  holders  of
   the various Ahmadi offices which he mentioned were at any time persecuted
   on account of the positions which they held or the activities which  they
   undertook.

91. We are not satisfied that the  first  appellant  was  ever  at  risk  on
   account of his proselytising activities, which were carried on  privately
   in the sense in which we have explained  above.   We  conclude  that  the
   objective of the Khatme Nabuwwat  mullahs  in  Sargodha  was  limited  to
   stopping the open advertisement of  the  Ahmadi  religion  in  the  first
   appellant's shop, in which they were successful.  The fact that they  did
   not pursue the first appellant and his wife to Rabwah in our view  is  an
   indication of their limited and localised adverse interest.

92. We cannot exclude the possibility that if the first  appellant  were  to
   reappear in Sargodha, re-establish his business and continue to advertise
   the Ahmadi religion he might again attract the adverse  interest  of  the
   local Khatme Nabuwwat mullahs who know him.  The evidence  before  us  is
   not sufficient, however, to  establish  even  to  the  appropriate  lower
   standard of proof that if the first appellant were to relocate to another
   part of Pakistan, such as Rabwah or Karachi, he would be at  any  greater
   risk than any other devout Ahmadi who was inclined to proselytise. We are
   not satisfied that the Sargodha  Khatme  Nabuwwat  mullahs  would  become
   aware that the first appellant had returned or that even if they did they
   would have any greater adverse interest in him than they appear  to  have
   in other Ahmadi officeholders in Sargodha.

93. We do not, therefore, consider that it would be unsafe or  unduly  harsh
   to expect the first appellant to exercise his internal relocation  option
   within Pakistan if he considers that he remains at risk of harassment  or
   difficulties in Sargodha.

Second appellant

94. The second appellant's account is credible;  there  is  no  issue  about
   that.  However, it is not an account of national pursuit  by  the  Khatme
   Nabuwwat; the difficulties he had in Karimabad  and  Khewra  were  wholly
   unconnected with those which he had in Karachi and also with each  other.
   He was not sought out in either place on  account  of  events  which  had
   occurred in Karachi.

95. In Karimabad, the appellant took a man  to  an  Ahmadi  mosque  and  the
   man's wife's brother complained about that.  In Khewra, a resident nearby
   complained to a Khatme  Nabuwwat  mullah  when  the  appellant  took  the
   children's classes at the local Ahmadi Library.  It does not appear  that
   similar difficulties were encountered  by  other  who  previously  taught
   children's classes at the Ahmadi Library,    an  established  institution
   dating back to pre-Partition days.  It is not suggested that  the  second
   appellant's cousin had any similar difficulty.

96. The difficulties in Karachi, Karimabad  and  Khewra  were  distinct  and
   fortuitous, with no relation with each other; that is not evidence to any
   standard that the second appellant risks further adverse  interest  shown
   in him if he returns to Pakistan for any of those reasons.

97. The appellant accompanied the Ahmadi mosque President  and  a  preaching
   team on a trip to Sindh without coming to any harm.  He position in cross-
   examination was that his propagation of the Ahmadi faith was discreet and
   privately carried out. He would always do it indoors  and  always  to  an
   invited individual or audience,  not  to  people  at  large.    In  these
   circumstances, if the second appellant were unable to return to  live  in
   Karachi, we consider that he could relocate to an area of Pakistan  where
   he was not known. In so doing, he would be at no greater  risk  than  any
   other devout Ahmadi who was inclined to propagate the Ahmadi faith.

98. The second appellant's dramatic claim that he could return  to  Pakistan
   only if his hands  were  tied  and  his  eyes  and  ears  covered  is  an
   exaggeration.  Of course there remains a risk that the second appellant's
   propagation activities might come to the  attention  of  Khatme  Nabuwwat
   mullahs but the risk of this happening is so small, given the  manner  in
   which the proselytising would be undertaken, that it does not amount to a
   real risk.  As far as safety is concerned, there is no indication that it
   would be unsafe for him to return to Pakistan now.

99. There remains the question of  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation.
   The second appellant does not want  to  go  back  to  his  home  area  of
   Karachi, but his reason is that he would not wish to live with his wife's
   parents  there, as do his wife and children at  present.   Save  for  the
   suggestion that he would have to remain silent about  his  religion,  the
   second appellant did  not  put  forward  any  practical  difficulties  in
   relocating elsewhere within Pakistan.  He has not discharged  the  burden
   of showing that it would be unsafe or  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
   relocate within Pakistan.

100. It follows that both appellants have failed to discharge the burden  of
   proving that their particular circumstances entitle them to international
   protection under either of the Conventions or to humanitarian protection.








Signed

Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson



                                   ANNEX 1

                 Schedule of documentary evidence submitted
|                                                               |          |
|Document                                                       |Date      |
|Amnesty International: Pakistan: "Insufficient protection of   |15/05/01  |
|religious                                                      |          |
|minorities"                                                    |          |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRBC):                |25/05/05  |
|"Whether an individual, who has a First Information Report     |          |
|(FIR) or an                                                    |          |
|outstanding warrant of arrest against him/her can obtain a     |          |
|Pakistani passport"                                            |          |
|IRBC: "The situation of members of the Ahmadiyya Movement in   |31/08/05  |
|Islam etc."                                                    |          |
|UK Home Office: Operational Guidance Note: Pakistan            |19/06/06  |
|Freedom House: Freedom in the World 2006: Pakistan             |06/09/06  |
|US Department of State International Religious Freedom Report  |15/09/06  |
|2006                                                           |          |
|Parliamentary Human Rights Group: "Rabwah: A Place For Martyrs"|16/01/07  |
|COIR Pakistan April 2007                                       |30/04/07  |
|US Commission on International Religious Freedom               |02/05/07  |
|Annual Report 2007: Pakistan                                   |          |
|Human Rights Watch (HRW) report: Pakistan: "Pandering to       |06/05/07  |
|Extremists Fuels Persecution of Ahmadis"                       |          |
|USCIRF, Pakistan: "Decries Abuse of Blasphemy Laws, Apostasy   |11/06/07  |
|Bill"                                                          |          |
|US Department of State International Religious Freedom Report  |14/09/07  |
|2007                                                           |          |
|US Department of State: "Democracy, Authoritarianism, and      |07/11/07  |
|Terrorism                                                      |          |
|in Contemporary Pakistan"                                      |          |


