
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


      FB and Others (HC 395 para 284:  "six months") Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT
                                                                       00030


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House  Date of Hearing:  7 February 2006
      Date of Promulgation: 16 March 2006

                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                    Mr G Warr (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   Respondent

                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   Respondent

                                     and

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   Respondent

Representation:
For the first Appellant:          Mr M A Kalam of Jalalabad Law Associates
For the second Appellant:         Mr M A Kalam of Jalalabad Law Associates
For the third Appellant:          Mr Jaisri, counsel instructed by Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:               Mr Y Oluntolu, Home Office Presenting
Officer

A person given leave to enter the United Kingdom for a  period  expiring  on
the day bearing the same date as the date of entry in the sixth month  after
entry is given leave for a period of six months and one day.  Such a  person
is therefore not excluded from seeking to remain  in  the  UK  as  a  spouse
under para 284(i) of HC 395 as amended by HC 538  on  1  April  2003.   That
period of six months and one  day  does  not,  however,  extend  beyond  six
months from the date of admission within the meaning of paragraph 284(i)  as
amended by Cm 5949 (in force from 25 August 2003 to 1  October  2004).   The
leave of any such person is nevertheless extended by s3C of the 1971 Act  if
he applies for variation;  and in that case he too  meets  the  requirements
of paragraph 284(i).  The most  recent  change  to  para  284(i),  Cm  6339,
(taking effect on 1 October 2004) does, however, exclude such  a  person  if
leave of more than six months is prohibited by the Immigration Rules in  his
case.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Issue

  1. How long is six months?  Or rather, is a period of time beginning on a
     date in one month and ending on the date bearing the  same  number  in
     the sixth month thereafter a period of "six months' duration or less"?
      And does such a period extend "beyond six months" from  the  date  on
     which it begins?

  2. The question arises because of the  terms  of  paragraph  284  of  the
     Immigration Rules, HC 395, which sets  out  the  requirements  for  an
     extension of stay as the spouse of the person present and  settled  in
     the United Kingdom.  The first of the requirements,  in  the  form  in
     which it had effect from 1 April 2003 (when it was amended by HC  538)
     until 25 August 2003 (when it was amended by Cm 5949), was as follows:

           "(i)  The applicant has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                 United Kingdom, other than where that limited leave  is  of
                 six months' duration or less. "

      (The amendment made by HC 538  was  the  insertion  of  the  words  in
      italics.)  From 25 August 2003, the form was as follows:


           "(i)  The applicant has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                 United Kingdom other than where as a result of  that  leave
                 he would not have been in the  United  Kingdom  beyond  six
                 months from the date on which he was admitted to the United
                 Kingdom on this occasion in accordance  with  these  rules,
                 unless the leave in question is limited leave to enter as a
                 fianc�."

      That requirement was itself amended by Cm 6339 by the addition of  the
      words "which was given in accordance with any  of  the  provisions  of
      these rules" before the words "other than" with effect from 1  October
      2004.

Entry Clearance and leave to enter

  3. In the course of this determination we  shall  have  to  consider  the
     process by which the Appellants were granted leave to enter the United
     Kingdom.  For clarity's sake, it may therefore be appropriate  to  set
     out the general principles relating to entry clearance  and  leave  to
     enter.

  4. The principal statutory provision relating to leave to enter is  s3(1)
     of the Immigration Act 1971, as amended by the British Nationality Act
     1981 and the Asylum and Immigration Act 1996:

           "3(1) Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a
                 person is not a British citizen-
                 (a)   he shall not enter the United  Kingdom  unless  given
                       leave to do so in accordance with the provisions  of,
                       or made under, this Act;
                 (b)   he may be given leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
                       (or, when already  there,  leave  to  remain  in  the
                       United Kingdom)  either  for  a  limited  or  for  an
                       indefinite period);
                 (c)   if he is given limited leave to enter  or  remain  in
                       the United Kingdom, it may be given subject to all or
                       any of the following conditions, namely-
                       (i)    a  condition  restricting  his  employment  or
                            occupation in the United Kingdom;
                       (ii)  a  condition  requiring  him  to  maintain  and
                            accommodate himself, and any dependants of his,
                            without recourse to public funds;  and
                       (iii) a condition requiring him to register with  the
                            police."

  5. By s4 of the 1971 Act and associated provisions in Schedule  2,  leave
     to enter is granted by Immigration Officers, who are officers  of  the
     Secretary of State for the Home Department.

  6. Before the coming into force of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,
     there was a clear demarcation between leave to enter, obtained from an
     Immigration Officer, and entry clearance, obtained from a British post
     abroad.   The  Immigration  Rules  provide  that  persons  of  certain
     nationalities (listed in  appendix  1  to  the  Rules)  require  entry
     clearance in the form of a visa  as  a  precondition  to  their  being
     granted leave to enter.  The Rules also provide that  leave  to  enter
     for certain purposes will not be granted unless  entry  clearance  has
     been obtained.  The administration of  entry  clearance  is  by  Entry
     Clearance Officers or Visa Officers, who are officers of the Secretary
     of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs.  Thus, a person who  is
     a national of one of the specified countries or who  seeks  entry  for
     one of the specified purposes must first present himself at his  local
     Embassy or High Commission and  obtain  entry  clearance  or  a  visa:
     without it he will not be admitted and, indeed, will not be carried by
     any reputable airline.  On arrival (under the scheme as it was  before
     the 1999 Act) he presented his entry  clearance  and  formally  sought
     leave to enter.  The holder of a valid entry clearance who was for any
     reason refused leave to enter on the strength of it had an  in-country
     right of appeal against of the refusal of leave to enter.  It was  for
     that reason that entry clearance was sometimes sought and obtained  by
     those who had no need to have it,  because  the  possession  of  entry
     clearance gave at least a right to be physically present in the United
     Kingdom during the course of any appeal against refusal  of  leave  to
     enter, and so might well ensure that a travel ticket  would  not  have
     been bought and used in vain.

  7. The strict separation between  entry  clearance  and  leave  to  enter
     ceased on 14 February 2000 when provisions of the 1999 Act  came  into
     force, inserting a new s3A into the 1971 Act.  This section  reads  in
     part as follows:

           "3A(1)      The Secretary of State may  by  order  make  further
                 provisions with respect to the giving, refusing or  varying
                 of leave to enter the United Kingdom.
           (2)   An order under subsection (1) may, in particular,  provide
                 for-
                 (a)   leave to  be  given  or  refused  before  the  person
                       concerned arrives in the United Kingdom;
                 ...
           (3)   The Secretary of State may by order provide that, in  such
                 circumstances as may be prescribed-
                 (a)   an entry visa, or
                 (b)    such  other  form  of  entry  clearance  as  may  be
                       prescribed, is to have effect as leave to  enter  the
                       United Kingdom."

  8. The associated Order is the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and  Remain)
     Order 2000 (SI 2000/1161) which came into force on 30 July 2000.   The
     effect of the Order is summarised  in  a  new  paragraph  25A  of  the
     Immigration Rules, operative from the same date:

           "25A. An entry clearance which satisfies  the  requirements  set
                 out in article 3 of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
                 Remain) Order 2000 will have effect as leave to  enter  the
                 United  Kingdom.   The  requirements  are  that  the  entry
                 clearance must specify the purpose  for  which  the  holder
                 wishes to enter the United Kingdom and should  be  endorsed
                 with the conditions to  which  it  is  subject  or  with  a
                 statement that it has effect as indefinite leave  to  enter
                 the United Kingdom.  The holder of such an entry  clearance
                 will not require leave to enter on arrival  in  the  United
                 Kingdom and, for the  purposes  of  these  Rules,  will  be
                 treated as a person who has arrived in the  United  Kingdom
                 with leave to enter the United Kingdom which  is  in  force
                 but which was given to him before his arrival."

  9. Part II of the Order is headed "Entry clearance as leave to enter" and
     comprises Articles 2 to 6.  We shall set out the provisions with which
     we are concerned, omitting references to entry clearance  endorsed  on
     travel documents issued under  the  Refugee  Convention,  and  special
     arrangements relating to the ADS Agreement with China.

           "2.   Entry clearance as Leave to Enter
                 ...  [A]n  entry  clearance   which   complies   with   the
                 requirements of article 3 shall have  effect  as  leave  to
                 enter the United Kingdom to the extent specified in article
                 4, but subject to the conditions referred to in article 5.


           3.    Requirements
                 ...
                    2) The entry clearance  must  specify  the  purpose  for
                       which the holder wishes to enter the United Kingdom.
                    3) The entry clearance must be endorsed with:
                         a) the conditions to which it is subject;  or
                         b) a statement  that  it  is  to  have  effect  as
                            indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom.


                 ...


           4.    Extent to which entry clearance is to be leave to enter
                 (1)   A visit visa, during its period  of  validity,  shall
                       have effect as leave to enter the United  Kingdom  on
                       an unlimited number of occasions, in accordance  with
                       paragraph (2).
                 (2)   On each occasion the holder  arrives  in  the  United
                       Kingdom, he shall be treated for the purposes of  the
                       Immigration  Acts  as  having  been  granted,  before
                       arrival, leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
                       limited period beginning  on  the  date  of  arrival,
                       being:
                       (a)   six months if six months or more remain of  the
                            visa's period of validity;
                             or
                       (b)   the visa's remaining  period  of  validity,  if
                       less than six months.
                 (3)   In the case of any other form of entry clearance,  it
                       shall have  effect  as  leave  to  enter  the  United
                       Kingdom  on  one  occasion  during  its   period   of
                       validity;  and, on arrival in the United Kingdom, the
                       holder shall be  treated  for  the  purposes  of  the
                       Immigration  Acts  as  having  been  granted,  before
                       arrival, leave to enter the United Kingdom:
                       (a)   in the case of any  entry  clearance  which  is
                            endorsed with a statement that it  is  to  have
                            effect as indefinite leave to enter the  United
                            Kingdom, for an indefinite period;  or
                       (b)   in the case of  an  entry  clearance  which  is
                            endorsed with conditions, for a limited period,
                            being the period beginning on the date on which
                            the holder arrives in the  United  Kingdom  and
                            ending on the  date  of  expiry  of  the  entry
                            clearance.


                    4) In this article 'period of validity' means the period
                       beginning on the day on  which  the  entry  clearance
                       becomes effective and ending on the day on  which  it
                       expires.

              5. Conditions
                 An entry clearance shall have  effect  as  leave  to  enter
                 subject to any conditions, being conditions of a kind  that
                 may be imposed on leave to enter given under section  3  of
                 the Act, to which the entry clearance is subject and  which
                 are endorsed on it."

 10. A number of changes were made by the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and
     Remain) (Amendment) Order 2005 (SI 2005/1159).  These partly relate to
     the ADS Agreement with China, but in addition make  special  provision
     for any visit visa "endorsed with the statement that  it  is  to  have
     effect as a single-entry visa".  A  single-entry  visit  visa  is  now
     excluded from paragraphs (1) and (2) of  Article  4  and  included  in
     paragraph (3):  in other words, a single-entry visit visa is effective
     for a single entry only.  These provisions came into effect on 1 April
     2005.

 11. Before the changes made by and under the 1999 Act, a grant of leave to
     enter as a visitor was normally for six months (even if  the  visa  or
     entry clearance had been obtained on the  basis  of  an  intention  to
     spend a much shorter period in the United Kingdom:  a  practice  which
     did nothing to promote an impression of enforcement).  The  leave  was
     notified by the use of a stamp in the visitor's passport,  giving  the
     date of entry and granting leave "for  six  months"  in  those  words.
     Under the present provisions, the stamp only needs to give the date of
     arrival:  the period of leave will be governed by the 2000 Order.   It
     will be a period of six months if the visa has at least six months  to
     run, or the remaining period of the visa's validity if less.

 12. There are still, however, Immigration Rules relating to the period for
     which visitors are  to  have  leave  to  enter.   They  are  primarily
     applicable in two circumstances.  The first is  where,  in  accordance
     with the Order, a person has received less than six  months  leave  to
     enter (because his visa had less than six months to run) and seeks  to
     extend his leave.  The second is where a person who is entitled to  do
     so (that is to say, who is not a visa  national)  arrives  at  a  port
     without entry clearance  and  seeks  leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor.
     Because he has no entry clearance, the Order has no effect for him.

 13. The relevant Rules relating  to  the  first  situation  are  those  in
     paragraphs 44 to 46 of HC 395.  Paragraph 44 provides that "six months
     is the maximum permitted leave which may be granted to a visitor", and
     limits any extension to the person who  "has  not  already  spent,  or
     would not as a result of an extension of stay  spend,  more  than  six
     months in total in the United Kingdom as a  visitor".   Paragraph  45,
     taken with paragraph 44, enables an extension to be granted so  as  to
     make the total stay up to six months.

 14. The second situation is covered  by  paragraph  42,  which  enables  a
     person seeking leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  visitor  to  be
     admitted for a period not exceeding six months.

 15. For completeness, we should also set out  paragraph  23A  of  HC  395,
     which has had effect since 13 November 2003 and is  in  the  following
     terms:

           "23A. A person who is not  a  visa  national,  not  a  specified
                 national, or who is seeking entry for a purpose  for  which
                 prior entry clearance is not required under these Rules may
                 ascertain in advance whether he is eligible  for  admission
                 to the United Kingdom by applying for an entry clearance in
                 accordance with paragraphs 24-30.  A person who seeks leave
                 to enter on arrival in the United Kingdom  may  be  granted
                 such leave, irrespective of the purpose or period  of  time
                 for which he seeks entry, for a period  not  exceeding  six
                 months."

 16. It is clear  that  six  months  is  a  period  of  time  which  is  of
     considerable importance in both the Order and the  Immigration  Rules.
     Whereas the Order, however, as  a  statutory  instrument,  has  effect
     regardless of any actual  grant  of  leave,  the  Secretary  of  State
     retains his power to behave more generously to a person seeking  leave
     to enter than is required or even allowed by  the  Immigration  Rules.
     It therefore follows that although leave to enter as a  visitor  under
     the Order cannot exceed six months, a grant  of  leave  to  enter  may
     exceed six months, because the Secretary of State  or  an  Immigration
     Officer may, by deliberate choice or by  mistake,  have  granted  more
     than is envisaged by the Immigration Rules.

The Appellants

 17. The first Appellant, FB, a citizen of Bangladesh,  obtained  from  the
     Entry Clearance Officer, Dhaka, a visitor's visa on 2 March 2003.  The
     period of validity is entered on the visa as beginning  on  "02/03/03"
     and ending on "02/09/03".  It is not restricted to a single entry, but
     the maximum length of stay is given as "180 days".  She arrived in the
     United Kingdom on 25 March 2003, and the visa was date stamped on that
     date by an Immigration Officer at Heathrow.  It is not disputed  that,
     under the Order, she thereupon had leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
     until 2 September 2003, when her visa expired.

 18. Before that date, she applied for an extension  of  leave,  which  was
     granted on 6 August 2003.  The extension is in  the  following  terms,
     endorsed in her passport:

           "Leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  condition  that  the
           holder maintains and accommodates  himself  and  any  dependants
           without recourse to public funds, does not engage in  employment
           paid  or  unpaid  and  does  not  engage  in  any  business   or
           profession, is hereby given until 25th September 2003."

 19. The combined operation of the Order and the extension  was  thus  that
     she had leave to enter from 25 March 2003 to 25 September 2003.  On 12
     September 2003, she applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse,  she
     having married a British man in July 2003.   She  was  refused  on  17
     October 2003 on the ground that she did not meet the  requirements  of
     paragraph 284(i) of HC 395 as amended  by  HC  538.   The  explanatory
     statement asserts that the Appellant's extension  of  leave  until  25
     September 2003 gave her  "the  maximum  six  months  permitted"  as  a
     visitor.  She was therefore not a person who had leave other  than  of
     six months' duration or less, and was not entitled to leave to  remain
     as a spouse.  The explanatory statement  makes  no  reference  to  the
     replacement of the wording of HC 538 from  25  August  2003,  but  the
     notice of decision refers generally to paragraph 284 (as amended)  and
     asserts that the Appellant did not "meet  the  requirement  of  having
     limited leave for a period of more  than  six  months  in  the  United
     Kingdom".

 20. The Appellant appealed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights
     grounds.   So  far  as  the  Immigration  Rules  are  concerned,   the
     Adjudicator, Mrs R Goldfarb, wrote as follows:

           "14.  As a preliminary  issue,  the  Appellant's  representative
                 raised two matters:  he asserted that the Appellant  stayed
                 more than six months in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant
                 entered the United Kingdom on 25th March 2003 with  a  visa
                 for 180  days.   The  period  of  validity,  including  the
                 extension granted, was until 2nd September 2003.   However,
                 the Appellant's grant of a  further  extension,  the  grant
                 being made on 6th August 23003, was  until  25th  September
                 2003.  I conclude from all the information before  me  that
                 her permitted duration in the United Kingdom  was  for  six
                 months.  I conclude that it had been open to her to make  a
                 further  application  to  extend  her  visa   beyond   25th
                 September, if she were minded to have done so (for a number
                 of bona fide reasons).  However, this was not the case  and
                 whatever the duration that she would have  wished  to  have
                 maintained she did not have a grant of more than  180  days
                 leave to remain here."

 21. The Adjudicator accordingly dismissed the appeal under the Immigration
     Rules.  There was an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal on  the  grounds,  inter  alia,  that  the
     Appellant had leave to remain for six months and one day, which  is  a
     period exceeding six months.  Permission was granted  on  that  ground
     and on another basis which is, as we understand it,  essentially  that
     the Adjudicator's  reference  to  the  period  from  25  March  to  25
     September  being  of  no  more  than  180  days  is  incomprehensible.
     Following the commencement of the appeals provisions of the 2004  Act,
     the appeal is now before us for reconsideration.

 22. The case of the second Appellant, MSA, is very similar.  She is also a
     citizen of Bangladesh.  The visa which she  obtained  from  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer, Dhaka, on 25 February 2003 is, mutatis mutandis, in
     identical terms to that issued to the first Appellant.  Its period  of
     validity is "25/02/03 to 25/08/03":  it is for multiple  entries,  the
     maximum period of stay being again 180 days.  She used it on 14  April
     2003 when she arrived at Heathrow and the visa was date-stamped  then.
     Before the expiry of the visa, she applied for an extension of  leave,
     which was granted in terms identical to those relating  to  the  first
     Appellant, save that the date of expiry is expressed as "14th  October
     2003".  On 3 October 2003, she applied for  leave  to  remain  as  the
     spouse of a man she had married on  6  August.   Her  application  was
     refused on 2 February 2004.  Both the explanatory  statement  and  the
     notice of refusal refer expressly  to  HC  538,  rather  than  to  the
     wording substituted by Cm 5949 from 25 August 2003.  The material part
     of the explanatory statement is as follows:

           "The Secretary of State also noted that the Appellant  had  been
           granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  for  six  months
           only.  However, it is one of the requirements of the Immigration
           Rules for leave to be granted as  a  spouse  that  the  original
           leave should exceed six months which means  that  the  Appellant
           does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules."

 23. The notice of refusal includes the sentence "However, the  Immigration
     Rules direct that a person seeking such leave is to be refused if they
     do not meet the requirements set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules  as
     amended by HC 358".

 24. The Appellant appealed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights
     grounds.  The Immigration Judge, Mr R  A  Cox,  dismissed  the  appeal
     under the Immigration  Rules,  holding  that  the  Appellant  had  had
     exactly six months' leave to  enter  and  no  more,  and  noting  from
     previous correspondence that the Appellant's representatives  appeared
     to have accepted that.  Reconsideration  of  the  Immigration  Judge's
     decision was ordered on the ground that the Appellant had arguably had
     leave to enter for six months and one day.

 25. The third Appellant, LM, is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She arrived in the
     United Kingdom on 15 October 2002 and  sought  leave  to  enter  as  a
     visitor.  At that time, Zimbabwe was not a country listed in  appendix
     1 to the Immigration Rules, and so she did not need entry clearance or
     a visa.  After enquiry, she was granted leave to enter.  The  relevant
     notification was stamped in her passport.  There is  a  Gatwick  entry
     stamp dated 15 October 2002 and another stamp which  reads  "Leave  to
     enter for/until 15th April 2003 no work or recourse to public funds".

 26. On 31 March 2003, she submitted an application for leave to remain  as
     the spouse of a  person  whom  she  had  married  on  28  March.   Her
     application was refused on 11 April 2003,  because  it  had  not  been
     completed in full and the required documents  did  not  accompany  it.
     The application was resubmitted and submitted on 15 April 2003.  On  8
     July 2003, the application was refused on the basis of HC  538,  which
     had come into force on  1  April  2003.   The  relevant  part  of  the
     explanatory statement is as follows:

           "The Secretary of State noted that the  Appellant  last  entered
           the country for six months' duration  and  therefore,  does  not
           qualify to change his immigration status to that of a spouse  of
           a person present and  settled  in  the  UK,  as  a  valid  entry
           clearance is required before returning to the  United  Kingdom."
           [sic]

 27. The notice of refusal is in the following terms:

           "You applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the
           basis of your marriage  ....   However,  the  Immigration  Rules
           direct that a person seeking such leave is to be refused if they
           do not meet each of the requirements set out in the  Immigration
           Rules as amended by HC 538.  This includes  that  the  applicant
           has limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  other  than
           where that leave is of six months'  duration  or  less.   On  15
           October 2002, you were granted  limited  leave  to  enter  as  a
           visitor for a period of six months from 15 October 2002 until 15
           April 2003, therefore you do not meet the requirements of having
           limited leave for a period of more than six months in the United
           Kingdom."

 28. The Appellant appealed essentially on human rights  grounds,  but  the
     Adjudicator, Mr F X J D'Ambrosio, dealt  with  the  matter  under  the
     Immigration Rules as well.  It is by no means easy to  understand  the
     procedure he adopted.  He appears to have taken  as  his  authority  a
     compendium of immigration law which did not purport to state  the  law
     in force at the time that the present decision was made.   He  ignored
     the reference to HC 538 in the notice of decision and appears to  have
     required the Home Office Presenting Officer to prove the terms of  the
     Immigration Rules as  a  matter  of  evidence.   When  the  Presenting
     Officer failed to do so, the Adjudicator appears to have purported  to
     find as a fact that paragraph 284 was not amended  on  1  April  2003.
     Faced with that proposed finding,  the  Presenting  Officer  indicated
     that he would no longer  oppose  the  appeal.   The  Adjudicator  then
     appears to have allowed the appeal on the  basis  of  the  Immigration
     Rules as he believed them to be at  the  date  of  the  decision,  but
     without making any enquiry as to whether at that  date  the  Appellant
     met the substantive requirements of those  Rules.   The  Secretary  of
     State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
     Immigration Appeal Tribunal on the ground  that  the  Adjudicator  had
     erred in ignoring HC 538.  In the grounds of  appeal,  the  Respondent
     asserted that the appeal was conceded only on the question of  whether
     the Appellant was excluded from consideration for leave to remain as a
     spouse.  Following the commencement of the appeal  provisions  of  the
     2004 Act, the grant of permission to the Secretary of  State  operates
     as an order that  the  Appellant's  appeal  be  reconsidered  by  this
     Tribunal.

The hearing

 29. By the consent of the parties' representatives, we  dealt  with  these
     reconsiderations  together.   Mr  Jaisri,  for  the  third  Appellant,
     submitted that the Adjudicator was right to require the  Secretary  of
     State to prove the terms of the Immigration Rules.  He referred us  to
     dicta of Eveleigh LJ in R v IAT ex parte Nathwani [1979-80] Imm AR  9,
     citing Lord Denning MR in R v SSHD ex parte  Hosenball  [1977]  1  WLR
     766, 780.  There, the Master of the Rolls had said of the  Immigration
     Rules:

           "They are not rules of law.  They are  rules  of  practice  laid
           down for the guidance of immigration officers and Tribunals  who
           are entrusted with the administration of the Act.  They can  be,
           and often are, prayed in aid by applicants before the  court  in
           immigration cases."

 30. Mr Jaisri's submission was that as they are  not  rules  of  law,  the
     Immigration Rules require to be proved.  We are unable to accept  that
     submission.  Whatever may have been the position in 1977, there can be
     no doubt now that the Immigration Rules are close to  being  rules  of
     law.  Thirty-five years of decided cases  have  established  that  the
     Immigration Rules bind Immigration Officers and  others  to  grant  to
     claimants relief at least as generous as that ordained in  the  Rules.
     Although they are neither statute nor statutory instruments, they  are
     made in accordance with the provisions of the Immigration Act 1971 and
     under that Act and all its successors an  Adjudicator  or  Immigration
     Judge or Tribunal is required  to  allow  an  appeal  insofar  as  the
     decision  against  which  the  appeal  is  brought  was  made  not  in
     accordance  with  any  relevant  Immigration  Rules.   In  an   appeal
     depending  on  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  Rules   themselves   are
     effectively  the  legal  context  within  which  the  Adjudicator   or
     Immigration Judge makes his decision.  It is  quite  inappropriate  to
     regard them in the same light as casual acts, needing proof or turning
     on the incidence of the burden of proof.  If the division  is  between
     law, which the judge is deemed to know, and fact, which  needs  to  be
     proved, then the Immigration Rules fall on  the  side  of  law.   That
     conclusion is adumbrated in Pearson  v  IAT  [1978]  Imm  AR  212  and
     confirmed by the phrase in  s86(3)(a)  of  the  2002  Act:   "the  law
     (including immigration rules)".

 31. For the foregoing reasons, Mr D'Ambrosio erred in law in the procedure
     he adopted and in failing to ascertain and apply the Immigration Rules
     as they were at the date of the decision under appeal.  Even if he had
     been right to require proof  of  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
     Rules, however, he would have erred in law in his failure to  take  in
     the account of HC 538, which was specifically brought to his attention
     by the notice of refusal.  He further erred in directing the issue  of
     entry  clearance  when  there  had  been  no  consideration   of   the
     substantive requirements of paragraph 284.  We note that he appears to
     have thought that the appeal was  conceded  on  that  basis.   We  are
     satisfied that that was his error,  brought  about  no  doubt  by  the
     confusion over  trying  to  ascertain  the  terms  of  the  applicable
     Immigration Rules.  We take the view that it is inconceivable that the
     Presenting  Officer  conceded  or  intended  to  concede  the   appeal
     substantively and accept the explanation in the Secretary  of  State's
     grounds.  Mr Jaisri made no submissions opposing the grounds  on  this
     point.

 32. The third Appellant's appeal should have been and was considered under
     paragraph 284 as amended by HC 538, because that was the rule in force
     when the decision was made.   Despite  the  reference  to  HC  538  in
     relation to the other two Appellants, their applications  should  have
     been considered under the terms of paragraph 284(i) as substituted  by
     Cm 5949.  By the time that the decisions were made in  the  other  two
     Appellants' cases, the rule had changed.  Their cases should have been
     considered under the rule in force at the date of  the  decision:   if
     authority for that proposition is required,  it  is  to  be  found  in
     Nathwani.  It looks as though those who made the  decisions  in  these
     cases were not aware that the rule had changed, but that is beside the
     point.

 33. The precise questions posed by these three appeals  are  therefore  as
     follows.  Was the leave granted to the first Appellant (25 March to 25
     September 2003) and the second Appellant (14 April to 14 October 2003)
     leave as a result of which the Appellants would not have been  in  the
     United Kingdom beyond six months from the  date  on  which  they  were
     admitted to the United Kingdom on this occasion in accordance with the
     Immigration Rules?  Was the leave granted to the third  Appellant  (15
     October 2002 to 15 April 2003) leave which, in the words of HC 538, is
     of six months duration or less?

 34. Both Mr Kalam, who represented the first two Appellants, and Mr Jaisri
     made reference to various arithmetical calculations.  Neither they nor
     Mr Oluntolu, who  represented  the  Respondent,  referred  us  to  any
     provisions for the calculation of periods of time in  the  Immigration
     Rules or elsewhere.  Mr Jaisri referred us in general terms  to  cases
     relating to leases, and Mr Kalan reminded us that the period for which
     leave to enter is given may be different from the period  of  validity
     of a visa;  but neither referred us to any specific authorities on the
     issue.

 35. Mr Oluntolu's submissions were confined to giving us what he  told  us
     was the consistent view of his colleagues that the periods of time for
     which leave to enter was given in these  cases  were  periods  of  six
     months and not more.  Although he acknowledged that both the first day
     and the last were periods on which the Appellant  was  in  the  United
     Kingdom with leave, he said that the last date was understood to be  a
     packing up day, during the course of which a person should depart from
     the United Kingdom.

Discussion

 36. The universal views of Home Office officials are no doubt entitled  to
     some weight in the interpretation of rules which they promote and they
     are intended to apply.  An examination of the operation of the  system
     of visas taking effect as leave to enter does not,  however,  give  us
     any confidence that there is in the  scheme  a  consistency  which  we
     should exploit and promote.

 37. We say that because of the difference between the terms  of  visas  as
     issued and the terms of the Order.  As we  have  recorded  earlier  in
     this determination, the visas issued to the first and second Appellant
     were expressed to be for a maximum stay of  180  days.   There  is  no
     doubt in our minds that that is the standard form.  But the Order  has
     effect that leave to enter is for six months or  such  shorter  period
     for which the visa is valid.  Six months has to be interpreted here as
     elsewhere as six calendar months, in accordance with the provisions of
     the  Interpretation  Acts.   (That  provision  in  itself  is  of   no
     assistance on the principal issue in this  case:   the  provision  was
     introduced in the Interpretation Act 1850 in  order  to  displace  any
     presumption that lunar months were intended.)  There is no  period  of
     six months that is as short as 180 days.  The shortest periods of  six
     months are  those  that  begin  in  January,  February,  September  or
     November:  they have 181 days or 182 in leap years.  Most  periods  of
     six  months  beginning  in  the  summer  are  of  184  days.    (These
     calculations are based on the assumption that the period ends  on  the
     day before the day bearing the same date of the month as  the  day  on
     which the period started:  otherwise, each of the figures  would  have
     to be increased by one.)

 38. It follows that, provided a visa is valid for long enough (or is  used
     early enough), the grant of leave to enter under the Order is a  grant
     which is in breach of the visa.  A person who arrives  in  the  United
     Kingdom with a visa limiting a stay to 180 days may, by the Order,  be
     given leave to enter for a period which exceeds 180  days.   At  first
     glance, it might appear that consistency was achieved by Article 5  of
     the Order, which provides that the leave to enter shall be subject  to
     any  conditions  which  the  entry  clearance  is  subject;   but  the
     conditions have to be conditions of a kind  that  can  be  imposed  on
     leave to enter under s3 of the 1971 Act.  Reference to  that  section,
     which we have set out above, shows that the period of the leave is not
     itself a condition.  So the inconsistency remains.  The  system  taken
     as a whole is not such as to  give  confidence  that  calculations  of
     lengths of time are precisely made and that the consequences  of  such
     calculations are rigorously worked out.

 39. We are therefore thrown upon our own resources for the  interpretation
     of the phrase "six months".  We  note,  with  regret,  that  no  party
     before us made any submissions on Cm 5949 or on s 3C of the 1971  Act,
     to which we refer below.  We are however confident  that  all  parties
     put all the points that they wished to put.

 40. We begin from first principles.  The whole of January, from the  first
     moment of 1 January until the last moment of 31 January, is one month.
      As the law takes no notice of fractions of a day, it follows  that  a
     period expressed as beginning on 1 January and ending on 31 January is
     a period of  one  month.   It  follows  that  a  period  expressed  as
     beginning on 1 January and ending on 1 February is one day longer than
     that:  it is a period of one month and one  day.   Looked  at  another
     way, it is a period of 32 days, and no month is as long as 32 days, so
     it must be a period of longer than one month.  The conclusion that the
     period beginning on 1 January and ending on 1 February is longer  than
     one month can be avoided only if there are provisions  requiring  some
     part of the period to be ignored  in  making  the  calculation.   Such
     provisions are quite usual in rules  which  limit  the  period  during
     which some act is to be done.  In such cases, the  first  day  of  the
     period, or the last,  or  both,  are  sometimes  directed  to  be  (or
     accepted as) excluded.  But no such rules apply to the provisions with
     which we are concerned, and, in any event, such rules are not commonly
     found in English law to apply to the calculation of a period  of  time
     during which some status (such  as  that  of  tenant  or  employee  or
     licensee or prisoner) is to exist.  Brett LJ set out the principle for
     the last category in Migotti v Colvill (1879) 4 CPD 233, 238:

           "The term a calendar month is a legal and technical term  ...  .
           The meaning of the phrase is that, in computing time by calendar
           months, the time must be reckoned by looking at the calendar and
           not  by  counting  days;   and   that   one   calendar   month's
           imprisonment is to be calculated from the day of imprisonment to
           the day numerically corresponding to that day in  the  following
           month less one."

     Bramwell and Cotton LJJ agreed with him.


 41. The normal rule for leases is that a lease ends  on  the  day  in  the
     final month with a date corresponding to that in the month in which it
     began:  but that is because it is a rule of interpretation that  where
     by an instrument, an interest or benefit  is  secured  for  a  certain
     time, the term commences from midnight at the  end  of  the  specified
     day.  The first day is therefore not part of the term and  the  period
     of weeks, months or years is itself calculated consistently with  what
     we have set out above.  In Clayton's Case (1585) 5 Rep 1a, one of  the
     questions at issue was the date on which  the  term  of  a  three-year
     lease commenced.  Once it was decided that it began on 20  June  there
     was no doubt but that the last day of the term was 19 June three years
     later.

 42. Dodds v Walker [1981] 1 WLR 1027  raised  a  more  complex  issue.   A
     tenant's notice had to be given not less than two nor more  than  four
     months after a landlord's  notice  had  been  given.   The  landlord's
     notice was given on 30 September, and the  question  was  whether  the
     tenant's notice was in  time  on  31  January.   The  House  of  Lords
     approved the use of the "corresponding date" rule, giving a four-month
     period from 30 September to  30  January,  because  in  calculating  a
     period that has elapsed after the occurrence of a specified event, the
     day on which the event occurred is to be ignored.  The  last  day  was
     therefore 30 January (and the notice was out of time);  but  that  day
     was the last day of a four-month period only  on  the  basis  that  30
     September was part of the period.

 43. Any suggestion that either the first day or the last is to be  ignored
     in the  cases  before  us  is  expressly  excluded  by  Mr  Oluntolu's
     acknowledgement  that  both  the  opening  and  closing  days  of  the
     expressed period of leave are days on which the person in question has
     leave.  That is also the  view  we  should  undoubtedly  have  reached
     without Mr Oluntolu's concessions.  The  first  day  of  each  of  the
     periods in question cannot be ignored,  because  it  was  the  day  of
     arrival, and unless each Appellant had leave commencing  on  that  day
     (rather than the next day)  she  entered  illegally.   And  it  cannot
     properly be suggested that the Appellants did not have  leave  on  the
     final day specified in their grants of leave because leave had expired
     the day before.

 44. A period of six months' leave is thus to be  calculated  according  to
     the rule in Migotti and Colvill;  and each of  the  periods  of  leave
     granted to the Appellants was therefore a period of six months and one
     day, which is a  period  of  more  than  six  months.   In  the  third
     Appellant's case, that conclusion is sufficient to show that  she  was
     not excluded by paragraph 284(i) as it applied  to  her  on  11  April
     2004.   We  have  already  identified  other  errors  of  law  in  the
     determination of the Adjudicator who heard her appeal.  In  her  case,
     we substitute a determination  allowing  her  appeal  insofar  as  the
     decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 45. There is also no doubt that, for the same reasons  as  those  set  out
     above, the first and second Appellants each had leave  of  six  months
     and one day.  In our judgment, however, the phrasing  of  Cm  5949  is
     materially different in its effect on these cases from that of HC 538.
      HC 538 looks only at the total period of leave, but Cm 5949 looks  at
     how far the period of leave stretched beyond  (that  is  to  say,  was
     after) a specified event.  Cm 5949 thus invites the application of the
     rule exemplified in Dodds v Walker.  Granted that the first day  is  a
     day of leave, it is nevertheless also the date on which the  Appellant
     was admitted.  That date was followed  by  a  period  of  six  months'
     leave.  The latter period being no more than  six  months,  the  leave
     granted on admission did not extend beyond six months from the date of
     admission.

 46. It follows that insofar as the first and second Appellants rely on the
     grants of leave to which we have referred, they  failed  to  meet  the
     requirements of paragraph 284(i) as it was in force at the date of the
     decisions in their cases.

 47. It appears, however, that the matter does not end there.   Section  3C
     of the 1971 Act, as substituted from 1 April 2003, is as follows:

           "3C.  Continuation of leave pending variation decision
           (1)   This section applies if-
                 (a)   a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in
                       the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of  State
                       for variation of the leave,
                 (b)   the application for  variation  is  made  before  the
                 leave expires, and
                 (c)    the  leave  expires  without  the  application   for
                       variation having been decided.
           (2)   The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
                 period when-
                 (a)   the application for variation is neither decided  nor
                       withdrawn,
                 (b)   an appeal under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                       Asylum and Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought
                       against the decision on the application for variation
                       (ignoring any possibility of an appeal  out  of  time
                       with permission), or
                 (c)   an appeal under that section against that decision is
                       pending (within the meaning of section  104  of  that
                       Act).
           (3)   Leave extended by virtue of this section  shall  lapse  if
                 the applicant leaves the United Kingdom.
           (4)   A person may not make an application for variation of  his
                 leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  while  that
                 leave is extended by virtue of this section.
           (5)   But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation  of  the
                 application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).
           (6)   In this  section  a  reference  to  an  application  being
                 decided is a reference to  notice  of  the  decision  being
                 given in accordance with regulations under section  105  of
                 that Act (notice of immigration decision)."


 48. These provisions appear to apply to all three Appellants, but they are
     of crucial importance in the first and second Appellants' cases.  They
     have the effect that the Appellants still have leave;  and that is not
     a new grant of leave but because "the  leave"  (subsection  (2))  that
     they had at the time of their application has been extended  to  cover
     the time of any appeal.

 49. There are formidable problems with the interpretation  of  s  3C.   In
     particular, its provisions seem to have the effect  of  excluding  any
     appeal under s 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act because  the  "result  of  the
     refusal" to vary is never that the person "has no leave";   and  there
     is thus an apparent circularity or contradiction in s  3C(2)(b).   But
     there can be no doubt at all that the  leave  of  each  Appellant  was
     extended by s 3C(2)(a)  to  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision.  That was, clearly, a period of leave extending  beyond  six
     months from the date of admission.   We  conclude,  albeit  with  some
     hesitation, that because (only) of the operation of s 3C the first and
     second Appellants met the requirements of paragraph 284(i) as  amended
     by Cm 5949.

 50. The Adjudicator who heard the appeal of the first  Appellant  and  the
     Immigration Judge  who  heard  the  appeal  of  the  second  Appellant
     therefore both  materially  erred  in  law  in  considering  that  the
     decision was made in accordance with the Immigration  Rules.   Insofar
     as the decisions were not made  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
     Rules, we substitute decisions allowing their appeals.

The way forward

 51. We are, however, fortified in our conclusion by the subsequent history
     of paragraph 284(i).   As  we  indicated  at  the  beginning  of  this
     determination, its terms were changed again with effect from 1 October
     2004.  The reference to a grant of leave is now restricted to a  grant
     of leave given in  accordance  with  any  of  the  provisions  of  the
     Immigration Rules.  We had originally supposed that this amendment was
     intended to cover  only  grants  by  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
     Immigration Officer that, intentionally  or  otherwise,  exceeded  the
     period allowed by the Rules.  Although there is no doubt that a  grant
     to a visitor of leave to enter for six months and one day  is  lawful,
     because the Secretary of State and his officers can give an  applicant
     more than the Rules require them to, there is equally  no  doubt  that
     the part of the period of leave that  exceeds  six  months  cannot  be
     given in accordance with any provision of the Rules, because  a  grant
     of leave to a visitor under the Rules is restricted to six months.  In
     the case of decisions taken after 1 October 2004, therefore,  whatever
     the period of leave actually  given  to  a  visitor  or  to  a  person
     applying under paragraph 23A of the Rules, he is a person who has  not
     had more than six months leave  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  284
     because his leave under the Rules is limited to six months.  The  most
     recent amendment has a general effect too.  If an  individual's  leave
     is extended by s 3C, the leave that he "has" is given by the  statute,
     not "in accordance with any of the provisions of [the] Rules", and the
     extension will thus not be sufficient to bring  him  within  paragraph
     284(i) in the form it now has.

 52. It follows that the issue which  we  have  decided  in  these  appeals
     relates only to decisions made between 1 April 2003 (when HC 538  came
     into effect) and 1 October 2004 (when Cm 6339 came into effect).

  53. That leaves a difficulty for these Appellants, because the  effect  of
      this  determination  is  that  their  applications  need  now  to   be
      substantively considered by the Secretary  of  State.   The  decisions
      which he in due course makes will be decisions after  1  October  2004
      and, according to the usual practice, would  now  be  subject  to  the
      Immigration Rules in force at the time that the decision is made.   As
      we have  indicated,  all  three  Appellants  would  be  excluded  from
      consideration by the newly amended paragraph 284(i) if  the  decisions
      in their cases were made today.  It would, however, be grossly  unfair
      for the Appellants to be penalised in this way  as  a  result  of  the
      Secretary of State's misinterpretation and misapplication of  his  own
      rules.  Our allowing the appeals insofar as the decisions were not  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules essentially deals with paragraph
      284(i) in all three cases.  We therefore direct that the Secretary  of
      State now continue his consideration of each of these applications, on
      the basis that sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 284 is fulfilled in each
      case.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
