

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                      MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT 00030




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2007                           |On 29 March 2007             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge LATTER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE
                                 MRS J HOLT

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr R. Toal, Counsel, instructed by the Brighton Housing
                    Trust
For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  As at February 2007,  the  situation  in  Ethiopia  is  such  that,  in
    general:-

               (a)  Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;

               (b)  persons perceived to be  OLF  members  or  sympathisers;
    and

               (c)  members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;

          will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope  of
    paragraph (2) or (3) below.

  (2)  OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically perceived by  the
    authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in  general  be  at
    real risk  if  they  have  been  previously  arrested  or  detained  on
    suspicion of OLF involvement.  So too will those who have a significant
    history, known to the  authorities,  of  OLF  membership  or  sympathy.
    Whether any such  persons  are  to  be  excluded  from  recognition  as
    refugees or from the grant of  humanitarian  protection  by  reason  of
    armed activities may need to be addressed in particular cases.

   (3)   Given the proscription of the MTA and the current state of  tension
    on the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal  considers  that
    MTA members will also be at real risk on return if they have previously
    been arrested or detained on suspicion of MTA membership and/or of  OLF
    membership or are known or suspected of membership of the MTA.  Despite
    the banning of the  MTA,  the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  the
    evidence is such as to show  a  real  risk  where  the  extent  of  the
    authorities' knowledge or suspicion  about  an  individual  relates  to
    something less than membership of the MTA.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia born on 12 December 1973,  arrived
    in the United Kingdom with leave as a visitor  on  20  June  1999.   He
    claimed asylum on 14 July 1999.  On 7 April 2004 the respondent refused
    to grant the appellant asylum and accordingly decided that he would not
    vary the appellant's leave to enter.  The  appellant  appealed  against
    that decision to an Adjudicator, Mr J  Entwhistle,  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross, who, by a determination that followed a  hearing  on  11  August
    2004, dismissed the appellant's appeal on both asylum and human  rights
    grounds.

 2. On 12 November 2004 permission was granted to the appellant  to  appeal
    to  the  Immigration  Appeal   Tribunal   against   the   Adjudicator's
    determination.  On 4 April 2005 that grant of permission had effect  as
    if the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (which came into being  on  that
    day) had been ordered to reconsider the determination.


   The appellant's claim

3.   The nature of the appellant's claim was as follows.  He  was  of  Oromo
    ethnicity.  He was born and grew up in the area of Addis  Ababa  where,
    according to the appellant, the dominant culture  was  Amhara.   As  he
    grew up, the appellant became interested  in  his  Oromo  culture.   He
    would read newspapers produced by supporters of  the  Oromo  Liberation
    Front (OLF).  After university, he became a  librarian  with  the  Bako
    Agricultural Research Centre and was subsequently promoted to  work  at
    the headquarters of the Institute of  Agricultural  Research  in  Addis
    Ababa.  In 1995 the appellant  began  work  for  Agri-Service,  a  non-
    governmental organisation, as a librarian, and in 1998 was promoted  to
    be their Information Officer.

4.   In early 1997, the appellant started to attend monthly meetings  of  an
    Oromo  self-help  organisation,  commonly  called  the  Maccaa   Tulema
    Association (MTA).  The  appellant  said  that  the  MTA  promoted  the
    cultural, linguistic, historical and  political  rights  of  the  Oromo
    people, as well as raising awareness of their human  rights  situation.
    The MTA was founded in 1962.  The appellant formally joined  it  on  18
    January 1998.

5.   The appellant described himself as an active member of the MTA,  albeit
    that he was not an office-holder of any  sort.   He  paid  his  monthly
    subscriptions to the MTA and attended their monthly meetings  in  Addis
    Ababa, as well as attending other  meetings  held  in  connection  with
    particular activities.

6.   One of the tasks assigned to the appellant by the MTA was  to  help  to
    organise Oromo youth.  A number  of  special  meetings  regarding  that
    issue were held.  These were arranged by the organiser  of  the  group,
    LG.  The appellant said that  he  was  second-in-command  to  Mr  G  in
    organising Oromo youth.  This work involved raising  awareness  of  the
    OLF's objectives and attempting to persuade young people  not  to  join
    the Oromo People's  Democratic  Organisation  (OPDO),  an  organisation
    which (according to the respondent's COI report of  November  2006)  is
    opposed to the OLF and represents the Oromo people  within  the  ruling
    Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF).

7.   The appellant asserted that one of his tasks was to gather  information
    about the Oromo and the OLF and to share that  information  with  other
    members of the MTA.  As an  information  technology  professional,  the
    appellant accordingly started to access information on the internet for
    the MTA.  In 1997, when the  appellant  started  doing  this,  internet
    access in Ethiopia was very limited and  the  appellant  was  the  only
    person in the MTA who had such access.  The appellant would go into his
    office on Saturdays and Sundays and use his work computer in  order  to
    download and print off OLF  material.   At  that  time,  the  appellant
    claimed that this was the only way in which information about  the  OLF
    could be  obtained  for  other  members  of  the  MTA.   The  Ethiopian
    Government was asserting that the OLF had been destroyed and no  longer
    existed.  As a result, the Oromo people were,  the  appellant  claimed,
    hungry for information about the OLF.

8.    The  appellant  said  that  his  first  problem  with  the   Ethiopian
    authorities occurred in 1997, at a time when tension was high in  Addis
    Ababa.  The appellant was detained by the police in that city, taken to
    a police station and asked if he was a Somali.

9.   In 1998, the appellant was asked by the Chairman of the Kebele  in  his
    area to join the OPDO and to be on the Woreda Council as  a  member  of
    the OPDO.  The appellant said that the OPDO was an organisation  formed
    by the Government, which was not a genuine Oromo organisation and whose
    views were essentially the opposite of  those  of  the  OLF.   All  its
    members worked for the Government.  The leaders were not even Oromo but
    Amhara, albeit that they spoke the Oromo language.

10.  The appellant was unwilling to join the OPDO and did not attend any  of
    their meetings.  However, in order  to  maintain  reasonable  relations
    with the Kebele, the appellant undertook some  desktop  publishing  for
    them.

11.  In October 1998 the appellant was detained by persons whom he  took  to
    be plain-clothes  police  officers,  who  took  him  to  Woreda  police
    station, where the appellant was asked why he had not gone to the  OPDO
    meetings.  The appellant gave the reply that he had been  busy,  as  he
    did not consider that he could give the true reason.   Asked  to  admit
    that he was a member of the OLF, the  appellant  said  that  he  was  a
    member  of  the  MTA.   He  did  this  because  the  MTA  was  a  legal
    organisation and the appellant did not  consider  that  he  would  face
    problems by admitting that he was a member of it.  However, as soon  as
    he had said this, one of the officers started to beat,  kick  and  slap
    the appellant.  He was held for three days at the police station before
    being transferred to Region 14 Police Commission in Addis Ababa,  where
    he was held for six weeks.  Although  not  ill-treated  whilst  he  was
    there, the appellant was interrogated about  his  membership  with  the
    MTA.  After six  weeks,  the  appellant  was  released  on  bail.   The
    appellant ascribed this release to the intervention of  a  friend,  who
    worked as a  member  of  the  police  force.   Amongst  the  conditions
    attached to the appellant's bail  were  a  requirement  to  inform  the
    police each time the appellant left Addis Ababa and  a  requirement  to
    attend court on a particular  day  in  February  1999.   The  appellant
    attended court on the due day, when he was simply given another date on
    which to attend again, namely 23 June  1999.   The  appellant  believed
    that the authorities were waiting until they  had  some  real  evidence
    about the appellant's associations with the OLF.

12.  On 20 June 1999, the appellant  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    order to attend a three-week workshop in web design at  the  University
    of Sussex.  He was sent on the course by his employers.  The  appellant
    did not inform the police or the court that he was going to  travel  to
    the United Kingdom because he was unsure whether he would be allowed to
    do so, if he did so inform them.   His  intention  was,  on  return  to
    Ethiopia, to produce evidence that he had been away on the  course,  on
    the basis that that would be an adequate explanation for his failure to
    attend court on 23 June.  The  appellant  did  not  consider  that  his
    failure to attend court would produce any big problem for him.

13.  However, in early July 1999, when the appellant  spoke  to  his  family
    and friends on the telephone, he was told that his cousin, a member  of
    the MTA, had been arrested and that the cousin had been asked questions
    about the appellant.  The cousin had been accused of membership of  the
    OLF.  On 13 July 1999, the appellant received  a  letter  by  fax  from
    another cousin, who told the appellant  that  the  situation  in  Addis
    Ababa was again deteriorating and that Oromos were being spied upon and
    kidnapped.  This cousin told the appellant that there were rumours that
    the appellant had used his computer in order to collect and  distribute
    information from the internet regarding the OLF and that the  appellant
    had left Ethiopia in order to escape political problems.  The appellant
    was told by his cousin that, as a result, the appellant's life would be
    in danger  if  he  returned  to  Ethiopia.   The  cousin  reminded  the
    appellant of what happened  to  the  appellant's  uncle  (the  cousin's
    father) who had been an OLF candidate in 1992 and  who,  when  the  OLF
    withdrew from the elections, had had to flee from his home.   Upon  his
    return, the uncle was arrested, detained and ill-treated.

14.  In October 1999, the appellant heard from his  other  cousin,  who  had
    been detained, that the cousin was released after three months and  had
    ceased his political activities.  That cousin wrote to say he had heard
    that the appellant was in trouble for failing to report  to  the  court
    and that there was a warrant out for his arrest.  Via some Oromo people
    working in the local police station, the cousin managed to  obtain  the
    warrant, which was dated 18 October 1991  (Ethiopian  calendar)  or  26
    June 1999 (European calendar).  The  warrant  referred  to  failing  to
    attend at court and  also  to  charges  of  distributing  writings  and
    materials contrary to  the  Ethiopian  constitution  and  of  provoking
    people to violence.  The appellant considered that, if the  authorities
    had searched his office,  they  would  have  found  documents  such  as
    minutes of MTA meetings and of articles and press  releases  which  the
    appellant had printed off the OLF website.  The appellant's  suspicions
    in this regard were strengthened when he contacted a  fellow  employee,
    who told the appellant that their boss had  told  them  all  that  "you
    don't know [the appellant]."

15.  On 18 April 2004, the individual, Mr G, to whom the appellant  used  to
    report in the MTA, had been arrested in Ethiopia.  So had  his  family,
    although they  were  returned  home  the  following  morning.   Amnesty
    International interviewed Mr G's son in the offices of the  MTA  on  19
    April.  Further senior officers of the MTA were arrested  and  detained
    in May 2004 and Amnesty International believed that they were prisoners
    of conscience.

16.  The Adjudicator did not place weight upon the  letter  received  on  13
    July 1999 from the cousin of the appellant.  This letter is now  to  be
    found at pages 294 and 295 of the appellant's bundle.  The  letter  was
    in general terms and did not, the Adjudicator found,  explain  how  the
    cousin had come to know several of the matters set  out  by  him.   The
    letter also told the appellant information about his uncle and  father,
    which the appellant would already have known.

17.  At paragraph 20(iii), the Adjudicator considered  the  arrest  warrant.
    Although he placed little weight on this document he did, however,  say
    this:-

         "The warrant gives very little information about the actual charges
         against the appellant and on what evidence this is based.  However,
         it does refer to bringing this dangerous criminal to justice.   The
         appellant had admitted that he was a member  of  the  MTA  and  had
         supported the OLF, which was an  illegal  organisation.   Therefore
         the appellant could expect to be prosecuted for this if he returned
         to Ethiopia but this would not amount to persecution."

18.  At paragraph 20(iv) of the determination, the Adjudicator did not  find
    credible the evidence of  the  appellant  to  the  effect  that,  since
    arriving in the United Kingdom, the Ethiopian authorities had  obtained
    evidence about him which would make him liable to  persecution,  rather
    than prosecution, were he now to be returned.  At paragraph 20(v),  the
    Adjudicator repeated the finding that it was:-

        "unlikely that the appellant would be prosecuted if he was returned
        to Ethiopia but if  he  was  for  the  activities  he  has  already
        admitted then he would be subjected to the due process of law which
        would not amount to a breach of Article 5 of the ECHR and any  ill-
        treatment in prison would not amount to a breach of Articles 2  and
        3 or be a Convention reason for asylum."



The grounds of appeal to the IAT

  19. The grounds of appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  contended
      that the Adjudicator  had  made  inconsistent  findings  at  paragraph
      20(iii) and 20(v), concerning the issue of whether the appellant could
      expect to be prosecuted on  return  to  Ethiopia.   The  grounds  also
      contended that the Adjudicator had  failed  to  take  account  of  the
      background evidence, in  reaching  conclusions  that  prosecution  was
      unlikely; that any prosecution would not entail persecution or serious
      ill-treatment;  and  that  the  appellant  would  not   otherwise   be
      persecuted or treated in breach of his human rights.   In  particular,
      the grounds pointed out that the Adjudicator  had  had  before  him  a
      report on the appellant from Dr Trevor Trueman,  who  opined  that  a
      person with the profile of the appellant "would  almost  certainly  be
      detained on entry, interrogated, beaten and probably tortured.  It  is
      probable that he would spend many months or years in detention."



The material errors of law in the Adjudicator's determination

20.  On 31 January 2006, the Tribunal  (Senior  Immigration  Judge Perkins;
    Immigration  Judge Aujla;  Mrs B M Southwell)  found  that  the
    determination of the Adjudicator contained a  material  error  of  law.
    The Tribunal's reasons were as follows:-

        "2     Before us Mr Ouseley conceded  that  the  determination  was
           wrong in law for the reasons identified in grounds 1  and  2  of
           the appeal.  The Adjudicator made perverse findings and  ignored
           evidence.  However that concession did  not  lead  to  agreement
           about the proper disposal of the appeal.  Mr  Ouseley  submitted
           that  it  should  be  reheard.   Mr  Toal  submitted  that   the
           Adjudicator had made sustainable  findings  and  those  findings
           should have led him to allow the appeal.  He submitted  that  we
           should allow the appeal in the light of those findings.


        3.     Ground 1 of the grounds complained that the Adjudicator  had
           made inconsistent findings.  The Adjudicator said  at  paragraph
           20(iii) of his determination 'the appellant could expect  to  be
           prosecuted  for  [his  support  for  OLF]  if  he  returned   to
           Ethiopia'.  This is inconsistent with his finding  at  paragraph
           20(v): 'I think it is first of all unlikely that  the  appellant
           would be prosecuted if he was returned to Ethiopia'.


        4.     In order to allow the appeal on the basis of the facts found
           by the Adjudicator we  would  have  to  be  satisfied  that  the
           inconsistency complained of did not mean that the other findings
           were obscure or unsound.


        5.     Mr Toal pointed out that the findings set out in paragraph 1
           of the application for permission to appeal to  the  Immigration
           and Asylum Tribunal were not the subject of any criticism by him
           or the subject of any cross-appeal by the respondent.   This  is
           true but not decisive.  We can only use existing  findings  that
           are  intelligible  and  which  have  an   internal   logic   and
           consistency.


        6.     The findings set out at paragraph 1 of the grounds of appeal
           were findings of fact about  past  events.   Mr  Toal  submitted
           that, properly understood, point 3 (ground 1 of the  grounds  of
           appeal) was concerned about an assessment of future  risk.   The
           complaint made by ground 1 was  not  that  the  Adjudicator  had
           found that the appellant could expect to be prosecuted  for  his
           support for the OLF but rather that having made that finding, he
           went on to find it unlikely that he would be prosecuted.


        7.     Mr Toal also indicated that the appellant did  not  want  to
           rely on ground 1.  He was more concerned with the points  raised
           in ground 2 which alleged the Adjudicator failed to  assess  the
           background and expert evidence properly.  This  change  of  tack
           did not assist  the  appellant.   We  could  only  consider  the
           expert's report in the light of the  Adjudicator's  findings  of
           fact and we could not do that unless we identified them.


        8.     We have looked carefully at  exactly  what  the  Adjudicator
           said.  At paragraph  20(iii)  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the
           appellant  'could  expect  to  be  prosecuted'  because  he  had
           admitted that he is a member of the MTA and  had  supported  the
           OLF.  At paragraph 20(v) the Adjudicator found it "unlikely that
           the appellant would be  prosecuted'.   This  is  confusing.   We
           recognise that a finding that the appellant 'could expect to  be
           prosecuted' is not particularly precise but it is very  hard  to
           give it  any  meaning  at  all  that  does  not  mean  that  the
           Adjudicator found there was a real risk of the  appellant  being
           prosecuted and if this is what he meant then he should have made
           his  determination  on  the  basis  that   the   appellant   had
           established a real risk of his being prosecuted.  He did not and
           this leaves us wondering just what the Adjudicator really  meant
           when he made his findings.


        9.     Ground 2 extends from paragraph 4  to  paragraph  7  of  the
           grounds of appeal.  The ground complains about the Adjudicator's
           conclusion that prosecution was unlikely, that prosecution would
           not bring with it a risk of persecution or breach  of  protected
           human rights, or that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of
           persecution or ill-treatment for  some  reason  other  than  the
           proposed prosecution given the  things  he  admitted  to  having
           done.  Point 5 complains that the Adjudicator failed to consider
           the expert report concluding that he would 'almost certainly  be
           detained on entry' to Ethiopia where he would be ill-treated and
           probably tortured.  Points 6 and 7 add to the complaint that the
           Adjudicator had not considered the expert report.


        10.    Some of the Adjudicator's apparent findings are set  out  in
           ground  1  of  the  grounds  and  we  repeat  them  here.    The
           Adjudicator accepted that the appellant was an active member  of
           Waldaa Maccaa Fi Tulema,  known  as  the  MTA,  that  he  was  a
           supporter of the OLF, that he was detained for a period of about
           six weeks in October 1998,  that  he  was  slapped,  beaten  and
           kicked during the first days in detention, that he  admitted  to
           being a member of the MTA and a supporter of the  OLF,  that  he
           was released on bail at the end of that period.


        11.    The Adjudicator also found that the appellant would  not  be
           persecuted if he was prosecuted.


        12.    We consider that the complaints made in ground  2  are  made
           out.  The Adjudicator did not explain his  conclusion  that  the
           appellant was unlikely to be prosecuted  or,  more  importantly,
           that  any  prosecution  would  not  bring  with  it  a  risk  of
           persecution or breach of human rights.  Further the  Adjudicator
           did  not  deal  adequately  with  the  evidence  of  the  expert
           Dr Trevor  Truman  and  in  particular  his  opinion  that  the
           appellant would 'almost certainly be detained and ill-treated on
           entry'.


        13.    In his efforts to persuade  us  that  we  should  allow  the
           appeal outright Mr  Toal  relied  heavily  on  the  Home  Office
           Operational Guidance Notes published on 21 November 2005.  These
           are  notes  published  by  the   Immigration   and   Nationality
           Directorate and  are  intended  to  guide  immigration  officers
           assessing a case.  Mr Toal particularly drew  to  our  attention
           paragraph 3.6.9 which is in the following terms:


               'If it is accepted that the claimant has been  involved  in,
               or is suspected of involvement in non-combat  activities  on
               behalf of one of these groups and has previously come to the
               adverse attention of the authorities, then they  are  likely
               to be at real risk of persecution by the state  authorities.
               The grant of asylum in such cases is therefore likely to  be
               appropriate.'


        14.    Mr Toal submitted that the appellant  plainly  comes  within
           this category.  The appellant has been detained  for  about  six
           weeks in October 1998 when he was ill-treated.  He  admitted  to
           being a member of the MTA and a supporter of the OLF.


        15.    The difficulty we have is that  we  do  not  know  that  the
           Adjudicator accepted that the appellant would be linked  in  the
           minds of the  authorities  with  the  OLF.   It  was  never  the
           appellant's case that he was a member of the OLF but  just  that
           he supported it.  Certainly it was the appellant's case that  he
           was seen as a supporter  of  the  OLF.   This  is  reflected  at
           paragraph 14(iv) of the determination.  It is not clear that the
           Adjudicator believed this, or at least not that the  authorities
           continued to regard him as an OLF  supporter.   The  Adjudicator
           found that the appellant had been detained and released on bail.
            The Adjudicator found that was because  they  had  insufficient
           evidence to proceed with  the  charge.   He  said  this  at  the
           troublesome  paragraph  20(iii).   The   Adjudicator   expressly
           rejected the appellant's evidence that he was now  being  sought
           for OLF activities.



        16.    We reject Mr Toal's contention that  the  inconsistency  and
           confusion  in   paragraph   20(v)   does   not   undermine   the
           Adjudicator's earlier findings.  We do not  see  why  we  should
           assume that the Adjudicator's finding that the appellant  risked
           prosecution is 'right' but his finding  that  he  did  not  risk
           persecution is "wrong".  We do not accept that  the  Adjudicator
           decided  properly  that  the   appellant   continued   to   risk
           prosecution in Ethiopia. He may have meant that the appellant no
           longer risked prosecution and that is  why  he  would  not  risk
           being persecuted if he returned.  The problem here is  not  that
           the Adjudicator made a series of clear findings and then spoiled
           the determination by  making  a  perverse  conclusion.   Rather,
           although the Adjudicator  appears at 'first blush' to have  made
           clear findings when the determination is read  carefully  it  is
           not at clear what the adjudicator really found or accepted.


        17.    It is  plain  to  us  that  the  findings  of  fact  in  the
           determination are not good enough to go on to allow  the  appeal
           for the reasons advanced by Mr Toal.  It follows that this  case
           will have to be reheard.


       18. We are very aware of the contents of the expert's  report  which
           we have not considered in detail because there is no point in us
           doing that at this stage.  We are also  aware  of  the  reported
           case HA (OLF members and sympathisers -  risk)  Ethiopia  [2005]
           UKAIT 00136 which could, if certain findings  are  made,  be  of
           considerable assistance to the appellant.  We also note that the
           case of HA is not designated as country guidance.  If  there  is
           sufficient material available at the second-stage  rehearing  it
           may be possible to give general guidance  on  the  risks  facing
           members, supporters or perceived members and supporters  of  the
           OLF."




The evidence before the Tribunal on 19 February 2007

21.  At the adjourned  reconsideration  hearing  on  19  February  2007  the
    Tribunal had before it the documentary evidence listed in the Annex  to
    this determination.  The Tribunal also heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant and Dr Roy Love.   At  the  commencement  of  the  adjourned
    hearing, Mr Toal, for the appellant, submitted that, in  the  light  of
    the Court of Appeal's judgment in DK (Serbia) and Others v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1747 and  the  Tribunal's
    determination in AH (Scope of S103A Reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT
    00038, the Tribunal should not proceed to reconsider  the  totality  of
    the case, as had been envisaged by the Tribunal at the  hearing  on  31
    January 2006, but should preserve the Adjudicator's  positive  findings
    of fact concerning the events which the appellant had said occurred, up
    to the time when he left Ethiopia.

22.  It is, however, plain from the findings of the Tribunal  following  the
    hearing on 31 January that  the  error  of  law  in  the  Adjudicator's
    determination went to the core of the findings of  fact  which  he  had
    purported to make.   The  contradictory  findings  as  to  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk of prosecution on return  were  found,  upon
    analysis, to reveal a lack of clarity as to what  the  Adjudicator  had
    "really found or accepted" (paragraph 16 of the reasons).  The Tribunal
    accordingly concluded that Mr Toal was unable to rely upon paragraph 22
    of the judgement of Latham LJ in  DK,  where  it  was  held  that  "any
    factual findings  and  conclusions  or  judgments  arising  from  those
    findings which  are  unaffected  by  the  error  of  law  need  not  be
    revisited."

23.  The appellant gave evidence in English to the Tribunal, having told  us
    that he was content to do so.  The Tribunal noted  that  the  appellant
    was at all times fully able to comprehend the questions put to him  and
    his answers  displayed  no  indication  that  he  had  difficulties  in
    expressing himself in English.

24.  The appellant confirmed that his witness statement (pages 4  to  18  of
    the appellant's bundle) was true.  The account given in that  statement
    is, essentially, that set  out  at  paragraphs  3  to  15  above.   The
    appellant also confirmed the truth of a second witness statement (pages
    146 to  148  of  the  appellant's  bundle).   In  that  statement,  the
    appellant corrected what he had said in his earlier statement about the
    occasion in which he was stopped  in  the  street  by  the  police  and
    accused of being a  Somali.   The  appellant  now  realised  that  this
    occurred in 1996, rather than 1997, since the heightened  detention  in
    Addis Ababa followed an attempt to assassinate the  Ethiopian  Minister
    of Transport and Communications in July 1996.

25.  So far as the two members of the MTA who were arrested in  August  1999
    were concerned, the appellant stated that he had heard that one of them
    had fled to Kenya and that the other one was still in prison.   Of  the
    members of the MTA arrested  in  April  and  May  2004,  the  appellant
    believed, on the basis  of  various  searches  of  websites,  including
    Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, that these  persons  were
    still in prison.  Finally, the appellant claimed that he  had  recently
    heard that a neighbour of his and fellow member of  the  MTA  had  been
    arrested and imprisoned  in  Ethiopia.   The  appellant  obtained  this
    information from  the  son  of  the  person  concerned.   Overall,  the
    appellant considered that the situation in  Ethiopia  had  deteriorated
    further since the Adjudicator hearing in August 2004.

26.  Cross-examined, the appellant said that he obtained his exit visa  from
    Ethiopia shortly before he came to the United  Kingdom.   It  had  been
    obtained for him by his employers.  His return flight had  been  booked
    and he had finished his course at the University of Sussex, when he had
    news from Ethiopia that there were difficulties there for him.  He  had
    spoken to his mother who said that people had been arrested and he also
    heard from his cousin.  The appellant extended his course for one week,
    as a result of the telephone conversation with his  mother,  but  still
    intended at that stage to return to Ethiopia.   It  was,  however,  the
    letter from his cousin that caused the appellant to claim  asylum.   Of
    the information contained in that letter, the appellant considered that
    the most significant was that the authorities considered the  appellant
    had been spreading OLF information  by  means  of  the  internet.   The
    appellant denied that he had discussed  the  letter  with  his  cousin.
    Asked how the letter could suggest that the appellant was  one  of  the
    most wanted of spies, the appellant said that the community in which he
    moved was a  close-knit  one  and  that  every  neighbourhood  had  its
    informers.

27.  The appellant was asked why the letter from the cousin  had  to  remind
    the appellant that he was a member of the MTA.  The  appellant  replied
    that he could have asked the cousin not to  put  the  letter  in  those
    terms, had he had an opportunity to do so.

28.  There was no re-examination.

29.  Dr Roy Love gave evidence.  He spoke to his report (pages 362  to  375
    of the appellant's  bundle),  dated  11  January  2007.   Dr Love  was
    formerly a senior lecturer of the School of Applied Social  Studies  at
    Sheffield Hallam University and senior lecturer in the  Departments  of
    Economics at the Universities of Botswana, Lesotho and Ethiopia.  He is
    at  present  an  independent  researcher,  consultant   and   part-time
    lecturer, besides being co-ordinating editor of the Review  of  African
    Political Economy.  Dr Love has studied, researched and  published  on
    the political economy  of  Ethiopia  since  the  early  1970s  and  has
    frequently visited  the  country.   His  doctoral  thesis  was  on  the
    Ethiopian coffee economy, which involved field work carried out between
    1997 and 2001.  His last visit to Ethiopia was in September 2003.

30.  Dr Love considers that the source of the appellant's problems is to be
    found in the  decision  in  the  late  nineteenth  century  of  Emperor
    Menelik, an Amhara from the Shoa region,  to  conquer  and  occupy  the
    whole of what is now the Oromia region of Ethiopia.  This was  seen  by
    the Oromo as Abyssinian imperialism, which in turn led to the  economic
    exploitation and cultural oppression of the Oromo people.  Oromia today
    covers a large part of southern Ethiopia, embracing  Addis  Ababa,  and
    contains about 40% of the population of Ethiopia.  The current dominant
    party in the coalition  Government,  the  EPRDF,  depends  heavily  for
    electoral support on the main legally recognised  political  party  for
    Oromia, the OPDO.  The  MTA,  until  its  recent  proscription  by  the
    Government, was the oldest and  most  prominent  Oromia  civil  society
    organisation.  It was formed in 1962,  with  the  object  of  promoting
    Oromo culture, education and self-help,  in  the  process  nurturing  a
    sense of Oromo nationalism.  Over the years, many have moved on from it
    to organisations such as the OLF, many of whose  early  leaders  had  a
    close association with the MTA.  From  1974  to  1991,  no  independent
    civil society organisations were permitted in  Ethiopia.   However,  on
    gaining power in 1991, the EPRDF allowed the MTA to operate once  more.
    Following the decision of the OLF in 1992 to withdraw from co-operation
    with the EPRDF and in effect return to armed opposition, old suspicions
    on the part of the Government towards the MTA began to reappear.

31.  In 1997, following a wave of bombings  in  the  capital,  31  prominent
    Oromo were arrested, amongst whom were seventeen supporters of the OLF.
     Most of those were, according to Dr Love, also members of the MTA.  By
    November 1997, some 10,000 people in Ethiopia were reported  to  be  in
    detention on suspicion of being members either of the OLF or the  Oromo
    National Liberation Front.  During the border war between Ethiopia  and
    Eritrea, the OLF had an opportunity to intensify its activities.

32.  In paragraph 10 of his report, Dr Love  comments  on  the  appellant's
    claim that internet access in Ethiopia was extremely limited in the mid
    to late 1990s and that the activities described by the appellant  were,
    accordingly, likely to be regarded as significant.   Dr Love  confirms
    the lack of access to the internet at the relevant time  and  considers
    that the appellant's  activities  in  this  regard,  coupled  with  his
    membership of the MTA, "could well  have  attracted  the  attention  of
    those on the Government side who assumed  links  between  MTA  and  the
    OLF."

33.  In 2004, Dr Love notes that the US State Department report found  that
    the MTA had organised, on 4  January  2004,  a  peaceful  demonstration
    involving some 10,000 Oromo residents of Addis Ababa and its  environs.
    The purpose of the demonstration was to urge the Government to  reverse
    its decision to transfer the capital of  Oromia  from  Addis  Ababa  to
    Adama.  Police reportedly beat and  arrested  demonstrators,  with  the
    Government claiming that the MTA did not  in  fact  have  the  required
    permit in order to conduct the demonstration.   Dr Love  also  recalls
    that in March 2004 a similar demonstration was  broken  up  at  Alemayu
    Agricultural College.  In April 2004, the Government blamed  a  grenade
    attack in Addis Ababa University on the OLF.  The following month, four
    leaders of the MTA plus a number of other Oromos  were  arrested.   The
    MTA officials were alleged to have raised funds for  the  attack.   The
    officials were the persons  named  in  the  appellant's  first  witness
    statement.

34.  On 23  July  2004,  the  Addis  Tribune  newspaper  reported  that  the
    Ministry of Justice had revoked the registration licence  of  the  MTA,
    with the result that the organisation  was  no  longer  allowed  to  be
    politically active.   The  MTA  was  also  accused  of  being  directly
    involved in terrorist activities.  On 9 August 2004  the  Federal  High
    Court ordered the release of the MTA leaders but by 17 August they  had
    been  re-arrested  without   warrant.    Following   further   judicial
    intervention, the detainees were released again in  November  2004  but
    then re-arrested once more  on  9  February  2005.   According  to  the
    respondent's COI report, referring to a UNHCR report of May  2006,  the
    MTA, in common with a number of other ethnic welfare organisations, had
    fallen foul of the Government and been closed down.  The MTA  was  seen
    as the political wing of the OLF and closed down.  So far as Dr Love is
    aware, that remains the position at the present time.  As at the end of
    2006, the MTA leaders remained incarcerated, according to Human  Rights
    Watch.

35.  Dr Love's report goes on to confirm the animosity felt by  members  of
    the OLF towards the OPDO.   Furthermore,  the  OPDO  were  reported  as
    having harassed opposition candidates during the May 2005 Parliamentary
    elections.

36.  Citing the US State Department report and Human Rights  Watch,  amongst
    others, Dr Love considers that what has happened to the MTA leaders is
    part of a pattern, whereby the authorities will detain large numbers of
    dissidents and then release them,  but  re-arrest  a  small  number  of
    leading individuals, such as the MTA leaders who appear  to  remain  in
    detention.  The Government utilises a  system  of  paid  informers,  in
    order to keep watch on persons of interest, such as OLF supporters.

37.  In the light of these events, Dr Love considers that the likelihood of
    the appellant receiving a fair  trial,  if  returned  to  Ethiopia  and
    arrested, must be questioned.  So far as  current  risk  is  concerned,
    Dr Love quotes Human Rights Watch as reporting that the security forces
    frequently arrest civilians, claiming they  are  members  of  the  OLF.
    Whilst some are released, others are kept in  arbitrary  detention  for
    prolonged periods, often without  hearing  or  cause  shown,  sometimes
    incommunicado.

38.  On 4 September 2006 it was reported that the  Government  had  detained
    without charge more  than  250  members  of  the  Oromo  ethnic  group,
    including  teachers,  high  school  students  and  politicians.   Most,
    however, were subsequently released without charge.

39.  If returned today, the appellant would, according to Dr Love,  face  a
    political situation that has changed for the worse in the aftermath  of
    the 2005 elections, with  its  legacy  of  resentment  and  bitterness,
    coupled  with  the  complex  interrelationships  between  the   parties
    involved in the conflict in Somalia and the continued failure to find a
    peaceful resolution to the border conflict with Eritrea.   Furthermore,
    Dr Love considers, in the "likely event"  of  the  appellant  renewing
    contacts in circles in which he moved before his departure in 1999, his
    presence would be  highly  likely  to  be  detected  by  opponents  and
    informers,  which  would  mean  that  it  would  be  likely  that   the
    appellant's name would be connected with his previous court summons  of
    1999.  Although Dr Love states that he is not familiar with the details
    of checks made  by  passport  officials  at  Addis  Ababa  airport,  he
    nevertheless considers it likely that the appellant would, if  forcibly
    returned, be asked to explain the large gap in  his  passport  for  the
    years from 1999 to the present day.  Having left during the currency of
    the present Government, he could not, for example, argue  that  he  was
    part of the returning pre-1991 diaspora.  Were that to lead to the  re-
    opening of the appellant's case, then the likelihood of  his  re-arrest
    would be increased by his failure to report to the  court  on  23  June
    1999 and his failure to return to Ethiopia on completion of his  course
    at the University of Sussex, choosing instead to  seek  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  These, taken together, would  be  seen  as  confirming
    previous official suspicion that he was  aiding  the  OLF  and  was  an
    opponent of the Government.

40.  In his conclusions, Dr Love states that, even if the appellant were to
    avoid detection and detention at the airport, there is a:-

        "high  probability  that  his   previous   involvement   with   the
        authorities, and his abscondence,  would  fairly  quickly  come  to
        their attention again, given the network  of  informal  connections
        amongst the still relatively small educated elite in  Addis  Ababa.
        This chance would increase were he to resume his previous  contacts
        with the MTA and to continue supporting the OLF" (paragraph 33).

41.  In examination-in-chief, Dr Love was asked whether he knew if those in
    Ethiopia responsible for processing exit visas had  access  to  records
    relating to bail.  Dr Love replied that he did not but he considered it
    quite likely that the relevant officials did not have  access  to  such
    information.  As for informers, Dr Love said that there  were  limited
    meeting places for educated Oromo to meet and it was therefore easy for
    informers to infiltrate their activities.

42.  Cross-examined, Dr Love was asked whether the appellant would be  able
    to get through the airport checks unscathed.  Dr Love considered  that
    there was a chance that the appellant might be detained at the airport,
    in order to account for what he had been doing since he left  in  1999,
    particularly given the current political climate.  The Ethiopians  were
    concerned about the activities of dissidents outside Ethiopia.   Oromos
    account for approximately 40% of the population of  Ethiopia.   If  the
    appellant, on return, remained politically active, Dr Love  considered
    that there was a strong likelihood that he would come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities.  Asked what the position might be if  the
    appellant "kept his head down", Dr Love said that he could not say.

43.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal,  Dr Love  stated  that  the
    factors that he considered would put the appellant at  risk  on  return
    were his connection with the MTA,  his  links  with  the  OLF  and  the
    problems regarding Somalia and the Ogaden area, all of which are making
    the authorities in Ethiopia wary of dissent.  So far  as  the  OLF  was
    concerned,  Dr Love  considered  that  any  actual  member  of   that
    organisation was at risk; so too would be any high-level  supporter  of
    the organisation.  In the case of the  appellant,  Dr Love  considered
    that the risk to him arose in equal measure from  his  past  activities
    and his current views.  Having unsuccessfully claimed asylum abroad was
    a factor to be considered in assessing the risk to an individual.

44.  Re-examined, Dr Love said that the level of educational attainment  of
    an individual was  also  a  relevant  risk  factor.   There  were  many
    examples of academics and  other  professionals  falling  foul  of  the
    authorities.  Recently, there  had  been  reports  that  the  staff  of
    Ethiopian embassies abroad were  being  spied  upon  by  the  Ethiopian
    Government, as were educated members of the Ethiopian diaspora.

45.  At pages 120 to 140 of the appellant's bundle there is  the  report  on
    the appellant of Dr Trevor Trueman (4 August 2004), which  was  before
    the Adjudicator.  Dr Trueman is a medical practitioner who has  worked
    extensively with the Oromo people  and  who  has  an  interest  in  the
    political and human rights situation in Ethiopia.  Since 1994,  he  has
    been the Chair of the Oromia Support Group.  Like Dr Love, Dr Trueman
    paints a picture of the human rights position in Ethiopia,  based  upon
    the work of organisations  such  as  Amnesty  International  and  Human
    Rights Watch.  The picture is a somewhat dark one, involving a  variety
    of human rights abuses on the part of the  Ethiopian  authorities.   At
    page 16 of the report, we observe that in a random survey of  over  500
    Oromo refugees in Minneapolis, Minnesota, 69% of men and 30%  of  women
    had been tortured "compared  to  the  usual  prevalence  among  refugee
    communities of 5-35%, according  to  a  report  by  the  University  of
    Minnesota and Center for Victims of Torture" (2004).  Since 1997, there
    have been reports, according to Amnesty International, of  hundreds  of
    persons  being  arrested  on  suspicion  of  supporting  the  OLF.   At
    paragraph 31, Dr Trueman opines that simple membership of, indeed mere
    suspicion of sympathising with, the OLF results in arbitrary detention,
    according to the US State Department  reports  for  2000  to  2003  and
    Amnesty International  and  Human  Rights  Watch.   The  MTA  has  been
    "persecuted by successive Ethiopian regimes since its formation  during
    the rule of Emperor Haile-Selassie"  (paragraph  31).   In  conclusion,
    Dr Trueman considers that:-

         "In my opinion, if a person with the profile of [the appellant],  a
         graduate of Addis Ababa University who has  refused  membership  of
         the OPDO, a member of the  Mach-Tulama  Association  who  has  been
         detained and beaten because of this in the past, for whom an arrest
         warrant has been written, were to  return  to  Ethiopia,  he  would
         almost certainly be detained on  entry,  interrogated,  beaten  and
         probably tortured.  It is probable that he would spend many  months
         or years in detention.  It is possible, but unlikely, that he would
         be killed or made to disappear during detention."

46.  The respondent's Operational Guidance  Note  on  Ethiopia  (27  October
    2006) observes at paragraph 211 that:-

         "The Government's already poor  human  rights  record  deteriorated
         markedly in 2005.  After the  May  2005  elections,  serious  human
         rights abuses occurred in June 2005  when  the  opposition  parties
         refused to accept the announced  results.   ...  the  aftermath  of
         election has laid bare the deeply entrenched patterns of  political
         repression, human rights abuse and impunity that characterised  the
         day-to-day  reality  of  governance  in  much   of   the   country.
         Throughout 2005, the Government severely clamped down on freedom of
         expression, assembly and the media with the arrest of  hundreds  of
         opposition politicians,  journalists,  editors  and  civil  society
         activists."

47.  At paragraph 2.12, it is noted that "since 2004 legal  restrictions  on
    civil society associations and NGOs  have  increased."   Both  existing
    laws and new draft laws allow  the  Government  extensive  powers  over
    civil society associations and NGOs.  Paragraph 2.13 records that:-

         "A number of indigenous NGOs that have  the  aspect  of  ethnic  of
         welfare organisations have fallen foul of the Government  and  have
         been closed down.  The  Mecha-Tuluma  Association  was  seen  as  a
         political wing of the OLF and  closed  down.   The  Ogaden  Welfare
         Society (OWS) in the Somali Regional State was banned in 2002 and a
         number of its members were arrested and detained."

     Paragraph 2.14 observes that:-

         "State oppression of ethnic groups such as the Oromos continued  in
         2005.  In rural areas in Oromia, local officials  often  threatened
         to withhold vital  agricultural  inputs  such  as  fertiliser  from
         impoverished farmers if  they  speak  out  against  them  or  their
         policies."

48.  Paragraphs 3.6.1 to 3.6.10 deal with membership of  the  OLF,  ONLF  or
    IUP.  In 2005, armed elements of the  OLF  and  the  ONLF  continue  to
    operate within the country and there were reports of clashes  with  the
    Ethiopian army.  In August 2006, it  was  reported  that  an  Ethiopian
    general had defected with a  hundred  troops  to  join  the  OLF.   The
    Operational Guidance Note advises that members of the OLF and the other
    named groups cannot escape ill-treatment or persecution from the  State
    authorities by relocating to a different area of Ethiopia,  given  that
    the fear of persecution emanates from the State.  However, ordinary low-
    level non-combat members of  the  OLF,  ONLF  and  IUP,  who  have  not
    previously come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,  are
    considered  to  be  unlikely  to  be  at  real  risk  of   persecution.
    Conversely, a claimant  who  has  been  involved  in  or  suspected  of
    involvement in non-combat activities on behalf of one of  those  groups
    and who has previously come to the adverse attention of the authorities
    is, according to  paragraph  3.6.9,  likely  to  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution from the authorities.

49.  Paragraphs 3.7.1 to 3.7.8  deal  with  the  Oromo  ethnic  group.   The
    Operational Guidance Note considers that Oromo nationalism:-

         "has evolved in response to the Oromo people's long, difficult  and
        often antagonistic relationship with the Ethiopian  State.   Oromos
        who come to the adverse attention of the  authorities  are  usually
        those who are known to be involved  with,  or  suspected  of  being
        involved with the OLF."

     Paragraph 3.7.8 concludes that:-

        "Whilst there is evidence that Oromos who are active in, or who are
        suspected of being active in, the OLF are likely  to  come  to  the
        attention of the authorities, there is no evidence that  the  State
        authorities systematically harass, discriminate or persecute  Oromo
        Ethiopians solely on account of their ethnic origin.  Claimants who
        express a fear of ill-treatment amount to persecution by the  State
        authorities solely on the basis of their Oromo  ethnic  origin  are
        therefore not likely to qualify for asylum."




HA (OLF Members and sympathisers - risk) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00136

50.  According to its italic rubric, HA  (OLF  Members  and  sympathisers  -
    risk) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00136 was "reported solely for what it says
    about risk to OLF members and  sympathisers  on  the  basis  of  recent
    country reports."  The appellant in that case was an  active  supporter
    of the OLF who had been arrested in May 2004, whilst at a meeting  with
    other OLF members.  Whilst  in  detention  for  three  weeks,  she  was
    severely ill-treated on account of her activities for the OLF  and  her
    political opinions.  She was released on condition  that  she  reported
    weekly and did not have contact with anyone  else  arrested  with  her.
    She was also required to refrain from any  involvement  with  the  OLF.
    The Immigration Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal because she  was
    only "a modest and low-level supporter of the OLF" who  had  "not  been
    charged with any offence, had been allowed to leave the police  station
    on conditions, had observed the conditions on which  she  was  released
    until at  least  20  July  2004  and  had  not  resumed  her  political
    activities at any time following her arrest" (paragraphs 3 and 4).


51.  Having found a  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision, the Tribunal in HA, in substituting a fresh decision  of  its
    own, considered the CIPU report of 2004, which detailed the arrest  and
    detention  of  thousands  of  OLF  members  or  sympathisers  and   the
    commission by the  security  forces  of  unlawful  killings  and  their
    mistreatment of detainees.  It also noted that the Government continued
    to arrest and detain persons arbitrarily, particularly those  suspected
    of sympathising with or being members of the OLF.


52.  The Tribunal found that, whether the appellant might have ceased  being
    involved with  the  OLF  and  had  no  continuing  commitment  to  that
    organisation, this would not be:-

        "at all  determinative  of  how  she  would  be  perceived  by  the
        authorities.  On the  basis  of  the  April  2004  CIPU  report  we
        consider it was reasonably likely that  they  would  re-arrest  and
        detain her and, in the course of that  detention,  inflict  further
        ill-treatment upon her  by  virtue  of  her  (perceived)  political
        opinion" (paragraph 12).


    Of further relevance was the Human Rights Watch report of May 2005,  in
    which it was noted  that  police  officials  in  Oromia  often  subject
    individuals who are arrested on suspicion of OLF-related activities  to
    torture and other forms of mistreatment.  Being released from detention
    was, according to the report, "only the beginning of their ordeal.   In
    many cases police officials harass and intimidate former detainees  and
    their families for years after their release" (paragraph 13).

53.  At paragraph 15 of its determination, the Tribunal said:-

         "Neither Mr Gulvin nor Mr Denholme were  able  to  assist  us  with
         specific background evidence regarding record-keeping  operated  by
         the Ethiopian authorities.  However, it is in our  view  abundantly
         clear that amongst the different opposition and  dissident  parties
         and groups currently existing in Ethiopia, the authorities  make  a
         particular priority of targeting those who are members  of  OLF  or
         are known OLF sympathisers.  The OLF is committed to armed struggle
         and does not regard itself as willing to work within  the  existing
         political and Parliamentary system.  In such circumstances it would
         be entirely reasonable to assume  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities
         maintain  centralised  records  on   persons   suspected   of   OLF
         involvement.  The many instances highlighted in the CIPU report and
         Human Rights Watch report of repressive action  taken  against  the
         suspected members and sympathisers strongly indicate  in  our  view
         the existence of a centralised and relatively sophisticated  system
         of record-keeping.  Whether at the point of return at  the  airport
         in Addis Ababa or subsequently, we consider  it  reasonably  likely
         therefore that this appellant would come to the  adverse  attention
         of the authorities as someone who had been previously  arrested  on
         suspicion of OLF involvement and had  breached  conditions  of  her
         release."

54.  In conclusion, the Tribunal held that:-

         "In  our  view  there  is  a  current  risk  to  OLF  members   and
         sympathisers who have been  previously  arrested  and  detained  on
         suspicion of OLF involvement or who  have  a  significant  history,
         known to the authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy.   We  have
         not considered that it is suitable for  designation  as  a  country
         guideline case because we did not have sufficiently  full  evidence
         or submissions.  But equally it is right that we should make known,
         by reporting, the views we have reached on the basis of the  latest
         available evidence as presented in this case" (paragraph 17).



The Tribunal's assessment of the evidence in the present case

55.  We turn now to the determination of the appeal before  us.  The  burden
    of proof is on the appellant,  who  must  show  that,  if  returned  to
    Ethiopia, he would face a real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment, such as to entitle him to the grant of refugee  status,  the
    grant of humanitarian protection or to a finding that his rights  under
    Article 3 of the ECHR would be violated.  In reaching our decision,  we
    have considered each item of evidence and have reviewed  that  evidence
    in the round.

56.   The Tribunal found Dr Love's report to be generally well-sourced  and,
    so far as it related to recent events in Ethiopia, consistent with  the
    other reports that were before  the  Tribunal.  His  description  of  a
    deterioration in the  degree  of  respect  accorded  by  the  Ethiopian
    government to human rights is in line with  that  of  the  respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note. Although there is a letter from Dr  Trueman,
    which seeks to bring his report up to  date,  that  report  is  not  as
    current as Dr Love's and we did not have the benefit of  oral  evidence
    from Dr Trueman. These factors limited the weight that could be  placed
    on his evidence.

57.  Neither the respondent's letter of refusal nor Mr Saunders  took  issue
    with the credibility of the appellant's account of  what  he  did,  and
    what happened to him, whilst he was in Ethiopia.  However, Mr  Saunders
    submitted that the  letter  from  the  appellant's  cousin,  which  the
    appellant claimed was the catalyst for claiming asylum, could not  bear
    any significant weight,  given  that  its  terms  showed  it  to  be  a
    contrivance.  Mr Saunders made a similar submission in relation to  the
    arrest warrant.  Given, however, that the appellant's account  of  what
    happened in Ethiopia is reasonably likely to be true, there is  nothing
    in the arrest warrant which strikes us as inherently problematic.   The
    appellant said that he  had  been  questioned  about  OLF  involvement,
    whilst in detention.  It is, therefore, plausible that, when the arrest
    warrant came to be issued, following the appellant's non-appearance  in
    court, it should assert that he was a member of the OLF.   It  is  also
    significant that the assertion in the warrant that the  appellant  "was
    distributing writings and materials contrary to the constitution of the
    federal Government" fits precisely with the  activities  involving  the
    internet, which  the  appellant  was  carrying  out  at  his  place  of
    employment.

58.  So far as the letter from the cousin is concerned, the Tribunal  agrees
    that this is plainly a concoction, written not for the benefit  of  the
    appellant but some third party, such as the Tribunal.   But  this  does
    not mean that the appellant's claim is  significantly  damaged.   Given
    the unchallenged account of the appellant's  activities,  the  Tribunal
    finds it is reasonably likely that, whether through his mother or  from
    some other source, the appellant found out,  towards  the  end  of  his
    course in the United Kingdom, that his failure to appear in  court  had
    excited the adverse interest of the authorities in Ethiopia.

59.  Mr Saunders understandably laid  great  store  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was  able  to  exit  Ethiopia,  with  a  valid  exit  permit,
    notwithstanding that he had in effect been bailed  in  connection  with
    what were regarded as anti-regime activities.   Mr  Saunders  submitted
    this  meant  that,  in  reality,  the  Ethiopian  authorities  had   no
    significant adverse interest in the appellant in 1999 and  still  would
    not today.

60.  Dr Love's evidence, however, was that the nature of Ethiopian  record-
    keeping was such that it was quite likely that a person  who  had  been
    bailed would not feature in the records available  to  those  officials
    charged with responsibility for issuing  exit  permits.   The  Tribunal
    accepts Dr Love's evidence in this regard.  There is no evidence before
    us,  to  the  effect  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities  maintain   any
    centralised system  of  record-keeping,  which  enables  the  officials
    responsible  for  immigration  and   emigration   matters   to   access
    information  regarding  all  those  who  have  been  detained  by   the
    authorities and released on bail.   To  this  extent,  we  respectfully
    differ from what is said at paragraph 15 of the  determination  in  HA.
    It may well be the case that high-profile individuals will  have  their
    names kept at the airport at Addis  Ababa  but,  at  the  time  of  his
    departure in 1999, the appellant in the present case claimed he did not
    fall within such a category.

61.  Turning to the position if the appellant were to be returned  in  2007,
    whilst it might be said that he  would  now  be  reasonably  likely  to
    feature in the records kept by the airport authorities, as a person who
    has been ordered to be arrested, Dr Love's evidence as to the lack  of
    co-ordination  between  the  relevant  Ethiopian   officials   strongly
    indicates that the appellant would not be identified  from  records  at
    the airport as a person whose arrest had been ordered.   Significantly,
    Dr Love's evidence was  that  there  was  only  a  "chance"  that  the
    appellant might be detained at the airport, notwithstanding the present
    political climate and the fact that he would be returning after a  long
    period of absence abroad.  Even being identified as a returning  failed
    asylum seeker was, according to Dr Love, no more than one of a  number
    of factors that would have to be considered in determining whether  the
    appellant would be  detained  upon  return.   There  is,  we  note,  no
    objective evidence  to  which  our  attention  has  been  drawn,  which
    suggests that returning failed asylum  seekers  to  Ethiopia,  even  if
    identified as such, are subjected to any in-depth questioning.  In  all
    the circumstances, therefore, the Tribunal concludes that the appellant
    would not be at real risk of persecution or other serious harm  at  the
    point of his return.

62.  However, that is not the end of the  matter.   The  appellant  will  be
    entitled to international protection if, having  hypothetically  passed
    through the airport, he would be at real risk thereafter.  In  all  the
    circumstances of the appellant's case, there is, we consider, plainly a
    real risk that he will come to the adverse attention of  the  Ethiopian
    authorities.  The appellant:-

          (a)  is the subject of  an  outstanding  arrest  warrant  for  OLF
    involvement;

      (b) is a member of the (now proscribed) MTA; and

         (c)   undertook information-gathering activities, via the internet,
               relating to both the OLF and the MTA, which fact is now known
               both to his employers and the authorities.

63.  In view of the current situation in  Ethiopia,  as  described,  perhaps
    most graphically, in the respondent's Operational  Guidance  Note;  the
    fact that the appellant comes from, and is reasonably likely to  return
    to,  the  relatively  small  group  of  intellectuals/professionals  in
    Ethiopia; and that there is a system of informers which operates in the
    country including  (particularly)  amongst  that  group,  the  Tribunal
    concludes that there is a real risk that the appellant will come to the
    adverse attention of the authorities. This is so, on the basis of  what
    the appellant is and what he has done in the past. But in any event, it
    has not been suggested  that  the  appellant  would,  if  returned,  be
    reasonably  likely  to  refrain  from  any  further  interest  in,  and
    involvement with, the kind of Oromo activities that  led  him  to  seek
    asylum in the United Kingdom. Mr  Saunders  accepted  that  there  were
    difficulties for him in contending that the appellant had  an  internal
    relocation alternative. The Tribunal agrees. This is not a  case  where
    the State's persecutory attentions have been shown to be geographically
    limited.

64.  So far as OLF involvement or alleged involvement is concerned,  neither
    Mr Toal nor Mr Saunders sought to  persuade  us  that  the  conclusions
    contained in paragraph 17 of the determination in HA should be amended.
     In the light of the  evidence  before  this  Tribunal,  the  following
    general conclusions can be made.

65.   As at February 2007, the  situation  in  Ethiopia  is  such  that,  in
    general:-

               (a)  OLF members and sympathisers;

               (b)  persons perceived to be  OLF  members  or  sympathisers;
    and

               (c)  members of the MTA;

          will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope  of
    paragraph 66 or 67 below.

66.   In the case of OLF members and sympathisers, the Tribunal  finds  that
    the conclusions in paragraph 17 of HA continue to be supported  by  the
    background country evidence. OLF members  and  sympathisers  and  those
    specifically perceived  by  the  authorities  to  be  such  members  or
    sympathisers will in  general  be  at  real  risk  if  they  have  been
    previously arrested or detained on suspicion of  OLF  involvement.   So
    too  will  those  who  have  a  significant  history,  known   to   the
    authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy. Whether  any  such  persons
    are to be excluded from recognition as refugees or from  the  grant  of
    humanitarian protection by reason of armed activities may  need  to  be
    addressed in particular cases (see paragraph 3.6.10 of the  Operational
    Guidance Note).

67. Given the proscription of the MTA and the current state of  tension  on
    the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal considers that  MTA
    members will also be at real risk on return  if  they  have  previously
    been arrested or detained on suspicion of MTA membership and/or of  OLF
    membership or are known or suspected of membership of the MTA.  Despite
    the banning of the  MTA,  the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  the
    evidence is such as to show  a  real  risk  where  the  extent  of  the
    authorities' knowledge or suspicion  about  an  individual  relates  to
    something less than membership of the MTA.



Decision

68.   The  Adjudicator  made  a  material  error  of  law.    The   Tribunal
    accordingly substitutes for his decision, a  decision  of  our  own  to
    allow the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 3). By reason of paragraph 339C(ii) of the Immigration  Rules,
    the appellant is not entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.






Signed                                      Date:


Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane

    Annex - Documentary Evidence

Evidence relating to the appellant's particular claim

1.   Witness statement of appellant.

2.   Appellant's diploma certificate from Addis Ababa University 1987.

3.   Various certificates concerning other  courses  attended  by  appellant
1990-1994.

4.    Certificate  relating  to  appellant  from  Institute  of  Development
Studies June/July 1999.

5.   Letter from appellant's solicitors to Home  Office  enclosing  SEF  and
    supporting documents 18 January 2001.

6.   Copy of appellant's MTA membership.

7.   Appellant's Agri-Service Ethiopia ID card.

8.   Appellant's passport.

9.   Email from appellant to [named individual] of the  Oromo  Community  29
    December 2002.

10.  Email from appellant to BBC 1 March 2004.

11.  Email from appellant to journalists in Addis Ababa 13 March 2004.

12.  Letter from Chair of Oromo Community (OC-UK) 9 July 2004.

13.  Report of Dr Trevor Trueman 4 August 2004.

14.  Second witness statement of appellant 31 January 2007.

15.  Four certificates relating to internet courses undertaken by  appellant
    in Ethiopia in March 1998.

16.  Letter from appellant's cousin plus translation.

17.  Arrest warrant dated 8 September 2001.

18.  Letter from Migrant  Helpline  regarding  appellant's  employment  with
    gateway protection programme.

19.  Article on gateway protection programme.

20.  Further article concerning Gateway Protection Programme.

21.  Letter from Dr Trevor Trueman 2 December 2006.

    22.   Report by Trevor Trueman 2 December 2006.

23.  Report by Dr Roy Love 2 February 2007.

Appellant's Evidence Concerning Entry Conditions

1.   Extract from Report on human rights  practices  in  Ethiopia  2003  (US
    State Department 25 February 2004).

2.   Extract from Home Office country assessment on Ethiopia (April 2004).

3.   Overview of human rights development in  Ethiopia  2003  (Human  Rights
    Watch 2004).

4.   International Annual Report (26 May 2004).

5.   Extract from Human Rights Watch World Report 1998.

6.   Extracts from Human Rights Watch World Report 1999.

7.   Extracts from Human Rights Watch World Report 2001.

8.   Ethiopia: Halt Crackdown on Oromo Students (Human Rights Watch News  22
    May 2002).

9.   Extracts from Human Rights Watch World Report 2003.

10.  Extract from Amnesty International Annual Report 28 May 2003.

11.  Ethiopia, investigates torture by police (Human Rights  Watch  News  18
March 2004).

12.  Ethiopia: The Treatment of Oromo and Members of Oromo Liberation  Front
    (Immigration Refugee Board of Canada Special Report 27 March 2003).

13.  Speaker of Federal Council Defence (IRIN 13 August 2001).

14.  Ethiopia: The Purposes, Goals and Activities of the Macha Tulema  Self-
    Help Association and the Nature and Extent of its Relationship with the
    Oromo Liberation Front, If Any (Immigration  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    Special Report 27 February 2003).

15.    Amnesty   International   Urgent   Action   -   Ethiopia:   Fear   of
    Torture/Arbitrary Detention/Prisoners of Conscience  (Arrested  Fifteen
    Members of the Oromo Ethnic Group 21 May 2004).

16.  Repression against the Macha Tulema Association  (Solidarity  Committee
    for Ethiopian Political Prisoners News Report 22 May 2004).

17.  Amnesty International Further Information  on  Urgent  Action  19  July
2004.

18.  Macha Tulema Association loses Licence to  operate  (Addis  Tribune  23
July 2004).

19.  Ethiopia Extract: Human Rights Watch Annual Report 11 January 2007.

20.  Extract from Home Office country of origin Information  Service  Report
    (October 2006).

21.  Ethiopia Extract from Amnesty International Report 23 May 2006.

22.  Extract from Report on Human Rights  Practices  in  Ethiopia  2005  (US
    Department of State 8 March 2006).

23.  Suppressing Dissent: Human Rights Abuses and  Political  Repression  in
    Ethiopia's Oromo Region (Human Rights Watch 10 May 2005).

24.  Extract from Ethiopia: Human Rights Defenders Under Pressure  (FIDH  14
    April 2005).

25.  Extract from Hansard Written Answers (11 December 2006).

26.  Ethiopia's Highest Judge Flees Threats and Harassment (HJT  Research  6
    November 2006).

27.   Smith:  Ethiopia  Regime  Silence  on  Report   Speaks   Volumes   (US
    Representative Chris Smith 20 October 2006).

28.  Ethiopia Admits Higher Death Toll  in  Opposition  Protests  (Voice  of
    America News 26 October 2006).

29.  Independent Report Says Ethiopian Police Massacred 193 During  Election
    Protests (HJT Research 19 October 2006).

30.  Panel Says Ethiopian Forces  Killed  193  in  Anti-Government  Protests
    (Voice of America News 18 October 2006).

31.  Amnesty  International  Urgent  Action  233/06  -  Ethiopia:  Detention
    Without Charge/Fear of Torture or  Ill-Treatment  (Civilians  From  the
    Oromia  Region  Arbitrarily  Arrested  by  the  Ethiopian   Government)
    (Amnesty International 30 August 2006).

32.  Further Information on Urgent Action 233/06  (Amnesty  International  2
    November 2006).

33.  Critical  Websites  Inaccessible  in  Ethiopia  (Committee  to  Protect
    Journalists, 24 May 2006).

34.  Press Group says Ethiopia censors internet (Voice of America  News,  24
    May 2006).

35.  Opposition websites and blogs  go  down  but  is  it  censorship  or  a
    technical glitch? (Reporters Sans Frontires 23 May 2006).

36.  Statement of J Peter Pham, Director, William  R  Nelson  Institute  for
    International Public Affairs, James Madison University to Committee  on
    international Relations in House of Representatives (29 June 2006).

37.  Human Rights Abuses in Ethiopia 2005-2006 (Oromia Support Group  Report
    2 August 2006).

Respondent's Documents

1.   Country of Origin Information Request dated 18 November 2005.

2.   Country of Origin Information Request dated 13 March 2006.

3.   Home Office Operation Guidance Note for Ethiopia 27 October 2006

4.   Country of Origin Information Report on Ethiopia 6 November 2006

5.   US State Department Report on Ethiopia March 8 2006.





