

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 5 and 6 October 2010              |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before


                             Mr Justice Cranston

                      Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy
                      Senior Immigration Judge Nichols


                                   Between


                                     BA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr Basharat Ali of Messrs Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer





1     Given the large  numbers  of  those  who   demonstrate  here  and  the
    publicity  which  demonstrators  receive,  for  example  on   Facebook,
    combined with the inability of the Iranian  Government to  monitor  all
    returnees who have been involved in demonstrations here,   regard  must
    be had to the level of involvement of the individual here  as  well  as
    any political activity which the  individual might have  been  involved
    in Iran before  seeking asylum in Britain.



2     (a)   Iranians returning to Iran are screened on arrival.  A  returnee
         who meets the profile of an activist may be detained while searches
         of documentation are made. Students, particularly  those  who  have
         known political profiles are likely to be  questioned  as  well  as
         those who have exited illegally.

    (b)    There is not a real risk  of  persecution  for  those  who  have
         exited Iran illegally or are merely  returning  from  Britain.  The
         conclusions of the Tribunal in the  country  guidance  case  of  SB
         (risk on return -illegal exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053  are
         followed and endorsed.


    (c)    There is no evidence of the use of facial recognition technology
         at the Imam Khomeini International airport, but there are a  number
         of officials who may be able to recognize up to 200  faces  at  any
         one time. The procedures  used  by  security  at  the  airport  are
         haphazard. It is therefore possible  that  those  whom  the  regime
         might wish to question would not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         regime on arrival. If, however, information is  known  about  their
         activities abroad, they might well be  picked  up  for  questioning
         and/or transferred to a special court near the  airport  in  Tehran
         after they have returned home.

3      It is important  to  consider  the  level  of  political  involvement
    before considering the   likelihood of the  individual  coming  to  the
    attention of the authorities and the priority that the  Iranian  regime
    would give to tracing him. It is only after considering  those  factors
    that the issue of whether or not there is a real  risk  of  his  facing
    persecution on return can be assessed.

4     The following are relevant factors to  be  considered  when  assessing
    risk on return having regard to sur place activities:

    (i) Nature of sur place activity

      . Theme of demonstrations - what  do  the  demonstrators  want  (e.g.
        reform of the regime through to its violent  overthrow);  how  will
        they be characterised by the regime?

      . Role in demonstrations and political profile - can  the  person  be
        described as a  leader;  mobiliser  (e.g.  addressing  the  crowd),
        organiser (e.g. leading the chanting); or simply a  member  of  the
        crowd; if the latter is he active or passive (e.g. does he carry  a
        banner); what is his motive, and is this relevant to the profile he
        will have in the eyes of the regime>

      . Extent of participation -  has  the  person  attended  one  or  two
        demonstrations or is he a regular participant?

      . Publicity attracted - has a demonstration attracted media  coverage
        in the United Kingdom or the home country; nature of that publicity
        (quality of images; outlets where stories appear etc)?

    (ii) Identification risk

      . Surveillance  of  demonstrators  -  assuming  the  regime  aims  to
        identify demonstrators against it  how  does  it  do  so,  through,
        filming them, having agents who  mingle  in  the  crowd,  reviewing
        images/recordings of demonstrations etc?

      . Regime's capacity to identify individuals - does  the  regime  have
        advanced technology (e.g. for facial recognition); does it allocate
        human resources to fit names to faces in the crowd?

    (iii) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return

      . Profile - is the person known as a committed  opponent  or  someone
        with a  significant  political  profile;  does  he  fall  within  a
        category which the regime regards as especially objectionable?

      . Immigration  history  -  how  did  the  person  leave  the  country
        (illegally; type of visa); where has the person been  when  abroad;
        is the timing and method of return more likely to lead  to  inquiry
        and/or being detained for more than a short period and  ill-treated
        (overstayer; forced return)?

    (iv) Consequences of identification

      . Is there differentiation between  demonstrators  depending  on  the
        level of their political profile adverse to the regime?

    (v) Identification risk on return

      . Matching identification to person - if a person  is  identified  is
        that information systematically stored and used; are  border  posts
        geared to the task?




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of Immigration Judge  Chana.   The
    judge had dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to grant the appellant asylum and to  give
    directions for his removal.  The case comes to us as an appeal but  has
    been designated as an intended country guidance  case  in  relation  to
    those like the appellant who seek to resist removal to Iran by reliance
    on risk arising from sur place activities.

 2. We have decided this appeal strictly  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before us. However, since in the course of our  deliberations  we  were
    made aware of a decision in draft by a separate panel of  the  tribunal
    dealing with some related issues [now reported as SA (Iranian Arabs- no
    general risk) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 41(IAC)] we would  simply  note  that
    that panel's conclusions appear to be very much in line with ours.

THE APPELLANT'S CLAIM

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12 July 2008 with  his  own
    passport and with a student visa, valid until 31 October 2009.  He  had
    worked in Iran at his father's company.  He is  unmarried  and  has  no
    children and the rest of his family live in Iran.

 4. In June  and  early  July  2009  the  appellant  participated  in  five
    demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in London.  That  was  at  a
    time when there were  protests  both  in  Iran  and  around  the  world
    following what were perceived to be malpractices  leading  to  the  re-
    election as President of Iran of Mahmud Ahmedinejad over his rival, Mir-
    Houssein Mousavi.  The appellant features briefly, for 2-3 seconds,  in
    a video clip of the demonstrations, chanting anti-regime slogans.   The
    clip was uploaded onto YouTube and is thus available on  the  internet.
    The appellant's photograph also appeared in a story about the  protests
    in the October 2009 edition of a magazine called Bamdad e  Iran,  which
    is an anti-regime publication.  The Supreme Leader of Iran  appears  on
    the cover of that edition  as  the  devil.   The  YouTube  feature  and
    magazine are associated with a secular nationalist  group,  the  United
    Front of Iranian Nationals, UFIN, based in  the  Iranian  community  in
    London.

 5. The appellant applied for asylum on 13  November  2009.   There  was  a
    screening interview that day, and an asylum interview was conducted  on
    24 November 2009.  On 26 November 2009 the Secretary of  State  refused
    the application, with detailed reasons.   The  appellant  appealed  and
    there was a hearing before Immigration Judge Chana on 15 December 2009.
     The judge rejected the claim and promulgated her detailed  reasons  on
    the following day.  At the hearing the  appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel.


The judge's findings

 6. As part of his case before the  judge  the  appellant  alleged  certain
    incidents to demonstrate a heightened threat of mistreatment should  he
    be returned to Iran, for example, his  previous  arrest  in  1999;  his
    sister's  arrest  on  15  June  2009  in  Tehran,  which  led  to   his
    demonstrating in London; and the detention of his father, who  appeared
    before a revolutionary court in November 2009,  because  of  his  son's
    activity.  The judge discounted or disbelieved the appellant's  account
    of these matters.

 7. That left the appellant's own participation in  demonstrations  outside
    the Iranian Embassy.  The judge found that the appellant  "deliberately
    and opportunistically attempted to establish a claim as a  refugee  sur
    place" by participating in  the  demonstrations.   However,  the  judge
    added: "I do not however take this  into  account  when  assessing  the
    appellant's risk upon return".  Even if the appellant had been involved
    opportunistically in demonstrations to lay  the  basis  of  his  asylum
    claim sur place, the judge said,  on  his  own  evidence  he  had  only
    attended five demonstrations, with hundreds  of  others.   He  was  not
    politically active while in Iran.

 8. The judge then made findings - which we have re-examined in  the  light
    of the additional evidence adduced before us  -  about  the  extent  to
    which the Iranian authorities could, or  would  try  to,  identify  the
    appellant from among the demonstrators and the risk he faced,  were  he
    to be identified, when he was not perceived to be a political dissident
    by the Iranian authorities.  Even applying the lower burden  of  proof,
    and resolving doubts in the  appellant's  favour,  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that there were substantial grounds for  believing  that  the
    appellant, if returned to Iran, would face a real risk of  persecution,
    death, torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

RELEVANT COUNTRY GUIDANCE CASES

 9. Although only obliquely referred to in  submissions  a  bundle  of  the
    country Guidance cases relating to Iran was placed before us.  Although
    most of the determinations refer to the brutality  of  the   regime  in
    Iran the only  determination in a country guidance case which  deals in
    part with a similar factual matrix to that of  this appellant  is  that
    in SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran  [2009]  UKAIT  00053.    In
    that determination the Tribunal considered evidence of what happens  on
    arrival to those who  are  returned  to  Iran.  In  paragraph   53  the
    Tribunal  set out various relevant risk factors as  follows:


       i) Events in Iran following the 12 June 2009 presidential  elections
          have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to be  opposed
          to the present government and the Iranian  judiciary  has  become
          even less independent. Persons who are likely to be perceived  by
          the  authorities  in  Iran  as  being  actively  associated  with
          protests against the June 12 election results  may  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill treatment, although much  will  depend
          on the particular circumstances.


      ii) Iranians facing enforced return do not in  general  face  a  real
          risk of persecution or ill-treatment. That remains the case  even
          if they exited Iran illegally. Having exited  illegally  Iran  is
          not a significant risk factor, although if it is the case that  a
          person would face difficulties with  the  authorities  for  other
          reasons, such a history could be a factor adding to the level  of
          difficulties he or she is likely to face.

     iii) Being a person who has left Iran when  facing  court  proceedings
          (other  than  ordinary  civil  proceedings)  is  a  risk  factor,
          although much will depend on the particular facts relating to the
          nature of the offence(s) involved and  other  circumstances.  The
          more the offences for which a person faces trial are likely to be
          viewed as political, the greater the  level  of  risk  likely  to
          arise as a result. Given the emphasis placed both by  the  expert
          report from Dr Kakhki and  the  April  2009  Danish  fact-finding
          report's  sources on the degree of risk varying according to  the
          nature of the court proceedings, being involved in ongoing  court
          proceedings is not in itself something  that  will  automatically
          result in ill-treatment; rather it is properly to  be  considered
          as a risk factor to be taken into account along with others.

      iv) Being a person involved in court  proceedings  in  Iran  who  has
          engaged in conduct likely to be seen as insulting either  to  the
          judiciary or the justice system or the  government  or  to  Islam
          constitutes another risk factor indicating an increased level  of
          risk of persecution or ill treatment on return.

       v) Being accused of anti-Islamic conduct likewise also constitutes a
          significant risk factor.

      vi) This case replaces AD (Risk-Illegal  Departure)  Iran  CG  [2003]
          UKAIT 00107.

    Although we have included  points     (iii),    (iv)   and  (v)  above,
    though they are not relevant to this appellant we considered  that  the
    conclusions in that country guidance case, based on the evidence before
    the Tribunal,  is an appropriate starting point for  our  consideration
    of the  appellant's claim of what might happen to him on return.


10. We have also, although it was not placed before us, taken cognisance of
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SS (Iran) [2008] EWCA  Civ  310.
    That was an appeal by an Iranian of Kurdish ethnicity  who  claimed  to
    have been involved with Komala, a Kurdish political party, in Iran  and
    that Komala leaflets had been found in his  home.   He  had  said  that
    after fleeing Iran and applying for asylum  here  he  had  become  more
    involved with Komala. A photograph  of  him  had  been  posted  on  the
    Internet and   film of a demonstration he had attended  in  London  had
    been broadcast on Komala Television in Sweden. The appeal was  remitted
    to the AIT because the Court of Appeal considered that the  Immigration
    Judge's conclusions on  the  credibility  of  the  appellant  were  not
    sustainable.  However, the  Court  of  Appeal  did  also  consider  the
    appellant's sur place activities. In paragraphs 22 through  25  of  his
    judgment, Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury, having commented that   it  was
    not easy  to decide whether or not the Immigration Judge  was  entitled
    to  claim that it was fanciful  for the appellant  to  claim  that  his
    presence  and activities were known to the authorities,  noted that the
    appellant had not produced any evidence  to show that  the  website  or
    television  station concerned  were monitored  or  that  the  appellant
    would be identified in the film  or  on  the  web  site  and  make  the
    connection if he were returned to Iran. Bearing in mind that the burden
    of proof lay on the appellant he found that the Immigration  Judge  had
    been entitled to reach the conclusion he did.  He commented:

         "There must be a limit as to how far an  applicant  for  asylum  is
         entitled to rely upon publicity about  his  activities  in  the  UK
         against the government of the country to which he is liable  to  be
         returned.  It seems to me that  it  is  not  enough   for  such  an
         applicant  simply to establish, as here, that he was   involved  in
         activities   which  were  relatively   limited  in  duration    and
         importance , without  producing any  evidence that the  authorities
         would be concerned about them, or even that they were or  would  be
         aware of them. "

11. It is, of course  the  central  purpose  of  this  appeal  to  consider
    relevant evidence on that issue.

The appeal

12. Reconsideration of the judge's decision was ordered by SIJ Spencer.  In
    his view it was arguable that the judge had made an  error  of  law  in
    refusing the appellant the opportunity of  adducing  evidence,  in  the
    form of an expert's report, to show that the Iranian authorities  would
    be able to identify him demonstrating outside the Iranian embassy.   It
    was also arguable that the judge's conclusion, that the appellant would
    not be recognised by the Iranian authorities from material showing  him
    demonstrating, was unreasonable.

13. First-stage reconsideration by SIJ Storey in  December  2009  concluded
    that  challenges  to  the  immigration  judge's   assessment   of   the
    appellant's personal and family history and circumstances had failed to
    identify any error.  However SIJ Storey considered that, in  the  light
    of the background evidence, there was a  strong  possibility  that  the
    Iranian authorities had been  taking  steps  to  identify  from  camera
    evidence and other sources the identities of persons  participating  in
    demonstrations outside their Embassy in the latter part of  2009.   The
    real question in most cases would therefore be  what  follows  for  the
    individual claimant.  SIJ Storey agreed with the appellant  that  there
    was need for an expert report.  The reasons given by Senior Immigration
    Judge Storey for finding a material error in law in  the  determination
    of Immigration Judge Chana are annexed to this determination  at  annex
    1.

14. At the appeal hearing we were taken through a large volume of  evidence
    as to the situation in Iran and the treatment of dissidents,  including
    those coming from abroad.  Included in that evidence was  a  submission
    of 29 September 2010 from Amnesty International UK,  prepared  for  the
    hearing.  Amnesty's  reputation  and  knowledge  mean  that  we  attach
    particular weight to that submission.  We also had the advantage  of  a
    report and evidence from an expert, following SIJ Storey's ruling.  The
    expert is Anna Enayat, an Iranian by origin who left Iran at  the  time
    of the revolution in 1979 and has never since returned.  Ms Enayat  has
    kept abreast of developments in Iran through, for example, her previous
    position as a senior editor at IB Tauris, a publisher of books  on  the
    Middle East.  Ms Enayat has  been  a  senior  associate  member  at  St
    Anthony's College, Oxford, and has organised seminars there on  current
    Iranian developments.  We found her report and oral evidence to be most
    helpful.

BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

Developments in Iran post June 2009

15. The expert's report begins with the recent political history  of  Iran.
    The account was not disputed by the Secretary  of  State.   The  report
    summarises developments such as the election of  President  Ahmedinejad
    in 2005, his  re-election  in  June  2009  over  the  reform  candidate
    Moussavi, and the mass protests which followed as a  reaction  to  what
    was widely perceived as a rigged result.  Those political  developments
    have three  important  implications  relevant  to  our  considerations.
    First, there has been the grim reaction of the  ruling  regime  to  the
    protest movement, and the repression of anyone associated with dissent.
     Secondly, those associated with the regime have  attempted  to  extend
    their control over organisations of the  state  and  to  all  parts  of
    society.  Thirdly, although there has long been  a  focus  in  Iran  on
    Britain as a threat, in recent times that has become a  paranoia  about
    this country's supposed role in encouraging  unrest  and  a  consequent
    suspicion of those with British connections.

(a) Post-June 2009 repression

16. The repression which followed the 2009 protests is addressed in several
    reports.  Most notable  are  the  Amnesty  International  report,  From
    Protest to Prison. Iran One Year After The Election,  June  2010  ("the
    Amnesty  Report"),  and  the  report  from  the   Iran   Human   Rights
    Documentation  Centre,  Violent  Aftermath.   The  2009  Election   and
    Suppression of Dissent in  Iran,  February  2010.   Both  describe  the
    arbitrary arrests of those involved in  the  protests  after  the  2009
    election; the detention of many without charge or  trial;  the  use  of
    violence, including torture, against those detained; the  use  of  show
    trials on vaguely worded charges; and the imposition of death sentences
    on a number of those convicted or, in other cases, very lengthy  prison
    sentences.

17. There are other reports as well.  On  28  January  2010,  The  Guardian
    published a spreadsheet of the  dead  and  detained,  collated  from  a
    number of  sources.   1259  names  were  listed.   In  April  2010  the
    International Campaign for  Human  Rights  in  Iran  alleged  that  the
    Iranian Intelligence Ministry,  MOIS,  was  manipulating  the  judicial
    process by forcing the issue of harsh and long sentences for activists,
    regardless of the lack of evidence against  them.   The  United  States
    State Department Country Report for Iran for 2009 commented on the lack
    of recognition in Iran of  the  concept  of  the  independence  of  the
    judiciary.

18. The point made  in  the  Amnesty  Report,  and  underlined  in  the  29
    September 2010 Amnesty International UK submission for the purposes  of
    this hearing, is that repression has continued in Iran to  the  present
    day.  Some commentators have characterised  it  as  a  policy  of  zero
    tolerance.  Hundreds of people remain detained for their  part  in  the
    protests  or  for  otherwise  expressing  dissenting  views,  and   the
    imprisonment of ordinary citizens has become  an  everyday  phenomenon,
    with the occurrence of arbitrary arrests  and  detention.   Those  with
    only tentative links to banned groups, as well  as  family  members  of
    former prisoners, have been subjected to arbitrary arrest in  the  past
    year.  Those  detained  have  been  held  incommunicado.   The  secrecy
    surrounding the arrests has made it easier for interrogators to  resort
    to  torture  and  ill-treatment,  in  some   cases   extracting   false
    confessions.  The United States State  Department  has  said  that  the
    victims of repression post June 2009 have included anyone suspected  of
    being in  opposition  to  the  regime,  but  in  particular  fall  into
    categories such as student activist, women's  rights  reformer,  ethnic
    minority rights activist and  religious  minority:  Country  Report  on
    Human Rights Practices 2009, 11 March 2010.   The  expert  told  us  of
    raids on student dormitories at university campuses.

19. We note that there are difficulties in painting a full picture  of  the
    situation in Iran.  As Human Rights Watch noted on 21  September  2009,
    no independent international human rights organisation has been allowed
    to work inside Iran and Iranian human rights organisations have  either
    been closed or have faced constant threats  and  intimidation.   As  we
    have said, the Secretary of State did not attempt to contest  the  fate
    of those expressing  dissent.   The  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
    Annual Report on Human Rights 2009, released in March 2010,  summarised
    the position as follows:

         "[I]t has been a particularly grim year in 2009 for human rights in
         Iran, largely  defined  by  the  Government's  brutal  response  to
         widespread protests after the disputed  presidential  elections  in
         June.  Freedom of assembly was curtailed  and  peaceful  protestors
         and political activists were subjected to repeated, well documented
         abuses.  However, human rights in Iran have been a source of shared
         concern and widespread  criticism  for  many  years  and  the  post
         election crackdown only  served  to  compound  these  concerns  and
         further illustrate Iran's failure to live up to  its  international
         obligations".

(b) Extension of state control

20. Under this head our attention was drawn to a  number  of  developments.
    In the expert's  description  there  has  been  a  "militarisation"  of
    intelligence   and   the   institutionalisation   of   a   brutal   and
    uncompromising attitude, which has driven the response of the  security
    establishment to the post 2009 protests and to dissent  generally.   We
    were shown charts of the reorganisations of the state  apparatus  after
    the  2009  protests,  including  changes  in  the  structure   of   law
    enforcement as hardliners have assumed more power.   In  particular  we
    were taken to an  article  by  Professor  Ali  Ansari  of  St  Andrew's
    University which describes changes in the intelligence apparatus.  Thus
    a former head of the Basij (the regime's militia), and  a  conservative
    cleric instrumental in suppressing the 2009 protests,  has  become  the
    head of the intelligence office of  the  Islamic  Revolutionary  Guards
    Corps, IRGC.  Moreover, President Ahmedinejad removed the head of  MOIS
    so that the IRGC now  has  a  greater  role  in  state  security.   The
    penetration generally of the IRGC into  Iranian  society,  economy  and
    politics is  dealt  with  in  a  report,  The  Rise  of  the  Pasdaran.
    Assessing the Domestic Roles of Iran's  Islamic  Revolutionary  Guard's
    Corps, prepared for the  United  States  Office  of  the  Secretary  of
    Defence by the Rand Corporation in 2009.

21. Our attention was drawn in particular to the report by Stratfor  Global
    Intelligence, a  consultancy  based  in  the  United  States,  entitled
    Iranian Intelligence and Regime Preservation, June 2010.   As  well  as
    covering the history of the intelligence community  in  Iran,  and  the
    increasing role played by the  Iranian  Supreme  Leader  Ayatollah  Ali
    Khameni in intelligence matters, the report refers to Iran's reputation
    for having a capable intelligence apparatus abroad, particularly  adept
    at managing militant proxies, all in the name of  regime  preservation.
    Iranian embassies and missions contain large intelligence sections.  As
    is standard practice among the world's intelligence  agencies,  Iranian
    agents abroad  are  also  placed  in  cover  jobs.    The  Ministry  of
    Intelligence and Security, MOIS, employs as unofficial  cover  for  its
    officers the role of student, professor,  journalist  and  employee  of
    state owned or state connected Iranian companies.  As in  its  domestic
    efforts MOIS' first priority on foreign soil is to monitor,  infiltrate
    and control Iranian dissident groups.

22. Another aspect of developments in Iran under this head  is  technology.
    The internet is used widely in Iran, including by the security  forces.
    It  provides  a  simple  method  for  Iranian   security   to   conduct
    surveillance.  The expert gave evidence that the oil  wealth  available
    to the ruling regime - even if it may not have  benefited  the  general
    population to the same extent - enables the  intelligence  agencies  to
    fund an  extensive  network  of  surveillance,  in  particular  through
    information technology  systems.    Within  Iran  the  post  June  2009
    crackdown has led to an intensification  of  surveillance  of  the  new
    media.  In particular, that has taken the form of  online  surveillance
    and the use of filtering systems.

23. Evidence from Reporters Without Borders of 10 June 2010, and  the  Open
    Internet Initiative (2009),  explains  how  internet  sites  have  been
    blocked and messaging  services  have  been  suspended.   The  Nokia  -
    Siemens  Networks  acknowledged  that  it  had   supplied   traditional
    surveillance equipment to Iran capable of tapping phone  conversations,
    but denied that it had sold software capable of  intercepting  data  or
    monitoring internet activities.  However, dissidents using the internet
    and messaging services have been arrested.   The  architecture  of  the
    Iranian internet is apparently conducive to widespread surveillance  as
    all traffic from the dozens of the internet service  providers  serving
    households is routed through the  state  controlled  telecommunications
    structure.  The Freedom House Report, Freedom On The Net 2009  -  Iran,
    dated 1 April 2009 states that the Iranian regime  wields  one  of  the
    world's most sophisticated apparatuses for controlling the internet and
    other digital technologies.  In its  country  report  on  human  rights
    practices in Iran for 2009, the United States State Department referred
    to  Iranian  government  monitoring  of  internet  communications   via
    Facebook, Twitter and YouTube, with technology purchased in 2009.

(c) Iran and the UK

24. The expert outlined the low ebb of British-Iranian relations  following
    the June 2009 protests.  Especially significant was  the  detention  of
    eight employees of the British Embassy  in  Tehran  on  27  June  2009,
    accused of involvement in the  unrest.   That  included  the  Embassy's
    chief political analyst.  In her report the expert quotes  anti-British
    rhetoric, including the  statement  by  President  Ahmedinejad  at  the
    beginning of August 2009 that "a large number of  Iranians  with  anti-
    government backgrounds were travelling to Iran from the United  Kingdom
    in the lead up to the elections".  Ahmedinejad  has  also  accused  the
    intelligence  ministry  of  gross  neglect  for  allowing  the  influx.
    Britain is sometimes described as the little devil, the  United  States
    being the big devil.

25. Current advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is that British
    travellers to Iran,  including  dual  British/Iranian  nationals,  face
    greater risks than nationals of most other countries.  Iranian paranoia
    about Britain's supposed role in its politics means that  the  security
    forces are suspicious of people with  British  connections.   There  is
    therefore a risk that British nationals could be arbitrarily  detained,
    despite their complete innocence.  The FCO explain  that  the  risk  is
    less for tourists, particularly those in tour groups, visiting  tourist
    centres where the local security authorities  are  more  likely  to  be
    involved with foreigners.  Similarly, business  visitors  are  less  at
    risk if they have been invited by local business contacts.

The situation outside Iran

26. In describing the operation of Iranian intelligence the Stratfor Global
    Intelligence report, referred to earlier, describes how MOIS  units  in
    Iranian Embassies  abroad  have  it  as  a  primary  duty  to  monitor,
    infiltrate and control   Iranian dissident groups.  The report contends
    that there has been a shift in Iran in intelligence tactics  abroad  to
    the  harassment,  intimidation   and   de-legitimisation   of   Iranian
    dissidents.  The Amnesty International UK submission for  the  purposes
    of this hearing contains specific examples from its own  experience  of
    this type of treatment of Iranian dissidents.  As Amnesty explained  to
    us, those arrested and released who have then left Iran  have  reported
    receiving warning telephone calls or have been  confronted  by  unknown
    Iranians in the street, who threaten them.  Our attention was drawn  to
    instances of Iranians demonstrating against  human  rights  violations,
    who had stood outside the Amnesty International secretariat in  central
    London in 2009, when unidentified Iranians approached them  and  warned
    them that they were being watched.

27. In January 2010  the  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada  has
    reported instances where persons in Iran, who have  relatives  who  are
    dissidents abroad, are called into local police or intelligence offices
    and themselves threatened or detained so as  to  exert  pressure.   The
    focus is on active opponents at the present rather than those who  were
    active 30 years ago during the revolution.  While Amnesty is unable  to
    confirm to us indirect threats from Iranians via relatives, they retell
    a number of instances  reported  to  them.   The  United  States  State
    Department Country Report, mentioned earlier, refers to similar  cases.



28. Certainly general threats by high government officials have  been  made
    to Iranians abroad.  In a speech in November 2009, published in  a  pro
    government newspaper, Brigadier Masoud Jazayeri of the Islamic Republic
    of Iran's Armed Forces Joint Command,  characterised  protestors  after
    the 2009 election as "acting as a plot"  and  as  an  "American-British
    coup".  He continued:

         "A large number of individuals involved in the plot  had  not  been
         identified until today and they will  be  confronted  in  time  ...
         [D]espite being patient the Islamic  Republic  of  Iran  could  not
         allow agents of regime change and soft coup to plot against it  and
         if forced to, shall even create "serious challenges" for the agents
         of the coup outside the country".

    In the course of her report the expert refers to an announcement  on  5
    April 2010 by the Minister of Justice, Morteza Bakhtiari, that  a  High
    Council for the Affairs of Iranians Abroad  had  been  established  and
    that  the  judiciary  was  in  the  process  of  organising  a  special
    prosecutor's office for  Iranians  resident  abroad.   The  unit  would
    consist of a number of investigative branches supervised by the  Tehran
    Prosecutor, two courts at first instance and two  appeal  courts.   The
    revolutionary court was cooperating with the project.

29. On 4 September 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that part of  the
    effort of harassing and intimidating members of  the  Iranian  diaspora
    involved  tracking  the  Facebook,  Twitter  and  YouTube  activity  of
    Iranians around the world and identifying them at  opposition  protests
    abroad.  A later article in the Wall Street  Journal,  on  10  February
    2010, stated that former Iranian law makers and former members  of  the
    Iranian security forces  claimed  that  monitoring  of  sites  such  as
    Facebook, Twitter and  YouTube  enabled  the  authorities  to  identify
    Iranians who attended overseas opposition protests.  On  the  basis  of
    such material the Australian Government Refugee Review Tribunal, in its
    current country advice on Iran, concludes that it is  likely  that  the
    Iranian authorities would be aware  of  protests  against  the  Iranian
    regime by overseas Iranian communities.

30. There is also evidence of more direct surveillance of Iranian  protests
    abroad.  The UK Border Agency Country Of Origin  Information  Report  .
    Iran quotes from an article in The Times, 11 June 2009,  regarding  the
    demonstrations  against  the  disputed  presidential   election   which
    occurred outside the Iranian  Embassy  in  London  (and  in  which  the
    appellant  participated).   The  Times  quoted  a  Metropolitan  police
    officer, who had been patrolling  the  demonstrations  since  they  had
    begun three days previously as saying: "They are filming quite  a  lot.
    Any intelligent person would assume they are sending the  footage  back
    to Iran".  The expert refers us to a report in The Telegraph of 20 June
    2009, that an Iranian  Embassy  camera  was  recording  the  protestors
    outside.  The Immigration Judge accepted the truth of this.

31. On 19 March 2010 the Wall Street Journal  contained  an  article  about
    Mohamad Reeza Heydari, the senior Iranian diplomat in Norway,  who  had
    sought asylum there.  Mr Heydari told the newspaper that  he  had  been
    asked to inform on Iranian expatriates, including his son, because they
    had marched in anti-government protests.  As the protests escalated the
    acting head of the Embassy in Oslo asked Mr Heydari to identify Iranian
    expatriates protesting in front of it.  Intelligence agents filmed  the
    protestors, Mr Heydari told the Wall Street Journal, and asked  him  to
    identify faces in the crowd.  The newspaper reported  that  an  Iranian
    Embassy spokesman denied the  demonstrators  were  videotaped  or  that
    there was an attempt to identify them.  Describing the protest as small
    groups of activists the spokesman said there was no need to record them
    since it was already known who they were.

32. Before us particular emphasis was laid  on  what  the  Deputy  Head  of
    German Intelligence in Hamburg, Manfred Murck, said publicly in October
    2009.  That was that Iranian secret  service  personnel  circulated  in
    demonstrations abroad, that there was evidence that people were filmed,
    and that there was  an  attempt  to  identify  them.   The  expert  has
    translated from the Persian the full interview which was  given  by  Mr
    Murck and quotes from him as follows: "[B]asically I think  that  those
    who are active in Germany will have to answer for it if they return  to
    Iran or, at a minimum, will be placed under surveillance".

Leaving and re-entering the country

33. In considering this issue, we take into account the evidence  that  was
    before the Tribunal in SB and its evaluation at  paras  47-52  of  that
    determination.

(a) Formal procedures

34.  The  United  Kingdom  Border  Agency  COI  report  on  Iran   contains
    information derived from various sources on the procedure for  Iranians
    leaving the country.  First, an  Iranian  wishing  to  travel  needs  a
    passport.  At the time the passport is issued there is a security check
    in relation to any security issues such as outstanding warrants.   That
    is done by use of a specialised data base, which  is  the  same  system
    used at the airport checkpoint when conducting the  final  verification
    of travel.  At Iman Khomeini airport, which was newly opened  in  2007,
    checks  are  undertaken  by  the  immigration   police   and   by   the
    revolutionary guards.

35. Secondly, Iranians wishing to travel abroad must obtain an exit permit.
     After verification of the applicant's background  an  exit  permit  is
    stamped in the passport indicating that there is  permission  to  leave
    the country.  Exit permits are of three types: a green  exit  stamp  is
    valid as long as the passport is valid; a blue exit stamp is valid  for
    the period it mentions; and a  red  exit  stamp,  which  the  appellant
    received, is valid for one exit only.  There is a list with  the  names
    of persons who are not able to leave Iran.

36. For re-entry of an Iranian at Iman Khomeini International Airport there
    are separate counters for Iranians  and  foreigners.   The  immigration
    officer scans the passport and registers all the personal data from the
    passport of  the  arriving  passenger  in  the  computer  system.   The
    personal information is  already  registered  in  the  system  and  the
    immigration officer checks the validity of the passport.  If the person
    is entering Iran on illegal grounds, or has outstanding issues with the
    authorities, he will be held.  A Danish Immigration Service  Report  of
    April 2009, quoted in the COI report, records the official in charge of
    passport border control at the airport as  saying  that,  although  the
    computer system in use was a few years old, it had been able to  detect
    forged visas, passports and other  documents.   If  a  person  has  had
    travel documentation issued by an Iranian Embassy  or  mission  abroad,
    they will be questioned, since there is no  exit  stamp  in  their  new
    travel  document.   The  head  of  passport  control  told  the  Danish
    Immigration Service that if a person has left  Iran  legally,  so  that
    they had the requisite exit stamp, he or she will not face any problems
    with the airport authorities when re-entering Iran.

(b) Leaving and entering in practice

37. The background evidence also dealt with the arrangements at the airport
    at  Tehran  for  those  discovered  to  have  exited  illegally  to  be
    transferred to a special court nearby.  However  it  takes  matters  no
    further than they were in the evidence considered  (and  evaluated)  by
    the Tribunal in SB at paras 47-52.

38. What happens in practice with border control at Iman  Khomeini  Airport
    is not, on the  evidence,  entirely  certain.   In  February  2008  the
    Prosecutor General of Tehran, who is  in  charge  of  the  prosecutor's
    office at  the  airport,  asserted  that  Iranians  who  had  committed
    offences, or whose actions were suspicious, would be subject to  "rapid
    action".  As the expert explained, since Iranian dissidents abroad have
    generally avoided travel to Iran in recent years, it is not possible to
    give an accurate account of  what  has  happened  to  those  returning.
    There were figures in evidence as to the number of  removals  from  the
    United Kingdom of Iranian nationals, both compulsory and voluntary, and
    in both the asylum and non-asylum categories but these were disputed by
    the expert.  For our purposes there is no need to  reach  any  definite
    findings on the figures.

39. Prior to 2009  there  are  several  reports  where  Iranians  returning
    through Tehran airport were subject to mistreatment.  Thus  the  expert
    refers to the case of Haleh Sahba, who was removed from Canada in  late
    2004 after her asylum claim failed.  She had left  Iran  illegally  and
    was arrested  on  arrival  at  the  airport,  detained  for  26  hours,
    interrogated,  apparently  with  the  use   of   some   violence,   and
    subsequently charged.  The  expert  also  quotes  from  the  Australian
    Financial Review in late 2003, which described an Iranian man  who  had
    been forcibly removed from Australia  to  Iran.   He  was  arrested  on
    arrival at the Tehran Airport by intelligence officers, taken  to  Evin
    Prison where he was beaten, tortured and interrogated,  but  was  later
    released on bail.  The report of the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of
    Canada, referred to earlier, gives  instances  in  2005  where  Iranian
    deportees from Canada were  subject  to  mistreatment  when  they  were
    returned to Iran, including one case  where  the  returnee  died  after
    receiving a thousand lashes in prison.  That was based on  a  newspaper
    report in the Globe and Mail.

40. After the June 2009 protests, there is evidence of some  persons  being
    detained on arrival at Iman Khomeini International Airport for activity
    abroad.  A report in the Wall Street Journal on  4  December  2009  was
    based on interviews with some three dozen persons who had travelled  to
    Iran after June 2009.  It  gave  the  example  of  two  travellers  who
    reported that they were arrested and questioned  about  their  Facebook
    accounts.  One was an Iranian engineer in  his  thirties  who  attended
    protests in the country where he was living, and who  described  having
    his mobile phone and laptop confiscated.  He told the newspaper that he
    had been called in for questioning several times, after  being  allowed
    to leave the airport, and had been blindfolded, kicked and  abused  and
    asked to hand over his email  and  Facebook  passwords.   Interrogators
    showed him images of himself participating in protests in Europe and he
    was pressed to identify other  people  in  the  images.   He  had  only
    attended a few demonstrations and did not even live in  Iran.   He  was
    given the choice of facing trial in Iran or  promising  to  act  as  an
    informant in Europe.  He agreed to the latter, left Iran after a month,
    but did not respond to follow up emails and telephone calls.

41. Other sources suggest that there are photographs kept at the airport of
    those protesting abroad.  There was a report published in February 2010
    by International Campaign for Human Rights in Iran, an  NGO  comprising
    persons mostly of Iranian origin in different parts of the  world.   It
    recounts that when leaving Tehran airport some  Iranian  citizens  have
    been randomly taken to rooms and,  after  being  questioned  about  the
    country and city to which they were travelling,  had  had  their  faces
    checked  against  available  photographs  in  an  attempt  to  identify
    Iranians who had been attending such gatherings.  The report says:

         "Several  people  who  have  recently  returned  from   Iran   told
         International Campaign for  Human  Rights  in  Iran  that  at  Iman
         Khomeni Airport they spent a few hours with anxiety as their  faces
         were compared to available photographs.  One of  these  individuals
         who has recently returned from Iran told International Campaign for
         Human Rights in Iran '... after I checked in my luggage an  officer
         asked me to follow him to the side entrance door.  In  the  room  I
         noticed people sitting behind monitors showing hundreds of faces on
         them.  They were not passport photographs but photographs of people
         in different gatherings.  In one photograph a  girl  had  raised  a
         fist and in another a young man was  yelling'.   These  individuals
         said at departure time officers  asked  the  names  of  destination
         states and cities and when they took people to the room where  they
         checked  the  photographs  they  searched  the  cities  where   the
         individual was heading to see whether he or she had participated in
         rallies".

42. Then there is a report in the newspaper, The  Australian,  of  8  April
    2010,  about  Iranian  students  living  in  Australia  who  had   been
    interrogated and threatened with severe punishment,  during  visits  to
    Iran, because of their support for the Iranian  pro-democracy  movement
    in Australia.  One of the cases  cited  by  the  newspaper  was  of  an
    Iranian born student, who now had Australian citizenship.  She had been
    summoned for interrogation by the state security bureau in Tehran after
    returning there to  visit  her  sick  mother.   She  was  told  by  the
    interrogator that the government had photographs of her and  colleagues
    taking part in a pro-democracy protest  in  Brisbane.   The  second,  a
    troubling, case was of an Iranian born man who lived in Queensland  and
    who was detained at the airport after arrival  and  interrogated  about
    his political activities in Australia.  He  was  shown  photographs  of
    himself at rallies in Brisbane and was given a list of names of Iranian
    pro-democracy activists in Queensland and asked to identify them.    He
    was threatened with the death penalty.

43. Another example of someone arrested after entry through the airport  is
    of a PhD student at Durham University, Eshan Abdoh Tabrizi.  The expert
    describes how Tabrizi travelled to Iran for a family visit  during  the
    Christmas vacation of 2009.  His passport was confiscated  on  arrival.
    Two weeks later he was arrested after he was summonsed for an interview
    with the Bureau of Foreign Citizens concerning his passport.  He awaits
    trial on political charges although there is no information that he was
    politically active.  The expert notes that some believe that  his  fate
    could be linked to his father's position as the  manager  of  the  pro-
    Moussavi reformist economic affairs newspaper, Sarmaiye.

44. It is difficult to understand what triggers arrest at  the  airport  or
    arrest later.  The Christian  Science  Monitor,  on  8  February  2010,
    reported that while several  prominent  journalists  and  human  rights
    activists had been detained at the airport, a surprisingly large number
    believed to be on watchlists have slipped through.

         "[W]hile several prominent journalists and human  rights  activists
         had been detained at  the  airport,  a  surprisingly  large  number
         believed to be on the Government watch list have  slipped  through,
         thanks to bureaucratic delays and also because Tehran's new airport
         may not be integrated into the country's security network".

45. Passengers on arrival are checked against two watch  lists,  issued  by
    the MOIS and Revolutionary Guards.  They are  either  arrested  on  the
    spot, or are allowed to pass through, subject to surveillance, or  have
    their passports confiscated and must attend interrogation  sessions  at
    the MOIS offices.  The report says that those on the lists are normally
    allowed to pass through,  only  to  have  their  movements  inside  the
    country monitored.  They may be later arrested at the airport when they
    are leaving Iran.

46. The report includes the story of a dissident journalist who escaped  to
    Turkey through the airport without problem.  It also  quotes  a  former
    regime insider who claimed that  one  reason  several  dissidents  have
    slipped through the MOIS checklist at the  airport  is  because  it  is
    manually updated every twelve hours, allowing fugitives a  slim  window
    of opportunity.  The author of the Christian  Science  Monitor  article
    records that when he had been held in Tehran's Evin  Prison  for  three
    weeks in the summer of 2009,  he  was  pressured  to  name  anti-regime
    demonstrators and witnessed intelligence officials using marker pens to
    circle recurring faces in freshly printed images, shot by  intelligence
    ministry subsidised photographers at demonstrations.

47. In the article Nicola Pedde, the director of the Rome  based  Institute
    for Global Studies, a frequent visitor to Iran,  is  quoted  as  saying
    that the new  Tehran  Airport  is  a  middle  level  security  standard
    international airport like a Turkish or Egyptian one.  Although cameras
    are fitted, it was not known whether they  were  equipped  with  facial
    recognition technology or the  equipment  to  machine  read  passports.
    Officers tap names and passport codes  manually  into  computers.   The
    authorities, however, may be alerted to individuals  of  interest  when
    their tracked mobile phones enter the airport  mobile  phone   coverage
    area.  Moreover, there were spotters at the airport who keep watch  for
    up to two hundred suspects whose pictures they have memorised.

48. A month earlier, on 4 January 2010, the Christian Science  Monitor  had
    another report suggesting that facial recognition  technology  was  not
    available at the Tehran airport.  That report was to  the  effect  that
    following demonstrations in December 2009 the Iranian  law  enforcement
    authorities had published circled photographs of around 165 anti-regime
    protestors on the pro-Ahmadinejad Raja News website, asking readers  to
    assist them in identifying  individuals.   The  report  continued  that
    shoddy file keeping and other security practices  at  the  intelligence
    ministry were corroborated by a Dubai based activist who  was  detained
    during the summer in one of the post election demonstrations, but whose
    worries dissipated after he realised  that,  even  assuming  his  prior
    detention  had  been  registered,  poor  information  sharing   between
    different  intelligent  branches  shielded  him  from  discovery.    In
    December 2009 he successfully tested this theory when  he  returned  to
    Iran  to  plan  demonstrations  and  entered  and  exited  the  country
    unhindered.

LEGAL PRINCIPLES

49. In legal terms it was common ground between the parties that the  issue
    for us is the  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  of  the  appellant's
    mistreatment as a result of his sur place activity.  One gloss on  that
    is that if questioned on return to Iran  the  appellant  could  not  be
    expected to lie about that activity:  IK  (Turkey)  CG  [2004]  UK  IAT
    00312; see now also RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA Civ 1285.   It  is  clear
    from YB (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2008]
    EWCA Civ 360 that opportunistic sur place activity is not an  automatic
    bar to a claim.  We were also referred to the dictum of Sedley  LJ,  in
    giving judgment in that case:

         "[18] Where, as here, the tribunal  has  objective  evidence  which
         "paints a bleak picture of the suppression of political  opponents"
         by a named  government,  it  requires  little  or  no  evidence  or
         speculation to arrive at a strong possibility - and perhaps more  -
         that its foreign  legations  not  only  film  or  photograph  their
         nationals who demonstrate in public against  the  regime  but  have
         informers among expatriate oppositionist organisations who can name
         the people who are filmed or photographed. Similarly  it  does  not
         require affirmative evidence to establish a  probability  that  the
         intelligence services of  such  states  monitor  the  internet  for
         information about oppositionist groups. The real question  in  most
         cases will be what follows for the  individual  claimant.  If,  for
         example, any information reaching the embassy is likely to be  that
         the claimant identified in a photograph is a hanger-on with no real
         commitment to the oppositionist cause, that will go directly to the
         issue flagged up by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive."

50. We were taken to two decisions of the Refugee Status Appeals  Authority
    of New Zealand both of which considered whether there was a real chance
    of the Iranian appellants being persecuted on return to Iran because of
    sur place activity in New Zealand.  In the first the appellant  arrived
    in New Zealand in 2004 and almost immediately claimed  refugee  status.
    Refugee appeal number 76454, 8 March  2010,  resulted  from  his  third
    refugee claim.  It was on the basis that he had been a  person  leading
    protests in New Zealand at which radical slogans had been chanted about
    the widely disputed presidential election in 2009.  He had attended the
    protests in the middle of June 2009, wore a green scarf, held a placard
    and chanted slogans such as "down with the dictator" and "death to  the
    dictator", the dictator being a reference to  Ayatollah  Khamenei,  the
    Supreme Leader of Iran.  In later demonstrations the  appellant  became
    responsible for keeping  the  slogans  chanted  during  those  held  in
    Auckland.  The first demonstration resulted in a four  minute  item  on
    New Zealand's TV 1 News, including footage, briefly, of the appellant's
    image.  On 17 June the New Zealand Herald published a story  about  the
    protest and a photograph showed the appellant holding a placard.  Later
    that month, or early in July, he learnt from his brother that his image
    had appeared on satellite television in  Iran  on  Voice  of  America's
    Persian News Network.  He also became aware that  he  had  appeared  in
    footage uploaded to YouTube  at  a  point  where  he  was  leading  the
    demonstrations.

51. The Authority recorded that it was not aware of any report  by  an  NGO
    dealing with what happened to persons moved or deported  to  Iran  whom
    the Iranian authorities knew or  suspected  of  participating  in  post
    election protests while abroad: para [57].  It noted that  the  country
    information  established  that  Iranian   security   and   intelligence
    services, including those working at the  airports,  were  increasingly
    sensitised to the role that new media such  as  YouTube,  Facebook  and
    Twitter could play as an intelligence gathering tool or as a  mechanism
    to stifle dissent: para [59].  It also noted that in the light  of  the
    increasing sensitivity by the regime to the role of the  new  media  in
    assisting with intelligence gathering there was an increased likelihood
    that the TV 1 broadcast and the YouTube videos might have  been  viewed
    by  Iranian  Embassy  staff  in  New  Zealand  and  some   participants
    identified.  The broadcast by Voice of America into Iran increased  the
    chance that some participants in the New Zealand  demonstrations  might
    have been identified by the Iranian authorities.

52. As to the appellant, he was clearly identifiable in both the TV 1 and a
    Voice for America broadcasts and on YouTube.  He could be seen in these
    in a prominent position.  The slogans being chanted were radical.   The
    Authority continued as follows:

         "In terms of assessing the  risk  to  the  appellant  against  this
         evidential void, the Authority  notes  the  documented  history  of
         serious human rights abuses perpetrated against detainees  in  Iran
         generally and, more specifically,  against  some  persons  detained
         after engaging in peaceful public protest over the 2009  elections.
          It is in these circumstances appropriate  for  the  Authority  to
         apply a benefit of the doubt.  Noting that  the  appellant  has  on
         occasions played a more 'leadership' role and the radical  tone  of
         the appellant's activity on these occasions has  been  captured  in
         YouTube video postings, the Authority finds, by  a  narrow  margin,
         that there is a real chance  the  appellant  will  be  detained  on
         arrival and interrogated about that activity.  In this circumstance
         the Authority accepts that there is a real chance that he  will  be
         subjected to serious harm amounting to his being persecuted because
         of the particular nature of his involvement in leading the chanting
         of radical slogan on these occasions.  The first principal issue is
         answered in the affirmative."

    However the Authority  concluded  that  the  case  turned  on  its  own
    specific facts and that the situation inside Iran was dynamic  so  that
    the risk presently existing might dissipate with time.

53. The second Refugee Status Appeals Authority decision is Refugee  appeal
    number 76345, 30 June  2010.   There  the  appellant  claimed  to  have
    absconded while on bail in Iran.  That had been granted in  respect  of
    what he said were false charges brought against him by a  high  ranking
    police officer.  The police officer had a vendetta against him  because
    he accused the colonel's son of theft.  He attended  demonstrations  in
    Auckland in response to the 2009 presidential elections  in  Iran.   He
    had no part in organising the events but held placards  and  joined  in
    chanting slogans.  Towards the end  of  June  2009  the  appellant  had
    telephoned his family and had told his mother that he had  attended  at
    least one protest.  Two or three  days  later  she  contacted  him  and
    reported that two members of the Iranian authorities  had  visited  her
    home asking where he was, whether she knew any of his friends and  what
    they had talked about.  In late 2009 he learned that video  footage  of
    some of the protests had been posted onto internet  sites  on  YouTube,
    two of which contained footage in which he could be  seen  for  several
    seconds in one of the items, fleetingly in the other.

54. The Authority rejected the appellant's  account,  apart  from  the  sur
    place activities.   That  included  the  suggestion  that  the  Iranian
    authorities had overheard the telephone call with his  mother.   As  to
    the  possible  threat  of  harm  to  the  appellant  because   of   his
    participation in the protests, the Authority  quoted  reports  such  as
    that in the Wall Street Journal, 4 December 2009.   It  concluded  that
    the evidence did not  establish  that  all  individuals  identified  as
    having participated in the protests  have  been  routinely  mistreated.
    While some were physically mistreated, these appeared  to  be  a  small
    minority and there was no information as to the particular profiles  of
    the individuals concerned.  The footage of  the  New  Zealand  protests
    recorded that the appellant was one among many individuals.  He  played
    no part in leading the organisation of the protests.  He had no history
    of posting material critical of the Iranian government on the internet,
    whether in a blog, on Facebook or Twitter.  Nor did he fall within  any
    of the categories such as  that  of  student  activist.   Even  if  the
    appellant was to be detained briefly  and  questioned  on  return,  the
    country information did not establish that ordinary protesters such  as
    the appellant were at risk of serious harm.

THE PARTIES' SUBMISSIONS

55. As advanced by Mr Basharat Ali the appellant's case was  built  on  the
    evidence.  It began with the Iranian regime's  uniformly  brutal  human
    rights record and its ill-treatment of political and other  dissidents.
    The general background evidence demonstrated very serious human  rights
    abuses being committed by the Iranian regime against those it viewed as
    being opposed to  it,  no  matter  where  they  are  on  the  political
    spectrum, and  whether  or  not  they  were  on  the  periphery.    The
    intelligence  apparatus  was  multi-layered,   sophisticated   in   its
    intelligence gathering and ruthless  in  its  suppression  of  dissent.
    Those regarded as not brutal enough had been dispensed  with,  so  that
    only hardline officials remained.   The gathering  of  intelligence  in
    Europe  was  widely   reported.    The   photographing,   filming   and
    identification of dissidents and those opposed to  the  Iranian  regime
    were widespread.

56. As to the  appellant,  Mr  Basharat  Ali  submitted,  he  had  attended
    demonstrations in London which have been filmed by the Iranian Embassy.
     Footage of his participation at one demonstration has been loaded onto
    YouTube.  His photograph has been published in an  opposition  magazine
    with highly objectionable content.  There was a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the  appellant  has  been  identified  by  the  Iranian
    authorities, given the meticulous way they collect  data  and  seek  to
    match names to faces.  The expert had opined that MOIS officials at the
    airport would have easy access to reports  and  material  submitted  to
    Tehran by their agents at Embassies abroad such as London,  or  to  the
    data collected by its internet surveillance units based in Iran,  where
    it is almost certainly electronically stored and retrievable.

57. This appellant would be returning from the United  Kingdom,  which  has
    been singled out for fomenting unrest in Iran after the 2009 elections.
      Those  returned  from  here  were  at  a  particular  risk  of  being
    mistreated.  In the case of the appellant he is likely to be  a  forced
    return from the United Kingdom and is without a valid visa.  That would
    draw attention to him and trigger a search of  any  footage  collected.
    The possibility that he may be known  to  someone  in  the  Embassy  or
    Embassy circles and already had  been  named  could  not  be  excluded.
    Although he left the country legally and his passport is  still  valid,
    his student visa expired in October 2009, around a year  ago.   Coupled
    with a forced return, which would surely not escape the notice  of  the
    airport authorities in  Iran,  the  lapsed  visa  was  likely  to  draw
    attention to him and uncover that he has claimed asylum in  the  United
    Kingdom.  That would in turn lead to an investigation.  Given  his  age
    group and his student visa, there was a considerable risk that  Iranian
    security would consult the archived films and photographs to  determine
    whether he had participated in protests in the United Kingdom.

58. Thus, the appellant's profile could trigger an  investigation  and  put
    him at risk of human rights violations, including torture.  As  to  the
    appellant's participation on the protests being opportunistic, there is
    the statement by the Minister of Justice, Morteza Bakhtiari, on 5 April
    2010, that individuals who did not have a political profile in Iran and
    who had introduced themselves as a political  activist  solely  to  get
    residence  abroad  would  be  detained  on  return  at  Iman   Khomeini
    International airport  and  thereafter  be  subjected  to  prosecution.
    Alternatively, there was a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  be
    persecuted after entry into Iran, even  if  he  were  allowed  to  pass
    through the airport without mistreatment.  There is no  sufficiency  of
    protection available to this appellant and internal flight  is  clearly
    not reasonable on the facts of the case.

59.  In submissions for the Secretary of State, Mr Tarlow  was  content  to
    rest his submissions on the evidence of  the  appellant's  own  expert.
    That acknowledged that of the many arrested after the demonstrations in
    Iran, most were quickly released.   There  were  a  limited  number  of
    reports of cases of mistreatment  of  persons  returning  to  Iran  via
    Tehran Airport, but there was no evidence that it was systematic.   The
    cases of mistreatment had to be placed  in  the  context  of  the  many
    persons passing through that airport and also the  numbers  of  persons
    being forcibly returned by the United Kingdom to Iran.  Tehran had been
    described as a middle security airport, and there was no evidence  that
    facial recognition technology was available, not surprising  given  the
    sanction on the sale of such technology to Iran.

60.  In  the  Secretary  of  State's  submission  the  appellant  had   not
    demonstrated that the Iranian authorities could filter the vast  amount
    of material, including their own recordings of demonstrations,  or  the
    YouTube upload, momentarily featuring the appellant at the front of the
    demonstrations.  That was a distinguishing feature from the  first  New
    Zealand case, no 76454,  when  the  appellant  there  had  appeared  on
    national television and in a photograph in a national  newspaper.   The
    Iranians may well have spotters, both at the demonstrations and  Tehran
    airport, but the difficulties in identifying specific persons, such  as
    the appellant were obvious.  There was evidence of dissidents, who  had
    escaped mistreatment.  The appellant had been found to be opportunistic
    in demonstrating and he did not fit any  of  the  known  categories  of
    those identified for arrest such as student activities.

61. In response to a question from the Tribunal  Mr  Tarlow  wrote  to  SIJ
    McGeachy on 29 October giving the information that in the year  between
    March 2009 and March 2010 there were 966 applications for student  (now
    tier 4) visas in Tehran.   641  were  issued  and  311  refused.   (the
    mismatch of the figures relates to those which  were  decided   in  the
    period but which were received before March 2009).

62. Mr Tarlow also wrote that the maintenance of passenger  information  as
    not within the domain of  UKBA.  An  airline   which  carries  returned
    failed asylum seekers had  clarified the position as follows:

         "1.      The flight  manifest  and  other  paper  records  are  not
             provided  to  the  authorities  at  the  destination   airport
             (Tehran).

         2.       It is the current  airline practice  for airline staff (or
             their agents) at all their destination  airports to query  the
             passenger manifest  in  order  to  identify  the  presence  of
             arriving  escorted and unescorted  removals for the purpose of
             fulfilling  any  appropriate   handling    arrangements   upon
             arrival, or where it is  locally   required,  to  obtain  pre-
             clearance from local immigration  authorities  for  passengers
             on the flight.

         3.       In case of a local requirement, the data given  (verbally)
             to the local immigration authorities comprises only the  names
             of the escorted or unescorted removal(s). (We are advised that
             the  date  of  birth  is  not  information  that  is  normally
             contained within the reservation record)."

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

63. Our task is to assess the risk to an Iranian who has demonstrated  here
    being subjected to persecution if returned to Iran, because of his  sur
    place activity here in the United Kingdom.  The starting point is  that
    he is to be returned to a country  where  on  all  accounts  the  human
    rights situation gives rise to grave concern.  In the last year,  since
    the  disputed  election  of  June  2009,  repression  has  intensified.
    Protestors have been detained and in some cases, tortured.   There  has
    been a crackdown on dissent.  Detainees have been systematically denied
    access to outside contact and legal assistance.  There have  been  show
    trials, in some cases leading to  severe  sentences.   That  repression
    inside Iran  has  been  coupled  with  express  threats  made  by  high
    officials to dissident  Iranians  abroad.   Institutional  measures  to
    prosecute such Iranians have been taken.

64. Against that backdrop of an  announced  intention  to  proceed  against
    dissident Iranians abroad, we need to make a judgment about the risk on
    return for an Iranian, having regard to his sur place  activities.   In
    this type of case the  factors  that  bear  on  that  judgment  can  be
    conveniently placed under four main heads: (i) the type  of  sur  place
    activity involved; (ii) the risk that a person will  be  identified  as
    engaging in it; (iii) the factors triggering inquiry on return  of  the
    person and; (iv) in the absence of a universal check  on  all  entering
    the country, the factors that  would  lead  to  identification  at  the
    airport on return or after entry.  For each factor there is a  spectrum
    of risk.  The factors are not exhaustive and may overlap.

    (i) Nature of sur place activity

      . Theme of demonstrations - what  do  the  demonstrators  want  (e.g.
        reform of the regime through to its violent  overthrow);  how  will
        they be characterised by the regime?

      . Role in demonstrations and political profile - can  the  person  be
        described as a  leader;  mobiliser  (e.g.  addressing  the  crowd),
        organiser (e.g. leading the chanting); or simply a  member  of  the
        crowd; if the latter is he active or passive (e.g. does he carry  a
        banner); what is his motive, and is this relevant to the profile he
        will have in the eyes of the regime>

      . Extent of participation -  has  the  person  attended  one  or  two
        demonstrations or is he a regular participant?

      . Publicity attracted - has a demonstration attracted media  coverage
        in the United Kingdom or the home country; nature of that publicity
        (quality of images; outlets where stories appear etc)?

    (ii) Identification risk

      . Surveillance  of  demonstrators  -  assuming  the  regime  aims  to
        identify demonstrators against it  how  does  it  do  so,  through,
        filming them, having agents who  mingle  in  the  crowd,  reviewing
        images/recordings of demonstrations etc?

      . Regime's capacity to identify individuals - does  the  regime  have
        advanced technology (e.g. for facial recognition); does it allocate
        human resources to fit names to faces in the crowd?

    (iii) Factors triggering inquiry/action on return

      . Profile - is the person known as a committed  opponent  or  someone
        with a  significant  political  profile;  does  he  fall  within  a
        category which the regime regards as especially objectionable?

      . Immigration  history  -  how  did  the  person  leave  the  country
        (illegally; type of visa); where has the person been  when  abroad;
        is the timing and method of return more likely to lead  to  inquiry
        and/or being detained for more than a short period and  ill-treated
        (overstayer; forced return)?

    (iv) Consequences of identification

      . Is there differentiation between  demonstrators  depending  on  the
        level of their political profile adverse to the regime?

    (v) Identification risk on return

      . Matching identification to person - if a person  is  identified  is
        that information systematically stored and used; are  border  posts
        geared to the task?

65. As regards the relevance of these  factors  to  the  instant  case,  of
    especial relevance is identification risk.  We are persuaded  that  the
    Iranian  authorities  attempt  to  identify  persons  participating  in
    demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in London.  The practice  of
    filming demonstrations supports that.  The evidence suggests that there
    may well have been persons in the  crowd  to  assist  in  the  process.
    There is insufficient evidence to establish that the regime has  facial
    recognition technology in use in the UK, but it seems  clear  that  the
    Iranian  security  apparatus  attempts  to  match  names  to  faces  of
    demonstrators  from  photographs.  We  believe  that  the   information
    gathered here is available in Iran.  While  it  may  well  be  that  an
    appellant's  participation  in  demonstrations  is  opportunistic,  the
    evidence suggests that this is not likely to be a  major  influence  on
    the perception of the regime.  Although, expressing dissent itself will
    be sufficient to result in a person having in the eyes of the regime  a
    significant political profile, we consider that the nature of the level
    of the sur place activity will clearly heighten  the  determination  of
    the Iranian authorities to identify the demonstrator while  in  Britain
    and to identify him on return. That, combined with  the  factors  which
    might  trigger  enquiry  would  lead  to  an  increased  likelihood  of
    questioning and of ill treatment on return.

66. As regards identification of risk back in Iran, it  would  appear  that
    the ability of the Iranian regime to identify all  returnees  who  have
    attended demonstrations, particularly given the number of those who do,
    on return, remains limited by the lack of facial recognition technology
    and the  haphazard nature of the checks at  the  airport.   The  expert
    frankly admitted that it was extremely difficult to estimate  the  risk
    to identified participants in protests against the Iranian  government.
    Mr Basharat  Ali's  careful  submission  was  not  that  all  of  those
    returning, or returned from the United Kingdom,  would  be  subject  to
    mistreatment.  We  conclude   therefore   that   for   the   infrequent
    demonstrator who plays no particular role in demonstrations  and  whose
    participation is not highlighted in the media there is not a real  risk
    of identification and therefore not a  real  risk  of  consequent  ill-
    treatment, on return.

67. In the country guidance determination in SB the Tribunal  identified  a
    number of risk factors for those returning to Iran. These we  have  set
    out  in  paragraph  9  above.  While  we  have  had  considerably  more
    information about some aspects of the procedures at the  Iman  Khomeini
    airport  on  return  we  consider  that   the   conclusions   in   that
    determination remain correct:  we have seen no evidence to lead to  the
    conclusion that merely having exited Iran illegally an appellant  might
    be subjected to  persecution.   While  returning  from  Britain  is  at
    present an increased risk factor, the mere fact that  an  appellant  is
    returning from Britain does not lead to a risk of persecution.

DETERMINATION OF THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL


68. In the case of this appellant we note Immigration Judge Chana  did  not
    accept the appellant's claims of  what  had  happened  to  him  and  to
    members of his family in Iran.  Her  conclusions  were  upheld  by  SIJ
    Storey.  Moreover,  the  appellant  left  Iran  on  a  properly  issued
    passport with an exit visa. He would  be  able  to  return  using  that
    passport although, if escorted on removal, the airline would be  likely
    to inform the grounds staff.

69. However, we consider that there are a number  of  factors  which  would
    mean that the resources available to the Iranian regime would  be  used
    to identify this appellant.  He  participated  in  five  demonstrations
    outside the Iran Embassy in London, over a short period, 17 June  to  9
    July 2009.  The appellant's association in the demonstration  was  with
    the secular/nationalist group,  UFIN,  and  his  participation  in  the
    demonstrations was recorded in the YouTube film and the  photograph  in
    UFIN's publication, Bamdad e Iran.  The demonstrators as a  whole  were
    chanting incendiary slogans.  While the appellant was not a  leader  or
    organiser, he was, for at least part of the time, not on the  periphery
    either  and  the  short  video  on  Facebook  does  show  him  shouting
    particularly inflammatory slogans.   We place weight on the  fact  that
    his face is clearly recognisable in the photograph  in  Bamdad  e  Iran
    and, given the  pictures on the cover  of  that  magazine  which  would
    certainly be offensive to the  Iranian regime, we consider that he is a
    demonstrator whom the  Iranian authorities would particularly  wish  to
    identify and that there is a real risk that  they would be able  to  do
    so;  because of the nature of his association with Bamdad e Iran  there
    is also a real risk that he would then face ill-treatment  which  would
    amount  to persecution because of his political  beliefs.  Even  if  he
    were not picked up at the airport we consider that he would still be at
    risk on return, as the nature of the Iranian regime  is  that  if  they
    wish to detain a particular individual they have the means to do so.

70. We therefore conclude that, on the low standard of proof,  there  is  a
    real risk that this appellant would face persecution for  a  Convention
    reason on return to Iran and that the decision of the Immigration judge
    should not stand. We remake the decision allowing this appeal on asylum
    grounds and for the same reason find that his appeal succeeds on  human
    rights grounds (Article 3).  As the appeal is allowed on asylum  ground
    the appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

DECISION

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

The appellant is not entitled to Humanitarian Protection.





Signed

The Honourable Mr. Justice Cranston








   Annex 1




   DECISION AS TO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW




   i. The appellant is a national of Iran. In a determination notified on 16
      December 2009  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)  Chana  dismissed  his  appeal
      against a decision by the respondent  made  on  27  November  2009  to
      remove him from the United Kingdom by way of directions having refused
      to grant him asylum.  His  appeal  was  heard  within  the  fast-track
      procedure.


  ii. The grounds for reconsideration contended that the IJ erred in failing
      to take the case out of the fast track pursuant  to  para  30  of  the
      Asylum and Imagination (Fast Track Procedure)  Rules  2005  so  as  to
      enable him to obtain  expert  evidence  relating  to  risk  on  return
      arising from sur place activities; in failing to correctly  follow  YB
      (Eritrea) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  360;   in  making  perverse  findings  in
      relation to risk on return; in making mistakes as to  certain  aspects
      of the appellant's evidence; and in failing to direct  herself  as  to
      the  correct  approach  when  considering  corroborative   documentary
      evidence,  in  particular  the  court  document  for  the  appellant's
      sister's sentence in Iran and the summons.


 iii. I shall deal with the last two grounds first as they are the only ones
      that seeks to challenge the  IJ's  findings  of  fact  concerning  the
      appellant's  personal  and  family  history  and  circumstances.   The
      mistakes of fact identified as having been made at paras  17  and  46,
      even accepting they are indeed mistakes, were  not  such  as  had  any
      material effect on the IJ's assessment of the appellant's account. The
      IJ gave a surfeit of other  reasons  for  rejecting  credibility.   In
      addition, the IJ elsewhere clearly proceeded on the basis  that  there
      was both a camera used by the Iranian  Embassy  as  well  as  pictures
      taken by other persons not connected  with  the  Embassy  which  found
      their way on to U-Tube and into the printed media. Her  assessment  of
      risk arising from these had regard to each of these.


  iv. I see no  merit  in  the  challenge  to  the  IJ's  treatment  of  the
      appellant's documents. In paras 9 and 49 the IJ correctly  noted  that
      she was obliged to consider the appellant's claim in the light of  the
      evidence as a whole. Although the IJ did not specifically refer to the
      case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439, her approach to the  various
      documents submitted by the appellant was entirely consistent with  the
      guidance in that case. The  IJ  gave  sound  reasons  for  placing  no
      reliance on the document relating to his sister's  detention  in  Iran
      and the court summons addressed to the  appellant's  father  dated  19
      August 2009. The grounds fail to identify any error in those  reasons.
      The IJ was quite entitled to find these documents unsatisfactory.


   v. As regards the IJ's assessment of the appellant's personal and  family
      history and circumstances, I consider that it  was  well-reasoned  and
      free of legal error. These grounds fail to mount any real challenge to
      the IJ's findings of fact relating to these matters.


  vi. However, it remains to consider whether the IJ erred in assessing risk
      on  return.  This  is  the  focus  of  the   remaining   grounds   for
      reconsideration, which I will not  deal  with  individually.  Although
      rejecting most of the appellant's account (and that  of  his  witness)
      the IJ did accept that: (i)  he had attended  five  demonstrations  in
      quick succession outside the Iranian Embassy in London from 17 June to
      9 July 2009; (ii) that the Iranian  Embassy  had  a  camera  recording
      these and other demonstrations held  in  the  aftermath  of  the  mass
      demonstrations  which  took  place  in  Iran  following  the  June  12
      Presidential elections; that the appellant appeared in a U-Tube  video
      recording of one of these demonstrations outside the  London  Embassy;
      and that a Farsi magazine called "Devil" had carried a  photograph  of
      the appellant protesting outside the London Embassy.


 vii. The IJ made  two  findings  as  to  this  evidence:  first,  that  the
      appellant  had  "deliberately  and  opportunistically   attempted   to
      establish  a  claim  as  a  refugee  sur  place  by  participating  in
      demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy" (para 38); second that  it
      was necessary nonetheless to consider whether his sur place activities
      would expose him to a real risk of suffering relevant harm  on  return
      as a result of his participating in demonstrations outside the Iranian
      Embassy (paras 38-48). In my judgment her finding on the latter  issue
      of risk on return was vitiated by legal error. Essentially  she  based
      her assessment on speculation about whether  the  Iranian  authorities
      would have the resources to identify  individuals  involved  in  these
      demonstrations. She concluded they would not. However,  as  Sedley  LJ
      stated in YB at para 17, when dealing with a similar factual scenario,
      it was necessary to consider:


           "whether the AIT has materially erred in law by
                 a) relying on the absence of objective evidence  that  the
                    Eritrean authorities  had  the  ability  or  desire  to
                    monitor the activities of  expatriates  throughout  the
                    UK, or
                 b) concluding that, even  if  photographs  were  taken  of
                    demonstrators,  it  was  unlikely  that  the   Eritrean
                    authorities would be able  to  identify  the  appellant
                    and/or place his name on a list of people  of  interest
                    to the authorities."


viii. At para 18 Sedley LJ continued:
           "18. As has been seen (7 above), the tribunal, while  accepting
           that the appellant's political  activity  in  this  country  was
           genuine, were not prepared to accept in the absence of  positive
           evidence that the Eritrean authorities had "the  means  and  the
           inclination" to  monitor  such  activities  as  a  demonstration
           outside their embassy, or that they would be  able  to  identify
           the appellant from  photographs  of  the  demonstration.  In  my
           judgment,  and  without  disrespect  to  what  is  a  specialist
           tribunal, this is a finding  which  risks  losing  contact  with
           reality. Where, as here, the  tribunal  has  objective  evidence
           which "paints a bleak picture of the  suppression  of  political
           opponents" by a named  government,  it  requires  little  or  no
           evidence or speculation to arrive at a strong possibility -  and
           perhaps more - that its  foreign  legations  not  only  film  or
           photograph their nationals who demonstrate in public against the
           regime  but  have  informers  among   expatriate   oppositionist
           organisations  who  can  name  the  people  who  are  filmed  or
           photographed. Similarly it does not require affirmative evidence
           to establish a probability that  the  intelligence  services  of
           such  states  monitor  the  internet   for   information   about
           oppositionist groups. The real question in most  cases  will  be
           what follows for the individual claimant. If, for  example,  any
           information reaching the  embassy  is  likely  to  be  that  the
           claimant identified in a photograph is a hanger-on with no  real
           commitment to the oppositionist cause, that will go directly  to
           the issue flagged up by art 4(3)(d) of the Directive."


  ix. Here too I consider that in the light of the background evidence it is
      at least right to say that there is  a  strong  possibility  that  the
      Iranian authorities have been taking steps  to  identify  from  camera
      evidence and other sources the identities of persons participating  in
      demonstrations outside their Embassy in the latter part  of  2009  and
      that the real question in most cases will  be  what  follows  for  the
      individual claimant. The IJ's speculation to the contrary amounted  to
      a departure from the approach set out in  YB  (Eritrea)  and  was  not
      sustainable in fact.



   x. This leads me to rule on whether or not the case should remain in  the
      fast track. I do not consider it would be just to keep it in the fast-
      track procedure. As regards the issue of  whether  a  person  who  has
      attended a number of demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in the
      second half of 2009 would meet with adverse treatment by  the  Iranian
      authorities on return,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  more  targeted
      evidence and also for up-to-date evidence. I agree with Mr Aslam  that
      this is a subject on which the Tribunal would be greatly  assisted  by
      evidence from  an  expert  with  accepted  credentials  in  giving  an
      informed opinion on recent political events in  Iran  and  the  likely
      behaviour of the Iranian authorities  towards  their  national  abroad
      known to have participated in recent demonstrations.



  xi. I should emphasise,  however,  that  further  expert  evidence  should
      confine itself to: (1) the general issue of risk to a person  who  has
      demonstrated outside the Iranian Embassy since June 12 2009;  and  (2)
      the general issue of risk to a person whose demonstrating outside  the
      Iranian Embassy has been found to be opportunistic and  not  based  on
      any real political convictions  or  involvements.  The  expert  report
      should not seek to consider the appellant's own account of his history
      and family circumstances. The basis of the further reconsideration  in
      this appeal is that the appellant has been found not  credible  except
      in relation to his mere attendance at five demonstrations outside  the
      Iranian Embassy in London post-June 12 2009.








               DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)




      APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED


|     |Document                                       |Date            |
|Item |                                               |                |
|1    |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Travel advice|24 September    |
|     |for Iran"                                      |2010            |
|2    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Iran jails |18 September    |
|     |rights activist for six years"                 |2010            |
|3    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Spouse of  |16 September    |
|     |jailed Iranian lawyer 'threatened with arrest'"|2010            |
|4    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Another    |14 September    |
|     |Iranian diplomat seeks asylum in Norway"       |2010            |
|5    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Iranian    |13 September    |
|     |diplomats defect in Finland, Belgium"          |2010            |
|6    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Exiled ally|11 September    |
|     |talks about jailed Iranian activist's torture  |2010            |
|     |allegations"                                   |                |
|7    |United Kingdom Border Agency table, "Iran      |3 September 2010|
|     |removals and voluntary departures" with an     |                |
|     |explanatory note                               |                |
|8    |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Iran's     |2 September 2010|
|     |human rights lawyers increasingly facing their |                |
|     |own days in court"                             |                |
|9    |International Campaign for Human Rights in     |1 September 2010|
|     |Iran, "Arrests and convictions of rights       |                |
|     |activists and lawyers escalate"                |                |
|10   |International Campaign for Human Rights in     |September 2010  |
|     |Iran, "Reporter's guide"                       |                |
|11   |United Kingdom Border Agency, "Country of      |31 August 2010  |
|     |Origin Information Report - Iran"              |                |
|12   |Human Rights Watch, "Iran: Stop abuse of       |6 August 2010   |
|     |political prisoners"                           |                |
|13   |Reporters Without Borders, "A year in prison   |26 July 2010    |
|     |and five-year political ban for dissident      |                |
|     |journalist"                                    |                |
|14   |United Kingdom Border Agency, "Operational     |28 January 2009 |
|     |Guidance Note - Iran"                          |(re-issued July |
|     |                                               |2010)           |
|15   |Stratfor Global Intelligence special report,   |21 June 2010    |
|     |"Iranian intelligence and regime preservation" |                |
|16   |Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of  |21 June 2010    |
|     |Torture, "A year on from Iran's disputed       |                |
|     |election, Iranian torture survivors speak out" |                |
|17   |Amnesty International, "Iran: Student activist |21 June 2010    |
|     |detained in Iran: Behzad Bagheri Kahkesh"      |                |
|18   |Voice of America News, "In Iran, internet is   |9 June 2010     |
|     |lifeline and a noose"                          |                |
|19   |The Guardian, "Iran election anniversary       |9 June 2010     |
|     |protests face severe crackdown"                |                |
|20   |Amnesty International, "Iranian political      |9 June 2010     |
|     |prisoners detained for dissent since the 2009  |                |
|     |election"                                      |                |
|21   |Amnesty International, "Iran's crackdown on    |9 June 2010     |
|     |dissent widens with hundreds unjustly          |                |
|     |imprisoned"                                    |                |
|22   |Voice of America News, "Fallout from contested |8 June 2010     |
|     |Iran election outcome still reverberates"      |                |
|23   |Reporters Without Borders, "Using skilfully    |8 June 2010     |
|     |devised strategy, regime's repressive policies |                |
|     |succeed"                                       |                |
|24   |RAND Corporation, "The rise of the Pasdaran"   |June 2010       |
|25   |Amnesty International, "From protest to prison:|June 2010       |
|     |Iran one year after the election"              |                |
|26   |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner |26 May 2010     |
|     |for Human Rights (OHCHR), "Report of the       |                |
|     |Special Rapporteur on the promotion and        |                |
|     |protection of the right to freedom of opinion  |                |
|     |and expression: Summary of cases transmitted to|                |
|     |governments and replies received" (Iran        |                |
|     |excerpt)                                       |                |
|27   |The Australian, "'Spies' report back to Tehran |24 May 2010     |
|     |on Pre-democracy activists"                    |                |
|28   |Iran Focus, "Two hanged in central Iran prison"|19 May 2010     |
|29   |AFP, "Iran confirms death sentence for         |15 May 2010     |
|     |opposition activists"                          |                |
|30   |Freedom House, "Iran continues use of          |11 May 2010     |
|     |executions and brutal tactics to silence       |                |
|     |opposition"                                    |                |
|31   |Australian Government Refugee Review Tribunal, |15 April 2010   |
|     |"Country Advice Iran - IRN36407 - Overseas     |                |
|     |protests - Sydney vigil - Post-election        |                |
|     |protests - Internet monitoring - Social        |                |
|     |networking websites - Returnees"               |                |
|32   |The Australian, "Court targets Iranian expats" |9 April 2010    |
|33   |The Australian, "Iranian students living in    |8 April 2010    |
|     |Australia held on trips back to Iran"          |                |
|34   |The Australian, "Iranian embassy in Canberra   |6 April 2010    |
|     |'spying' on activist students"                 |                |
|35   |Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty, "Special    |5 April 2010    |
|     |court to be established for Iranians abroad"   |                |
|36   |Reporters and Human Rights Activists in Iran,  |1 April 2010    |
|     |"Son of Tehran stock exchange's former         |                |
|     |Secretary-General detained for 3 months"       |                |
|37   |Amnesty International, "Iran executions send a |30 March 2010   |
|     |chilling message"                              |                |
|38   |Reporters and Human Rights Activists of Iran,  |27 March 2010   |
|     |"Letter by Saeed Malekpour: A shocking account |                |
|     |of torture, interrogation & forced confessions"|                |
|39   |Reporters Without Borders                      |12 March 2010   |
|40   |U.S. Department of State, "2009 Human Rights   |11 March 2010   |
|     |Report: Iran"                                  |                |
|41   |The Times, "BBC an arm of MI6, says Police     |22 February 2010|
|     |Chief of Iran"                                 |                |
|42   |AFP, "Over 65 reporters face spying charges in |16 February 2010|
|     |Iran: Rights group"                            |                |
|43   |BBC, "MEPs condemn Nokia Siemens 'surveillance |11 February 2010|
|     |tech' in Iran"                                 |                |
|44   |Amnesty International, "Iran: Fears for        |9 February 2010 |
|     |demonstrators as authorities warn of zero      |                |
|     |tolerance amid ongoing arrests and trials"     |                |
|45   |CS.Monitor.com, "How Iranian dissidents slip   |8 February 2010 |
|     |through Tehran's airport dragnet"              |                |
|46   |Iran Human Rights Documentation Center,        |February 2010   |
|     |"Violent aftermath: The 2009 election and      |                |
|     |suppression of dissent in Iran"                |                |
|47   |Amnesty International, "Submission to the UN   |February 2010   |
|     |universal periodic review for Iran, 7th session|                |
|     |of the UPR working group of the Human Rights   |                |
|     |Council"                                       |                |
|48   |The Times, "Iran hangs alleged dissidents to   |29 January 2010 |
|     |warn opposition"                               |                |
|49   |Amnesty International, "'Shocking' execution of|28 January 2010 |
|     |Iran protesters condemned"                     |                |
|50   |United Kingdom Parliament House of Commons,    |19 January 2010 |
|     |"Hansard debates 19 January 2010 (oral answers |                |
|     |to questions): Iran"                           |                |
|51   |Voice of America News, "Iran demonstrators     |17 January 2010 |
|     |facing death sentence"                         |                |
|52   |Human Rights Watch, "Iran: End persecution of  |9 January 2010  |
|     |peaceful activists"                            |                |
|53   |Amnesty International, "Urgent action: Hundreds|8 January 2010  |
|     |held in Iran after Ashoura protests"           |                |
|54   |International Campaign for Human Rights in     |6 January 2010  |
|     |Iran, "Authorities attempt to crush remaining  |                |
|     |active human rights NGOs"                      |                |
|55   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Iran:|5 January 2010  |
|     |Student protests in Iran; treatment by Iranian |                |
|     |authorities of student protestors (December    |                |
|     |2007 - December 2009)"                         |                |
|56   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Iran:|4 January 2010  |
|     |Treatment by Iranian authorities of relatives  |                |
|     |of persons who have left Iran and claimed      |                |
|     |refugee status, including former members of the|                |
|     |Bureau of National Security (SAVAK), of a      |                |
|     |Fedayeen organization, or opposition           |                |
|     |protestors"                                    |                |
|57   |Christian Science Monitor, "Iran uses internet |4 January 2010  |
|     |as tool against protestors"                    |                |
|58   |International Committee Against Executions,    |January 2010    |
|     |"Bulletin of the International Committee       |                |
|     |Against Executions"                            |                |
|59   |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2010:     |2010            |
|     |Iran"                                          |                |
|60   |Wall Street Journal, "Iranian crackdown goes   |4 December 2009 |
|     |global"                                        |                |
|61   |Amnesty International, "Election contested,    |December 2009   |
|     |repression compounded"                         |                |
|62   |Rooz 1260, "Guards threaten to punish activists|9 November 2009 |
|     |outside Iran"                                  |                |
|63   |Human Rights Watch, "Iran: Stop covering up    |6 November 2009 |
|     |sexual assaults in prison"                     |                |
|64   |United Press International, "Iranian spies     |16 October 2009 |
|     |active in Germany"                             |                |
|65   |Human Rights Watch, "Iran: Crisis deepening one|17 July 2009    |
|     |year after disputed elections"                 |                |
|66   |Scoop News, "Demonstration outside Iranian     |29 June 2009    |
|     |embassy in London"                             |                |
|67   |The Telegraph, "Iran 'to downgrade ties with   |24 June 2009    |
|     |UK' after accusing London of interference in   |                |
|     |election"                                      |                |
|68   |Islamic Republic News Agency, "Students' sit-in|23 June 2009    |
|     |protest outside UK embassy cancelled"          |                |
|69   |Words, "Iran embassy staff secretly film       |20 June 2009    |
|     |British protesters taking to the streets in    |                |
|     |wake of election rigging claims"               |                |
|70   |The Telegraph, "Iranian embassy camera watches |20 June 2009    |
|     |protesters in London"                          |                |
|71   |The Free Library, "Embassy camera spies on     |19 June 2009    |
|     |protests"                                      |                |
|72   |Politics.co.uk, "Iranian solidarity protest    |18 June 2009    |
|     |outside London embassy"                        |                |
|73   |Newspark, "Iran election protest footage,      |18 June 2009    |
|     |Iranian embassy (London)"                      |                |
|74   |The Guardian, "Students in solidarity protest  |18 June 2009    |
|     |at Iran embassy"                               |                |
|75   |YouTube, "Protest against Iran's election      |17 June 2009    |
|     |result"                                        |                |
|76   |Demotix, "Election protests outside Iranian    |17 June 2009    |
|     |embassy"                                       |                |
|77   |Flickr, "London Iranian embassy demonstration" |14 - 18 June    |
|     |                                               |2009            |
|78   |Anonymous Iran, "June 16 - London - Iranian    |June 2009       |
|     |embassy"                                       |                |
|79   |Danish Refugee Council and Danish Immigration  |April 2009      |
|     |Service, "Human rights situation for           |                |
|     |minorities, women and converts, and entry and  |                |
|     |exit procedures, ID cards, summons and         |                |
|     |reporting, etc."                               |                |
|80   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Iran:|9 January 2008  |
|     |The treatment of student protestors or         |                |
|     |activists (June 2006 - November 2007)"         |                |
|81   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "The  |26 June 2006    |
|     |treatment of student protestors or activists   |                |
|     |since 2002"                                    |                |
|82   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada,       |20 June 2006    |
|     |"Arrest warrants and other court documents;    |                |
|     |trial in absentia in criminal cases; punishment|                |
|     |for persons charged with helping               |                |
|     |anti-revolutionaries; procedure when someone   |                |
|     |acts as surety"                                |                |
|83   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "Exit |3 April 2006    |
|     |and entry procedures at airports and land      |                |
|     |borders, particularly at Mehrabad International|                |
|     |airport"                                       |                |
|84   |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, "The  |7 December 2005 |
|     |repatriation of failed refugee claimants to    |                |
|     |Iran, including reports of claimants being     |                |
|     |detained, mistreated and tortured upon removal |                |
|     |from Canada on the basis they made refugee     |                |
|     |claims in Canada"                              |                |
|85   |OpenNet Initiative, "Internet filtering in     |                |
|     |Iran"                                          |                |
|86   |The National Interest, "The revolution will be |                |
|     |mercantilized"                                 |                |

|     |Case Law Considered                            |Date            |
|Item |                                               |                |
|1    |New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority - |30 June 2010    |
|     |Refugee appeal no. 76345                       |                |
|2    |New Zealand Refugee Status Appeals Authority - |8 March 2010    |
|     |Refugee appeal no. 76454                       |                |
|3    |SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG     |16 December 2009|
|     |[2009] UKAIT 00053                             |                |
|4    |SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG  |12 November 2008|
|     |[2008] UKAIT 00082                             |                |
|5    |YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360               |15 April 2008   |
|6    |SH (Baha'is) Iran CG [2006] UKAIT 00041        |27 April 2006   |
|7    |RM and BB (Homosexuals) Iran CG [2005] UKIAT   |8 July 2005     |
|     |00117                                          |                |
|8    |IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey CG [2004]|2 December 2004 |
|     |UKIAT 00312                                    |                |
|9    |FS and others (Iran - Christian Converts) Iran |17 November 2004|
|     |CG [2004] UKIAT 00303                          |                |
|10   |AH (Gashgai nomads - no persecution) Iran CG   |22 June 2004    |
|     |[2004] UKIAT 00169                             |                |
|11   |ME (Male Adulterer - Convention Reason? - Risk)|9 December 2003 |
|     |Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00166                     |                |
|12   |HA (Article 3 - Refugee - Adultery -           |17 October 2003 |
|     |Punishment) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00095         |                |
|13   |SS (Risk - Manastry) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT 00035|8 August 2003   |
|14   |ZH (Women as Particular Social Group) Iran CG  |6 June 2003     |
|     |[2003] UKIAT 00207                             |                |
|15   |FT (Fair Trail - Adultery) Iran CG [2002 ]     |3 April 2003    |
|     |UKIAT 07576                                    |                |
|16   |MT (Refugee - Communist Party) Iran CG [2002]  |3 March 2003    |
|     |UKIAT 06995                                    |                |
|17   |BZ DR (Risk - Political Journalist) Iran CG    |11 February 2003|
|     |[2002] UKIAT 06452                             |                |
|18   |FM (Risk - Homosexual - Illegal Departure) Iran|5 December 2002 |
|     |CG [2002] UKIAT 05660                          |                |
|19   |FK (Persecution - Refugee - Political Writer)  |2 May 2002      |
|     |Iran CG [2002] UKIAT 01328                     |                |
|20   |SF (Article 3 - Prison Conditions) Iran CG     |4 April 2002    |
|     |[2002] UKIAT 00973                             |                |










