
                                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                    Determination Promulgated
On 11 November 2010

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                     AW
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr G P McGowan, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr K Kyriacou, Home Office Presenting Officer





1.  At  paragraph  55  of  Auld  LJ's  summary   in   Bagdanavicius   [2005]
EWCA Civ.1605 it is made clear that the test  set  out  in  Horvath  [2001]
1 AC 489 was intended to deal with  the  ability  of  a  state  to  afford
protection to the generality of its citizens.

2. Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection, a claimant  may
still have a well founded fear of persecution if authorities know  or  ought
to know of circumstances particular to  his/her  case  giving  rise  to  the
fear, but are unlikely to provide the additional protection  the  particular
circumstances reasonably require (per Auld LJ at paragraph 55(vi)).

3. In considering whether an appellant's particular circumstances give  rise
to a need for additional protection, particular account  must  be  taken  of
past persecution (if any) so as to ensure  the  question  posed  is  whether
there are good reasons to consider that such persecution (and past  lack  of
sufficient protection) will not be repeated.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal against the decision of the Immigration Judge  dated
   20 March  2009  refusing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,
   humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

Background

2.    The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 5 November  1966.   He
   claims to have left Pakistan on 16 November 2008 and  to  have  flown  to
   Paris.  He left France on 16 December 2008 and entered the United Kingdom
   concealed in a lorry.  He  claimed  asylum  on  18  December  2008.   For
   reasons contained in the Home Office letter dated  5 February  2009  his
   claim for asylum was refused and it was  said  he  did  not  qualify  for
   humanitarian protection.  It was also concluded that the  United Kingdom
   would not be in breach of our obligations under the  European  Convention
   of Human Rights (ECHR) if he was removed to Pakistan.

3.    The appellant  then  appealed  under  s.82  (1)  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that appeal was heard at  Glasgow  on
   17 March 2009.

The basis of the appellant's claim

4. The basis of the appellant's claim was  as  set  out  in  his  statement.
   That statement was set out by the  Immigration  Judge  in  the  following
   terms:


      "3.   He is a Sunni Muslim who last lived in Miranshah which is  North
      Waziristan in Pakistan.  He was employed as a police officer.  He  was
      married and they have one daughter who now lives with his mother since
      his wife was killed on 28 September 2008. His brother was  killed  by
      the MQM on 25 July 2008.


      4.    The reason he claims asylum is because of his fear  of  the  MQM
      who have already killed his wife and brother because of his activities
      as a police officer against them.


      5.    He joined the police in October 1991 and worked  in  Karachi  in
      Sindh Province.


      6.    His problems began on 12 May 2007  when  a  number  of  Pashtun
      speakers demonstrated about the sacking of the Chief  Justice  of  the
      Supreme Court.  The incident turned nasty and vehicles were burned and
      people were killed.  His superiors ordered that he release the  people
      who had been involved in the violence.  They were MQM  supporters  and
      he was not prepared to release them.


      7.    During 2008 the Home Minister issued a circular order  that  all
      police  stations  in  Karachi  called  criminal  procedure  144  which
      prohibited processions and public  meetings  and  graffiti.   It  also
      prohibited wall chalking or graffiti and he  was  responsible  in  his
      area for overseeing the issue of wall chalking.   During  this  period
      his own house was wall chalked and in particular it was  written  that
      'he who was a traitor to the leader deserves to be killed'.


      8.    He arrested some people for wall chalking who  were  writing  on
      the wall of his house.  He continually had to clean up the wall.


      9.    On one occasion his brother caught people wall chalking  outside
      their home and tried to stop them.  Within two days he  was  murdered.
      His brother lived in the same house as him.  There were  two  suspects
      who were shooters for the MQM.  They were  taken  to  court  and  then
      released on bail.  After they got bail he tried to have them  detained
      again and he wrote various applications but the MQM leaders approached
      him in order to  try  and  settle  the  matter.   Rauf  Siddique,  the
      Minister in Charge  for  Work  and  Industry  and  Faruk  Sattar,  now
      Overseas  Minister,  sent  their  people  to  see  whether  or  not  a
      settlement could be arranged.  He refused to accept a settlement.   He
      believes these two men were also responsible for the shooting  at  his
      home and the killing of his wife when she was  8  months  pregnant  on
      28 September 2008.


      10.   On that day he was up on the roof feeding birds and his wife was
      in the ground floor.  Suddenly he could hear shouting and swearing and
      then shots.  His neighbour said that there were four men and that  one
      of these was [AD, the senior MQM official in charge of Mahmoudabad].


      11.   After his wife's  death  a  report  was  filed  against  him  on
      21 October 2008 accusing him of kidnapping the two MQM suspects under
      section 365 of the Pakistan Penal Code.


      12.   He cannot go to another part of Pakistan to hide  from  the  MQM
      because  they  have  different  groups  and   departments   throughout
      Pakistan.  They have  a  funding  group,  an  intelligence  group,  an
      operations group, and they would not spare him.  They killed  four  of
      his friends in  Lahore  at  different  times  and  they  have  reached
      throughout Kashmir.  There is also the case against  him  which  means
      that there is nowhere in Pakistan that is safe.


      13.   He cannot stay hidden forever and it is for that reason that  he
      fled the country as soon as he received information  from  his  friend
      and that the MQM had used its influence to start a case  against  him.
      If he was to be caught and imprisoned he would almost certainly be ill-
      treated in custody and probably killed.  He understands that  to  date
      the MQM has killed over 200 police officers who have stood up  against
      them in Karachi.  They  have  a  known  history  of  attacking  police
      officers' homes.  They are a well  known  organisation,  militant  and
      political.  In terms of the refusal letter the MQM were in full  power
      from 1999 to 2007.  He comments on  various  aspects  in  the  refusal
      letter.  He says that the MQM leader said he should  settle  for  they
      could not guarantee his safety or be responsible for the consequences.
       The judges are also in the hands of the  MQM  who  have  killed  many
      judges and lawyers.  FIRs are circulated throughout the country and he
      could be arrested anywhere in  the  country.   The  FIR  is  not  just
      limited to his own province.  Any police authority would return him to
      Sindh.  He has produced a number of documents to the Home Office".

The evidence

5. Before the Immigration Judge the appellant adopted his statement  and  no
   oral evidence was led.  However, in support of his  claim  the  appellant
   produced a number of documents.  They included extracts from a Country of
   Origin  Information  Report  (COIR)  dated   November 2008   which   at
   paragraph 9.04 noted that the  police  were  politicised.   Further,  at
   paragraph 9.05 it was noted that corruption within the police was rampant
   and that police charged fees to register genuine complaints and  accepted
   money for registering false complaints.  Paragraph 9.06 stated that there
   was a climate of impunity.  In addition at paragraph 18.01 it noted that
   the law provided criminal  penalties  for  official  corruption  but  the
   Government did not implement the law effectively and officials frequently
   engaged in corrupt practices with  impunity.   Paragraph 18.02  observed
   that corruption  charges  were  frequently  used  as  a  tool  to  punish
   opposition politicians or induce them to join the ruling PML-Q.

6.     Other  items  of  evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant  before   the
   Immigration Judge  were  documents  from  7/1  onwards  relating  to  the
   activities of the MQM.  The Article 8/1 says that the MQM has been widely
   accused of human rights abuses since the founding of it two decades  ago.
   They have been heavily involved in the widespread political violence that
   has racked Pakistani's southern  Sindh Province,  particularly  Karachi.
   Amnesty International has accused  the  MQM-A  and  a  rival  faction  of
   summary killings, torture and other abuses.   The MQM-A  is  one  of  two
   factions of the MQM and is led by the founder of the MQM  Altaf  Hussain.
   It is said in document 8/1 that the MQM has become the dominant political
   party in Karachi and Hyderabad, another major city  in  Sindh.   Document
   10/1 says that a US Think Tank  lists  the  MQM  as  a  militant  outfit.
   Document 19/1 indicates that the MQM retained total political control  of
   Karachi and monopolised the government of  Sindh.   Document  25/1  noted
   that the MQM decided to join the Federal Government and it was given four
   slots in the cabinet.  A source in  the  government  said  that  MQM  was
   playing  an  important  role  in  defusing  the  Pakistan/India   tension
   following the Mumbai terrorist attacks.  Government circles, the official
   said, were highly appreciative of the efforts being made by the  MQM  for
   the normalisation of Pakistan/India ties.  The MQM leader said that  they
   were playing a role in improvement of Pakistan/India ties and their party
   would continue playing a role in bringing a thaw  to  the  Pakistan/India
   relationship.

7.    Lastly, certain documents were  lodged  establishing  the  appellant's
   wife's death and the death of his brother.

8.    The Immigration Judge accepted at paragraph 24 of  his  determination
   that there was little or no challenge to the appellant's credibility.

9.    The Immigration Judge from paragraph 25 of  his  determination  begins
   his detailed consideration of the case.  He takes as his  starting  point
   that in general it has  been  held  by  the  Tribunal  that  there  is  a
   sufficiency of protection in Pakistan as set out in  AH  (Sufficiency  of
   Protection - Sunni Extremists) Pakistan CG  [2002]  UKIAT 05862  and  as
   commented on in Hussain v SSHD [2005] CSIH 45.

10. The Immigration Judge goes on to state at paragraph 25 as follows:

      "The appellant is clearly very unhappy, understandably so, that  those
      persons who are believed to have killed his brother were  subsequently
      released  on  bail.   However,  as  the  Home  Office  points  out  in
      paragraph 28 of the refusal letter, the granting of bail  to  persons
      while further investigation is carried  out  does  not  demonstrate  a
      failure of state protection.  Many people, even in the United Kingdom,
      are released on bail pending very serious criminal charges.   It  does
      seem to me to be  noteworthy  in  connection  with  an  assessment  of
      whether or not there remains a sufficiency of protection  in  Pakistan
      that the appellant did not report  the  murder  of  his  wife  to  the
      authorities.  It seems the appellant concluded that the police  either
      could or would not assist him.  However, the objective evidence before
      me does not suggest that the  police  would  not  investigate  such  a
      serious crime.  While there is clearly considerable corruption in  the
      police I was not referred to any  passage  which  even  hints  at  the
      suggestion that the police would do nothing to try and investigate who
      committed such a crime;  the only reasonable inference  to  draw  from
      the objective evidence is that they would do everything they could  to
      bring the perpetrators to justice.  The concept of  a  sufficiency  of
      protection does not require that there should be a guarantee of safety
      to an individual in the state.  No state can hope to provide that.  It
      requires essentially  simply  that  there  be  an  effective  criminal
      system, offered within the state which  will  usually  result  in  the
      criminal process being taken against those who break the  law  and  in
      respect of which the state does not operate on a discriminatory  basis
      against particular groups of which an appellant for asylum forms part.
       It seems to me that there is no discriminatory approach on  the  part
      of the state of Pakistan".


11.   As regards the documents produced to which we  have  earlier  referred
    the  Immigration  Judge  accepts  the  authenticity  of  the  documents
    relating to the death of the appellant's brother and wife.  Other  than
    that he merely notes at the end of paragraph 26 of his Determination as
    follows:


      "There is no objective evidence in front of me to suggest that because
      the MQM have Cabinet posts there is a causal link  between  that  fact
      and the proposition that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
      that the appellant  will  be  seriously  ill-treated  if  returned  to
      Pakistan".


12.   The Immigration Judge then at paragraph 28 of his determination holds
    that the appellant could relocate, noting  that  Pakistan  is  a  large
    country with a number of principal cities with very large populations.

13.   At paragraph 29, despite his findings at paragraph 28 in relation  to
    internal relocation, the Immigration Judge turns to look at  the  issue
    of the appellant being wanted  on  criminal  charges  in  Pakistan  and
    accepts that on his arrival in Pakistan he would be arrested,  returned
    to Sindh, be placed in custody and denied bail.

14.    At  paragraph  30  turning  to  the  issue  of  denial  of  bail  the
    Immigration Judge states:


      "The risk to the  appellant  appears  to  be  one  that  faces  people
      generally e.g. in this case of someone  detained  pending  trial.   It
      seems to me it cannot be said that such a person  would  face  a  real
      risk of serious harm unless in that  country  there  is  a  consistent
      pattern of gross and systematic violations of their human rights while
      in detention - on the objective evidence before me it cannot  be  said
      that serious ill-treatment  is  generally  or  consistently  happening
      which was the test set out in  AA  (Zimbabwe)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ 149.
      Accordingly, however unsatisfactory  the  prison  conditions  and  the
      difficulties that the appellant may face in custody this does not seem
      to me to take the appellant to the point where he has proved  that  it
      is reasonably likely that he would  face  Article  3  mistreatment  in
      custody".


15.   The Immigration Judge then concludes that it seemed to  him  that  the
    appellant could safely be returned to  Pakistan.   Notwithstanding  the
    volatility of that country and the killings which did occur  from  time
    to time by non-state actors the objective evidence before him as he had
    above set out indicated that there was a sufficiency of protection  for
    someone such as the appellant.

The grounds of appeal and submissions


16.  Mr McGowan's submissions were broadly divided into four parts:

      (1)   He submitted that the Immigration Judge had failed  to  properly
      take into consideration the  background  evidence  in  the  particular
      circumstances  of  the  appellant's  case  in  assessing  whether  the
      appellant should have stayed in Pakistan and reported  the  murder  of
      his wife to the authorities.  In this regard the Immigration Judge had
      failed to take into account  the  background  information  in  various
      respects:
           (i)   the prevalence of corruption within the  police  (9.05  of
           November 2008 COIR),
           (ii)  the serious human rights abuses committed  by  members  of
           the police force and the culture of impunity (9.06),
           (iii) the routine engagement of the police  in  using  excessive
           force, torture and bribery and the commission of  extra-judicial
           killings especially for critics of the regime (9.07),
           (iv)  the slow progress in relation to  investigating  cases  of
           abuse and redressing grievances  leading  to  an  atmosphere  of
           impunity (9.07),
           (v)   the allegation that  security  personnel  used  abuse  and
           torture of persons in custody throughout  the  country  and  the
           fact that  the  government  rarely  took  action  against  those
           responsible and that torture is routine in Pakistan (9.13),
           (vi)  that there were 304 cases of torture in the Sindh province
           reported in the last 6 months (9.14),
           (vii) that the security forces stages the deaths of a number  of
           suspects (9.16),
           (viii)      that lengthy trial delays and failures to discipline
           and  prosecute  those  responsible   for   abuses   consistently
           contributed to a culture of impunity (9.16).


      This resulted, he submitted, in the  Immigration  Judge  not  properly
      reasoning why he expected the appellant to seek  protection  from  the
      state given the accepted corruption in the police and  the  fact  that
      the appellant feared that he would have  exposed  himself  to  further
      danger by reporting the death of his wife, given that his brother  and
      wife and had been murdered  within  a  very  short  timescale  of  his
      refusal to act politically in relation to MQM supporters.
      (2)   In addition the  Immigration  Judge  had  also  failed  to  take
      cognisance of the submissions made on behalf of the appellant  as  set
      out by him at paragraph 26 of his determination.  What the  appellant
      was submitting by reference to these  documents  was  that  there  was
      substantial background information to show that the MQM  although  now
      part of mainstream politics, had its base in terrorist foundations and
      that they were not simply a provincial party with no influence outside
      the Sindh province.  The submission was to the effect that  given  the
      politicised nature of the police force and the MQM's  influence  there
      was a real risk of the appellant being targeted in the manner feared.


      (3)   He also argued that at paragraph 27 the Immigration  Judge  had
      failed to come to any conclusions on whether or not  the  respondent's
      suggestion  that  a  false  claim  against  the  appellant  would   be
      thoroughly  investigated  was  correct  or  whether  the   appellant's
      submission was more likely to  be  correct.   Whilst  he  accepted  at
      paragraph 29 that there may be a real risk of the authorities wishing
      to arrest the appellant on the basis of the FIR against him,  he  then
      failed to properly assess the  risk  to  the  appellant  in  detention
      either pending trial or post-decision.  It is unclear whether  or  not
      he accepted the submissions made that bail was likely to be denied  at
      the request of the police for non-payment of bribes.  It was submitted
      that the appellant was not just any other person awaiting trial and it
      was necessary for the Immigration Judge to provide explanations as to
      why he was not taking into account the particular circumstances of the
      appellant's case in considering the risk to him  of  ill-treatment  in
      custody.  In particular, the Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  take
      account of the facts: (a) that the appellant had made an enemy of  the
      MQM by refusing to release suspects on the orders of his MQM superior;
       (b) his brother had  been  killed  and  the  MQM  suspects  had  been
      released on bail and were therefore at liberty;  (c) his wife had been
      killed and again the suspicion was that this was by MQM henchmen;  and
      (d) the prevalence of torture to extract confessions  referred  to  in
      the COIR, paragraphs 9.13, 9.14 and 9.15.  Lastly, he had  failed  to
      take account of the appellant's real fear of being killed  in  prison,
      pre or post-trial,  as  disclosed  in  his  substantive  interview  in
      response to question 73 and as supported in the COIR at 9.16.  It was
      submitted that the background information  suggested  that  those  who
      were critics of the regime  were  particularly  at  risk  of  torture,
      disappearance or denial of basic due process rights at  the  hands  of
      the  military  authorities.   He  went  on  to  submit  that  had  the
      Immigration Judge considered the background  information  relating  to
      the politicised nature of the police, the prevalence of corruption  in
      these instances, the likelihood of ill-treatment for a person such  as
      the appellant in custody and the use of torture to extract confessions
      and extra-judicial killings in a culture of  impunity,  he  would  not
      have reached the conclusion that there was no real risk of  Article  3
      being engaged.  This failure to properly consider the Article  3  risk
      of mistreatment in custody was crucial to his decision.


      (4)   At  paragraph  31  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to  properly
      consider the real risk of the appellant's political opponents  in  the
      MQM using their henchmen to kill him in prison after sentence had been
      imposed, falsely or otherwise.

17.   Lastly, he submitted  that  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation the Immigration Judge appeared to accept at paragraph 29 of
    his Determination that on his return the  appellant  would  immediately
    find himself in custody.  If that was the position then  there  was  no
    question of internal relocation.

18.   Mr Kyriacou in his reply  accepted  that  there  was  no  question  of
    internal relocation given the Immigration Judge's finding at  paragraph
    29.

19.   However, with reference to KA & Others (Domestic Violence  -  Risk  on
    Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) Mr Kyriacou  submitted  that
    the Immigration Judge was entitled to find that there was a sufficiency
    of protection.

20.   He relied in  particular  on  a  number  of  paragraphs  in  the  said
    decision:  paragraph 191 relating to the system of  the  use  of  FIR;
    paragraph 193 relating to the police which stated  that  the  evidence
    fell well short  of  establishing  that  in  general  the  police  were
    fundamentally unwilling or unable to carry out law and order  functions
    and ensure the protection of the public.  It could  not  be  said  that
    there was a consistent pattern of police impunity  for  wrongdoing;  in
    relation to the Judiciary he referred to paragraph 196  where  it  was
    said:


      "We do not understand any of the  experts  to  assert,  nor  does  the
      background evidence support the view that the  Pakistan  judiciary  is
      fundamentally corrupt".


21.  Lastly, he referred to paragraph 199 in relation to prison  conditions
   where it was held that:

      "As noted earlier, there is a broad consensus  in  the  major  country
      reports that prison conditions in Pakistan are extremely poor and fail
      to meet international standards, the main problem being  overcrowding,
      instances of ill-treatment by prison officials and inadequate food and
      medical care.  That said, there are some signs of improvement  in  the
      more recent period and we note that no major  international  body  has
      argued that conditions in Pakistan prisons generally  fall  below  the
      high threshold of Article 3 ill-treatment as enunciated by the ECHR in
      Ramirez  Sanchez  (or  their  UN  International  Civil  and  Political
      Covenant equivalent)".

Assessment of whether there is an error of law

22.   The starting point in considering whether there is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection must be regulation 4 of the Refugee or  Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 (implementing
    Article 7 of the Qualification Directive 2004/83/EC) which we  take  to
    mirror the principles set out by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Horvath  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] 1 AC 489 where it was
    held that whether protection was sufficient was a  "practical  standard
    which takes proper account  of  the  duty  which  the  state  owes  its
    nationals..." and that "the sufficiency  of  state  protection  is  not
    measured by the existence of a real risk of an abusive right but by the
    availability of a  system  for  the  protection  of  a  citizen  and  a
    reasonable willingness of the state to operate it".

23.   However, in our view in the instant case the foregoing  only  provides
    a starting point.  As noted by  the  Tribunal  in  IM  (Sufficiency  of
    Protection) Malawi [2007] UKAIT 00071, in Bagdanavicius the  House  of
    Lords at [2005] UKHL 38 left undisturbed the proposition  set  out  by
    Auld LJ on real risk and sufficiency of protection  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal [2005] EWCA Civ 1605.  These propositions are in the  following
    terms:


      "54.   Summary  of  conclusions  on  real  risk/sufficiency  of  state
      protection.


           The common threshold of risk


      55.   1)    The threshold of risk is the same in  both  categories  of
                 claim;  the main reason for introducing section 65  to  the
                 1999 Act was not to provide an alternative, lower threshold
                 of risk and/or a higher level of  protection  against  such
                 risk through the medium of  human  rights  claims,  but  to
                 widen the reach of  protection  regardless  of  the  motive
                 giving rise to the persecution.


      Asylum claims


       2)   An asylum seeker who claims to be  in  fear  of  persecution  is
                 entitled to asylum if he can show a  well-founded  fear  of
                 persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that  there
                 would be insufficiency of  state  protection  to  meet  it;
                 Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489].
       3)   Fear of persecution is well-founded if there  is  a  'reasonable
                 degree of likelihood' that it will materialise; R v SSHD ex
                 p. Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G.
       4)   Sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state  agents  or
                 non-state actors, means a willingness and  ability  on  the
                 part of the receiving state to provide  through  its  legal
                 system a reasonable level of protection from  ill-treatment
                 of which the claimant for asylum has a  well-founded  fear;
                 Osman v UK [1999] 1 FLR 193], Horvath, Dhima [2002] EWHC 80
                 (Admin), [2002] Immigration Judge AR 394].
       5)   The effectiveness  of  the  system  provided  is  to  be  judged
                 normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent
                 the form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just
                 punishment of it after the event; Horvath; Banomova  [2001]
                 EWCA Civ.807. McPherson [2001] EWCA Civ 1955 and Kinuthia
                 [2001] EWCA Civ 2100.
       6)   Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
                 receiving state a claimant may still  have  a  well-founded
                 fear of persecution if he can  show  that  its  authorities
                 know or ought to know of circumstances  particular  to  his
                 case giving rise to his fear, but are unlikely  to  provide
                 the  additional  protection  his  particular  circumstances
                 reasonably require;  Osman.


       Article 3 claims


       7)   The same principles apply to claims in removal cases of risk  of
                 exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment in the receiving state,
                 and are, in general, unaffected  by  the  approach  of  the
                 Strasbourg Court in Soering; which, on its facts, was,  not
                 only a  state-agency  case  at  the  highest  institutional
                 level, but also an unusual  and  exceptional  case  on  its
                 facts;  Dhima, Krepel [2002] EWCA Civ 1265 and Ullah [2004]
                 UKHL 26.
       8)   The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal case is  that
                 the claimant, if sent to the country in question, would  be
                 at risk there of Article 3 ill-treatment.
       9)   In most, if not all, Article 3 cases in this context the concept
                 of risk has the same or closely similar meaning to that  in
                 the  Refugee  Convention  of  a   'well-founded   fear   of
                 persecution', save that it is confined to a risk of Article
                 3 forms of ill-treatment and is not restricted  to  conduct
                 with any particular  motivation  or  by  reference  to  the
                 conduct of the claimant;  Dhima, Krepel, Chahal v UK [1996]
                 23 EHRR 413.
       10)  The threshold of risk required to engage Article  3  depends  on
                 the circumstances of each case, including the magnitude  of
                 the risk, the nature  and  severity  of  the  ill-treatment
                 risked and whether the risk emanates from a state agency or
                 non-state actor;  Horvath.
       11)  In most, but not necessarily all, cases of ill-treatment  which,
                 but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a risk of
                 such ill-treatment will  be  more  readily  established  in
                 state-agency cases than in non-state actor cases - there is
                 a spectrum  of  circumstances  giving  rise  to  such  risk
                 spanning the two categories, ranging from breach of a  duty
                 by the state of a negative duty not to  inflict  Article  3
                 ill-treatment to a  breach  of  a  duty  to  take  positive
                 protective action against such ill-treatment  by  non-state
                 actors;  Svazas.
       12)  An assessment to  the  threshold  of  risk  appropriate  in  the
                 circumstances to engage Article 3 necessarily  involves  an
                 assessment of the sufficiency of state protection  to  meet
                 the threat of which there is such a risk -  one  cannot  be
                 considered without the other whether or not the exercise is
                 regarded as 'holistic' or to be conducted  in  two  stages;
                 Dhima, Krepel, Svazas [2002] EWCA Civ 74.
       13)  Sufficiency of state protection is not a guarantee of protection
                 from  Article 3  ill-treatment  any  more  than  it  is  a
                 guarantee of protection from an otherwise well-founded fear
                 of persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the  extent
                 that there is any difference, is it eradication or  removal
                 of risk of exposure to  Article 3  ill-treatment';  Dhima,
                 McPherson; Krepel.
       14)  Where the risk falls to be judged by the  sufficiency  of  state
                 protection, that sufficiency is judged,  not  according  to
                 whether it would eradicate the real risk  of  the  relevant
                 harm, but according to whether it is a reasonable provision
                 in the circumstances;  Osman.
       15)  Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of state protection in
                 the receiving state,  a  claimant  may  still  be  able  to
                 establish an Article 3 claim  if  he  can  show  that  the
                 authorities there know  or  ought  to  know  of  particular
                 circumstances likely to expose him to risk of Article 3 ill-
                 treatment;  Osman.
       16)  The approach is the same whether the receiving country is or  is
                 not a party to the ECHR, but,  in  determining  whether  it
                 would be contrary to Article 3 to remove a person to  that
                 country, our courts should decide the factual issue  as  to
                 risk as if ECHR  standards  apply  there  -  and  the  same
                 applies to the certification process under  section 115(1)
                 and/or (2) of the 2002 Act".


24.   Thus, while it will always be relevant to ask whether or not there  is
    in general a sufficiency of  protection  in  a  country,  the  critical
    question will nevertheless remain in an asylum case as set out  in  the
    sixth proposition by Auld LJ and in an Article 3 case as set out in the
    fifteenth proposition.  Thus under  either  head  a  judge  must  look,
    notwithstanding a general sufficiency of protection in  a  country,  to
    the individual circumstances of the appellant and ask himself the above
    questions.

25.   The Immigration Judge in our view never progressed beyond  considering
    the  issue  of  whether  the   appellant   had   established   systemic
    insufficiency or a criminal system operated on a discriminatory  basis.
    He at no point in his  determination  considered  that  the  individual
    circumstances of the appellant were capable of making a  difference  to
    the question of whether there would be sufficient protection  available
    in this case.  He did  not  engage  with  the  issues  as  set  out  at
    proposition 6 and 15 in Bagdanavicius [2005] EWCA Civ 1805.

26.   That he has failed to attach  due  significance  to  these  individual
    circumstances is clear from first looking at his conclusions as a whole
    set out between paragraphs 24 and 31 of  his  determination.   In  the
    course of his discussion in these paragraphs the Immigration Judge  at
    no point turns to look at the appellant's personal history  and  actual
    suffering of persecutory acts.  There is no reference to  his  being  a
    police officer or to the related background evidence and that  the  MQM
    had killed 200 police officers who had stood up against them.  There is
    no consideration of the fact that the  appellant  has  made  himself  a
    particular enemy of the MQM and that his  brother  and  wife  in  quick
    succession appear to have been killed by the MQM without  any  apparent
    protection from the  authorities  at  the  relevant  time.   These  are
    examples of matters relating specifically to the  appellant  which  the
    Immigration Judge failed to assess correctly.

27.   We are of the view that there was  considerable  merit  in  the  theme
    which underlay much of  Mr  McGowan's  submissions  namely:   that  the
    appellant had been looked at by the  Immigration  Judge  as  just  "any
    other person" without due regard to  the  circumstances  particular  to
    him.  Secondly, his reference to the AH  case  at  the  outset  of  his
    conclusions in the absence therefrom of any reference to  Bagdanavicius
    tends to point to an approach which is flawed  in  that  it  failed  to
    follow the guidance given in Bagdanavicius relating to  the  importance
    of the particular circumstances of an appellant insofar as they  relate
    to the issue of sufficiency of protection.  It is of course  proper  to
    have regard to guidance given in the AH case, however, the  Immigration
    Judge thereafter considers nothing other  than  the  issue  of  general
    sufficiency of protection and the appellant's  inability  to  establish
    systemic failure.  That this is the approach of the  Immigration  Judge
    is made clear when he states as follows in paragraph 25:


      "The obligation of the state to provide a  sufficiency  of  protection
      must be interpreted in a way which does not impose  an  impossible  or
      disproportionate burden on the authorities.  It is not enough for  the
      appellant to point to corruption on the part of individual members  of
      the police, prosecution or justice system.  There has to  be  evidence
      of systemic or institutionalised unwillingness to afford protection to
      the victims of persecution by non-state actors;  the  evidence  before
      me on how the criminal justice system operates in Pakistan does not go
      nearly that far".


28.   This is the Immigration Judge's fundamental conclusion in relation  to
    the case.  It is clear from this part of his consideration that  he  is
    seeking to decide the  issue  of  whether  this  appellant  would  have
    sufficient protection solely on the basis of being satisfied that there
    exists a general sufficiency of protection.

29.   Thirdly, it is also clear from the  way  that  the  Immigration Judge
    dealt with the documentary productions in paragraph 26 that he makes no
    attempt to see these documents in light of the  appellant's  particular
    circumstances.  Rather he simply  brushes  them  aside.   There  is  no
    attempt to consider how this information regarding the MQM would impact
    on the appellant's particular circumstances.

30.   Fourthly, at paragraph 27 when  looking  at  the  issue  of  FIRs  he
    confines himself to the issue of whether it has been  established  that
    there is a general systemic failure in relation to these.

31.   Fifthly, again  at  paragraph 31  when  he  turns  to  summarise  his
    conclusions the Immigration Judge once  more  refers  to  the  general
    background evidence that there is no systemic failure.

32.   Sixthly, he at no point refers to the Bagdanavicius case.

33.    For  the  foregoing  reasons  we   are   of   the   view   that   the
    Immigration Judge has made a material error of law.  His whole approach
    to the case is  in  our  judgement,  for  the  reasons  which  we  have
    identified,  fundamentally  flawed.   Accordingly  we  set  aside   the
    decision and turn to the issue of what decision to remake.

Our assessment

34.   The starting point in assessing whether the appellant would  be  given
    sufficient protection if returned to Pakistan is  to  consider  whether
    there is systemic insufficiency of state protection.   In  relation  to
    Pakistan, having regard to the case of AH and also to the  case  of  KA
    and Others (Domestic Violence - Risk on Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT
    216 (IAC), it cannot be said that such a general insufficiency of state
    protection has been established.  Neither party  submitted  that  there
    was,  nor  do  we  find,  that  the  background  evidence   before   us
    demonstrates such as insufficiency.

35.   However, as we have outlined above, that is not an end of the  matter,
    regard must be had to the individual  circumstances  of  the  appellant
    with a view to addressing the questions as outlined in  the  sixth  and
    fifteenth propositions of Auld LJ in Bagdanavicius [2005] EWCA 1605.

36.  In assessing risk to an appellant whose family  members  have  suffered
    persecution or serious harm it is also  important to bear in  mind  the
    principles set  out  at  Recital 27  of  the  Qualification  Direction
    2004/83/EC that:


       "(Family members, merely due to their relation to the refugee,  will
       normally be vulnerable to acts of persecution in such a manner  that
       could be the basis for refugee status)".


37.   We would stress that it is also particularly important to have  regard
    to the circumstances of the individual where that  person  has  already
    been subject to persecution or serious harm and  therefore  falls  into
    the category of persons to whom to Rule 339K of the Immigration  Rules
    applies mirroring Article 4 of the Qualification Directive.  That Rule
    is in the following terms:

      "The fact that a person has already been  subject  to  persecution  or
      serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution and such  harm,
      will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well  founded
      fear of persecution or real risk of  suffering  serious  harm,  unless
      there are good reasons to consider that such  persecution  or  serious
      harm will not be repeated".


38.   Mindful of these important considerations, we  now  turn  to  consider
    the relevant circumstances and we find these to be:

      (a)   The background information contained in the documents  from  7/1
      onwards when taken together with the paragraphs with  which  reference
      was made on behalf of the appellant  in  the  background  information,
      namely, the COIR report of November 2008.


      (b)   The MQM has killed over 200 police officers who  have  stood  up
      against them in Karachi.   The  appellant  was  a  police  officer  in
      Karachi.  That  was  only  a  circumstance  of  limited  significance.
      However, in addition:


      (c)   The appellant has made an enemy  of  the  MQM  in  his  area  by
      refusing to release supporters of that  party  on  the  order  of  his
      superiors.


        d) In his role as a police officer he oversaw locally the issue  of
           chalking.  He was required to  arrest  people  for  doing  this.
           Chalking on his wall was a continual problem.  On  one  occasion
           on his wall the following was chalked:


           'He who is a traitor to the leader deserves to be killed'.


      (e)   The foregoing was no idle threat.  His brother  was  killed  two
      days after catching people wall chalking.  The two suspects  were  MQM
      supporters.  They were bailed.  The appellant tried unsuccessfully  to
      have them detained again.  Attempts were made at a high level  in  the
      MQM to settle this issue with the appellant but he refused and threats
      to his safety were made if he did not settle the matter.


      (f)   His wife was shot and killed and he believed on the basis of his
      own observations that it was by these men.
      (g)   He was then accused of kidnapping these men.


      (h)   On his return to Pakistan he will be arrested  and  returned  to
      the province of Sindh and will be kept in custody.


39.   In light of these circumstances we are satisfied  that  the  appellant
    suffered past persecution as a result of  the  local  MQM  deciding  to
    target him and his family.  His brother and  wife  were  killed  merely
    because of their relationship with the appellant and there are no  good
    reasons to consider that upon his return the MQM locally would not seek
    to repeat actions of this type and target him and/or other  members  of
    his family.  That would be all the more likely because  on  return  the
    appellant would clearly be required, in order to defend himself against
    the accusations of kidnapping, to stand up to the local MQM and seek to
    have them charged for the two murders of his  brother  and  wife.   The
    evidence does not demonstrate that in relation to these past events the
    police had taken specific steps to protect the appellant and his family
    and in the context of what had happened it was not justifiable for  the
    local court to have released the two  MQM  suspects  without  at  least
    ensuring the appellant would receive additional protection

40.   When taken together the circumstances particular  to  the  appellant's
    case gave rise to a compelling basis for holding that  the  authorities
    in Pakistan would be unlikely  to  provide  the  additional  protection
    which the circumstances particular to the appellant reasonably require.

Decision

41.   We accordingly allow the appeal on asylum grounds and on human  rights
    grounds.

42.   We do not consider this an appropriate case in  which  to  expect  the
    appellant to show he  would  not  have  a  viable  option  of  internal
    relocation.  For reasons given earlier, it was not in dispute that  the
    FIR raised against him on charges of kidnapping  were  likely  to  mean
    that wherever he went in Pakistan the authorities would hand  him  over
    to the police in Karachi.

43.     To conclude:

The Immigration  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  and  we  set  aside  his
decision.
The decision we remake is to allow the appellant's appeal.

Signed

Lord Bannatyne


                 APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED



|     |                                               |                |
|Item |Document                                       |Date            |
|1    |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |28 July 2009    |
|     |Information Report: Pakistan"                  |                |
|2    |Daily Nawa-I-Waqt, "Murder of Tehsil           |20 July 2009    |
|     |Administrator, Muree, protest against the case |                |
|     |against a member of the People's Party.        |                |
|     |......Procession against DSP and SHO, Shah     |                |
|     |Nazar. 4 teams organised by RPO, raids at      |                |
|     |different places, 10 persons arrested."        |                |
|     |(certified translation dated 30 September 2009)|                |
|3    |CDG Rawalpindi, "Contacts List"                |22 April 2009   |
|4    |BBC, "Clashes mark protest in Pakistan"        |12 March 2009   |
|5    |Pakistan Elections 2008, "Summary"             |27 February 2009|
|6    |Wikipedia, "Cabinet of Pakistan"               |7 February 2009 |
|7    |Wikipedia, "Ishrat-ul-Ibad Khan"               |7 February 2009 |
|8    |GEO Pakistan, "Political alliance necessary for|12 January 2009 |
|     |country's security: Altaf, Rehman Malik"       |                |
|9    |MQM, "Federal Advisor for Interior Mr Rehman   |11 January 2009 |
|     |Malik met Mr Altaf Hussain at MQM International|                |
|     |Secretariat in London"                         |                |
|10   |The International News, "MQM poised to join    |20 December 2008|
|     |federal govt"                                  |                |
|11   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |5 November 2008 |
|     |Information Report: Pakistan"                  |                |
|12   |The International News, "Local govt issues to  |18 September    |
|     |be resolved amicably: Zardari"                 |2008            |
|13   |The International News, "Rahman Malik meets    |9 May 2008      |
|     |Altaf Hussain in London"                       |                |
|14   |GEO Pakistan, "MQM to become part of Sindh     |30 April 2008   |
|     |government"                                    |                |
|15   |The International News, "IG to be briefed on   |23 April 2008   |
|     |probes into May 12, Dec 27 incidents"          |                |
|16   |Weekly Pulse, "MQMs battle for survival"       |19 April 2008   |
|17   |Dawn, "MQM urged to review decision"           |14 April 2008   |
|18   |Pakistan Elections 2007, "MQM to sit on        |14 April 2008   |
|     |opposition benches"                            |                |
|19   |Sindh Today, "Shoaib Suddle upgraded, named    |12 April 2008   |
|     |Sindh IG"                                      |                |
|20   |Pakistan Link, "MQM names election candidates  |December 2007   |
|     |for NWFP"                                      |                |
|21   |Dawn, "Karachi: JWP slams Muttahida for        |29 May 2007     |
|     |'indecent' graffiti"                           |                |
|22   |Teeth Maestro, "MQM threatens 20 journalists"  |25 May 2007     |
|23   |The International News, "Eight more die in     |15 May 2007     |
|     |Karachi"                                       |                |
|24   |Dawn, "Karachi: PPP blames Musharraf, MQM for  |14 May 2007     |
|     |violence"                                      |                |
|25   |Webindia, "Karachi clash toll 34, Musharraf    |13 May 2007     |
|     |against Emergency"                             |                |
|26   |The Peninsula, "US think-tank lists MQM as     |6 May 2007      |
|     |militant outfit"                               |                |
|27   |Refworld, "Pakistan: Information on Mohajir/   |09 February 2007|
|     |Muttahida Qaumi Movement-Altaf (MQM-A)"        |                |
|28   |MQM, "Pakistan is in great danger - Altaf      |13 January 2007 |
|     |Hussain"                                       |                |
|29   |The Frontier Post, "Ahmad Shah Masoud provides |16 April 1999   |
|     |shelter to most wanted terrorists"             |                |






