

                     IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Field House                                   Date of Hearing:
18 December 2007


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Clements

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Skopje
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. D. O'Callaghan instructed by B H
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr. J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The burden of proving that a marriage is not a "marriage of
convenience" for the purposes of the EEA Regulations rests on the
appellant: but he is not required to discharge it in the absence of
evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage is one of
convenience (i.e. there is an evidential burden on the Respondent). See
also AG [2007] UKAIT 00075. (2) An EEA family permit is not "Entry
Clearance" and so is not caught by s 85(5).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is from Kosovo.  He appealed to the Tribunal against  the
    decision of the respondent on 24 August 2006 refusing him an EEA family
    permit.  The Immigration Judge dismissed  his  appeal.   The  appellant
    sought and obtained an order  for  reconsideration.   Thus  the  matter
    comes before us.

 2. The basis of  the  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  married  to  a
    Lithuanian national exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    whom we shall call the "sponsor".  The marriage took place in Kosovo on
    24 May 2006.  The application was made and decided under reg  12(1)  of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   (SI
    2006/1003).  That regulation requires a family permit to be issued,  on
    application, to a person who is the "family member" of an EEA  national
    who  is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with   the
    Regulations, which the sponsor was and is.  "Family member" is  defined
    in reg 7(1)(a) as including a spouse, but in reg  2  entitled  "general
    interpretation", is found the following:

      "-(1) In these Regulations-
      ...
        "spouse" does not include a party to a marriage of convenience".

    The respondent's refusal, and the Immigration Judge's dismissal of  the
    appeal, are both based on a conclusion that the  marriage  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor is a marriage of convenience.

 3. Before looking in detail at the  facts  of  the  present  case,  it  is
    convenient  to  deal  with  the  first  ground  for  review  which  Mr.
    O'Callaghan argues on the appellant's  behalf,  which  relates  to  the
    burden of proof.  The Immigration  Judge  decided  that  the  appellant
    before him had the burden of establishing that his marriage was not one
    of convenience.  Mr. O'Callaghan  submits  that  that  was  wrong.   He
    submits that the burden of proof is on  the  respondent  to  prove  the
    marriage to be one of convenience.

 4. So far as we are aware, this issue has not previously been the  subject
    of judicial decision.  In Chang [2001]  UKIAT  00012,  a  starred  case
    dealing  with  a  number  of  matters  in  relation  to  marriages   of
    convenience, the respondent accepted the burden of proof.  The Tribunal
    said this:

        "43.     Before the Adjudicator  it  was  common  ground  that  the
             Respondent had the  burden  of  proving  that  the  Appellant's
             marriage was a 'sham'. The position before us was the same. For
             the purposes of this determination we accept it, but it appears
             to us that that position (as to both burden and standard) might
             properly be reconsidered in some other case. So far as concerns
             burden, the burden of proof is, as a matter of the general law,
             usually on the  party  who  asserts.  We  should,  if  we  were
             required to make a decision on the matter, have  been  inclined
             rather to say that it is the Appellant who asserts that he is a
             spouse who has a right of residence than that he merely asserts
             that he is a spouse, leaving the Respondent to deny that he has
             a right of residence. We are fortified  in  that  view  by  the
             provisions of Rule 31 of the 1984 Rules (which applied to  this
             appeal before the Adjudicator). So far as concerns standard,  a
             high standard is  appropriate  in  cases  where  misconduct  is
             alleged: but, as at present advised, we are not persuaded  that
             there is anything inherently wrong in marrying for  convenience
             and taking any advantages that flow  from  the  relationship  -
             provided, of course, that no deception is involved.".




    In VK [2004] UKIAT 00305, the Tribunal said this:

      "16.  It was common ground between the parties that  it  was  for  the
             Secretary of State to prove that the marriage was a marriage of
             convenience. This  concession  is,  presumably,  based  on  the
             general position in common law  that  a  person  who  makes  an
             assertion has to prove it. We are aware of the starred decision
             of the Tribunal in Chang ... that  left  open  the  possibility
             that the proper approach was for the Appellant  who  wanted  to
             take advantage of her married status to prove that her marriage
             was not a marriage of convenience and therefore excluded by the
             Rules. [The Tribunal] was careful to  state  in  that  decision
             that the Tribunal did not have to decide the point.  Whilst  it
             must remain open  to  argument  we  find,  given  the  specific
             concession of the Secretary of State, that unless the Secretary
             of State makes it plain in a particular case that  he  takes  a
             different position (in which case the question will have to  be
             reconsidered)  it  is  now  established  that  it  is  for  the
             Secretary of State to prove that a marriage is  a  marriage  of
             convenience if that is what he alleges. For the reasons already
             discussed it is clear that the Adjudicator  accepted  this  and
             set out to apply it."

 5. In the  present  appeal  the  Presenting  Officer,  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State, did indeed make it  clear  that  the  Secretary  of
    State took a different position.  He submitted to the Immigration Judge
    that the appellant bore the burden of proving that his marriage was not
    a marriage of convenience.

 6. In the circumstances Mr. O'Callaghan  was  not  able  to  rely  on  the
    previous decisions on the issue as settling the question in his favour.
     He did, however, point to them as  an  indication  of  what  might  be
    regarded as established practice.  He  reminded  us  of  the  notorious
    difficulty of  proving  a  negative,  of  the  fact  that  it  was  the
    respondent who had raised the issue of whether the marriage was one  of
    convenience, and that the question ought to be decided in  the  context
    of  any  relevant  rules  of  European  law,  because  the  Regulations
    implement the Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC.  Mr. Gulvin told  us  that
    he proposed to repeat the argument of the  Presenting  Officer  to  the
    Immigration Judge, and was fortified in that view by  what  had  fallen
    from the Tribunal in the course of Mr. O'Callaghan's submissions.

 7. We have reached the firm conclusion that the burden of  proof  lies  on
    the appellant.  There are a number of reasons for this: perhaps none is
    in itself decisive, but together we regard the  result  as  compelling.
    The first is that, generally speaking, it is for the appellant to prove
    his case.  As the Tribunal pointed out in Chang, it is probably  better
    to put the appellant's case as that of being a spouse entitled  to  the
    benefits of the Directive and the Regulations rather than merely  being
    a spouse.  In a case  such  as  the  present,  an  applicant  needs  to
    establish that his sponsor is a person exercising  treaty  rights,  and
    that he himself is related in a particular way  to  the  sponsor.   The
    relationship has to be the relationship defined by the Regulations, and
    in the case of the relationship of spouses, part of that definition  is
    that the marriage is  not  one  of  convenience.   So  the  appellant's
    general duty to prove his case  includes  a  duty  to  prove  that  his
    marriage is not one of convenience.

 8. The second reason tends to reach the same conclusion  by  a  completely
    different route.  If the first reason does not persuade, that would  be
    because the provision that a marriage does not include  a  marriage  of
    convenience is not an essential part  of  what  the  appellant  has  to
    prove, but is something additional which may arise in some cases.   But
    then rule 53 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005 (SI 2005/230), which  is  the  successor  of  rule  31,  to  which
    reference was made  in  Chang,  has  relevance.   That  rule  reads  as
    follows:

      "Burden of proof
          53.-(1) If an appellant asserts that a relevant decision ought not
                 to have been taken against  him  on  the  ground  that  the
                 statutory provision under which  that  decision  was  taken
                 does not apply to him, it is for that party to  prove  that
                 the provision does not apply to him.
            (2) If -
                  (a) an appellant asserts any fact; and
                  (b)  by  virtue  of  an  Act,  statutory  instrument   or
                    immigration rules, if he had made such an  assertion  to
                    the Secretary of State, an  immigration  officer  or  an
                    entry clearance officer, it would have been for  him  to
                    satisfy the Secretary  of  State  or  officer  that  the
                    assertion was true, it is for  the  appellant  to  prove
                    that the fact asserted is true."

 9. There may be some doubt about the meaning of "statutory  provision"  in
    rule 53(1).  It clearly excludes  the  Immigration  Rules.   Given  the
    formulation in rule 53(2), there seems to be no reason  to  suppose  it
    does not include both Acts and statutory instruments, because if it was
    intended to apply to Acts alone one would have thought that  that  word
    would have been used in the first paragraph as  it  is  in  the  second
    paragraph of the rule.  It was not suggested before us that  "statutory
    provision" in rule 53(1) does not include a statutory instrument.   The
    EEA Regulations are a statutory instrument.  As we have indicated,  reg
    2 of those Regulations provide that  a  marriage  does  not  include  a
    marriage of convenience, and it seems to us that, in  a  case  such  as
    this, the appellant is asserting that that provision does not apply  to
    him in the sense that it is irrelevant  to  the  determination  of  his
    application.  If that is right, it follows that the burden of proof  is
    placed on the appellant by the Procedure Rules.

10. The third reason is to be found in the relevant provisions of  EU  law.
    So far as concerns the Citizens Directive,  although  "spouse"  is  not
    defined so as to exclude marriages of convenience, there  is  no  doubt
    that "spouse"  in  EU  law  bears  a  meaning  excluding  marriages  of
    convenience.  Article 35 of the Directive is as follows:

      "Abuse of rights
        Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse, terminate
        or withdraw any right conferred by this Directive in  the  case  of
        abuse of rights or fraud, such as marriages  of  convenience.   Any
        such measure shall be proportionate and subject to  the  procedural
        safeguards provided for in Articles 30 and 31."

      Preamble 28 is as follows:

            "To guard against abuse of rights or  fraud,  notably  marriages
        of convenience or any other form of  relationships  contracted  for
        the sole purpose  of  enjoying  the  right  of  free  movement  and
        residence, Member States should have the possibility to  adopt  the
        necessary measures."


11. The problem of marriages of convenience  has  been  recognised  by  the
    community authorities for  many  years.   Council  Resolution  12337/97
    includes the following text, which has never replaced or superseded:

            "...
           Noting that marriages  of  convenience  constitute  a  means  of
        circumventing the rules on entry  and  residence  of  third-country
        nationals,
            ...
            Whereas this resolution is without prejudice to Community law,
            ...
      3.  Where there are factors which support  suspicions  for  believing
        that the marriage is one of convenience, Member States shall  issue
        a residence permit or an authority to reside to  the  third-country
        national on the basis of the marriage only  after  the  authorities
        competent under national law have checked that the marriage is  not
        one of convenience, and that the other conditions relating to entry
        and residence have been fulfilled.  Such  checking  may  involve  a
        separate interview with each of the two spouses.
      4.  Should the authorities competent  under  national  law  find  the
        marriage  to  be  one  of  convenience,  the  residence  permit  or
        authority to reside granted  on  the  basis  of  the  third-country
        national's marriage shall as a general rule be  withdrawn,  revoked
        or not renewed."

12. As the Tribunal remarked in Chang,

        "Of  course  a  Resolution  ...  cannot  override  any  legislative
        provision: indeed this one is  specifically  subject  to  Community
        law.  We are, however, entirely unable to accept  [the  appellant's
        representative's] submission  that  it  'has  nothing  to  do  with
        European law'.  It is a statement by one of the legislative bodies,
        and as such is entitled  to  respect.   It  relates  to  a  subject
        covered by Council Directives, which are  themselves  not  entirely
        clear.  In addition, it would be surprising if (as [the appellant's
        representative] essentially  has  to  claim)  the  Council  was  so
        ignorant of its own legislation that it was capable  of  passing  a
        Resolution the whole contents of which were contrary  to  Community
        law.  We decline to accept that thesis."

13. It is clear that the terms of the Citizens Directive allow National law
    to  make  regulations  to  prevent  abuses  founded  on  marriages   of
    convenience.  So far as the detection of such marriages  is  concerned,
    it is clear from the Council Resolution  that  the  relevant  residence
    documents are not to be issued if  there  are  "factors  which  support
    suspicions for believing that the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience",
    until the suspicions are resolved  in  the  applicant's  favour.   That
    appears to us to be a clear indication  that,  so  far  as  EU  law  is
    concerned, the burden of proof, as it is called in English  law,  rests
    on the appellant, because, the suspicions  having  arisen,  the  matter
    will be resolved against him unless the suspicions are resolved in  his
    favour.  The Resolution clearly indicates that what Wigmore calls  "the
    risk of non-persuasion" is borne by the appellant.

14. As we have said, these three reasons taken together lead us to the view
    that the burden of proving that a marriage is not  one  of  convenience
    lies on the appellant.  We would,  however,  also  associate  ourselves
    with the wording of the Council Resolution to this extent.   Not  every
    applicant needs to prove that his marriage is not one  of  convenience.
    The need to do so only arises where there  are  factors  which  support
    suspicions  for  believing  the  marriage  is   one   of   convenience.
    Translated into the technical language of the English law of  procedure
    and evidence, that means that there is  an  evidential  burden  on  the
    respondent.  If there is no evidence that could  support  a  conclusion
    that the marriage is one of convenience, the appellant does not have to
    deal with the issue.  But once the issue is raised, by evidence capable
    of pointing to a conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience, it
    is for  the  appellant  to  show  that  his  marriage  is  not  one  of
    convenience.

15. If the burden of proof were on the respondent, there would be room  for
    argument that the standard should be higher than the  standard  of  the
    balance of probabilities.  As we have  noted,  the  Tribunal  in  Chang
    thought that there was  no  reason  in  principle  to  apply  a  higher
    standard.  R(CPS) v Registrar General of Births, Deaths  and  Marriages
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1661, to which Mr. O'Callaghan  referred  us,  suggests
    the same.  As the burden is on the appellant, however, there can be  no
    reason at all for supposing that the standard is higher than that of  a
    balance of probabilities.

16. In the light of those conclusions we turn now to the facts of this case
    and the issues before us on reconsideration.

17. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 21 August 1998 and  claimed
    asylum.  The application was refused  over  three  years  later  on  15
    October 2001 and the appellant appealed.  His appeal was  heard  by  an
    Immigration Adjudicator, who dismissed it in a  determination  dated  5
    March 2003.  The determination was before  the  Immigration  Judge  who
    noted that at that time the appellant was living with his sister.   The
    appellant's case is that he first met his wife on 18 February 2004,  at
    a friend's house: the appellant was still then in the  United  Kingdom.
    They began a relationship in August 2004 and  started  living  together
    then.  In August 2005 they decided to get married.   In  December  2005
    the appellant was removed from the United Kingdom; and the sponsor went
    to Kosovo to marry him in 2006.  In connection with his application the
    appellant was interviewed.  On the basis of the  material  before  him,
    the Entry Clearance Officer refused his  application  because,  as  the
    Entry Clearance Officer put it:

      "I am not satisfied, on the balance of  probabilities  that  you  have
        not entered into a bogus  and  sham  marriage  of  convenience  for
        immigration purposes merely to facilitate your re-entry to the UK.

      You claimed that you initially went to the UK  in  1998  illegally  in
        the back of a lorry then sought to remain permanently in a category
        outside of the Immigration Rules.  This application was refused and
        you claim you returned to Kosovo voluntarily in December 2005.  You
        were unable to give me satisfactory answers to questions concerning
        your wife.  These were very basic questions which if your  marriage
        was genuine and not a bogus one entered into solely for Immigration
        purposes I would have expected you to know.  In  addition  at  your
        interview you gave details of where and when you  lived  with  your
        wife in the UK.  These details did  not  tally  with  some  of  the
        documentation that you submitted with your  application.   If  your
        marriage was not a bogus one which had not been entered into solely
        for immigration purposes to facilitate your re-entry to the UK then
        I would not have expected you to give such answers."

      The respondent's reasons for  refusal  conclude  with  the  indication
    that he has given consideration to Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.

18. In view of the phraseology used by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  we
    pause at this moment to notice the terms  of  a  Home  Office  document
    giving general information  on  marriage,  which  Mr.  O'Callaghan  put
    before us.  At para 5 is the following:

      "Bogus marriages and marriages of convenience
        1. Bogus marriages are  invalid  or  entirely  fictitious  and  may
           involve forgery or  misuse  of  documents  relating  to  another
           person.  It should be recognised that a marriage which  involves
           impersonation may still be a valid marriage, and that it is  the
           impersonator who is legally married and not the  identity  which
           he or she has used.
        2. Marriages of convenience are contracted for the specific purpose
           of evading Immigration control or gaining  an  easier  route  to
           citizenship."


19. There is no real doubt in the present case that the parties are in  law
    husband and wife.  Despite the wording  used  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, their marriage is not "bogus" in the sense  indicated  by  the
    Home Office document.  It is clear that the respondent has at all times
    treated the marriage as formally  valid.   The  issue  is  whether  the
    marriage is one of  convenience,  a  phrase  also  used  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

20. The Immigration Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  had
    substantial documentary evidence.  In his determination  he  notes  and
    analyses the particular points made in the notice of refusal and points
    out  various  inconsistencies  or  irregularities  in   the   evidence,
    considers the explanations he has been given, and largely rejects them.
     He notes the lack of oral evidence from the appellant's sister who had
    clearly been expected to give evidence.  He noted that  he  asked  "the
    appellant" (meaning, presumably, the sponsor) what she would do if  the
    appeal were to be refused: would she live in Kosovo?  She replied  that
    she would continue to live in the United Kingdom: she could not live in
    Kosovo as she did not understand the language. At the hearing she  said
    this through a Lithuanian interpreter; it is, however, clear  that  the
    sponsor has  learned  a  good  deal  of  English,  and  was  using  the
    interpreter for clarity and as directed by the Immigration Judge.   The
    Immigration Judge concluded his determination as follows:

       "Having  considered  all  the  evidence  in   the   round   including
        specifically the whole of the  interview  (and  particularly  those
        questions referred to by the representatives), I conclude that  the
        appellant has not satisfied me that this is a genuine marriage.   I
        have  considered  all  the  factors  which  tended  to   show   the
        relationship  was  genuine  against  all  those   which   indicated
        otherwise.  I conclude that it was a marriage that has been entered
        in to circumvent immigration  control.   There  is  no  documentary
        evidence of the couple ever having lived together.  The explanation
        that is provided for lack of such  documentation  relates  only  to
        documentation  from  the  Home  Office  not  from  elsewhere.   The
        appellant's sister could have provided evidence going to the nature
        and genuiness of the  relationship.   She  did  not  give  evidence
        despite there being an indication that such evidence would be given
        in the notice of appeal.  No explanation for this lack of  evidence
        was forthcoming.  The sponsor  and  the  appellant's  evidence  was
        contradictory on important issues, the explanation that there  were
        interpreter problems at the interview being raised  for  the  first
        time at the hearing by the sponsor, with  no  explanation  for  why
        this was not raised earlier.

      I do not find the appellant's, or the sponsor's, evidence relating  to
        the nature of the relationship to be  credible.   For  the  reasons
        given above, the Appellant  has  failed  to  satisfy  me  that  the
        immigration decision made was wrong on the  basis  of  any  of  the
        grounds set out in section 84 of the 2002  Act  or  under  the  EEA
        Regulations.  I therefore dismiss his appeal entirely."

21. The grounds  for  review  suggest  firstly  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's use of the word "bogus" means that the parties never intended
    to live together.  That, as we have indicated, is not the issue  before
    us.  But, with more substance, the grounds point out that  the  sponsor
    has been to Kosovo on three occasions, for a week in February 2006, for
    a week in May 2006 during which the wedding took  place,  and  for  ten
    days in October 2006.  The grounds also point out that the  Immigration
    Judge  had  before  him  photographs,  including  photographs  of   the
    appellant and the sponsor in nightwear, and that they  "clearly  looked
    comfortable with each other".  The other grounds are that  the  sponsor
    had sought an adjournment of the appeal on the basis of feeling unwell:
    the adjournment had been refused and no reasons had been given and that
    "the Immigration Judge has not established as to  why  it  was  in  the
    interest of justice to proceed with the hearing".  Lastly, it  is  said
    that the Immigration Judge ought not to have been "critical of the fact
    that the appellant's sister failed to attend the hearing", particularly
    because no issue as to her non-appearance was  raised  at  the  hearing
    itself.

22. So far as the last point is concerned, it is not a matter of criticism.
     The Immigration Judge had decided that the burden of proof was on  the
    appellant, and noted, as he was perfectly entitled to do,  the  absence
    of evidence from one particular source.  Absence  of  evidence  is  not
    itself evidence: but the absence of evidence may well hinder a  party's
    ability to discharge the burden of proof.  The Immigration  Judge  made
    no error in making the comments he did.  The  fact  that  it  had  been
    expected that the appellant's sister would be at the hearing, and  that
    arrangements had been made for her to give evidence, merely drew to his
    attention the absence of her evidence  and  the  consequent  difficulty
    that the appellant had in discharging the burden of proof.  So  far  as
    the adjournment is concerned, the position is that the  presumption  in
    rule 21(2) is against adjournment.  It  was  not  for  the  Immigration
    Judge to establish that it was in the interest of justice  to  proceed:
    it was for the party seeking adjournment to show  that  an  adjournment
    was necessary.  We have been referred to a witness statement,  made  by
    the sponsor since the hearing of the appeal, in which she asserts  that
    she was not feeling well because of depression, but  we  note  that  in
    correspondence in relation to the reconsideration, it has been asserted
    that, for the same reason, she seeks an  early  determination  of  this
    appeal.  It seems to us that there is no reason  to  suppose  that  the
    sponsor was unable because of illness  to  tell  the  truth  about  her
    marriage and her relationship with the appellant, nor  that  any  other
    day for the hearing would have been any better than the one  originally
    fixed.  There is no substance in this ground for reconsideration.

23.  So far as concerns the Immigration Judge's treatment of the  evidence,
    there was no doubt that he was fully aware  of  at  least  two  of  the
    sponsor's journeys to Kosovo because he mentions them specifically.  He
    also had the  photographs  before  him.   We  do  not  think  that  the
    Immigration Judge can properly be criticised for not drawing  from  the
    photographs the  conclusions  suggested  in  the  grounds  for  review.
    Photographs of people apparently "comfortable with each other", with or
    without members of their family and friends,  exist  in  what  must  be
    millions.  It would be quite wrong to assume that the subjects of  such
    photographs live together as husband and wife or intend to do so.   The
    photographs add nothing to the appellant's case.

24. Nor, as it seems to us,  does  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's  three
    journeys to Kosovo cast any doubt on the  Immigration  Judge's  overall
    conclusions.  Given that a  marriage  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor has taken place, if it is a marriage of convenience, then  that
    is a matter with which they  are  both  concerned.   It  would  not  be
    surprising if the sponsor continued to maintain the outward form  of  a
    relationship with the appellant.  The Immigration Judge did not  regard
    the sponsor, who gave oral evidence before  him,  as  credible  on  the
    circumstances of her relationship with the appellant, and any travel by
    her has to be seen in that context.  Looking at the matter as  a  whole
    as we do it does not appear to us that the Immigration Judge  erred  in
    his conclusions on the evidence before him.

25. There is one other matter to which we should refer.  In para 9  of  his
    determination the Immigration Judge said  that  by  virtue  of  Section
    85(5) of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  he  was
    required only to take into account circumstances  appertaining  at  the
    time of the decision to  refuse.   That  was  wrong.   The  restriction
    imposed by s 85(5) applies only  to  "refusal  of  entry  clearance  or
    refusal of a certificate  of  entitlement".   Although  an  EEA  family
    permit under reg 12 of the EEA Regulations is similar in  its  function
    to entry clearance, it is not entry  clearance  and  is  therefore  not
    caught by the terms of s 85(5).  The Immigration Judge was entitled  to
    look at all evidence  "relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
    including evidence which concerns a matter arising after  the  date  of
    the decision".  The Immigration Judge's error may be connected with his
    failure to mention the sponsor's visit to Kosovo in October  2006,  but
    there is no doubt that he did consider a number of  items  of  evidence
    that post-dated the decision, and his general conclusion  is  expressed
    in contemporaneous, rather than historical terms.  In  the  context  of
    the evidence before him as a whole and the way he dealt with  it,  this
    is a small error and one which had no perceptible effect on the outcome
    of the appeal

26. Mr. O'Callaghan suggested to us that a marriage that was a marriage  of
    convenience at his inception might become a marriage that was  not  one
    of convenience in due course.  We do not think that that issue strictly
    arises on the facts of this appeal, because the Immigration  Judge  was
    not prepared to accept the evidence of the relationship at  any  stage.
    For the avoidance of doubt  we  should  indicate  that  we  reject  Mr.
    O'Callaghan's submission.  The relationship which  gives  rise  to  any
    rights under EU law and  the  Regulations  is  the  marriage,  formerly
    valid, and entered into at a  specific  time  and  place.   It  is  the
    ceremony and the act which count for  these  purposes  and  it  is  the
    ceremony and the act which, in the circumstances that give rise to  it,
    amount to or do not amount to a  "marriage  of  convenience".   If  the
    question had arisen on the facts of this case we should have held  that
    the development of a real relationship after  the  marriage  would  not
    have assisted the appellant in his claim based on the marriage itself.

27. The Immigration Judge's assessment of the evidence before him discloses
    no material error of law.  In our view he was also correct in the  view
    he took on the incidence of the burden of proof.  It follows  that  his
    determination as a whole contains no  material  error  of  law  and  we
    accordingly order that it shall stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
