
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

YF (double jeopardy - JC confirmed) China CG [2011] UKUT 32 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 28 October 2010                   |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ROBERTS



                                   Between

                                     yf

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Solicitor instructed by Halliday Reeves
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer




1.    The guidance given by the Tribunal in JC (double jeopardy: Art 10  CL)
    China CG [2008] UKAIT 00036 is confirmed save for the addition  of  the
    words underlined immediately below:

          "The risk of prosecution or reprosecution will be  a  question  of
    fact in individual cases but is more likely where (a) there has been  a
    substantial amount of adverse publicity within China about a case;  (b)
    the  proposed  defendant  has  significantly  embarrassed  the  Chinese
    authorities by their actions overseas; (c)  the  offence  is  unusually
    serious.  Generally, snakehead cases do not have the significance  they
    have in the West and are regarded  as  ordinary  (but  serious)  crimes
    requiring no  special  treatment;  (d)  political  factors  (which  may
    include the importance attached by the Chinese authorities to  cracking
    down on drugs offenders) may increase the likelihood of prosecution  or
    reprosecution; and (e) the  Chinese  Government  is  also  particularly
    concerned about corruption of Chinese officialdom."

2.     Reprosecution/double   punishment   of   a   returnee   through   the
    administrative disciplinary procedure  system  is  extremely  unlikely,
    since for a person to be considered under this system by virtue  of  an
    overseas offence the Chinese authorities must have decided his case was
    not serious enough to justify reprosecuting him  through  the  criminal
    law system.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a national of Peoples  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  or
    China, born on 8 July 1968.  He was born in the Zhe Jiung province near
    Shanghai. By his own admission he entered the UK illegally in  February
    2008.   In  May  the  same  year  he  was  arrested  and  charged  with
    cultivating cannabis and on 23 July 2008 he was convicted of  producing
    cannabis, then a Class C controlled drug.  On 3  October  2008  he  was
    sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, serving approximately 9 months of
    that.  A pre-sentence report said that the appellant  was  found  in  a
    rented property in Blyth, Northumberland, tending 407  growing  plants.
    The sentencing judge noted  that  whilst  he  had  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant had been subjected to exploitation at  a  serious  level  and
    whilst he was sure the appellant was not one of the  gang  involved  in
    cannabis drug production, nevertheless in his  judgment  the  appellant
    could have left the premises if he chose to. After serving 9 months  he
    was re-detained under Immigration Act powers.  In November 2008 he  was
    informed that he may be subject to automatic deportation under  s.32(5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

2.    An application he made for asylum was refused on 3 June and on 9  June
    2009 a deportation order was signed.  He appealed.  In a  determination
    notified on 12 August 2009 a panel comprising Immigration Judge  Zucker
    and Mr B Yates dismissed  his  appeal.   However  his  application  for
    reconsideration  was  successful  and  on  24  November   2009   Senior
    Immigration Judge Perkins found that the panel had erred in law "by not
    having sufficient regard to the evidence before it that pointed to    a
    contrary result [the appellant being at risk of ill-treatment by reason
    of his involvement in drug  offences  in  the  United  Kingdom]."   SIJ
    Perkins noted that the question raised before him was whether and/or to
    what extent the guidance given in JC (double jeopardy: Art 10 CL) China
    CG [2008] UKAIT 00036 identified particular risks for those involved in
    drugs offences.

3.    Further  directions  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  resulted  in  the
    production of an expert report by Professor  Michael  Dillon  dated  12
    April 2010 together with bundles of background documents  submitted  by
    both parties.  In passing we would observe that  although  the  parties
    did not adhere to the Tribunal direction to  produce  a  joint  bundle,
    sensibly they have largely avoided duplication.

4.    By virtue of legislative changes brought into effect  on  15  February
    2010 this appeal  now  falls  to  be  decided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).  This is not a case in which there is
    any dispute about the panel's primary findings of fact.

5.    Since there was a great deal of reference throughout  the  hearing  to
    the case of JC, it is as well to give a brief summary of it.

6.    JC was a national of PRC, who in 1999 along with 12 other Chinese  men
    was convicted following  trial  upon  indictment  of  various  offences
    relating to their capture of a group  of  trafficked  individuals  from
    China who had been brought illegally into the United Kingdom by a rival
    gang.  The appellant and the other gang members held the  rival  gang's
    hostages for ransom, forcing them to telephone relatives in  China  and
    making terrifying threats in telephone conversations with  the  Chinese
    relatives.  They also ill-treated the hostages at  a  level  which  the
    trial judge described as 'torture'.   The  sentencing  judge's  remarks
    make it clear that JC was one of five men regarded as at the  heart  of
    the conspiracy.  JC and  his  co-defendants  were  convicted  of  three
    counts of conspiracy all contrary to s.1(1) of  the  Criminal  Law  Act
    1977:  conspiracy  to  kidnap;  conspiracy  falsely  to  imprison;  and
    conspiracy to extort money from Chinese nationals in the United Kingdom
    and their Chinese relatives.  Several of JC's co-defendants  had  since
    been returned to China.  There was no evidence that they have  come  to
    harm; but again, there was no direct evidence that they had not.

 7. The Tribunal in JC had before it  written  reports  from  a  number  of
    expert witnesses: Professor Cohen, Professor  Palmer,  Dr  Gechlik,  Dr
    Dillon, Dr Sheehan and Professor  Fu  Hua  Ling  (hereafter  "Professor
    Fu").  It also heard  oral  evidence  from  several  of  these  experts
    including Dr Dillon and Professor Fu.  Under  the  subheading  "Country
    Background Evidence" the Tribunal observed:
    "People's Republic of China Criminal Law 1997 (CL): Articles 7  and  10
    (overseas offences)
        61.      Articles 7 and 10 of the CL permit the  Chinese  state  to
             prosecute  or  re-prosecute  Chinese  citizens   for   offences
             committed abroad ('overseas  offences').  Their  operation  and
             context is helpfully set out in Professor Fu's main report -
             "Article 7 and Article 10 of the Criminal Law (CL)
             1.   The power to re-prosecute in Article 10  of  the  Criminal
               Law (CL) derives from Article 7 of the CL.
             2.   Article 7 of the CL provides:
               "This Law shall be applicable to any citizen of the People's
               Republic of China who commits a crime prescribed in this Law
               outside the territory and territorial waters  and  space  of
               the People's Republic of  China.  However,  if  the  maximum
               punishment to be imposed is fixed-term imprisonment  of  not
               more than three years as stipulated in this Law, he  may  be
               exempted   from   the   investigation   for   his   criminal
               responsibility. This Law shall be applicable  to  any  State
               functionary or serviceman who commits a crime prescribed  in
               this Law outside the territory and  territorial  waters  and
               space of the People's Republic of China."
             3.   This provision  reflects  the  personality  principle  and
               allows the extra-territorial application of the CL.  Because
               of  this  application,  the  CL  follows  Chinese   citizens
               wherever  they  go,   and   Chinese   courts   always   have
               jurisdiction to punish Chinese citizens who  have  committed
               crimes overseas upon their return.
             4.  Even if a Chinese  citizen  has  already  been  tried  (and
               punished) in a foreign country, the Chinese  government  can
               re-prosecute the relevant citizen upon his return.
             Article 10 of the CL provides:
               "Any person who commits a crime outside  the  territory  and
               territorial waters and space of  the  People's  Republic  of
               China, for which  according  to  this  Law  he  should  bear
               criminal responsibility, may still be investigated  for  his
               criminal responsibility according to this Law,  even  if  he
               has already been tried in a foreign country. However, if  he
               has already received  criminal  punishment  in  the  foreign
               country, he may be  exempted  from  punishment  or  given  a
               mitigated punishment."
             5.  The rationale behind Article 10 of the CL is that China, as
               a  sovereign  state,  refuses  to  recognize  foreign  penal
               judgments unless such recognition arises in accordance  with
               any international agreement which China has signed. The rule
               against  double  jeopardy  does  not  apply  in   China   in
               principle.
             6. Importantly, decisions to prosecute or re-prosecute offences
               committed overseas under both Article 7 and Article  10  are
               discretionary. Under Article 7, CL  normally  applies  to  a
               crime committed by a Chinese citizen overseas  only  if  the
               offence  is  relatively  serious  (and  attracts  a  maximum
               sentence of more than three years) unless the offender is  a
               civil servant or a serviceman, in which  case  all  offences
               may, in theory, be prosecuted.
             7.   Article 10 is intended to avoid a  situation  in  which  a
               foreign court treats a Chinese offender with undue lenience.
               The article gives the procuracy the discretion to  prosecute
               or not to prosecute a Chinese citizen who  was  tried  by  a
               foreign court for an offence committed overseas depending on
               the seriousness  of  the  offence  committed  and  penalties
               imposed by the foreign courts. The Chinese procuracy may re-
               prosecute the offender for the same  offence  to  compensate
               for the undue lenience. The same article also authorizes the
               court to exempt the offender, when re-prosecuted,  from  any
               further  punishment  in  China  and  give   only   mitigated
               penalties depending  on  the  seriousness  of  the  overseas
               offence and the severity of the overseas penalty."
          1. Further guidance was available on the website maintained by the
             National People's Congress (NPC), China's highest parliamentary
             body and legislative authority. The NPC itself met only once  a
             year but had a Standing Committee working throughout the  year.
             The NPC website guidance on Articles 7  and  10,  published  in
             2002, was as follows -
             "May offences committed outside China's  territory  which  have
             already  been  adjudicated  by  a  foreign   court   still   be
             ascertained for criminal responsibility under China's  Criminal
             Law?
             According to the provisions of Article 10 of the CL, any person
             who commits a crime outside PRC territory and according to  the
             Criminal Law of the PRC should  bear  criminal  responsibility,
             even if she or he has been tried  in  a  foreign  country,  may
             still be investigated [for criminal  responsibility]  according
             to the Criminal  Law  of  the  PRC.  China  is  an  independent
             sovereign  state,  possessing  independent  power  of  criminal
             jurisdiction. It does not accept the binding force  of  foreign
             adjudication, and the power  of  its  jurisdiction  over  crime
             cannot be lost just because  such  criminal  conduct  has  been
             subjected to adjudication in another country. This provision in
             the criminal law, is a concrete manifestation of the  principle
             of Chinese sovereignty and  a  concrete  manifestation  of  the
             principle of protection in the CL.
             According to the provisions of the CL, crimes committed outside
             the territory of the People's Republic of  China  should  carry
             criminal responsibility. Most important are the  provisions  of
             Article 7 of the CL, under which the provisions of the Criminal
             Law [of the PRC] are applicable when  Chinese  citizens,  state
             personnel and members  of  the  armed  forces  commit  offences
             outside Chinese territory; the provisions of Article  8,  under
             which the provisions of the CL are  applicable  to  foreigners,
             who outside PRC territory, commit crimes against the PRC  state
             or against its citizens; and other concrete provisions  in  the
             criminal law concerning criminal responsibility. In  accordance
             with  the  basic  provisions  of  PRC  criminal  law,  criminal
             responsibility should be borne, even if a  [case  has]  already
             been tried by a foreign  court,  including  where  the  foreign
             court has delivered a verdict of not guilty  or  a  verdict  of
             guilty, and also if the foreign court has  imposed  a  criminal
             punishment or exempted [the offender] from criminal punishment.
             The PRC  is  not  bound  by  the  foreign  judgements,  and  in
             accordance with the criminal law of the PRC, the  PRC  judicial
             organs may still decide if such conduct constitutes a crime and
             the punishment to be imposed. The following  points  should  be
             given  attention  in  such  circumstances:  the  PRC  "may"  in
             accordance with the CL determine [criminal responsibility]  but
             does not have to determine [criminal responsibility]  -  it  is
             that the power to prosecute is retained to the extent  that  it
             decides whether it is desirable or not want to again  [try  the
             case] in accordance  with  PRC  criminal  law  and  necessarily
             decide [the case] in accordance  with  the  concrete  case  and
             concrete circumstances. For example, where a  convicted  person
             has already been tried by a foreign court, and sentenced  to  a
             certain punishment, although with reference to the  same  crime
             even if the punishment is  still  a  little  heavier,  but  the
             offender admits guilt, [and] in the enforcement of the sentence
             shows effective repentance, then the PRC may  [decide]  not  to
             carry out a determination [of guilt].
             In order to achieve the  purpose  of  effective  education  and
             change the [outlook of the] offender, and at the same  time  to
             respect foreign law, the Criminal Law  also  provides  that  in
             cases in which there has already been criminal punishment  then
             if the PRC must in accordance with the Criminal Law carry out a
             fresh trial, then the criminal punishment may  be  exempted  or
             reduced. In this stipulation, it is important to consider  that
             the offender has already been tried by the  foreign  court  and
             received criminal  punishment,  so  that  when  the  PRC  court
             handles  the  case,  then  in  accordance  with  the   concrete
             circumstances of the case, the court may exempt  punishment  or
             reduce punishment. Of course, the provisions of the CL  [state]
             "may" but this is not "should",  and  if  the  foreign  court's
             decision is obviously partial, resulting in an abnormally light
             sentence, the PRC of course may not be bound by the  [decision]
             in which there  is  exemption  or  reduction  of  the  criminal
             punishment. (Dated: April 17, 2002)".
8.    The Tribunal in JC went on to say about case reporting in China:

        "63.     Much of the information about the Chinese Court  case  law
             and reporting system provided by the expert witnesses  in  this
             appeal is entirely novel.  In particular, and  surprisingly  in
             the light of the reputation which the PRC has for secrecy,  all
             the witnesses referred us to at least one, and several to  more
             than one, web-accessible database of decided cases. The website
             most  frequently   mentioned   was   http://www.chinacourt.org/
             ('Chinacourt'), which is  sponsored  by  the  Supreme  People's
             Court and contains, in its Chinese version, over  25,000  cases
             approved  by  the  Supreme  People's  Court  and   edited   for
             publication.  Chinacourt is freely available to individuals and
             researchers all over the world, a significant  advance  on  the
             position set out in WC and in SC.  It came  into  existence  in
             the early 21st century, as did the BAILII website in the United
             Kingdom.

        64.      Professor Fu also had access to  the  www.chinalawinfo.com
             website ('Chinalawinfo')  maintained  by  the  Law  Faculty  of
             Peking University, a subscription-only site  with  much  better
             indexed information and more decisions (50,000 and rising).

        65.      We were told by all the experts of published  guidance  on
             the website maintained by the NPC Standing Committee ('the  NPC
             website'), and in particular of  what  amounts  to  a  practice
             direction held there since 2002, giving guidance to judges  and
             lawyers on  the  application  of  Articles  7  and  10  of  the
             CL[Criminal Law]."

    At para 122, when noting Dr Dillon's evidence the Tribunal stated:

        "122.    There had been a significant  change  in  availability  of
             court reports in China over the last ten years, due in part to
             improvements  in  technology.    Dr   Dillon   accepted   that
             Chinacourt  had  on   it   23,100   criminal   judgements   or
             thereabouts.  That was a  drop  in  the  ocean.   (By  way  of
             comparison, the principal public websites for  United  Kingdom
             judicial decisions date back to  the  same  period,  the  late
             1990s and the open access website of  the  British  and  Irish
             Legal Information Institute was available only from 2000)."

    At para 129 it added:

        "Dr Dillon was aware of a certain number of Article 7  and  Article
        10 [see para 7 above] cases but considered that he did not properly
        understand the Chinese authorities' motivation; he was not  certain
        that it was deterrence, more  a  question  of  national  pride  and
        patriotism.  If an overseas prosecution case  were  dealt  with  in
        Beijing, NGOs and  Governmental  organisations  from  abroad  could
        probably track it.  However, re-prosecution in Fujian province by a
        lower level Court would render it extremely difficult to  find  out
        what happened.  Torture was less likely in Beijing than in Fujian."

9.    The Tribunal referred in its decision to what it referred  to  as  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) 'double jeopardy'  letter,  which
    it described thus:

        "177.    On 15 July 2005,  in  response  to  an  enquiry  from  the
              Country of Origin Information unit of the  Home  Office,  the
              Research Analysts of the  North  Asia  and  Pacific  Research
              Group of  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  (based  in
              London) wrote setting out the  position  in  Chinese  law  in
              relation to Articles 10 and 7 of the  1997  Chinese  Criminal
              Code and adding:

                 'Following our recent correspondence, I am  confirming  our
                 understanding  that  the  concept  of  double  jeopardy  is
                 addressed in Chinese law.

                 Article 10 of the 1997 Criminal Code of the PRC states that
                 [see above para  7]...Article  7  states  [see  above  para
                 7]...'

              The circumstances under which an individual would be punished
              in China for a crime committed  in  a  foreign  country,  for
              which he had already  been  punished  in  that  country,  are
              unstipulated.  The Chinese authorities  are  more  likely  to
              take this action if the crime had received a lot of publicity
              in China, if the victims were  well-connected  in  China,  if
              there were a political angle to the original crime or if  the
              crimes were of a particular type that the authorities  wanted
              to make an example of  [sic].   Our  Embassy  in  Beijing  is
              unaware of such instances.  The  specific  inclusion  in  the
              Criminal Law of 'exemptions' from second punishment in  China
              for crimes committed abroad  suggests  that  the  authorities
              would not  take  further  action  against  ordinary  criminal
              offences.

              I can also confirm  that  we  have  no  means  of  monitoring
              Chinese citizens once they have returned to China."

10.   Having noted that none of the 5 cases identified in WC had turned  out
    on closer analysis to be genuine double jeopardy cases, at para 240 the
    Tribunal  then  referred  to  the  following  examples  identified   by
    Professor Wu and Dr Gechlik:


        "Article 7 Prosecutions


        a) In 1996, Chinese citizen  Chen  Xiangui  worked  for  a  Chinese
             construction company in Kuwait  but  became  unhappy  with  the
             working and living conditions. According to  the  judgment,  he
             incited workers to assault the managers, damaged  property  and
             caused disorder in  the  workplace.  Chen  was  prosecuted,  in
             China, for organising others in  disrupting  social  order  and
             causing substantial economic loss to  the  company.  The  court
             emphasized the aggravating  factor  of  negative  international
             impact that case might have and  sentenced  Chen  to  2  years'
             imprisonment. (This case was also mentioned in WC).

        b) In 2001, Chinese citizen Yao Ping, a caretaker of a Chinese monk
             who accompanied the monk to Nepal to work in  a  temple  there,
             was prosecuted in China for theft from the monk during his work
             in the  Nepalese  monastery,  of  a  notebook  computer,  video
             camera, a DVD player and a watch belonging  to  the  monk.   In
             convicting Yao, the court balanced the  aggravating  factor  of
             "undesirable   impact   to   the   Buddhist    community    and
             internationally" that Yao's crime had  created  with  the  fact
             that Yao had returned all the stolen goods. The  court  finally
             sentenced Yao to 5 years' imprisonment and a fine of 1,500  RMB
             for theft.

        c) In 2002, Chinese resident Xiang Jianhua was prosecuted in  China
             for conspiracy with another Chinese citizen  Chen  Guanping  to
             kidnap and falsely imprison Chinese  resident  Shen  Hong,  the
             offence being carried out in Yugoslavia, including  instructing
             two other Chinese citizens to open bank accounts in false names
             in Wenzhou and Beijing to receive the ransom money.   Shen  was
             assaulted during the course of detention. Xiang's  co-defendant
             telephoned Shen's family several  times,  threatening  to  kill
             Shen and demanding ransom in the amount  of  two  million  RMB,
             which was paid by Shen's father. The Yugoslavian Courts did not
             prosecute Xiang; he was returned to China (it is unclear  how),
             prosecuted and tried under Article  7 of the CL, convicted   of
             kidnapping and sentenced to 14 years' imprisonment, deprivation
             of political rights for 4 years and  a  fine  of  300,000  RMB.
             Xiang appealed against the decision; the appeal  was  dismissed
             on 9 October 2003.

        Article 10 Prosecutions

        a) In 1990, Ning Hong was convicted of causing  serious  injury  to
             another Chinese citizen in Kuwait  in  1990  and  sentenced  to
             imprisonment (the term is unknown). A few  months  later,  Iraq
             invaded Kuwait. The  prison  was  attacked.  Ning  escaped  and
             returned to China. After his return, he was identified  by  the
             person he attacked. The victim called the police and  Ning  was
             subsequently arrested, re-prosecuted, and re-convicted for  the
             same offence in China (Professor Fu)


        b) In June 1996, the Shandong PSB was considering investigating the
             criminal responsibility of  a  returned  Chinese  citizen  (Yao
             Weiye) who had committed a crime and been tried and punished by
             a court in Ukraine. However, the prison term  the  citizen  had
             served overseas might be taken  into  account  by  the  Chinese
             authorities  as  a  mitigating  factor   in   determining   his
             punishment. There is no further information as to how this case
             was handled eventually but the question of  re-prosecution  was
             at least considered. (Professor Fu and Dr Gechlik)

        c) In July  2001,  a  news  article  identified  the  case  of  Lin
             Xuecheng, convicted in the United States of smuggling more than
             60  illegal  immigrants  to  the  United  States,  tried,   and
             sentenced to 30 months imprisonment.  He  served  his  sentence
             and returned to China; upon his return, he was arrested by  the
             local Procuratorate.  Again, the final outcome of this case  is
             unknown.  (Dr Gechlik);

        d) In September 2007, a mainland Chinese citizen,  surname  Shi,  a
             convicted  arsonist  who  had  been  sentenced  to  9   months'
             imprisonment in the United States  and  then  deported  with  a
             warning as  to  his  mental  illness  from  the  United  States
             authorities  to  the  Chinese  authorities  was  given  lenient
             treatment by the Border police.   (Professor Fu)

        e) In February 2007, a news article reported that a  Mr.  Yang  was
             convicted  of  trafficking  illegal  drugs  to  Japan  and  was
             sentenced to five years imprisonment.  He was released in  late
             February  2007  and  deported  to   China   by   the   Japanese
             authorities.  Immediately upon his return, he was  "handled  in
             accordance with relevant legal rules" by the authorities at the
             Shanghai border. It is not  known  whether  that  included  re-
             prosecution. (Dr Gechlik)."

11.   Having assessed the evidence the Tribunal's  conclusions  in  JC  were
    summarised in a head note to the reported decision as follows:

        "1.      There is a risk  of  prosecution  or  reprosecution  under
             Articles 7 and 10 of the  Chinese  Criminal  Law  for  overseas
             offenders  returned  to  China.   However,  the  use  of  those
             provisions  is  discretionary  and  extremely   rare.    Absent
             particular aggravating factors, the risk falls well  below  the
             level required to engage  international  protection  under  the
             Refugee Convention, the ECHR, or humanitarian protection.   The
             risk of prosecution or reprosecution will be a question of fact
             in individual cases but is more likely where (a) there has been
             a substantial amount of adverse publicity within China about  a
             case; (b) the proposed defendant has significantly  embarrassed
             the Chinese authorities by  their  actions  overseas;  (c)  the
             offence is unusually serious.  Generally,  snakehead  cases  do
             not have the  significance  they  have  in  the  West  and  are
             regarded as ordinary (but serious) crimes requiring no  special
             treatment; (d) political factors may increase the likelihood of
             prosecution or reprosecution; and (e) the Chinese Government is
             also  particularly  concerned  about  corruption   of   Chinese
             officialdom.


        2. Prosecution under Article 7 or 10 is a fresh  prosecution.   The
             discretion to prosecute  is  exercised  in  the  light  of  the
             opinion of the Chinese authorities as to  whether  the  foreign
             jurisdiction dealt properly, and without undue  leniency,  with
             the offence.  It can  no  longer  be  said  that  there  is  no
             information available on the use of that power: the  Chinacourt
             database of cases and the NPC website guidance  are  maintained
             directly by the Chinese Government and  provides  guidance  for
             judges and lawyers on the use of these powers.


        3. The burden of proof does not shift to the Secretary of State  in
             double jeopardy cases.  The Court of Appeal decision in Adam  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ  265
             is not authority for such a proposition, particularly where the
             decision to re-prosecute is discretionary.


        4. In the light of our findings above, the decisions in WC (no risk
             of double punishment)  China  CG  [2004]  UKAIT  00253  and  SC
             (Double jeopardy? WC considered) China CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00007
             and are no longer to be treated  as  country  guidance  on  the
             double jeopardy question."

    The Tribunal in JC also considered the question of whether there was  a
    risk of persecution/double punishment for returning  Chinese  nationals
    through the Chinese administrative  or  disciplinary  procedure  system
    especially in the  form  of  laojiao  (education  through  labour).  It
    observed that all the experts (save for Dr Sheehan) were  adamant  that
    laojiao was not a likely approach to cases involving  serious  criminal
    offences; the system nationally was applied to  minor  law  violations:
    see paras 100-112, 120, 163, 167(d), 175, 254, 262, 273 (14-16).

12.   The further evidence before the Tribunal in this case is  itemised  in
    the Appendix. Here we  shall  confine  ourselves  to  highlighting  the
    evidence of Dr Dillon, further information supplied by  the  respondent
    in response to Tribunal directions and an article by Professor  Jianlin
    of China University of Political Science and Law entitled  "China:  the
    application of criminal procedural principles in  discipline  procedure
    in China".

Dr Dillon

Written report

13.   As just stated Dr Dillon was one of several experts who gave  evidence
    to the Tribunal in JC.  His report for this case  was  dated  12  April
    2010.  In it he notes that his most recent visit to China  was  in  May
    2009 as Visiting Professor in Contemporary Chinese Studies at  Tsinghua
    University, Beijing.  His report emphasised three interrelated  points.
    First, that the Chinese legal system is  very  much  a  closed  system,
    trials are rarely open to the public and the reporting  of  trials  and
    sentences is the exception rather than  the  rule  and  is  subject  to
    censorship and political control in the media.  Second, as a result  it
    is extremely difficult to glean reliable statistics on court decisions,
    sentences and executions.  Third, it is also  extremely  difficult  for
    those in the West to follow up the cases of individuals who  have  been
    returned to China to ascertain how they have been  dealt  with  by  the
    Chinese legal  system.   Further,  given  the  nature  of  the  Chinese
    political system it would not be possible to  have  confidence  in  any
    assurances given by government officials about the likely treatment  of
    an individual such as the appellant.

14.   Commenting on the expert evidence given  to  the  Tribunal  in  JC  Dr
    Dillon  took  issue  with  Professor  Fu's  evidence   concerning   the
    availability of case reports through the Chinese Courts' database.  The
    only substantial database covering legal cases of which Dr  Dillon  was
    aware was that by the Law Department at  Beijing  University.   It  was
    subscription only and was indicative of the drive towards  transparency
    advocated  by  academic  lawyers  rather  than  by  the  judiciary   or
    government.

15.   Addressing the letter of 15 July 2005  by  the  FCO  setting  out  its
    understanding of the Chinese law and  practice  on  re-prosecution,  Dr
    Dillon said this made clear  that  the  circumstances  under  which  an
    individual would be punished in  China  for  a  crime  committed  in  a
    foreign country, for which he had already been punished in that country
    are unstipulated.  However, it was possible to say that  re-prosecution
    was more likely if: (i) the crime had been publicised in China, (ii) if
    the accused were well-connected or (iii) if there was a political angle
    to the original crime or if the crimes were of a particular  type  that
    the authorities wanted to make an example  of.   The  appellant's  case
    would fall into the third category because he was a drug  offender  and
    the Chinese authorities currently took a hard line towards such  crimes
    as exemplified by its execution of foreigners in drugs cases  in  spite
    of pressure from the international community.  It was  also  pertinent,
    Dr Dillon's report stated, that the FCO letter confirmed  they  had  no
    means of monitoring Chinese citizens once they have returned to China.

16.   Dr Dillon stated that in China drugs offences had been  "politicised".
     This could be gleaned from two trends.  The first, already  mentioned,
    was the choice by the regime to make public the  execution  of  Chinese
    citizens found  guilty  of  drugs-related  offences  to  coincide  with
    International Anti-Drug Day.  The other  was  the  recently  publicised
    cases of executions for drugs-related offences of foreigners  (with  no
    previous connections to the PRC).  He cited the execution of 4 Japanese
    in April 2009 for smuggling drugs in north-east China and the execution
    of a Briton, Akmal Sheikh on 29 December 2009 despite protests from the
    FCO and credible evidence that he was mentally ill.  In  April  2010  a
    South African national, Janice Linden, had  been  sentenced  to  death.
    These cases illustrated the  draconian  attitude  being  taken  by  the
    Chinese authorities  to  the  smuggling  of  narcotics  and  the  clear
    determination by the Chinese authorities to assert the primacy  of  its
    own court and legal system, in spite of international criticism.

17.   All this entailed for the appellant, stated Dr Dillon, that  he  would
    face a real risk of re-prosecution in China and that the UK  government
    would not be in a position to monitor his  fate  or  seek  reassurances
    that he would not be re-prosecuted.  He would be detained, either in  a
    prison or a labour camp, and a sentence for his execution  was  a  real
    risk.

Oral Evidence

18.   In his evidence to us Dr Dillon said that he had  no  doubt  that  the
    Chinese authorities  held  a  detailed  database  of  court  cases  and
    sentences, but this was not publicly available.  His own check  of  the
    Chinacourt database had only found coverage of judgment debtors.  There
    were academic subscriptions using databases but these held  details  of
    only a small proportion of the criminal cases dealt with by the Chinese
    courts annually.  When he had spoken with Chinese academics and lawyers
    about this lack of transparency he had found them reluctant to  discuss
    it, which reflected a general  defensiveness  in  response  to  outside
    criticisms of China.

19.   Asked whether the publicity given within China  to  the  execution  of
    foreigners was initiated by the Chinese authorities  or  was  rather  a
    response to international media coverage, he said it  was  the  latter.
    At the same time he did consider that the Chinese authorities used such
    publicity in order to deter  foreigners  from  such  behaviour  and  to
    reassert   to   the   international   community    their    nationalist
    interpretation  of  Chinese  law.   Similarly,  in  relation  to  their
    publicising of the execution of Chinese citizens for drug crimes,  they
    did this for its deterrent effect.

20.   Dr Dillon said that the Chinese authorities had not  faced  a  serious
    drugs problem until the 1980s and its  reaction  since  then  had  been
    heavy-handed.  He was not aware of any particular regional variation in
    prosecutions: in all provinces, for example, there had been executions.

21.   Asked what he thought would happen to  the  appellant  on  return,  Dr
    Dillon said he would be handed over by the  airport  officials  to  the
    local police.

22.   It was important to remember, said Dr Dillon, that  someone  like  the
    appellant would not necessarily be dealt with through the court system;
    he could be dealt with administratively and in this  way  detained  and
    sent to a labour  camp.   He  believed  that  whether  the  authorities
    decided  to  deal  with  someone  like  the  appellant  judicially   or
    administratively  his  particular  circumstances  would  be   examined.
    Notice would be taken of such matters as whether he had a local  "track
    record" as an offender.  But because drugs were involved  the  approach
    would be politically driven.

23.   Asked by the Tribunal whether it was significant that there  had  been
    no known cases of re-prosecution for some time, Dr Dillon said that  it
    could not be assumed that persons returned to China, having committed a
    crime in another country, would contact friends or relatives or lawyers
    there upon their return to let them know they  were  all  right.   Many
    Chinese abroad believed in keeping a low profile.  When Westerners  had
    tried to find out the whereabouts of persons who  had  disappeared,  it
    could be very had to find out where they were  as  illustrated  by  the
    events following the award of the Nobel  Prize  very  recently  to  Liu
    Xiaobo.

24.   In the light of the clarification by  UKBA  that  details  of  persons
    convicted of criminal offences in  the  UK  were  sent  by  the  Prison
    Service to the Chinese embassy under a bilateral agreement,  Dr  Dillon
    said he assumed that the Chinese Embassy would convey that  information
    to the authorities in China.

25.   In cross-examination Mrs Pettersen asked Dr Dillon what  his  response
    was to the observation at para 287 of JC that  the  FCO  had  confirmed
    that  there  had  been  no  requests  by  the  Chinese  government  for
    information concerning returned Chinese citizens who had been convicted
    of crimes in the UK.  Dr Dillon said it would be wrong  to  infer  from
    that that nothing had happened, only that nothing was  heard  of.   The
    fact that Arts 10 & 7  of  the  Chinese  Criminal  Law  envisaged  such
    requests  did  not  mean  the  Chinese  authorities  would   stick   to
    formalities.

26.   Dr Dillon said that  within  China  publicity  of  court  cases  (e.g.
    involving re-prosecution) would not necessarily be at a national level,
    coverage could occur in a local paper  and  the  local  press  was  not
    monitored by anyone.  Asked how  significant  it  was  that  of  the  5
    examples of re-prosecution  cases  that  had  been  identified  by  the
    experts in JC only 1 was found to be actual, Dr Dillon said he did  not
    think that  re-prosecutions  would  necessarily  be  publicised  or  if
    publicised, publicised nationally.  More particularly,  one  could  not
    infer from the absence of any known cases  of  re-prosecution  of  drug
    trafficking that such cases did not happen.

27.   Dr Dillon accepted that the Chinese authorities appeared  to  want  to
    publicise its severe punishment of  drug  offenders,  but  it  did  not
    follow they would want to publicise re-prosecutions.  It  all  depended
    on whether the authorities saw "political mileage" in publicity.   Just
    because no cases were known did not mean there was  not  a  significant
    risk of re-prosecution.  For example, very few of the estimated numbers
    of persons executed in China had received any publicity of their cases.
     There was no tradition of independent reporting;  the  media  is  very
    highly controlled.

28.   Asked by the Tribunal whether  he  believed  the  Chinese  authorities
    viewed various types of drugs offences differently, e.g. ones involving
    "soft" and "hard" drugs, Dr Dillon said he was not aware of the Chinese
    authorities making the same distinctions, as had many Western countries
    in relation to marijuana.  They  lumped  all  narcotics  together.   He
    could not assist the Tribunal with information about likely maximum  or
    typical sentences for different  types  of  drugs  offences  except  by
    reference to the Amnesty International Report about the likely  amounts
    of different drugs that could lead to the death penalty.  He thought it
    likely that persons caught in possession of small amounts of  marijuana
    would be dealt with through the education-through-labour system  rather
    than through the courts but that in any event was  not,  he  said,  the
    appellant's case: his involved cultivation.

Information on returns of Chinese foreign nationals to China

29.   In advance of  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  asked  the  respondent  to
    provide information as to the method and route of return  of  deportees
    to China and the likely response that the  Home  Office/Foreign  Office
    would give to a request from the Chinese authorities for information on
    a  person  so  deported  for  being,  or  suspected  (by  the   Chinese
    authorities) for other reasons, of  being  a  criminal  in  the  United
    Kingdom (whether convicted of a criminal offence in the United  Kingdom
    or otherwise)". In a letter dated 26 October Ms Holmes on behalf of the
    respondent replied as follows:

        "UKBA does not routinely disclose  the  fact  that  a  subject  has
        committed a crime in the UK.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that
        because the UK has signed a bilateral  agreement  with  China,  the
        Prison Service would in any case disclose this information  to  the
        Chinese authorities...see http://pso.hmprisonserice.gov.uk/PSO 4630-
        immigration-and-foreign-nationals.doc...


        If a Chinese prisoner is to be returned emergency travel  documents
        are applied for via the Chinese Embassy in London.


        I can confirm that returns to China are via scheduled flights.  The
        main destinations are Beijing and Shanghai - but other destinations
        used less frequently  are  Kunning,  Guangshou,  Chengdu,  Nanking,
        Xiamen and Fuzhou. The use of escorts will depend on  the  attitude
        of the subjects and also the nature of the crime committed.  I  can
        confirm that escorts can also be used for  subjects  who  have  not
        been convicted of a crime.


        I can confirm that, whilst the number of Foreign National Prisoners
        returned to their country of origin, including China is  known  (in
        2009 over 5500 were deported or removed  to  over  150  countries),
        such country specific information is not disclosed. The details  of
        all removals and voluntary Departures by Nationality can be located
        in      the      Control      of       Immigration       Statistics
        http://rds.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs  10/hosb1510supptabs.xis.   I
        have attached to this letter pages from the  Home  Office  research
        and statistics website,  which  is  in  the  public  domain,  which
        indicates how many FNPs as a whole have been removed...".


30.   In an accompanying document headed "Removals and voluntary  departures
    (1) by destination (2) and type, nationals of China,  January  2004  to
    March 2010 the sub-headed "Removals and voluntary departures, nationals
    of China" shows that in 2009 and Jan-March 2010 respectively there were
    2,725 and 920 removals including 980 and  335  "enforced  removals  and
    notified voluntary departures" respectively.

Chinese administrative/disciplinary system

31.   In support of his submission  that  Chinese  nationals  who  had  been
    convicted in the UK could face further punishment for the same offences
    in China through the administrative as well  as  the  criminal  justice
    system, Mr Selway adduced an article  by  Professor  Jianlin  of  China
    University  of  Political  Science  and  Law   entitled   "China:   the
    application of criminal procedural principles in  discipline  procedure
    in China". This article analyses the concept  of  Chinese  disciplinary
    procedure, emphasising that as a  control  method  discipline  is  used
    extensively in Chinese social life and  that  disciplinary  regulations
    have multi-level power sources. Disciplinary regulation, the  Professor
    explains,  is  as  important  as  the  law  and  Chinese  law  strictly
    distinguishes the concepts of illegality and crime:

        "In social legal ideologies, there is a  clear  difference  between
        the concept of  a  disciplinary  violation  and  a  law  violation.
        Although the range of  disciplinary  regulation  and  that  of  law
        overlap,  we  are  under  the  impression  that  the   disciplinary
        regulation deals with slight  internal  social  orders,  while  the
        state laws deal with social order as a whole. The phrase "following
        the discipline and obeying the law" widely used by people  explains
        the situation."

32.   Most disciplinary procedures are secret. The modes  of  punishment  do
    not extend to restrictions or deprivation  of  freedom.   Persons  have
    been punished through the criminal system can also be  the  subject  of
    disciplinary punishments.  At p.19 it is stated:

        "Prohibition of double jeopardy is not provided for in the criminal
        procedure as a definite principle, let alone  in  the  disciplinary
        procedures, which are less important...It is worthy  of  note  that
        the prohibition of double jeopardy is embodied in some disciplinary
        procedure  regulations.  For  example,  in   Clause   54   of   the
        disciplinary Regulations of the PLA, no- one shall be liable to  be
        tried or punished again for a breach of discipline for which he has
        already been finally punished in accordance with the regulations. "


Submissions

33.   Mrs Pettersen said that whilst the evidence did  suggest  the  Chinese
    government treated drugs offences as  serious  matters,  there  was  no
    evidence of any re-prosecution of drug offenders from abroad.  Since JC
    was heard in January  2008  there  had  not  been  any  report  of  re-
    prosecutions of any returned Chinese citizens, whether  drug  offenders
    or other types of offenders and regardless of how serious the  offence.
    For the appellant to succeed it was not enough  to  show  there  was  a
    possibility he might face re-prosecution, which might be  suggested  by
    one or two documented cases (which in any case were not to  be  found);
    he had to show a real risk.  Whilst the Chinese  legal  system  may  be
    closed and secretive, it defied commonsense to suggest  that  if  there
    had  been  a  significant  pattern  of  re-prosecutions,  international
    observers would not  have  heard  about  it.   Amnesty  International's
    Reports revealed a close monitoring of what  was  happening  in  China.
    They had been able to highlight and estimate the numbers of executions,
    including of drug traffickers, Chinese and  foreign,  but  nothing  had
    come to light about re-prosecutions.

34.   Mrs Pettersen said there was no need to modify the guidance  given  in
    JC.  The existing set of indicators would potentially  apply  to  those
    convicted in the UK of drug  offences  in  certain  circumstances,  but
    drugs-related offences should not be made  a  distinct  category.   For
    example, if someone had been convicted of  trafficking  in  heroin  and
    part of the evidence was that he had bribed  Chinese  officials,  there
    may be a real risk.  The absence of evidence of re-prosecutions  was  a
    weighty indicator.  The Chinese authorities clearly believed  in  using
    publicity to deter, yet there was no signal  being  sent  out  by  them
    concerning returned drug offenders.  Dr Dillon had failed  to  come  up
    with any cases.  It was  true  there  was  no  monitoring  of  returned
    Chinese nationals by the UK government, but it was highly unlikely that
    if such persons had met problems, this would not have  come  to  light,
    particularly given the significant number of removals now being made to
    China, as documented in statistics provided to the Tribunal.

35.   As regards the appellant, the fact of the matter is that  his  offence
    and sentence of 18 months was relatively minor;  it  was  not  credible
    that the Chinese authorities would perceive it as a high value  offence
    or as one involving organised crime.  The  judge's  sentencing  remarks
    did not suggest he was involved in supply and portrayed him as  someone
    akin to a forced labourer.  He would not be of interest to the  Chinese
    authorities.  They had known about his offence since July 2008, yet had
    done nothing.  At most they might decide to monitor his conduct to  see
    he was not continuing to be involved in drugs,  but  he  would  not  be
    prosecuted or administratively punished.

36.   Mr Selway's submissions built on his  skeleton  arguments.   His  main
    points were as follows.  There were various  features  of  the  Chinese
    system - in particular its  hardline  approach  to  crime,  its  strict
    political control of the courts and the justice system, the  fact  that
    it continued to engage in extrajudicial  killings,  torture  and  other
    human rights abuses of its citizens, its  inscrutability  and  lack  of
    transparency - that made it very dangerous to infer merely from a  lack
    of evidence that re-prosecutions did not happen.  JC made no mention of
    drugs-related offence, which was an odd omission given China's hardline
    attitude to them.  Very considerable weight should be attached  to  the
    view of Amnesty International (AI) that re-prosecutions and  executions
    were a "distinct possibility".  Very considerable weight should also be
    attached to Dr Dillon's evidence to similar effect.  Even  the  Chinese
    Supreme Court which now had more oversight over death penalty cases did
    not have the authority to issue new decisions  It could only  send  the
    case back, where it could go back round the system again.

37.   It was important to keep in mind, submitted  Mr  Selway,  Dr  Dillon's
    evidence that risk to a returned offender had to be considered not just
    in terms of re-prosecution through the court system but  through  fresh
    punishment via the administrative system, education-through-labour etc.
     There would be no fair hearing.

38.   The evidence from Dr Dillon  concerning  databases  of  Chinese  court
    cases showed that although the government clearly kept such  databases,
    they were internal.   What  was  disclosed  publicly  through  academic
    channels was only a  narrow  selection  and  reflected  only  what  the
    Chinese leadership wanted the public to know about.

39.   Mr Selway asked us to revisit one of the  key  findings  in  JC.   The
    Tribunal's conclusions in that case were  against  the  weight  of  the
    expert guidance.  Despite the fact that four of the experts involved in
    that case had identified a real risk of  re-prosecution,  the  Tribunal
    had gone with the opinion of the sole one  who  thought  re-prosecution
    unlikely.  The Tribunal had been unduly influenced by the facts of  the
    case before them, where it had little choice to find as they did.

40.   Mr Selway said it was wrong  of  Mrs  Pettersen  to  expect  that  the
    Chinese authorities would have requested to have the  evidence  in  the
    appellant's drugs case yet,  if  ever.   It  was  nave,  submitted  Mr
    Selway, to assume that the Chinese authorities would follow the  letter
    of their own law relating to re-prosecutions so  that  they  sought  to
    obtain evidence  from  the  UK.   They  would  be  able  to  extract  a
    confession from the appellant under torture.  They  are  dismissive  of
    Western justice.  When it came to drugs, they would have in  mind  that
    their  own  drugs  laws  prohibit  marijuana.   They  would   see   the
    appellant's offence which involved him in helping run a  cannabis  farm
    where he tended over 400 plants, as certain to yield in excess of the 5
    kg amount specified in their  law  as  attracting  the  death  penalty.
    Their corpus of legislation made very  clear  that  all  citizens  were
    under a duty to be on their guard against narcotics and those  involved
    in their production.  Their concern about the "Golden Triangle" of drug-
    trafficking had resulted in a hard-line policy that would mean that  it
    would  be  mandatory  that  any  returned  drugs  offenders  would   be
    investigated and punished further.

41.    The  appellant  was  almost  certain  to  be  found  guilty,  on  re-
    prosecution; the courts had a  99%  conviction  rate.   The  view  that
    higher courts could correct "misjudged cases" was fanciful.

42.   In relation to  the  appellant,  what  would  matter  to  the  Chinese
    authorities was that he had been convicted of  an  offence  in  the  UK
    which carried a maximum of 14 years' imprisonment yet he had only  been
    sentenced to 18 months and of this he had only served half that period.
     They  would  be  certain  to  see  the  sentence  as  unduly  lenient,
    especially since under their own law  he  would  have  been  likely  to
    receive the death penalty.  In China to be convicted of  production  of
    drugs, possession of the same is  implied,  as  one  is  the  de  facto
    'owner' of the same for the purposes of the law.

Background Evidence

Drugs

43.   According to the USSD 2010 International  Narcotics  Control  Strategy
    Report, March 2010, the PRC subscribes to "the four Prohibitions" which
    include (1) disruption of trafficking organisations, by  attacking  the
    source  stemming  the  flow  of  drugs  entering  China,   (2)   strict
    enforcement of all relevant laws and regulations, (3) treatment of drug
    users  by  determining  root  causes  of  drugs  use   and   empowering
    communities to address their particular drug problems, and (4) actively
    co-operating with other countries and international drug organisations.

44.   Achievement of progress with these  4  goals  is  made  difficult  for
    China by a number of factors, including its physical proximity to major
    narcotics-producing areas in Asia - Southeast Asia's "Golden  Triangle"
    and  Southwest  Asia's  "Golden  Crescent".   The  Chinese   government
    reported an increase of drug users within China from 955,000 in 1997 to
    1,126,700 in 2009.  Other published reports state that China  may  have
    as many as  15  million  drug  abusers;  drug  abuse  has  become  more
    prevalent among China's youth in large and mid-sized cities.

45.   In the AI Report, 'China: Annual execution spree  looms  on  UN  anti-
    drugs day', dated 25 June 2004, it is stated that possession of defined
    quantities  of  drugs  triggers  a  potential  death  sentence.    This
    assessment is restated in the AI  letter  written  to  the  appellant's
    solicitors on 17 March 2010 as follows:

           "China's drug laws are particularly draconian.  For example, the
        death penalty can be applied to people convicted of trafficking  or
        being in possession of 1 kg of heroin, 50g of cocaine or  5  kg  of
        cannabis resin.  It can  also  be  applied  for  precisely  defined
        quantities of 'designer drugs' such as ecstasy etc."


    In the same letter AI states that it:


           "does not actually know for certain whether someone who has been
        convicted and sentenced abroad has  indeed  faced  prosecution  and
        been sentenced again upon being returned to  China.   However,  the
        legal mechanisms are certainly in place for  this  to  happen,  and
        with drug crimes being such a major focus of the Chinese police and
        judiciary at the moment, it is a  distinct  possibility  that  this
        could happen and a distinct possibility that the persons  could  be
        executed if the quantities of drugs involved match  or  exceed  the
        quantities above."


46.   Shedding light on  why  China  had  adopted  a  "Strike  Hard"  policy
    towards drug offences, the USSD Report, 2010 states:

           "The [PRC] continues to face problems  of  drug  production  and
        trafficking, which contribute to its status as  an  important  drug
        transit country in the international drug trafficking area.   China
        is a major manufacturer of 'dual use' chemicals, primarily used for
        licit  products,   but   also   used   for   illicit   drugs   like
        methamphetamine.  Organised crime diverts legitimately manufacturer
        chemicals, especially  ephedrine  and  pseudoephedrine  from  large
        chemical industries throughout China to produce illicit drugs.   In
        addition to domestic drug production problems, China's proximity to
        the  Golden  Triangle,  North  Korea,  and  the   Golden   Crescent
        facilitates the trafficking of drugs such as heroin and opium.  PRC
        authorities view drug trafficking as  a  major  threat  to  China's
        national security, economy and stability".


47.   The same report furnishes the following statistics  for  2008:  public
    security agencies in China recorded 61,900 drug-related criminal cases,
    uncovered 1,565 drug  trafficking  groups,  destroyed  244  clandestine
    laboratories and arrested 73,400 drug  suspects.   Totals  seized  were
    4.33 tons of heroin, 1.38  tons  of  opium,  6.15  tons  of  "ice"  and
    tablets, 5.27 tons of ketamine in that process.  The number of suspects
    charged with drugs-related crimes and prosecuted were 50,307.

China anti-drugs laws

48.   The current anti-drugs laws in China are those  adopted  at  the  31st
    Meeting of the  Standing  Committee  of  the  Tenth  National  People's
    Congress of the PRC, 29 Dec 2007, which came  into  effect  on  1  June
    2008.  Articles 2, 19, 59 and 60 are particularly important.

      Article 2 of the Criminal Law provides that:

      "For the purposes of this law, narcotic drugs include opium,  heroin,
        methylaniline  (ice),  morphine,  marijuana,  cocaine   and   other
        narcotic and psychotropic substances that  are  addictive  and  are
        kept under control according to State regulations."


    Article 19 provides that:


      "The State exercises control  over  the  cultivation  of  the  mother
        plants of the narcotics drugs for medical use.  Illegal cultivation
        of the plants of the opium poppy, cocoa, marijuana and of the other
        mother plants that may be used for refining or processing  narcotic
        drugs that are kept under control according to State regulations is
        prohibited.  Smuggling, trafficking in, transporting,  carrying  or
        possessing of the seeds  or  seedlings  of  the  mother  plants  of
        narcotic drugs which are not inactivated is prohibited."


    Article 59 assigns criminal and other responsibility as follows:


      "Where a person commits any of the following acts which constitute  a
        crime,  he  shall  be  investigated  for  criminal   responsibility
        according to the  law;  if  the  case  is  not  serious  enough  to
        constitute a crime, a penalty for administration of public security
        shall be imposed on him according to law: (1)  smuggling,  selling,
        transporting  or  manufacturing  narcotic  drugs;   (2)   illegally
        possessing narcotic drugs; (3)  illegally  cultivating  the  mother
        plants  of  narcotic   drugs;   (4)   illegally   trafficking   in,
        transporting, carrying or possessing the seeds or seedlings of  the
        mother plants of narcotic drugs, which  are  not  inactivated;  (5)
        illegally importing  the  methods  for  manufacturing  narcotic  or
        psychotropic substances or the chemical materials that  can  easily
        be transferred into narcotic drugs; (6) compelling, or  instigating
        another person to ingest or inject drugs, or luring  or  inveigling
        him into doing so; or  (7)  providing  narcotic  drugs  to  another
        person."


    Article 60 stipulates that:


      "Where a person commits any of the following acts, which  constitutes
        a crime, he  shall  be  investigated  for  criminal  responsibility
        according to law: if the case is not serious enough to constitute a
        crime, a penalty for administration of  public  security  shall  be
        imposed on him according to the law..."


Death Penalty and Executions

49.   Under the Criminal Law of the PRC, Article 48 mandates that:

      "The death penalty  shall  only  be  applied  to  criminals  who  have
        committed extremely serious crimes".

      Article 61 provides that: "When sentencing a  criminal,  a  punishment
    shall be meted out on the basis of the facts, nature and  circumstances
    of the crime, the degree of harm  done  to  society  and  the  relevant
    provisions of this law."

50.   The Asian Harm Reduction Network (AHRN) in its News Digest of 26  June
    2009,  states  that  in  2008  China  was  one  of  28  countries  that
    implemented the death penalty.  16 countries in Asia (including  China)
    applied the death penalty for drug-related offences.

51.   The FCO in its report on China dated 17 March 2010  notes  that  China
    executes more people than any other country.  It refers to  AI  figures
    on known executions showing China as  being  responsible  in  2008  for
    1,718 executions compared with a worldwide total  of  2,390.   It  adds
    that the real number is believed to be much higher,  estimates  ranging
    from 2,000 to 10,000.  China retains the death penalty for  68  crimes.
    It is said that two recent procedural reforms (the holding of all death
    penalty appeals in open court; since 2007 the  review  by  the  Supreme
    People's Court (SPC)  of  all  death  sentences)  may  have  led  to  a
    reduction in executions, but this has proved impossible to verify.

52.   The International Drugs Policy Consortium in the IHRA Global  overview
    for 2010 states that the country's tough counter-narcotics efforts  and
    policies make it likely that a "sizeable  portion"  of  those  executed
    each year are drug offenders.  The IHRA Report also  cited  Zhong  Jun,
    Vice President of the SPC, claiming that the courts handled 14,282 drug-
    related cases between Jan and May 2009, registering  6,379  convictions
    with severe penalties ranging from imprisonment to capital  punishment.
    Drug offences capable of resulting in executions  include  manufacture,
    planting, transportation and sale and relapsing drug use.  China is the
    only Member State identified in the report as having the death  penalty
    for drug offences.


53.   Several background sources refer to the fact  (already  noted  by  us)
    that in recent years the Chinese authorities have  used  26  June,  the
    UN's International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Drug Trafficking,
    as an opportunity  to  make  a  high-profile  public  example  of  drug
    offenders.  The New Zealand Drug Foundation records that in  2001  more
    than 50 people were publicly executed for drug crimes at mass  rallies,
    at least one of which was broadcast on state  TV.   In  2002  the  same
    event was  marked  by  64  public  executions  in  rallies  across  the
    countries:

           "While the typical application  of  capital  punishment  is  for
        trafficking, cultivating,  manufacturing  and  importing/exporting,
        the definition of capital narcotics crimes is not limited to  these
        offences".


54.   According to the AHRN Digest,  China  has  marked  the  26  June  with
    executions since the early 1990s.  An AHRN Report  for  2007,  entitled
    "The Death Penalty for Drug Offences: Violation of International  Human
    Rights Law", reports a UN human rights  monitor  report  that  in  2004
    'dozens of people were executed on 26 June'.  The  same  report  states
    that A1 recorded 55 executions for drug offences in the 2  week  period
    leading up to 26 June in 2005.  The  report  refers  to  Chinese  media
    reporting multiple death  sentences  being  pronounced  and  executions
    being carried out on or around 26 June 2008.

Treatment of Foreign Criminals

55.    Various sources refer to recent prosecutions and execution  in  China
    of foreigners.

56.   On 29 December 2009 the British national Akmal Sheikh was executed  in
    Urumqi, Xinjiang following his conviction for drug smuggling.

57.   On 6 April 2010, China executed a 65 year old Japanese  who  had  been
    caught illegally carrying more than 1.5  kg  of  "stimulant  drugs"  in
    September 2006.

58.   On 20 July 2010 BBC News report that  3  Japanese  citizens  had  been
    executed in Liaching province, in China for trying to smuggle the  drug
    methamphetamine.  On the same day a  Philippine  news  agency  reported
    that there were 66 Filipinos facing the  death  penalty  in  China  for
    illegally bringing in huge amounts of heroin and other narcotics, 8  of
    whom had already been executed.

Double Jeopardy Cases

59.   As already stated in JC the Tribunal found, having  analysed  a  great
    deal of evidence and the researches of several experts, that  only  one
    case was a genuine double jeopardy or a reprosecution case.  There  was
    also the case of Mr Yong described  in  para  240(e)  of  JC.   He  was
    convicted of trafficking illegal drugs to Japan and was sentenced to  5
    years' imprisonment.  On release in late February 2007 he was  "handled
    in accordance with relevant legal rules"  by  the  authorities  at  the
    Shanghai border.  Dr Gechlik did not know  whether  that  included  re-
    prosecution.

Our assessment

60.   In remaking the decision we must take into account the evidence  as  a
    whole, applying the lower standard of proof.

Dr Dillon

61.   Unlike the Tribunal in JC we have not  had  the  benefit  of  evidence
    from several experts, which would have given us the ability to  compare
    their position. However, since in relative terms not that much time has
    passed since JC, we do not think that has handicapped  our  task.  Like
    the Tribunal in  JC  we  have  found  the  evidence  of  Dr  Dillon  of
    considerable assistance but have noted that he is not an expert in  the
    Chinese criminal law and many of  his  observations  on  the  issue  of
    double jeopardy are based on his own general views  about  the  Chinese
    political system and state policies. It is very understandable that  he
    should wish to re-emphasise the point  he  made  in  JC  that  lack  of
    evidence of reprosecutions must not be equated  with  conclusive  proof
    that they do not or will not happen. At the  same  time,  we  have  not
    found persuasive his suggestion that they could be happening  secretly,
    since there  are  strong  reasons  for  considering  that  the  Chinese
    authorities attach significant importance to the notion  of  deterrence
    of criminality through publicity and are also  concerned  to  show  the
    international community that they  are  tough  on  narcotic  drugs.  In
    addition, whilst we accept that much  is  still  not  known  about  the
    workings of the Chinese criminal  justice  system,  efforts  to  ensure
    secrecy have not prevented  international  observers  such  as  Amnesty
    International from compiling a very significant body of data about such
    matters as to the numbers of persons executed and numbers imprisoned.

62.   We think Dr Dillon must be right in suggesting that the  lack  of  any
    official monitoring by the UK (and seemingly other countries)  of  what
    happens to  returned  Chinese  offenders  should  also  be  a  relevant
    consideration. But we cannot agree with him that we can infer from that
    that double jeopardy could be visited upon returned  nationals  without
    international observers knowing  about  it.  In  our  judgement  it  is
    extremely unlikely that offenders forcibly returned to China would  not
    be in a position to alert international observers, via their friends or
    family, in the event that they found themselves  facing  further  legal
    punishment for the same offence(s)  from  the  Chinese  authorities  on
    return. It is common sense that when they knew when  they  were  to  be
    flown  back  they  would  notify  a  friend  or  family  or   a   legal
    representative in the UK beforehand and arrange to contact  them  after
    return. In most cases it is also likely they will  be  able  to  inform
    family or friends back in China when they are  due  to  return  and  to
    where. This is the age of the mobile phone and  the  internet  and  the
    Chinese people have these technologies in  large  number.  Even  though
    there is evidence that the Chinese authorities seek from time  to  time
    to control such forms of communication Dr Dillon agreed  that  normally
    mobile phone communication to and from China was  straightforward.  The
    notion therefore that there are likely to be a  significant  number  of
    returning offenders who are then secretly removed from circulation  and
    subjected to serious punishment is in our view not tenable. We consider
    there would be reports finding their way to organisations such  as  AIJ
    noting that such and such a returned  offender  failed  to  notify  his
    contact as arranged or that friends/family awaiting their return  after
    airport processing were unable to trace them.

63.   In addition, as we shall come to in a moment, even if we  were  highly
    persuaded by the views of an expert on this subject, the effect of that
    on the guidance we give still turns very much on  our  need  to  assess
    risk according to specific legal criteria:  see below para 60.

Revisiting country guidance

64.   Mr Selway, drawing on the evidence of Dr Dillon, sought  in  parts  of
    his submissions to argue that the guidance given in JC was wrong at the
    time (and was still wrong). We reject that contention.

65.   We would first of all  note that JC  was  expressly  approved  by  the
    Court of Appeal in JC (China) [2009] EWCA Civ 81, notwithstanding their
    Lordships being well aware that on several  matters  the  Tribunal  had
    preferred the evidence of Professor Fu over that of the  other  experts
    (including Dr Dillon): see paras 15-18.

66.    Second  we  would  observe  that  the  Tribunal  in  JC  reached  its
    conclusions on the subject of the risk of reprosecutions on  the  basis
    of an assessment of the evidence as a whole, not simply that  from  the
    experts. Further, of course experts, (Professor Fu  included)  are  not
    concerned with or expert in the criteria that judges have to  apply  in
    deciding  issues  of  real  risk  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
    Qualification Directive or the Human Rights Act.  That  dovetails  with
    the point made by Scott Baker LJ in JC  (China)  at  para  25  when  he
    wrote:

        "The question is not, as Ward LJ pointed out in  argument,  whether
        there is an increased risk of prosecution but whether the level  of
        risk is such that returning the appellant would  put  him  at  real
        risk of his human rights being breached..."

67.   There is a further matter. As we have seen, Mr Selway  has  sought  to
    identify further evidence to hand since JC, with particular emphasis on
    the oral and written evidence of Dr Dillon. This further  evidence  has
    clearly been collected and adduced with a  view  to  establishing  that
    reprosecutions (especially for drugs offences) are much more of a  risk
    than JC considered. Whilst it is extremely helpful to the Tribunal that
    such evidence has been produced, it has plainly not been  collected  as
    part of an attempt to collect all relevant evidence on the issue - i.e.
    evidence pointing against as well as for the view  that  reprosecutions
    were (and are) more of a real risk than  JC  found  they  were.  It  is
    presented as the  evidence  in  support  of  one  view.  That  poses  a
    particular problem. As the Tribunal observed in TK (Tamils, LP updated)
    Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049 at para 13(ii):

        "Secondly, all parties should understand that when a  case  is  set
        down to review existing country guidance, the latter is to be taken
        as a starting-point.  The Tribunal has not ruled out that  in  some
        cases there could be  a  challenge  to  the  historic  validity  of
        Tribunal  country  guidance  (although  such  would   require   the
        production of  evidence  pointing  both  towards  and  against  the
        accuracy of that guidance at the relevant time: see AM & AM  (Armed
        conflict; risk categories) CG Somalia [2008] UKAIT 00091; but  that
        will be rare. .."

68.   In the absence of evidence pointing against the accuracy of JC at  the
    time it was heard we do not consider that there is any proper basis for
    revisiting its historic validity. The only question before us, then, is
    whether evidence now to hand demonstrates that events since JC  justify
    the Tribunal taking a different view of the position now.

The availability of Chinese case law

69.   We do not consider it helpful to reach any definitive  conclusions  on
    the issue raised by Dr Dillon as to  whether  or  not  the  Chinacourts
    website contains the range of decisions which JC indicated that it did.
    If Dr Dillon is right in what he said to us (that Chinacourts does  not
    contain any criminal cases), then he appears to have changed  his  mind
    since the evidence he gave in JC (at para 122). But in  any  event,  it
    seems agreed on all sides that through a combination of government  and
    academic websites, some accessible to the outside world, some  not  (or
    only indirectly so), it  is  increasingly  possible  for  international
    observers to gain a better picture of Chinese jurisprudence,  at  least
    as represented by the cases that the government  is  prepared  to  make
    known.

Removals to China

70.   Mrs Petterson sought to  supplement  her  main  arguments  as  to  why
    reprosecution/double  punishment  of  returned  Chinese  nationals  was
    likely to be a rare by reference to the fact that there were  no  known
    cases despite a significant number  of  returns  to  China  of  Chinese
    nationals who had committed crimes in the UK. However, in  our  opinion
    the statistics she  produced  afford  us  only  very  limited  help  in
    establishing how many returns there have been of such persons.  For one
    thing they do not  identify  the  numbers  of  enforced  removals.  For
    another they do not identify how many of those  removed  had  committed
    criminal offences in the UK (the respondent's letter of 26 October 2010
    states that whilst the number of Foreign National Prisoners returned to
    their country of origin is known  country  specific  information  about
    such person is not disclosed.  Further, they  give  us  no  information
    about the nature of the  crimes  involved,  as  to  whether  they  were
    relatively serious or not.

Chinese knowledge of overseas offenders

71.   As we have seen, by virtue of the fact that the  UK  has  a  bilateral
    agreement  with  China,  information  that  a  national  of  China  has
    committed a crime in the UK is disclosed to the Chinese authorities  by
    the UK, although it is the Prison Service, not UKBA,  that  does  this.
    If a Chinese prisoner is to be returned, emergency travel documents  re
    applied for via the Chinese Embassy in London. Accordingly we  consider
    that it can safely be assumed that in the case of a national  of  China
    who is removed from the UK having committed a criminal  offence  whilst
    here, the Chinese authorities will come to learn both of  the  fact  of
    his or her return and of the basic facts about the crime concerned.

The degree of risk of reprosecutions

72.   We remind ourselves of Scott-Baker LJ's observations cited earlier  at
    para 66.

73.     As   regards   reprosecutions   generally,   there   are   competing
    considerations.

74.   On the one hand, it is extremely  difficult  to  obtain  comprehensive
    information about the Chinese system of criminal  justice  and  how  it
    treats offenders. There is no official publication  of  the  number  of
    offenders who suffer the death penalty for example. And, as just noted,
    the case law of the courts is only selectively presented or  known.  In
    addition, there is no official  or  organised  monitoring  of  returned
    Chinese nationals by the UK or other Western countries. There  is  also
    evidence  that  the  Chinese  government  is  keen  to  assert  to  the
    international community that it continues  to  attach  primacy  to  its
    national law. We do not doubt Dr Dillon's statement  that  the  Chinese
    system of government   remains very much a closed, secretive one.

75.   On the other hand, JC established that up to  January  2008  cases  of
    reprosecution were rare. And in the period of two  and  three  quarters
    years since there have been no cases that have come to light.

76.   The fact that there are competing considerations has led to  the  view
    being taken that (1) reprosecution cannot be ruled out  as  a  possible
    step the Chinese authorities  might  take  in  respect  of  a  returned
    Chinese national who has been convicted abroad; but (2) the  degree  of
    likelihood of that risk being real as distinct from  remote  will  vary
    depending on a number of factors. It is convenient to reiterate how the
    FCO letter of 15 July 2005 and  then  the  Tribunal  in  JC  summarised
    matters. The FCO letter stated:

        "The circumstances under which an individual would be  punished  in
        China for a crime committed in a foreign country, for which he  had
        already been punished  in  that  country,  are  unstipulated.   The
        Chinese authorities are more likely to  take  this  action  if  the
        crime had received a lot of publicity in China, if the victims were
        well-connected in China, if there were a  political  angle  to  the
        original crime or if the crimes were of a particular type that  the
        authorities wanted to make an example of  [sic].   Our  Embassy  in
        Beijing is unaware of such instances.  The  specific  inclusion  in
        the Criminal Law of 'exemptions' from second  punishment  in  China
        for crimes committed abroad suggests that the authorities would not
        take further action against ordinary criminal offences."

77.   The head note to the Tribunal decision in JC stated:

        "1.      There is a risk  of  prosecution  or  reprosecution  under
             Articles 7 and 10 of the  Chinese  Criminal  Law  for  overseas
             offenders  returned  to  China.   However,  the  use  of  those
             provisions  is  discretionary  and  extremely   rare.    Absent
             particular aggravating factors, the risk falls well  below  the
             level required to engage  international  protection  under  the
             Refugee Convention, the ECHR, or humanitarian protection.   The
             risk of prosecution or reprosecution will be a question of fact
             in individual cases but is more likely where (a) there has been
             a substantial amount of adverse publicity within China about  a
             case; (b) the proposed defendant has significantly  embarrassed
             the Chinese authorities by  their  actions  overseas;  (c)  the
             offence is unusually serious.  Generally,  snakehead  cases  do
             not have the  significance  they  have  in  the  West  and  are
             regarded as ordinary (but serious) crimes requiring no  special
             treatment; (d) political factors may increase the likelihood of
             prosecution or reprosecution; and (e) the Chinese Government is
             also  particularly  concerned  about  corruption   of   Chinese
             officialdom.


          2.     Prosecution under Article 7 or 10 is a fresh  prosecution.
             The discretion to prosecute is exercised in the  light  of  the
             opinion of the Chinese authorities as to  whether  the  foreign
             jurisdiction dealt properly, and without undue  leniency,  with
             the offence.  It can  no  longer  be  said  that  there  is  no
             information available on the use of that power: the  Chinacourt
             database of cases and the NPC website guidance  are  maintained
             directly by the Chinese Government and  provides  guidance  for
             judges and lawyers on the use of these powers."


78.   As regards the FCO letter, both Dr Dillon in evidence  and  Mr  Selway
    in submissions sought  at  different  junctures  to  suggest  that  its
    summary was incomplete or inadequate, although both also sought to rely
    on its statement that the circumstances under which an individual would
    be punished in China for a crime committed in  a  foreign  country  for
    which he  has  already  been  punished  there  were  "unstipulated"  as
    demonstrating that the risk of such punishment was at  large.  However,
    as is clear from the FCO  text,  the  reference  to  "unstipulated"  is
    intended as a description of the Chinese statute; and the  letter  goes
    on to identify specific factors that would increase  the  risk  of  the
    statute been applied.

79.   Having considered the FCO letter  alongside  a  great  deal  of  other
    evidence the Tribunal  in  JC  followed  a  similar  approach  although
    formulating the factors it thought most relevant somewhat differently.

80.   Having examined the further evidence presented to us by  both  parties
    for this case we would observe that in it we have identified references
    to a wider number  of  factors  as  being  potentially  relevant.  They
    include:

    - whether the offence is a very serious one (ordinary  or  very  common
    offences appear not be of interest);


    - whether the Chinese authorities are likely to perceive  the  overseas
    punishment as unduly lenient by their own standards;


    -  whether  they  consider  there  has  been  an  admission  of   guilt
    accompanied by effective repentance;


    - whether there has been any international publicity;


    - whether there has been any indication of Chinese  concerns  expressed
    through diplomatic channels;


    -   what the time period is since the prosecution in another country;


    -  what  difficulties  are  likely  to  be  involved  for  the  Chinese
    police/prosecuting authorities in obtaining the evidence  in  the  case
    (either - as envisaged in the  statute  -  from  the  overseas  country
    involved or by other means), particularly bearing in mind that they are
    expected to achieve a conviction rate of 99%;


    - whether there are any Chinese nationals who were the victims  of  the
    relevant crimes;


    - whether any such Chinese victims could exert influence  in  China  or
    were well-connected;


    - whether there is any political angle or any active  interest  on  the
    part of the Chinese authorities to make an example in public (this will
    depend a great deal on what issues those authorities wish to  highlight
    at any particular time).

81.   As regards reprosecution for  drug  offences  in  particular,  Amnesty
    International  has  stated  that  it   considers   this   a   "distinct
    possibility" and Dr Dillon appears to  consider  that  the  appellant's
    case is an illustration that in certain cases there can be a real  risk
    of reprosecution for a drug offender. We also know that China adopts  a
    draconian approach to serious drug offenders and has regularly  carried
    out executions often in public settings on June 26 each year.

82.   Whilst the further evidence we have had leads  us  to  think  that  in
    dealing with any case of reprosecution it will be valuable to  bear  in
    mind the above non-exhaustive list of factors, we do not see that  this
    gives rise to any need to modify the guidance given in  JC,  which  is,
    and was always intended to be flexibly understood and applied.

83.   As regards Mr  Selway's  submission  that  we  should  supplement  the
    guidance in JC so as to specify drug offenders, we see sense  in  that.
    That is largely because we agree with  him  (and  Dr  Dillon)  that  in
    current-day China the issue of punishment of drug  offenders  has  been
    politicised  by  the  Chinese  authorities.  But  since  the   category
    specified in (d) of the JC guidance - "political factors" is clearly  a
    wider category, the need to our supplement it can be limited to  adding
    in parentheses the following"(which may include the importance attached
    by the Chinese authorities to cracking down on drugs offenders)".

84.    However,  given  that  there  have  not  been  any  known  cases   of
    reprosecution of drug offenders that are truly "double jeopardy" cases,
    this indicates to us that real risk of a drug offender suffering double
    jeopardy is only likely to exist in cases where factors  (a),  (b)  and
    (c) are also present.

85.   It also seems to us particularly  unlikely  that  such  reprosecutions
    would arise unless the Chinese authorities wanted to make  a  point  to
    the  international  community  as  to  their  treatment  of  their  own
    nationals. Despite Dr Dillon's somewhat equivocal evidence on the issue
    of whether the Chinese authorities use domestic publicity for deterrent
    purposes, it seems to us that they do and that the  executions  carried
    out on 26 June each year demonstrate that. But that in our view appears
    to  bear  out  Professor  Fu's  view  that  increasingly  the   Chinese
    authorities are less inclined to apply their "double jeopardy" laws. It
    may be, of course, that there have simply  not  been  potential  cases,
    although it would appear to us likely that among the number of  Chinese
    nationals who have gone overseas and then returned there will have been
    those who have been punished for drug offences overseas  and  that  the
    Chinese authorities will know of them.  If the Chinese authorities were
    to use double jeopardy in a drugs case, therefore, it seems to us  that
    it  would  be  for  the  purpose  of  sending  out  a  message  to  the
    international community as to how tough China is on drugs compared with
    the overseas country concerned.  We do not think they would contemplate
    such a step except in a very serious  cases  or  cases  involving  drug
    trafficking on a very significant scale where factors (a), (b) and  (c)
    are also present.

The administrative justice system

86.   It will be apparent from the above  that  we  have  not  accepted  the
    submission of Mr Selway that even if a national of Chinese convicted of
    crimes overseas would not face reprosecution/double punishment  through
    the Chinese criminal  justice  system  he  could  face  its  equivalent
    through the Chinese administrative/disciplinary system.

87.   We are bound to say first of all that we found Mr Selway's  submission
    on this matter somewhat surprising given that it was not  supported  by
    Dr Dillon and indeed we know from the evidence Dr Dillon  gave  to  the
    Tribunal in JC that he (like the other experts  save  for  Dr  Sheehan)
    considered that this system was unlikely  to  be  applied  in  foreign-
    related cases. Certainly the evidence of Dr Dillon in JC was  that  the
    laojiao system applies to minor law violations and that serious  crimes
    were more likely to be punished by the laogai  system  (see  JC,  paras
    112,120, 254, 273(14-16; see also paras 100, 163, 167(d), 175, 262)).

88.   Secondly, we  did  not  find  the  evidence  submitted  by  Mr  Selway
    concerning the Chinese disciplinary procedure system very helpful.  The
    article by Professor Jianlin contains a number  of  passages  that  are
    difficult to understand and it does not make clear the role  played  in
    this procedure by the laojiao  (re-education  through  labour)  system.
    Whereas  this  article  describes  disciplinary  punishments   as   not
    extending to restriction or deprivation of liberty, we  know  from  the
    COIS for January 2010 at para 12.19-20 that Article 9  of  the  Law  of
    Administrative Penalty states that "Different types  of  administrative
    penalty  may  be  created  by  law.  Administrative  penalty  involving
    restriction of freedom of person shall only be created by law":  we  do
    not know whether there is any such law that  covers  laojiao,  although
    paras 12.11-17 of the same COIS would  suggest  not.   However,  taking
    this article on its face it would appear to confirm that  (except  when
    they are used as a complement)  disciplinary  procedures  are  normally
    applied to types of illegal conduct that are less  serious  than  those
    that are subject to  criminal  prosecution  and  punishment.  The  same
    article appears to suggest that insofar as "double jeopardy" principles
    are applied  in  China  they  are  less  present  in  the  disciplinary
    procedure  system  and  this  system  even  contains  some   provisions
    prohibiting double jeopardy.

89.   We accept of course that this  parallel  system  of  justice  is  very
    important in China and may be particularly  relevant  when  considering
    cases in which the risk on return  is  related  to  likely  punishments
    facing a person in China for violations committed in China. But in  the
    context of reprosecution/double punishment we do not see  use  of  this
    system as a real risk, since if an overseas  offence  is  not  seen  as
    serious enough for the Chinese  authorities  to  pursue  through  their
    criminal justice system with a view to double punishment,  it  is  even
    less  likely  they  would  pursue  an  adverse  interest  through   the
    administrative/disciplinary procedure system.

The Appellant

90.   As already noted, the appellant is in his early 40s.  On 23 July  2008
    he was convicted of producing cannabis, then a Class C controlled drug.
     He was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment, serving  approximately  9
    months of that.  A pre-sentence report  said  that  the  appellant  was
    found in a  rented  property  in  Blyth,  Northumberland,  tending  407
    growing plants.  The sentencing judge noted that whilst he had no doubt
    that the appellant had been subjected  to  exploitation  at  a  serious
    level and whilst he was sure the appellant was  not  one  of  the  gang
    involved in cannabis drug production, nevertheless in his judgment  the
    appellant could have left the premises if he chose to. On  11  December
    2009 the appellant was interviewed by the Chinese Embassy at the behest
    of UKBA.  It is also accepted by Mrs Petterson that the Prison  Service
    will have notified the Chinese Embassy of  the  appellant's  conviction
    (in accordance with standard policy relating to foreign offenders).

91.   We accept from the background evidence that on return the  immigration
    authorities re likely to identify from their records that the appellant
    was convicted in the UK of a drugs  offence  together  with  the  basic
    particulars of the charge, sentence etc. We  also  accept  that  it  is
    likely that the Chinese  immigration  authorities,  having  established
    this much, will pass the appellant on to the local police.

92.   However, once in the hands of the local police,  we  do  not  consider
    that anything more is likely to happen than that the appellant will  be
    asked questions to establish where he is living and who are his family.
    There is no evidence to suggest  he  has  any  record  in  China  as  a
    criminal or administrative/disciplinary procedure offender. We consider
    that records kept by  the  authorities  (and  available  to  the  local
    police) will show what his overseas offence was and what the punishment
    was (and, we will assume) the period of  time  he  actually  served  in
    prison. We are entirely  satisfied  that  nothing  in  the  appellant's
    details will cause the Chinese authorities, at a local,  provincial  or
    centralised level, to  consider reprosecuting the appellant. We  accept
    as Mr Selway has pointed out, that cultivation is included  as  one  of
    the methods  of  drug-offending  that  can  attract  the  most  serious
    penalties. We also accept that the appellant was seemingly involved  in
    a cannabis factory, not simply in a  domestic  setting.  However,  even
    though  the  Chinese  authorities   do  not  adopt  the   same   formal
    differentiation  used in the UK and many other countries (in  different
    ways) between "hard" and "soft" drugs, there  is  nothing  to  indicate
    that they would see relatively small-scale  industrial  cultivation  of
    cannabis as near the serious end of the drug-offending spectrum, or as,
    in consequence, unusually serious. Not  being  unusually  serious,  the
    appellant's offences would not attract criminal reprosecution or double
    punishment. They would be even less likely  to  be  considered  by  the
    authorities as suitable for reprosecution/double punishment through the
    disciplinary procedure system.

93.   We accept that the appellant is likely to be asked whether he has  any
    Chinese criminal record, but on the facts of this case that is not  the
    case. We are prepared to accept that once they learn  of  his  overseas
    offence they may require him to report to them for a period of time  so
    to keep a check on his movements. But  we  do  not  consider  that  the
    evidence establishes that  the  local  police  would  go  further  than
    routine questioning and monitoring of this kind. We do not  think  that
    these requirements could be described as serious harm  or  persecution,
    since he would be allowed to continue of his way and remain at  liberty
    subject only to light monitoring requirements to report or the like.

94.   The appellant would not be at risk on return.

95.   For the above reasons:

96.   The panel materially erred in  law  and  their  determination  is  set
    aside.

97.   The decision we re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.




Date


Senior Immigration Judge Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                 APPENDIX: LIST OF DOCUMENTATION CONSIDERED



|     |                                               |                |
|Item |Document                                       |Date            |
|1    |UK Border Agency, "Removals and voluntary      |October 2010    |
|     |departures, nationals of China, January 2004 to|                |
|     |March 2010"                                    |                |
|2    |Wikipedia, "Capital Punishment in the People's |20 July 2010    |
|     |Republic of China"                             |                |
|3    |International Drug Policy Consortium commentary|24 May 2010     |
|     |on the International Harm Reduction Association|                |
|     |report, "The Death Penalty for Drugs Offences: |                |
|     |Global Overview 2010"                          |                |
|4    |BBC, "China executes Japanese smugglers"       |9 April 2010    |
|5    |Amnesty International letter, "Conviction of   |17 March 2010   |
|     |Drug Offences in the People's Republic of      |                |
|     |China"                                         |                |
|6    |Foreign and Commonwealth Office, "Annual Report|17 March 2010   |
|     |on Human Rights 2009 - Countries of Concern:   |                |
|     |China"                                         |                |
|7    |U.S. Department of State, "2009 Human Rights   |11 March 2010   |
|     |Report: China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong and   |                |
|     |Macau)"                                        |                |
|8    |U.S. Department of State, "2010 International  |1 March 2010    |
|     |Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR):     |                |
|     |China"                                         |                |
|9    |Radio Free Europe, "China urges judges to limit|10 February 2010|
|     |death penalty"                                 |                |
|10   |Inquirer.net, "53 Filipinas on China Death Row |11 January 2010 |
|     |over drugs"                                    |                |
|11   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |8 January 2010  |
|     |Information Report: China"                     |                |
|12   |International Harm Reduction Association, "The |2010            |
|     |Death Penalty for Drugs Offences: Global       |                |
|     |Overview 2010"                                 |                |
|13   |UK Border Agency, "Operational Guidance Note:  |10 June 2009    |
|     |China"                                         |                |
|14   |Prison Service Order 4630, "Immigration and    |11 January 2008 |
|     |Foreign Nationals in Prison"                   |                |
|15   |Anti-Drug Law of the Peoples Republic of China,|29 December 2007|
|     |Order No. 79                                   |                |
|16   |UK Border Agency, "Country of Origin           |3 December 2007 |
|     |Information Report: China"                     |                |
|17   |International Harm Reduction Association, "The |2007            |
|     |Death Penalty for Drugs Offences: A Violation  |                |
|     |of International Human Rights Law"             |                |
|18   |CNN, "Condemnation as China executes Briton for|Undated         |
|     |drug smuggling"                                |                |
|19   |New Zealand Drug Foundation, "The Ultimate     |Undated         |
|     |Price: The Death Penalty for Drugs Offences"   |                |
|20   |Professor Bian Jianlin, "China: The Application|Undated         |
|     |of Criminal Procedural Principles in Discipline|                |
|     |Procedure in China"                            |                |




