


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


         FN (Article 8 - removal- viable options) Eritrea [2006] UKAIT 00044

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On 5 December 2005
                                                   Determination Promulgated
                                                            On 18 April 2006
                                      ......................................

                                   Before:

                  Dr H.H. Storey, Senior Immigration Judge
                 Mr Andrew Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge
                              Mr P. Rogers, JP

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Mr R. Solomon, counsel, instructed by Ziadies
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The assessment of an in-country Article 8 claim will normally first  require
consideration of (i) whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
appellant's family accompanying him or her  abroad  and  then  second,  (ii)
whether even if there exist such obstacles, there is a viable option  of  an
entry clearance application.

The fact that before being able to apply for entry clearance  a  person  may
have to perform military service in his country of origin will not  normally
be a factor of any  significance  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of  a
return in the context of Article 8.

Introduction - the procedural history

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 27 February  1984.   He
     is twenty-one years old.  He travelled from  Ethiopia  to  the  United
     Kingdom claiming to have arrived on 2 January 2001.  We know, however,
     that he claimed asylum on 5 January 2001.  On 23  November  2004,  the
     Secretary of State made a  decision  refusing  his  asylum  claim.   A
     subsequent decision  was  made  on  8  December  2004  to  remove  the
     appellant as an  illegal  entrant.   Directions  were  given  for  his
     removal to Eritrea.  This gave rise to a right of appeal under section
     82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  the
     appellant exercised on 4 January 2005.

  2.  His  appeal  came  before  an  Adjudicator,  Miss  S.  Jhirad,  whose
     determination was promulgated on 6  April  2005.   She  dismissed  the
     appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   In  an
     application for reconsideration under section 103A of the 2002 Act,  a
     Senior Immigration Judge ordered reconsideration on the basis that the
     Adjudicator had arguably made a material error of the law.

  3. At a hearing  before  the  Tribunal,  Dr  H.H.  Storey  and  Mrs  L.A.
     Freestone concluded that  there  were  material  errors  of  law  that
     vitiated both the immigration judge's conclusions on  risk  on  return
     and on Article 8.  Its reasons were as follows:

           "1.   On risk on  return,  the  Immigration  Judge  accepted  in
                 paragraph 12 that the appellant had  perhaps  conscientious
                 reasons for not wanting to  perform  military  service  and
                 that he would face in consequence a penalty of three  years
                 detention.  Given these findings his  assessment  that  the
                 appellant would not face a real risk of  serious  harm  was
                 contrary to the Tribunal Country Guidance on this issue.
            2.   On Article 8, the Immigration Judge erred  in  failing  to
                 consider, when examining whether the appellant would have a
                 viable option of applying for entry clearance, that Eritrea
                 currently imposes exit restrictions on  those  of  eligible
                 military age."

  4. As a result of this finding and pursuant to the  directions  given  by
     the Tribunal to the effect that no reliance could properly  be  placed
     upon the Immigration Judge's findings  of  fact,  the  reconsideration
     hearing at its second stage was directed towards the issues at  large.
     The Tribunal also invited the parties to make submissions on the issue
     of whether, in view of the type of exit controls currently imposed  by
     the Eritrean Government on its nationals,  there  could  be  a  viable
     option of entry clearance in respect of those likely to be subject  to
     such controls.

A summary of the claim

  5. In a statement that formed part of his application of 15 January 2001,
     the appellant stated that he was born in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,  where
     he remained until 8 December 2000.  He claimed that his father was  an
     Eritrean, although his mother was Ethiopian from the  Tigray  Province
     of northern Ethiopia.  The appellant has a brother  born  in  December
     1992.  He  said  that  his  father  was  an  army  officer  with   the
     Revolutionary Armed Forces in the Mengistu regime.  At some period  in
     his career, his father was based in Asmara, Eritrea.  The  family  did
     not  vote  in  the  referendum  as  they  did  not  support   Eritrean
     independence.  Indeed his father had fought against the EPLF movement.
      The appellant stated that his father was arrested in  July  1992  and
     that his whereabouts have remained unknown ever since.  The  appellant
     himself claimed that he had been subjected to persecution at the hands
     of the EPRDF government.  In June 1998,  he  said  that  he  had  been
     questioned by the Ethiopian authorities about his nationality and  had
     been forced to sign a document to say that he was Eritrean.   At  that
     time, he was 14 years old.  As  a  result,  he  claimed  that  he  was
     arrested by the authorities and detained pending  his  deportation  to
     Eritrea.  He was held at the Fiche detention  centre  from  4  October
     until 14 October 2000, (see the  amendment  contained  in  his  second
     statement of 28 June 2004).  During the course of  his  detention,  he
     claims that he was ill-treated.  His  mother  managed  to  secure  his
     release to enable her to obtain medical  treatment  but  on  condition
     that he returned to detention when called upon to do so.   During  the
     time the appellant spent in a  civilian  hospital,  arrangements  were
     made for his departure from Ethiopia.  His mother  then  paid  for  an
     agent to arrange his travel to the United Kingdom.

  6. In the course of his interview, conducted at Lunar House in Croydon on
     28 June 2004, the appellant stated that his mother and younger brother
     were in Kenya.  Since his arrival in the United Kingdom, he has formed
     a relationship with MO, an Eritrean  national  who  has  been  granted
     indefinite leave to remain.  She is the mother of B,  born  20  August
     2003, aged 2.  The couple now have a son, E, born on  4  May  2005  in
     London, where his parents now live.  He is 8 months  old.   The  birth
     certificate which we have seen indicates that the appellant's wife was
     also born in Ethiopia.  The appellant told us  in  evidence  that  his
     wife has never sought and has not been granted Eritrean citizenship by
     the Eritrean Government and is a refugee.

  7. The appellant claimed that, although he had never been to Eritrea,  he
     feared the EPLF government there.  In answer to question 27,  he  said
     he feared "individuals who were in Ethiopia and who are now in Eritrea
     who know about our family." Although he did not have  any  documentary
     evidence that established his mixed Eritrean/Ethiopian  parentage,  he
     said that he was provided with a special identity card.

  8. For the purposes of this appeal, we heard the appellant's evidence  as
     well as that of his wife.  Both provided more recent  statements  each
     dated 14 February 2005, found at pages  1  to  7  of  the  appellant's
     bundle.  In addition, we were provided with a skeleton argument in its
     original and in an amended form and background  material  attached  to
     both.  The witnesses gave evidence in Amharic.

The burden and standard of proof

  9. In asylum cases, the burden of  proof  is  upon  the  appellant.   The
     standard of proof is a "reasonable  degree  of  likelihood"  sometimes
     expressed as a  reasonable  chance  or  a  serious  possibility.   The
     question must be answered by looking at the evidence in the round  and
     assessed at the time of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
     standard as applying in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
     sometimes expressed as "substantial grounds for believing".

The documentary evidence before us

 10. The documents submitted by the appellant include:
                    i) the SEF and statement of 15 January 2001 (Annex E);
                   ii) the second statement of 28 June 2004 (Annex F);
                  iii) the appellant's bundle, paginated 1 to 360;
                   iv) the appellant's statement of 14 February 2005  (pages
                       1-3 of the appellant's bundle);
                    v) the statement of MO of 14 February 2005 (pages 6 to 7
                       of the appellant's bundle);
                   vi) the  skeleton  argument  with  additional  background
                       material;
                  vii) the amended skeleton argument  (running  to  some  23
                       pages) with additional background material;
                 viii) the October 2005 COI Service  report  from  the  Home
                       Office Science and Research Group;
                   ix) the Eritrea OGN v. 4.0 issued 21 November 2005;
                    x) case law, including IN (Draft evaders -  evidence  of
                       risk) Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00106;  KA  (draft-
                       related risk categories updated)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]
                       UKAIT 00165; SS (ILR, Article 8,  return)  Sri  Lanka
                       [2004] UKIAT 00126.

The appellant's claim to be at risk in Eritrea

 11. We turn first to the appellant's  asylum  and  Article  3  grounds  of
     appeal.  The substance  of  the  asylum  appeal  (and  its  associated
     Article 3 claim) is, therefore, the  risk  posed  by  his  removal  to
     Eritrea (whether temporary or otherwise) as an Eritrean  national  who
     has never been to Eritrea and who is of draft age.  The specific areas
     of risk for this appellant are set out in a  comprehensive  submission
     somewhat inaccurately described as his (amended) skeleton argument.

 12. The appellant's case is that he has a well-founded fear of persecution
     in Eritrea for the following reasons:

          i) he is of mixed ethnicity;
         ii) he will be perceived as an Ethiopian;
        iii) he is a member of a particular social  group,  namely,  family
             members of parents of mixed ethnicity;
         iv) his perceived political  opinion  as  anti-Eritrean  and  pro-
             Ethiopian;
          v) his perceived  political  opinion  based  upon  the  political
             beliefs of his father;
         vi) as a returned asylum-seeker of draft age, he will be perceived
             as a draft evader with the imputed political  opinion  as  one
             who is opposed to the current Eritrean government;
        vii) as a person who refuses to perform military service,  he  will
             be similarly viewed as opposing the regime.


 13. These grounds are summarised in paragraph 8 of the argument:

           "In summary, the appellant claims a fear of persecution...  from
           the Eritrean authorities... because his father was  an  opponent
           of the regime (as an army officer during  the  Derg  regime  and
           thereafter as an active member of the Eritrea  Liberation  Front
           (Revolutionary Council) and/or his  father  fought  against  the
           EPLF for fifteen years)( in consequence of which the authorities
           will attribute to him the political beliefs of his  father),  he
           is of mixed Eritrean/Ethiopian ethnicity (he will be seen as pro-
           Ethiopian and a  spy  in  particular  in  light  of  the  rising
           tensions between the two countries), he  is  a  returned  asylum
           seeker of draft age and he refuses to perform  military  service
           in consequence of which he will be perceived as a  draft  evader
           and  imputed  a  political  opinion  opposed  to   the   regime.
           Suspicions that he is a traitor and an opponent  of  the  regime
           will be aroused because he is a returned asylum-seeker of  draft
           age.  As such he will be perceived to  be  a  draft  evader  and
           therefore anti-government.  He will be suspected  of  disloyalty
           and imputed a political opinion opposed to the regime.  He  will
           be arrested,  detained  and  interrogated  about  his  past  and
           background.  Family members of political opponents are  targeted
           for arrest, detention and harassment.  The government often uses
           national service  as  retribution  for  perceived  criticism  of
           government  policies.   The  appellant  is  at  particular  risk
           because: his family did not vote in the independence referendum;
           they did not contribute financially to the  Eritrean  Government
           whilst living abroad; he did not return to  Eritrea  during  the
           border war or thereafter; he  is  part  Ethiopian,  grew  up  in
           Ethiopia and speaks Amharic; whilst an army officer  during  the
           Derg regime his father was based  in  Asmara;  his  father  fled
           Eritrea upon liberation; his father was an active member of  the
           ELF (RC) and was arrested by the Ethiopian  government  in  1992
           (the EPRDF was sympathetic to Eritrean nationalist  aspirations)
           and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi was a former ally  of  the  EPLF
           leader, his  whereabouts  is  unknown;  his  father  had  fought
           against the EPLF for fifteen  years;  individuals  who  were  in
           Ethiopia and are now in Eritrea would know about his family, his
           mixed race and his father's position in the Derg regime;  he  is
           of draft age (currently twenty-one years  old);  he  will  be  a
           returned asylum seeker; he will  be  perceived  to  be  a  draft
           evader; he will refuse to perform military service."


 14. The grounds are developed in pages 12 to 21 of the argument.

The appellant's evidence

 15. In the course of his evidence to us, the appellant spoke of  the  date
     when he was first arrested in Ethiopia.  It was pointed out to him  by
     Mr Gulvin, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,  that  in
     his SEF prepared with his solicitor's help, he had  stated  that  this
     took place in June 1998.  This appears in answer to question 8 of  his
     SEF (Self Completion) and on page 3 of the associated statement of  15
     January 2001.  In his subsequent statement, the appellant altered this
     to say that he was first detained  on  2  October  2000.   He  claimed
     before us that this was the correct date and that  the  error  in  his
     previous  application  and  statement  was   as   a   result   of   an
     interpretation error made by his solicitor.  He went on  to  say  that
     between 1998 and 2000, the Ethiopian authorities came to  see  him  on
     several occasions about his Eritrean nationality.   He  said  that  on
     each occasion they came to his home, they searched  for  documentation
     about the Eritrean government.  He told us the authorities closed down
     his mother's shop, although did not otherwise target her.   In  cross-
     examination, he accepted that the authorities first started coming  to
     see him in 1998 when he was about 14.  He stated that he did not  know
     how many times they searched his home but it was definitely more  than
     three or four times.

The Tribunal's analysis of the appellant's claim

 16. In the statement made by the appellant on 26 June 2004, he  refers  to
     soldiers coming to his home in June 1998 but  makes  no  reference  to
     repeated visits by the authorities between 1998 and 2000.   He  claims
     it was in June 1998 that he was required to declare  that  he  was  an
     Eritrean  and  was  forced  to  sign  a  document  to   that   effect,
     notwithstanding his protests that he was an Ethiopian.

 17. It is the appellant's case that his father was arrested in July  1992,
     when the appellant was just eight years old.  Thereafter, his  mother,
     an Ethiopian, maintained a small clothing shop in Addis Ababa.  He had
     an  unremarkable  upbringing  with  his  brother  in  a  single-parent
     household.  He claims that  in  1998,  when  aged  14,  the  Ethiopian
     authorities first  targeted  him  because  of  his  father's  Eritrean
     ethnicity and activities and then made repeated searches of  his  home
     in an attempt to  find  incriminating  material  about  Eritrea.   The
     appellant himself had no dealings with any political organisation and,
     given his age, it is inconceivable that he would have stored  material
     likely to be of any interest to the Ethiopian authorities or that  the
     authorities might reasonably believe it likely he had.  If it  is  not
     reasonably likely that the authorities would have searched his home on
     a single occasion, it is even less likely that they  would  have  made
     repeated searches.  We do not accept that, as a teenager  living  with
     his Ethiopian mother in Addis Ababa, the authorities  would  have  had
     any interest in the appellant six years after his father had left  the
     home.  We are supported in that conclusion by the conflicting evidence
     he has provided as to the  date  of  his  first  arrest.   Whilst,  of
     course,  mistakes  occur   in   interpretation   or   by   solicitors'
     carelessness, we do not  consider  the  same  error  would  have  been
     occurred at exactly the same point in the narrative both  in  the  SEF
     and in the statement associated  with  it.   We  do  not  consider  it
     credible that the Ethiopian authorities would have shown any  interest
     in the appellant bearing in mind his age and the fact that his  father
     had left in 1992.

 18. The appellant went on to say that he was held  in  detention  and  ill
     treated to such an extent that he required medical treatment that  the
     authorities refused to  provide  him.   He  claimed  that  his  mother
     pleaded for his release and two prominent people  agreed  to  sign  as
     sureties to enable him to be  released  in  order  to  obtain  medical
     treatment.  The arrangement was made on condition  that  he  would  be
     returned to detention when he felt better,   (see page 4 of his  first
     statement).  He told us that he was discharged  from  hospital  on  22
     October 2000 and went into hiding.  At one stage he told  us  that  he
     did not see his mother again before he left Ethiopia because he was in
     hiding.  He altered this account to say that he last saw  her  on  the
     date he left on 8 December 2000.  He explained that he could  not  see
     her before because the authorities  might  have  been  following  her.
     Once again, we are unable to accept the  appellant's  account  of  his
     release from custody so as to enable him to obtain  medical  treatment
     on condition that, when it had been  completed,  he  would  return  to
     custody.  We  regard  this  as  inherently   implausible   given   the
     appellant's evidence as to the hostility  shown  towards  him  by  the
     authorities.  In his statement, the appellant asserts that  whilst  it
     was in hospital  and  his  mother  was  making  arrangements  for  his
     departure from the country, the house was, once  again,  ransacked  by
     the authorities on two separate occasions in a  search  for  documents
     such as a list of Eritreans who contributed  money  for  the  Eritrean
     cause.  We do not consider it is remotely possible that the  Ethiopian
     authorities suspected the appellant of having such information bearing
     in mind his history or that they would continue to show the  level  of
     interest in him he claims whilst, at the same time, releasing him from
     custody on the  promise  of  a  voluntary  return.   The  evidence  of
     continued raids on the house is inconsistent  with  his  release  from
     custody.

Our conclusions on the facts

 19. For these reasons, we consider that the centrepiece of his claim to be
     at risk in Ethiopia falls away.  We do not consider that the appellant
     was of any interest to the authorities during his teenage years  as  a
     result of his father's Eritrean ethnicity.  We reject his  account  to
     have been arrested either  in  1998  or  in  2000  and  to  have  been
     subjected  to  torture  whilst  in  detention,  necessitating  medical
     treatment.   We  are  not  satisfied  that  the  activities   of   the
     appellant's father in 1992, when the appellant was  eight  years  old,
     had any consequences for the appellant during his  minority  or  until
     the time he left Ethiopia.  Having reached this conclusion, we are not
     satisfied that the appellant is a reliable  witness  as  to  the  true
     circumstances in which he came  to  leave  Ethiopia.   Further,  these
     findings undermine his claim centred upon  his  father's  military  or
     political activities either in Ethiopia or in Eritrea.    We  are  not
     satisfied that his claims about any of  his  father's  activities  are
     true.

 20. For these reasons, we reject any claim advanced by the appellant based
     upon perceived political opinion arising from the political beliefs or
     activities of  his  father.   We  accept,  however,  the  unchallenged
     evidence that his  father  is  Eritrean  and  that,  accordingly,  the
     appellant is entitled to Eritrean citizenship based upon his  father's
     nationality.

The refusal to perform military service and the risk on removal to Eritrea

 21. We next turn to consider the appellant's claim to be at risk by reason
     of a settled intention to refuse military service.  This was stated to
     arise because he did not wish to fight Ethiopians: see  his  statement
     of 14 February 2005,  appellant's  bundle  page  4.   This  claim,  of
     course, sits uneasily with his claim that  the  Ethiopian  authorities
     targeted and ill-treated him because of his Eritrean ethnicity.

 22. The Amnesty International report dated 19 May 2004 notes that:

           "In November 1991 the new EPLF government issued  regulations  to
           make national service compulsory for  all  citizens.   The  first
           intake of national service was in 1994 and it continued in staged
           phases  since  then.   Under   the   revised   national   service
           regulations of 23 October 1995, national  service  is  compulsory
           for all citizens aged between 18 and 40 years, male  and  female.
           It consists of six months of military training (performed at Sawa
           military training centre near Tessenei in western Eritrea) and 12
           months of 'active  military  service  and  development  tasks  in
           military forces' under Ministry of Defence authority.  It extends
           to military reserve duties up to  the  age  of  50.   It  may  be
           continued under 'mobilisation or emergency  situation  directives
           given by the government' ".

      The  same  report  provides  that  the  legal  penalty   for   evading
     conscription or assisting evasion is  two  years-imprisonment  but  in
     practice offenders are punished administratively by  local  commanders
     without any form of trial, legal recourse or opportunity for appeal or
     redress.  The forms of punishment consist  of  torture  and  arbitrary
     detention for an indefinite period.  Although  these  punishments  are
     unlawful and  an  abuse  of  human  rights,  they  are  well-known  to
     government and military officials and the public, and no army  officer
     has ever been punished for employing them.


 23. We are satisfied that  the  appellant  does  not  wish  to  return  to
     Ethiopia or Eritrea.  Not surprisingly, he wishes  to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom with his wife and new family.  He has  put  forward  no
     religious or philosophical basis for  avoiding  the  draft.   We  have
     already determined that the true circumstances in which the  appellant
     came to leave Ethiopia have not been established and that we  are  not
     satisfied it reasonably likely it was as a result of persecution.   We
     are not persuaded that he has held or holds any reasons of  conscience
     in relation to military service; and, in considering his  evidence  in
     the round we consider that in his case his claim that he does not wish
     to fight Ethiopians to be no more than an alternative method of saying
     that he does not want to be a soldier - a fact which we accept but  it
     is not, in our judgment, underpinned by any strong moral  compunction.
     On removal to Eritrea, the appellant will have a stark choice: he will
     be required to perform his military service or face  the  consequences
     of not doing so.  Given his failure to establish any deeply-felt moral
     scruples against conscription, we are satisfied to the point of  being
     sure that he will comply with the draft.  In reaching this  conclusion
     we bear in mind the consequences to the appellant of conscription.  He
     will be involved in the six month period of military training followed
     by 12 months active  military  service  and/or  development  tasks  in
     military forces.  Military service may  or  may  not  involve  combat.
     There is also a risk that military service will be extended but it  is
     not so clear that such an extension is a  reasonable  likelihood.   By
     comparison, the consequences of refusal  are  much  more  severe  and,
     given the absence of any credible evidence establishing the  appellant
     will elect the latter, the reality is  that,  albeit  grudgingly,  the
     appellant like most other conscripts will perform military service.

 24. At the hearing before the Adjudicator, she noted in  paragraph  11  of
     her determination that there was no evidence of an attempt  to  go  to
     the  Eritrean  Embassy  to  obtain  verification   of   his   Eritrean
     nationality.  No additional material  was  presented  to  us  on  this
     subject.  The appellant has not been called up  for  military  service
     and his actions in leaving Ethiopia and coming to the  United  Kingdom
     do  not  readily  suggest  he  will  be  perceived  by  the   Eritrean
     authorities as pro-Ethiopia, anti-Eritrean, a political opponent or an
     Ethiopian spy.  Although it is argued that this will be the perception
     by the Eritrean authorities, it can only be an  inference  drawn  from
     the background material.

 25. We were referred to the US State Department report for 2004 (page 9 of
     13) to the effect that, in general, Eritrean citizens have  the  right
     to return subject to payment of 2% of their foreign income in order to
     secure  eligibility  for  some  government  services.   We  have  also
     considered the Amnesty International report of 7 January 2005  of  the
     treatment meted out to four Eritrean soldiers who were  refused  leave
     to enter Djibouti and  were  summarily  returned.  (Page  144  of  the
     appellant's bundle refers.)  These cases  follow  the  well-documented
     returns from Libya (pages 159-162) and Malta (pages  234  -235).   The
     Home Office itself recognises the risk faced by some returnees in  its
     Operational Guidance Note of November 2005:

           "3.7.8 Conclusion. If it is accepted that  the  claimant  is  of
           military service age, has previously received call-up papers and
           left the country having refused to undertake military service or
           has undertaken military service or  training  but  has  escaped,
           then it is likely that they will  be  of  due  interest  to  the
           authorities. As the Government effectively views those who evade
           service or desert from the military as political opponents,  the
           treatment by  the  authorities  of  individuals  known  to  have
           deserted or evaded military  service  is  likely  to  amount  to
           persecution under the terms of  the  Convention.  The  grant  of
           asylum in such cases is therefore likely to be appropriate.
           3.7.9 Nevertheless, an individual of military service age is not
           automatically viewed as an evader  or  deserter  simply  because
           they fall within the age range. If the claimant is  of  military
           service age  but  has  not  received  call-up  papers,  has  not
           previously received any other direction  to  undertake  military
           service,  has  completed  their  military  service  or  has  not
           previously come to the adverse  attention  of  the  authorities,
           then it is unlikely that they will be of undue interest to those
           authorities. Similarly, if someone  falls  within  an  exemption
           from the draft, is outside the age for military service  or  has
           been eligible for call-up over a significant period but has  not
           been called up there would be no perception by  the  authorities
           of draft evasion. Such claimants are unlikely to  encounter  ill
           treatment amounting to  persecution  within  the  terms  of  the
           Convention. The grant of asylum in these cases is therefore  not
           likely to be appropriate.
           3.7.10 Claimants who present an objection to military service on
           religious grounds (see 3.6 above), would be  subjected  to  ill-
           treatment amounting to persecution within the terms of the  1951
           Convention as a result of these beliefs and  should  be  granted
           refugee status."


 26.  In KA (draft-related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005] UKAIT
     00165, the Tribunal updated the analysis of risk categories undertaken
     in IN (Draft evaders - evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00106
     and confirmed the  previous  Tribunal  view  that  returnees  are  not
     generally at risk. It reaffirmed the view  that  those  who  would  be
     perceived as draft evaders or deserters would be at risk. In contrast,
     persons of eligible draft age, whilst being regarded by  the  Eritrean
     authorities with suspicion, would only be treated  adversely  if  they
     were unable to explain their absence abroad. The  appellant's  grounds
     of appeal relied heavily on  a  January   2004  UNHCR  position  paper
     entitled 'UNHCR Position on  Return of  Rejected   Asylum  Seekers  to
     Eritrea' which highlighted evidence concerning  the  fate  of  persons
     returned by Malta to Eritrea in 2002 and posited in the light of  this
     evidence an extremely wide  risk  category  -  all  Eritrean  rejected
     asylum seekers. The Tribunal drew a narrower definition  of  those  at
     risk, summarised in paragraph 113 of the determination:


           (b)   The Tribunal confirmed the view taken in IN  that  persons
                 who would be perceived as draft evaders or deserters  faced
                 a real risk of persecution as well as treatment contrary to
                 Article 3.

           (c)   The Tribunal continues to take  the  view  that  returnees
                 generally are not at real risk of persecution or  treatment
                 contrary to Article 3. It  did  not  consider  that  failed
                 asylum  seekers  would  be   regarded   by   the   Eritrean
                 authorities as traitors and ill treated in consequence.

              d) The  Tribunal  continues  to  reject  the  contention  that
                 persons of eligible draft age are by that reason  alone  at
                 real risk of persecution or treatment contrary  to  Article
                 3.


              f) Subject to  the  remarks  set  out  in  sub-paragraph  (e),
                 persons of eligible draft age (defined in  the  context  of
                 return as being between 18 and 50 for  men  and  18-40  for
                 women) were currently at real risk of persecution  as  well
                 as treatment contrary to Article 3 unless:
                   i) They can be considered to have left Eritrea legally.
                  ii) They have not been in Eritrea since the start of  the
                      war with Ethiopia in 1998 (that being the  year  when
                      the authorities increased  dramatically  the  numbers
                      required for call up and took  the  national  service
                      system in a much more  authoritarian  direction)  and
                      are able to show  that  there  was  no  draft-evasion
                      motive behind their absence.
                 iii) They have never been to Eritrea and are able to  show
                      that there was no draft-evasion motive  behind  their
                      absence.  If  they  have  not  yet  obtained   formal
                      nationality documents, there is no  reason  to  think
                      they will be perceived as draft-evaders.


           (g)   Nevertheless, even those of draft military age  who  would
                 not be considered at real risk  of  serious  harm  (because
                 they come within (i) or (ii) or (iii)) would  still  be  at
                 such a  risk  if  they  hold  conscientious  objections  to
                 military service.

           (h)    Otherwise,  the  Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  mere
                 performance of military service gives rise to a  real  risk
                 of  persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to   Article   3.




Our conclusion on the risk on removal

 27. Applying these guidelines, the appellant as a  person  who  has  never
     been  to  Eritrea  and  who  has  not  yet  obtained  formal  identity
     documents, does not fall into  a  category  at  risk.   Nor  is  he  a
     conscientious  objector.   Contrary  to  what  is  asserted   in   the
     appellant's submissions, he will not be perceived as a draft evader or
     as a person holding views opposed to the regime.  No investigation  is
     likely to reveal a background of  activities  in  Ethiopia  that  will
     place him at risk in Eritrea, either as a result of his  own,  or  his
     father's activities.  His mixed ethnicity does not automatically  give
     rise to a risk of harm.

 28. For these reasons, the appellant's asylum and Article 3  claim  fails.
     If these claims fail, he will be removed to  Eritrea,  unless  he  can
     establish that his removal will violate his right to family or private
     life within the terms of Article 8.

The appellant's Article 8 claim

 29. Where there is a viable option of the entire family relocating in  the
     country of origin (or somewhere else), it  is  necessary  to  consider
     where there are insurmountable obstacles  preventing  the  move.  Such
     consideration is part of the examination of the various  factors  that
     are the substance of the balancing exercise performed under Article 8.
      In those cases where there is the option  of  making  an  application
     from abroad for entry  clearance  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
     immigration judge is not thereby discharged  from  a  similar  careful
     examination of the various factors  that  are  the  substance  of  the
     balancing exercise performed under Article 8.

 30. In our view it will normally be necessary to  address  both  of  these
     issues when considering whether a decision to remove is proportionate,
     since an appellant is not entitled to succeed unless he can show  that
     neither option is viable.

 31. It will normally be appropriate to address these  two  issues  in  the
     order we have outlined  for  the  following  three  reasons.  Firstly,
     Article 8 does not enshrine a right for  foreign  nationals  to  enjoy
     private or family life  in  the  territory  of  a  Member  State:  see
     Abdulaziz v  United  Kingdom  (1985)  7  EHRR  471.  It  follows  that
     generally  speaking  persons  who  have   private   or   family   life
     relationships can be expected to continue or  resume  those  in  their
     country of origin or elsewhere: they cannot expect that they can enjoy
     them in the UK. Secondly, because there is no right to  enjoy  private
     or family life in the territory of a Member State, the mere fact  that
     a  person  has  established  or  developed  private  or  family   life
     relationships here does not in itself give rise to any basis for stay.
     It will normally only be in cases where it has been  established  that
     the private and family life relationships  concerned  have  particular
     strength and content that it would be permissible not to  dismiss  the
     claim on the basis that there disruption of it will not amount  to  an
     interference or a disproportionate interference, whether or not  there
     exist insurmountable obstacles to it being resumed elsewhere.

 32. However, where the strength of private and family  life  relationships
     in the UK, together with other  factors,  is  such  that  there  exist
     insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed  elsewhere,  an
     appellant has then gone some way to  showing  he  can  succeed  in  an
     Article 8 claim - subject to being able to show that  entry  clearance
     is not a viable option.

 33. A third reason is that by dealing with both issues  there  can  be  no
     question of an immigration judge failing to make full findings on  the
     Article 8 issues. This way it is made known to the  parties  what  the
     essential findings of the Tribunal are on both  of  the  issues  which
     generally arise.

 34. We would accept, however, that there may be some  cases  where  it  is
     sensible for practical reasons to consider the second issue first.  It
     is likely to depend essentially upon the facts of an individual  cases
     as to which option is  given  greater  attention  and  whether  it  is
     strictly necessary for both to be considered.

 35. But if either option is viable,  an  appellant  cannot  succeed  under
     Article 8.

 36. In conducting the balancing exercise we  have  in  respect  of  either
     option to  take  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances,  including
     factors such as delay.

The  Article  8  claim  and  whether  there  are  insurmountable   obstacles
preventing the family's return

 37. The appellant claims that his removal  would  violate  his  Article  8
     rights and, in particular, the family life he enjoys with MO and their
     two children.  In considering the Article 8 issue, we  turn  first  to
     the issue  of  whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
     appellant's family accompanying him to Eritrea to resume  family  life
     there.

 38. MO gave evidence.  She repeated her claim made in her  statement  that
     she was an Eritrean citizen who had no family in Eritrea and  who  had
     never been there.   She said the Eritrean authorities would not accept
     her, notwithstanding a visit to the Eritrean Embassy  in  relation  to
     her own case.  The official there spoke of the requirement  for  three
     witnesses to attest to her identity.  In any event, she said that  she
     would not return to Eritrea.

 39. Mr Solomon submitted that there was clearly an  existent  family  life
     and that the decision to remove the  appellant  would  interfere  with
     that  and  that  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles   to   MO
     accompanying her husband.  In this regard she relied chiefly upon MO's
     refugee status in the  United  Kingdom  as  justifying  her  right  to
     remain.

 40. It was accepted by Mr Gulvin that the appellant enjoys family life  in
     the United Kingdom and that a return  to  Eritrea  on  his  own  would
     involve interference in that family life.  He submitted, however, that
     there were no insurmountable obstacles to MO accompanying her husband.
      He relied upon the decision of the Tribunal in SS  (ILR,  Article  8,
     return) Sri Lanka [2004] UKIAT 00126 (Ouseley J.,  President)  to  the
     effect  that  a  prior  recognition  of  refugee   status   does   not
     automatically amount to an insurmountable obstacle.  Such  cases  will
     depend upon a consideration of the specific facts upon which the claim
     had been recognised.  There is no automatic insurmountable  hurdle  in
     the mere fact of the past grant of ILR. Mr Gulvin  submitted  that  MO
     would not be returning as a lone single woman  with  children  and  no
     means of support (part of the basis upon which the Adjudicator allowed
     her appeal).

 41. The determination in  MO's  claim  is  amongst  our  papers.   It  was
     notified in May 2003.  We must accord due weight to the findings  made
     by an Adjudicator (Mrs C. Bart-Stewart) in the context of an appeal in
     which the evidence  is  tested.   There  are,  however,  a  number  of
     features of her findings and reasons  which  we  consider  reduce  the
     weight to be attached to the determination.  In paragraph  31  of  the
     determination, the Adjudicator recorded that  the  objective  evidence
     was that the Eritrean Government placed restrictions on free  movement
     in and out of the country.  The Adjudicator said that  the  government
     had increasingly denied exit visas to  young  people  to  ensure  they
     carry out their national service.   However,  this  factor  is  of  no
     direct relevance for MO because, like the  appellant,  she  has  never
     entered the country or gained recognition as a  citizen  of  it.   The
     Adjudicator also stated there had been instances where citizens living
     abroad had had difficulty on return and may also be required to  prove
     that they had paid tax on their annual income while abroad in order to
     receive government services on their return.  This is material that we
     have referred to above.  It does not seem to us that a failure on  the
     part of an Eritrean national who  has  lived  abroad  to  satisfy  the
     requirements for receiving services when in Eritrea gives  rise  to  a
     claim of persecution or treatment that would violate the human  rights
     of that claimant.

 42. In paragraph 32 of her determination, the Adjudicator also referred to
     the difficulties faced by Eritreans who cannot demonstrate  sufficient
     ties in order  to  obtain  citizenship.  MO  and  her  witnesses  gave
     evidence of the difficulties she  would  encounter  in  finding  three
     witnesses willing and able to speak to  the  applicant's  origins  and
     parentage.  The Adjudicator said:

                 "... the position is not sufficiently clear in respect of a
                 person  who  cannot  demonstrate  their  ties  to  Eritrea.
                 Having never lived in the  country  or  even  visited,  the
                 appellant would be at a significant disadvantage."

      The Adjudicator makes no  express  finding  that  MO  would  fail  but
     confined herself to the comment that MO would be disadvantaged.

 43. In paragraphs 33 and 34, the Adjudicator relied upon the fact that  MO
     would be returning as a single young woman  with  a  young  child  and
     without any means of support.  She  would  be  vulnerable  and,  in  a
     traditional and patriarchal society, would  have  an  inferior  status
     without the privilege of access to education, employment  and  control
     of economic resources.  She would  be  at  risk  of  violence  against
     women.  She would return completely destitute and unable to access  to
     government  services  or  family  support.   On  this  material,   the
     Adjudicator decided that MO's return placed her at  risk  of  both  of
     persecution and a violation of the Article 3 human rights.  There  was
     no separate Article 8 claim.

 44.  In her  own  claim,  MO  and  her  witnesses  gave  evidence  of  the
     difficulties she would encounter in  establishing  her  identity.   No
     further information regarding her position has been produced  for  the
     present appeal.  The Adjudicator in her appeal appears to have decided
     that MO could not satisfy the requirements for  citizenship  although,
     as we have seen, the finding is not entirely clear.  Whatever may have
     been the position in May 2003, we  now  know  that  the  3  witnesses'
     requirement is not  an  exacting  one  and  in  a  case  such  as  the
     appellant's wife, it is reasonably likely she would be able to  obtain
     confirmation of her Eritrean nationality without any serious obstacle.
       See  FA  (Eritrea  -  nationality)Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT   00047
     paragraph 18.

 45. MO may be able to gain entry clearance to accompany the  appellant  as
     his partner or spouse, although they are not in fact married  to  each
     other.  We are not, however, confident that this would be permitted by
     the Eritrean authorities, although we doubt entry clearance is subject
     to the same sophisticated and rigorous  rules  such  as  govern  entry
     clearance to the United Kingdom.  It appears that she could not  apply
     for naturalisation through marriage to the appellant (if  they  marry)
     because the requirements for  doing  so  include  demonstrating  three
     years  legal  residence  in  Eritrea  following  the  marriage  and  a
     renunciation of other nationality.   (This  is  the  conclusion  of  a
     British Fact Finding Mission reporting in April 2003 and  referred  to
     in paragraph 5.06 of the COI Report, October 2005.)

 46. The fact that MO has been granted indefinite leave to remain does mean
     that the United Kingdom government would be  able,  (in  circumstances
     where she was unable to obtain Eritrean documentation), to furnish her
     with travel documents sufficient to enable her to  leave,  and  return
     to, the United Kingdom.

 47.  We are, however, satisfied that the appellant  has  not  demonstrated
     that she will be prevented from going to Eritrea because she  faces  a
     risk of persecution.  The determination of Mrs Bart-Stewart falls well
     short of establishing that, accompanied by  the  appellant,  she  will
     suffer the adverse consequences  identified  by  the  Adjudicator  who
     heard her asylum appeal.

 48. Similarly, we cannot be satisfied that MO would be required to perform
     military service, were she  to  accompany  her  husband.   This  would
     depend upon the capacity in which she is admitted to Eritrea, in other
     words whether she enters as a national of Eritrea.  But even  assuming
     she was admitted as a national, she is the mother  of  young  children
     and as such it appears to us to be an exceedingly  remote  possibility
     that she would be required to perform military service.   No  argument
     was addressed to us on this  issue  but  see  KA  (draft-related  risk
     categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005] UKAIT 00165 in which it was said
     married women are not currently at risk of  conscription  in  Eritrea.
     In essence, it remains academic because  of  her  express  refusal  to
     accompany her husband.

 49.  In  these  circumstances,  we  are  not  satisfied  that  there   are
     insurmountable obstacles preventing the appellant travelling with  his
     family to Eritrea.  It is not, however, essential to  our  conclusions
     that we reach this finding because of what we say about the  appellant
     seeking entry clearance from abroad.

The Article 8 claim and whether there is a viable  option  of  applying  for
entry clearance

 50. We next turn to consider the other aspect  of  the  Article  8  issue,
     namely,  whether  even  if  we  had  accepted  that  there  would   be
     insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant  and  his  family  resuming
     family life in Eritrea, he would have the  viable  option  of  seeking
     entry clearance.  We begin by recapitulating relevant principles.   In
     Mahmood [2001] Imm AR 229, the Court of Appeal considered  the  viable
     option of making an out-of-country application for entry clearance  as
     a spouse.  Such a consideration is all the  more  important  in  cases
     where the appellant's fianc� refuses  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
     Such an option is a reasonable basis for concluding that the  decision
     to remove is proportionate as it does not  represent  any  necessarily
     conclusive disruption of the appellant's family life.   The  appellant
     is  not  necessarily  faced  with  any  permanent  or  even  long-term
     exclusion from continuing family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   See
     Simon Brown, LJ in paragraph 19 of Ekinci [2003] EWCA Civ  765.    The
     option affords the appellant a right of appeal against a  refusal  and
     both the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  or  Immigration
     Officer and any subsequent appeal has the in-built  right  to  require
     that any decision is compliant  with  the  appellant's  human  rights.
     Thus, the existence of a legal avenue abroad is sufficient  to  render
     the  removal  proportionate  and  it  will  only  be  in   exceptional
     circumstances that the decision will not be so, as  Laws  LJ  said  in
     paragraph 23 of Mahmood:

           "If the established rule is to the effect - as it is  -  that  a
           person seeking rights of residence here on grounds  of  marriage
           (not being someone who already enjoys a leave,  albeit  limited,
           to remain in the UK) must  obtain  an  entry  clearance  in  his
           country of origin, then a waiver of that requirement in the case
           of someone who has found his way here without an entry clearance
           and then seeks to remain on marriage grounds,  having  no  other
           legitimate claim to enter, would in the absence  of  exceptional
           circumstances to justify the waiver, disrupt and undermine  firm
           immigration control because it would  be  manifestly  unfair  to
           other would-be entrants who are content to take their  place  in
           the entry clearance queue in their country of origin."
 51. Exceptional circumstances have not been said to exist where the effect
     of separation was likely to require the  remaining  spouse  to  become
     dependent on public funds for subsistence, even in a  case  where  the
     remaining spouse was partially disabled.   (See  Baljit  Singh  [2002]
     UKIAT 00660)  Nor where the separation will result  in  the  appellant
     losing his job (as would normally occur),  even  where  there  was  no
     guarantee that the same or a similar job would be available on return.
      (See the Master of the Rolls in Mahmood  paragraph  65.)   The  Entry
     Clearance Officer can be expected to have regard  to  the  appellant's
     work-record as evidence of the appellant's and his  partner's  ability
     to maintain and accommodate  themselves  without  recourse  to  public
     funds.  It is not an exceptional circumstance that the appellant  runs
     the risk of failing  in  an  application  for  entry  clearance,  (see
     Ekinci, paragraph 17).   Article 8 should not be used as  a  means  of
     circumventing the provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 52. Exceptional circumstances  may  be  established  where  the  returning
     appellant is  unable  to  make  an  effective  application  for  entry
     clearance from abroad either  because  there  are  no  facilities  for
     making such an  application  in  his  country  of  nationality  or  by
     travelling  to  a  neighbouring  country,  (see  KJ  (Entry  Clearance
     Proportionality) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT  00066  and  EH  (Palestinian  -
     entry clearance - proportionality) Iraq [2005]  UKIAT  00062)  and  SA
     (Entry clearance application in  Jordan  -  proportionality)  Iraq  CG
     [2006] UKAIT 00011 or if there is  a  prolonged  delay  rendering  the
     period of separation disproportionate, (see the Master of the Rolls in
     paragraph 65 of Mahmood).  No submissions were directed  to  us  about
     the absence of facilities for entry clearance in the context  of  this
     case.

 53. Bearing in mind these legal principles and guidelines, we must now ask
     how they are to be applied to  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
     appellant's case.  We approach the second stage of the Article 8 claim
     by considering whether it is proportionate to require the appellant to
     make an out-of-country application for entry clearance, leaving behind
     his 2 children, aged 2 years and 8 months in the United  Kingdom.   In
     the light of KA, the Tribunal accepts that, on removal to Eritrea,  he
     will be required to perform his military service for 18 months.  As we
     have set out above, there is a risk  that  military  service  will  be
     extended but it is not so clear that such an extension is a reasonable
     likelihood.

The impact of military service on the Article 8 claim

 54. Before proceeding further, however, it is necessary to take  stock  of
     what has been said previously by the Tribunal in reported cases as  to
     the significance in Article 8 cases of  the  fact  that  a  person  on
     return might be required to do military service before being  able  to
     apply for or exercise entry clearance  to  come  back  to  the  United
     Kingdom.

 55. Drawing  upon  the  three-fold  categorisation  of  the  circumstances
     identified by Laws LJ in paragraph 61 of Sepet and Bulbul [2001]  EWCA
     Civ 681 in which an objection to military service might give rise to a
     claim for asylum (where the military service involves acts  which  are
     contrary to basic rules of human  conduct;  where  the  conditions  of
     military service are themselves so harsh as to amount  to  persecution
     on the facts; where the punishment in question  is  disproportionately
     harsh or severe), the Tribunal in Hariri [2002] UKIAT  03557  did  not
     rule out the principle that  military  service  if  too  prolonged  or
     repeated could give rise to an Article 8 claim.

 56. Absent a personal risk, however, there can be no real risk of relevant
     ill-treatment unless the situation in the receiving country is one  in
     which the level of abuse amounts to a "consistent  pattern  of  gross,
     flagrant or  mass  violations  of  human  rights"  -  the  "gross  and
     systematic" standard adopted by the Tribunal in Muzafar  Iqbal  [2002]
     UKIAT 02239 and adopted by the Court of Appeal in Hariri  [2003]  EWCA
     Civ 807 in the words of Laws LJ paragraph 8:

           "...there could be no real risk of relevant ill-treatment unless
           the situation to which the appellant would be returning was  one
           in which such violence was generally or consistently happening."

      Similar expressions were used by Buxton LJ in the Court of  Appeal  in
      Batayev No 2 [2005] EWCA Civ 366 in which he said at paragraph 5

           "...significant evidence must be  given  of  conditions  in  the
           systems that  are universal, or very likely to be encountered by
           anyone who enters that system."

      The Hariri test should not be  taken  as  assimilating  real  risk  to
      probability.  Such was the unanimous view of the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Batayev No 1 [2003] EWCA Civ 1489 as observed by  Munby  J  in  Kpagni
      [2005] EWHC 881 at paragraph 8.

 57. Absent these conditions, if an appellant  fails  to  perform  military
     service  and  thereby  renders  him   liable   to   prosecution,   his
     imprisonment will not violate his  Article  8  rights.   This  is  the
     conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in  Tasyurdu  [2002]  UKIAT  03722   at
     paragraph16:

           "However, the appellant in this case must have been fully  aware
           that when he entered upon this marriage that he  might  have  to
           serve such a period of imprisonment upon return to Turkey.   And
           there is no reason to think that  whilst  the  appellant  is  in
           prison the couple cannot maintain some degree of contact through
           prison visits and correspondence.  Although prison conditions in
           Turkey are plainly not the same as in the United Kingdom, it  is
           noteworthy that the court in Strasbourg has never seen, save  in
           very    exceptional    circumstances,    any    disproportionate
           interference with the right to respect for  private  and  family
           life to arise from  the  separation  of  the  family  caused  by
           service of a lawfully imposed punishment."

 58. If this is the position for those liable  to  imprisonment  for  draft
     evasion, by parity of reasoning, the same result must apply  to  those
     who are separated for the period of military service.  They can be  no
     logical distinction  between  the  separation  brought  about  by  the
     performance  of  military  service  and  separation  as  a  result  of
     imprisonment for draft evasion.

 59. In Tasyurdu the appellant faced imprisonment for up to three years for
     failure to perform a duty which was considered part of the  obligation
     a state  can  legitimately  require  its  citizens  to  fulfil.   That
     sentence and the period of separation that was likely  to  result  did
     not amount to a violation of the appellant's Article 8  rights.   This
     compares with the lesser period of  military  service  which  we  have
     found the appellant will serve on return.

 60. It seems to us that military service is an incident of life for  those
     citizens of  countries  whose  governments  impose  national  service.
     Whilst the imposition of conscription is now an alien concept for  all
     European countries,  this  is  only  a  relatively  recent  historical
     phenomenon.  At international law, performance of military service  is
     an obligation which a state has a right to require  of  its  citizens.
     It remains a matter of policy for the government  of  any  country  to
     decide whether its own security is best achieved by conscription.   If
     the decision is made  to  impose  national  service,  that  obligation
     cannot be viewed as a violation of the individual's freedom or private
     life.  There are limitations upon the state's ability to  require  its
     citizens to engage in military activity: Sepet and Bulbul [2003]  UKHL
     15 on appeal from [2001] EWCA Civ 681 and particularly paragraph 61 of
     the judgment of Laws LJ.  Those limitations do not apply in  the  case
     of Eritrea.  Accordingly, as a citizen of Eritrea,  the  appellant  is
     expected to comply with the requirements of the state that  he  should
     perform military service, notwithstanding  the  fact  that  this  will
     involve interference in his family life.  We do not consider  that  it
     is the  function  of  Article  8  to  relieve  an  appellant  of  that
     obligation.  Nor  do  we  consider  it  appropriate  to  differentiate
     between the various states that impose military conscription  so  that
     it is permissible to remove persons liable to conscription in the case
     of some countries but not in the case  of  others,  such  as  Eritrea.
     Whilst the human rights situation in Eritrea is poor, it does not seem
     to us that this, by itself, justifies the non-return of its  nationals
     on Article 8 grounds where the returnee will  face  military  service.
     The appellant has not established that there is consistent pattern  of
     gross, flagrant or mass  violations  of  human  rights  sufficient  to
     satisfy the "gross and systematic" test laid down in the case law.

Conclusions

 61. Accordingly, we do not consider that it is disproportionate to  remove
     an appellant to his country of nationality in order to make an out-of-
     country application for entry clearance merely because the application
     will be delayed whilst the applicant undergoes his  military  service.
     Indeed, to do otherwise, would undermine the right of the  appellant's
     country of nationality to impose a system  of  military  conscription.
     It would only be in highly unusual circumstances (for  example,  where
     performance of military service would entail an  appellant  having  to
     engage in armed conflict contrary to  international  law  (see  Krotov
     [2004] EWCA Civ 69) ) that a different view might be justified.

 62. There are no such unusual circumstances in the present case. The  fact
     that the appellant will be separated from his family for  this  period
     is the inevitable consequence of his decision to start and  develop  a
     family life in the United Kingdom pending the  determination  of  what
     has proved to be an ultimately unsuccessful asylum claim.  During  the
     currency of his claim, his immigration status was limited to the right
     not to be removed  but  was  no  more  than  that.   Whilst  we  fully
     appreciate the impact of removing a father from his children  for  the
     duration of a period of military service, there will never be an ideal
     moment for such a separation.  At present,  the  appellant's  children
     are very young but there will be equally compelling reasons that could
     be advanced to prevent removal were the children to be older.

 63. Nor do we consider that removal will only be justified if  the  family
     will accompany the appellant to  his  country  of  origin  during  the
     period of his conscription.  If will, of course, be for the  remaining
     family members to decide whether they will  accompany  the  appellant.
     In the present case,  MO  has  stated  in  terms  that  she  will  not
     accompany him but that decision is not determinative of the  issue  of
     proportionality.  The determination in her own asylum  claim  was  not
     based upon the risk  of  ill-treatment  on  arrival  but  was  largely
     centred upon the difficulties that she would face in establishing  her
     identity and in returning as a single vulnerable young mother at  risk
     of destitution and violence.  The appellant, having made no attempt to
     adduce evidence about the difficulties he will  face  in  establishing
     his identity, (he claimed to have lived  in  Asmara  for  some  time),
     cannot rely upon that ground.  MO, if she returns, will  be  returning
     with the appellant and not as a lone parent.  For these reasons, as we
     have said in paragraph 50 above, we are not satisfied that  there  are
     obstacles sufficient to prevent her travelling  to  Eritrea  with  the
     appellant.

 64. Even if the  appellant  were  to  have  established  that  there  were
     insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  wife   and   children
     accompanying him to Eritrea, we are satisfied in the  alternative,  in
     accordance with the principle set out in Huang [2005] EWCA  Civ  105I,
     that this is  not  an  exceptional  case  preventing  the  appellant's
     removal to Eritrea  in  order  to  submit  an  application  for  entry
     clearance.

Delay

 65. Finally, we deal with the  submission  that  the  Secretary  of  State
     delayed in the handling of the appellant's claim from the time it  was
     made on 5 January 2001 until the date of decision on 23 November 2004,
     nearly 4 years later.  As we noted earlier, delay is one of the  range
     of relevant factors we  have  to  take  into  account  when  assessing
     proportionality.  The case of Akaeke [2005]  EWCA  Civ  947  (27  July
     2005) concerned a Nigerian appellant who, in February  1999,  made  an
     application to remain on the basis of her marriage  which  application
     was not determined for over three years.  It was  accepted  that  this
     marriage was genuine and that in  normal  circumstances  the  marriage
     would entitle her to live lawfully in United Kingdom.  The  issue  was
     whether the appellant should be required to return to Nigeria in order
     to make an application and take her place in the queue: see  paragraph
     3 of the judgment.  It is therefore plain that, like the case of Shala
     [2003] EWCA Civ 233, the appellant in Akaeke was  not  being  provided
     with any substantive additional right to which she would not otherwise
     be entitled but a procedural advantage that avoided the  necessity  of
     returning to Nigeria to make the application.  It  was  accepted  that
     the appellant worked regularly and  that  her  husband  was  credible,
     honest and very hard-working.  He had worked in the  United  Kingdom's
     Post Office for many years.  They did not rely on benefits and  wished
     to start a family.  In paragraph 23  of  the  judgment,  Carnwath  LJ,
     having reviewed the authorities,  indicated  that  culpable  delay  in
     handling an immigration application may not, by itself, amount  to  an
     Article 8 interference.  He went on to say, in paragraph 25, that once
     it is accepted that unreasonable delay on the part of the Secretary of
     State is capable of being a relevant factor, then  the  weight  to  be
     given to it in a particular case was a matter for the Tribunal subject
     only to the constraints imposed by judicial  review  principles.  This
     was a case in  which  the  Tribunal  described  the  handling  of  the
     application by the Secretary of State as a "public disgrace".

 66.  It  is  conceivable  that  unreasonable  delay  could  in  itself  be
     determinative of a claim but the delay in this case has not caused the
     appellant prejudice and, whilst it  is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
     account, does not render  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
     disproportionate when taken together with the other  factors  we  have
     considered.

DECISION

      The original Tribunal made a material error of law.
      On reconsideration, we reach  the  same  conclusion  as  the  original
      Tribunal though for different reasons:
                 The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.
                 The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
