
 PK (EEA regs: Jia) Sri Lanka [2008] UKAIT 00043

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 15 January 2008


                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Drabu


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr. V. P. Lingajothy of Linga & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr. S. Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer

There is nothing in Jia v Migrationswerket to cast doubt on the legality  of
reg 8(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He appealed to  the  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent on 2 March 2007 refusing  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community Law. An Immigration Judge dismissed his appeal.  He sought an
    order for reconsideration.   The Tribunal made no order but on  renewal
    to the High Court, in circumstances to  which  we  make  more  detailed
    reference below, Silber J. ordered  reconsideration.  Thus  the  matter
    comes before us.

 2.  The  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom,  entering   illegally,
    apparently in the summer of 1998.  He applied for asylum, which he  was
    refused, and his appeal was dismissed in November  1999.   He  did  not
    leave the United Kingdom.  He then sought to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.  That claim was refused,  and  his  appeal  was  dismissed  in
    January 2002.  He did not leave the United Kingdom.  In May 2006,  when
    the appellant was still in  the  United  Kingdom,  a  relative  of  his
    described as a 'cousin-brother', who had been granted asylum in  France
    following his arrival there in 1989,  and  has  subsequently  become  a
    French citizen, came to the United Kingdom in the  exercise  of  Treaty
    rights.  The  evidence  before  the  Immigration  Judge  was  that  the
    appellant and the relative had lived together  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since May 2006 and that, before that, the relative had provided a great
    deal of support to the appellant so that the appellant was not merely a
    relative but a dependant of  his.   The  Immigration  Judge  found  the
    evidence offered on the appellant's behalf to be lacking in credibility
    and declined therefore to find that  he  had  established  the  factual
    basis upon which his legal claim depended.  He went on nevertheless  to
    consider the prospects of that claim in the event  that  he  should  be
    wrong about the facts.  He considered an argument put before  him  that
    reg 8(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (SI 2006/1003) was incompatible with the Citizens Directive  2004/38/EC
    and that that had been decided by the European Court of Justice in  Jia
    v Migrationsverket (C-1/105).  The Immigration Judge referred  also  to
    the decisions of the Tribunal in PB [2005] UKIAT 00082  and  RG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00034.  He  took  the  view  that  he  was  bound  to  apply  the
    Regulations despite any view about their incompatibility with  European
    Law but in any event said that the circumstances were  quite  different
    from those of Jia, particularly because of the lack of  credibility  of
    the evidence and the appellant's failure to establish the facts in  his
    favour.  He went on to deal with the arguments raised by the  appellant
    under the European Convention on Human Rights and, after giving reasons
    for his conclusions on all issues, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 3. The application for reconsideration challenges the Immigration  Judge's
    conclusions on credibility and on Art 8.   Reference  is  made  in  the
    grounds to Horvath [2000] Imm AR 205, Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL  11  and
    LS [2005] UKAIT 00132; but that case  is  cited  only  as  part  of  an
    argument on Art 8.  The grounds for reconsideration make  no  reference
    to any argument challenging reg 8(2) of the EEA Regulations, or to Jia.
     The Senior Immigration Judge dealing with the application declined  to
    order reconsideration.  He pointed out that, following RG the appellant
    is not entitled to consideration as an 'extended family  member'  under
    the EEA Regulations.  He said that the Immigration Judge  was  entitled
    to make the findings that he did on credibility and on  proportionality
    on Art 8 and that, as he put it, "the grounds disclose no error of  law
    in the determination".

 4. The appellant (who, we should say, has  had  the  same  representatives
    throughout) then renewed the application to the High Court  as  he  was
    entitled to do.  The provisions for doing so are  in  part  54  of  the
    Civil Procedure Rules at 54.31.  The Rules there provide  that  if  the
    Tribunal, having received an application, indicates that  it  does  not
    propose to make an order for reconsideration,  the  applicant  may,  by
    service of a notice on the Administrative Court Office, invite the High
    Court to consider 'the application'.  We have put that last  phrase  in
    inverted commas because it appears to us quite clear that the applicant
    is not entitled to make to the High Court an application different from
    that which he made to the Tribunal.  What the applicant is entitled  to
    do, under CPR 54.31(5), is to 'respond to  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Tribunal for its decision'  by  making  submissions  'setting  out  the
    grounds upon which the applicant disputes any of the reasons  given  by
    the Tribunal'.

 5.  The  form  used  by  the  appellant's  representative  to  make   such
    submissions is headed as follows:

        "Part C - the grounds which the court will consider are those  that
        you submitted to the AIT in your  application  for  reconsideration
        (Form AIT/103 A).


        If you wish to respond to the reasons given  by  the  Tribunal  for
        it's [sic] decision that it does not propose to make an  order  for
        reconsideration you should set out in this part  the  grounds  upon
        which you dispute any of the reasons given by the Tribunal and give
        reasons in support of those grounds."


    The appellant's representative's response to that invitation is in  our
    view rather remarkable.  The new submission is approximately twice  the
    length of the original grounds.  It refers in almost every paragraph to
    Jia, which did not feature in the original grounds.  It  refers  to  an
    argument that the decision of the European  Court  of  Justice  in  Jia
    overrode reg 8(2) of the EEA Regulations, another matter not  mentioned
    in the original grounds.   It  refers  to  what  is  alleged  to  be  a
    definition of "lawful residence" to be found in the Immigration  Rules,
    also not mentioned in the original grounds.  Horvath is not cited,  nor
    is Huang, nor is LS, but it is said that the Immigration Judge erred in
    failing to find  that  RG  was  inconsistent  with  Jia.   There  is  a
    reference to a case called Chiver, which is cited as  an  authority  on
    the assessment of credibility.  It does not appear that these extensive
    complaints were accompanied by any application to amend the grounds  as
    originally submitted.  We have the gravest of doubts whether  the  High
    Court had jurisdiction to consider them in the context of CPR 54.31(5),
    which allows an applicant merely to argue that the Tribunal's  response
    to the grounds as originally submitted was wrong.

 6. In any event, the new submissions put to  the  High  Court  contain  at
    least three misstatements of law, each of  which  should  readily  have
    been apparent to the person making the submissions.

 7. The first relates to the treatment of Jia. The submissions in  response
    to the Tribunal's decision begin as follows:

        "The Immigration Judge's decision of 15 of June 2007, contains  the
        following error of law.  First, it has now been decided in the case
        of Yunging Jia v Migrationsverket (Grand Chamber, European  Court),
        a copy of the decision is enclosed with the relevant paragraph (33)
        highlighted, which clearly states  that  for  the  purpose  of  reg
        8.2(a) and (c), it no longer is a requirement  that  the  appellant
        and the sponsor must have resided  in  any  state  other  than  the
        United Kingdom.  Based on this ground, residents in  the  sponsor's
        household and current support is only  relevant.   A  copy  of  the
        tenancy agreement exemplifying their joint residence is adduced.


        Since Jia established that the applicant needs not to have lived in
        another EEA state where the sponsor resided,  therefore  overriding
        reg 8(2)(a) of the 2006 regulations, but that only lawful residence
        of the UK has to be satisfied, the IJ has failed in  his  reasoning
        of his determination and findings why he thinks  the  applicant  is
        not a lawful resident and does not  consequently  fall  within  the
        ambit of Jia".


   8. The use of the word "now" at the beginning of that  passage  might  be
      taken to suggest that the decision in Jia  postdated  the  Immigration
      Judge's   determination   and   perhaps   even   the    grounds    for
      reconsideration.   The  fact  is,  however,  that  the  decision   was
      published on 9 January 2007, well before the Immigration  Judge  heard
      the case on 17 May 2007.  As we have indicated, he  considered  it  in
      his determination.  If it was regarded as important to the appellant's
      case, it is difficult to understand why it  did  not  feature  in  the
      grounds for reconsideration submitted  to  the  Tribunal.   Much  more
      important, however, is that Jia does not "decide" or "establish"  what
      it is alleged in the submissions to do.  In Jia the European Court  of
      Justice was asked a question about persons such as the appellant,  who
      are not themselves citizens of the Union but who are  relatives  of  a
      national of a member  state  who  has  exercised  his  right  of  free
      movement.  The question was  whether  the  members  were  required  by
      European Law to make the grant of a residence permit to such a  person
      subject to the condition that he had previously been lawfully resident
      in another member state.  Such a requirement had  been  formulated  in
      Akrich v SSHD (C-109/01) [2003] ECR I-9607.  After reviewing the facts
      of Akrich, the Court ruled as follows:

           "[32] It follows that the condition of previous lawful residence
           in another Member State,  as  formulated  in  the  judgement  in
           Akrich, cannot be transposed to the present case and thus cannot
           apply to such a situation.


           [33] The answer to Question 1(a) to (d) must therefore be  that,
           having regard to the judgement in Akrich, Community law does not
           require member States to make the grant of a residence permit to
           nationals of a non-Member State, who are members of a family  of
           a Community national who has exercised his or her right of  free
           movement, subject to the condition  that  those  family  members
           have previously been residing lawfully in another member state."

9.    Subject to  the  ordinary  difficulties  of  reading  long  sentences,
      nothing could be clearer.  The decision in Jia is that  Community  law
      imposes no general requirement of  the  nature  suggested.   There  is
      nothing at all in the judgement in Jia remotely equivalent to what  is
      alleged in the submissions made to the High Court.  Those  submissions
      are to the effect that, so far from there being no  rule  in  European
      law of the sort suggested, there is a rule  to  the  contrary  effect.
      Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth.   No   such   rule   is
      "established"  in  Jia  (which,  incidentally,  contrary  to  what  is
      suggested in  the  submissions,  makes  no  reference  to  the  United
      Kingdom's regulations), and the High Court should not have been  given
      submissions in the form we have set out.


10.   In submissions to us, Mr. Lingajothy said that the comparison  of  Jia
      and  Akrich  was  a  difficult   matter,   which   required   detailed
      interpretation.  It does not appear that his submissions to  the  High
      Court gave any hint of that.  The truth is that it is not difficult at
      all.  The judgement in Jia is clear.  It does not cast  any  doubt  on
      the legality of reg 8(2) of the EEA Regulations.


11.   The second misstatement of law in the  submissions  put  to  the  High
      Court is as follows.  Raising an issue which, in  so  far  as  we  are
      aware, is entirely new in these proceedings, the submissions state  as
      follows:

             "The criteria for lawful residence is laid  down  at  paragraph
             276(A)(b) of the Immigration Rules and read as follows:-"

      An extract  from  that  paragraph  of  the  Statement  of  Changes  in
      Immigration Rules, HC395 is then set out  and  there  are  submissions
      based on it.  What those submissions fail to  indicate  is  that  para
      276A begins with the words "for the purposes  of  paragraphs  276B  to
      276D".  Those paragraphs relate to applications made  by  persons  who
      have lived in the United Kingdom lawfully for more than ten  years  or
      have been in the United Kingdom lawfully or unlawfully for  more  than
      fourteen  years.   The  appellant  has   made   no   application   for
      consideration under those paragraphs and indeed, given his own account
      of his arrival in 1998 it is  difficult  to  see  how  he  could  have
      expected success had he done so.  There is  no  suggestion  that  this
      definition in paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules has any  general
      applicability  and   it   was   quite   wrong   of   the   appellant's
      representatives, by selective citation, to suggest  that  it  did,  or
      that the definition had any general relevance  to  the  present  case.
      Made, as it was, in the  context  of  an  assertion  that  the  Senior
      Immigration Judge erred in  his  decision,  the  suggestion  that  the
      Senior  Immigration  Judge  should  have  misread  the  rule  as   the
      appellant's representatives had done is improper.

  12. The third misstatement of law  is  as  follows.   In  the  penultimate
      paragraph of the submissions the appellant's representatives assert as
      follows:


             "The Senior Immigration  Judge,  McGeachy,  instead  of  having
             recourse to the proper construction of  paragraph  276  of  the
             Immigration Rules and in line with the case of  Jia,  has  only
             rubber stamped the decision of the previous Immigration  Judge.
             Had he scrutinized the documentary evidence that were on  file,
             he would have observed that credibility  issues,  if  any,  can
             only be made in light of the backdrop of the situation  in  the
             applicants home country  at  the  present  time.   Reliance  is
             placed here on Chiver (10758), where it was mentioned
             "Credibility should be made with regard to the centre piece  of
             Appellant's account". "

  13. SSHD v Chiver is a decision of a Vice President and two lay members of
      the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, made in March 1994  and  reported  at
      [1997] INLR 212.  The decision  does  not  contain  the  passage  here
      alleged to be cited from it.  It is in  that  context  very  difficult
      indeed to understand why the phrase is  cited  as  though  it  were  a
      quotation from the judgement.  Although there may have  been  problems
      between 1994 and 1997 in ascertaining the text of the determination of
      the Tribunal in Chiver, there can since the end of 1997 have  been  no
      excuse at all for what has happened here.


  14. It is perhaps worth saying again what Chiver  decides,  as  it  is  so
      often misstated in general, although we are glad to  say  seldom  with
      the mendacious particularity adopted here.  Chiver was  an  appeal  by
      the Secretary of State against the determination of an adjudicator who
      had allowed an appeal despite having concerns about particular aspects
      of the credibility of the appellant's story.  The Secretary  of  State
      argued essentially that, given the concerns that he had, some of which
      were unresolved, the adjudicator was wrong in  law,  on  the  evidence
      before him as he assessed it, to allow the appeal.  On that issue  the
      decision of the Tribunal was that:

           "It is perfectly possible for an adjudicator to believe  that  a
           witness is not telling the truth about matters, has  exaggerated
           his story to make his case better, or is simply uncertain  about
           matters, and still to be persuaded that the centre piece of  the
           story stands".

      The Tribunal did not decide that an adjudicator was obliged to believe
      a story if uncertainties, exaggerations, lack of memory or  lies  went
      only to details.  What it did decide was that the  existence  of  such
      difficulties is not in law a  bar  to  an  adjudicator  (or,  now,  an
      Immigration Judge) believing other parts of what is  said  if,  having
      taken everything into account, he decides it right to do so.

  15. Despite the failings of the extra submissions as we have set them out,
      they were sufficient to persuade  Silber  J.  to  make  an  order  for
      reconsideration, which he did giving his reasons as follows:

           "It would be helpful  to  have  a  definitive  decision  of  the
           Tribunal (if possible presided over by its President) clarifying
           the position of failed asylum seekers and the J.A Case.  Similar
           cases should also be listed with this case."

  16. We must assume that "J.A." is intended to be a reference to  Jia.   We
      do not know what is meant by the reference "similar  cases",  although
      the Tribunal has identified one other case  in  which  reconsideration
      has been ordered in identical terms.

  17. Before us, Mr. Lingajothy volunteered a submission that  is  obviously
      right, that is, that, in the light of the order  for  reconsideration,
      we are concerned only with matters  relating  to  Jia.   Even  if  the
      assertions made about Jia in the submissions to  the  High  Court  had
      been accurate, this case could not succeed, for two reasons which  for
      some reason were not brought to the attention of the High Court Judge.
       The first is, as we have already said,  that  the  Immigration  Judge
      disbelieved the evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant.  Although
      the Immigration Judge's assessment of credibility  was  challenged  in
      general terms in the grounds submitted to the Tribunal, and, if we may
      say so, in even more general terms in the  additional  submissions  to
      the High Court, it is not now suggested that the  Immigration  Judge's
      assessment of credibility was flawed.  Any suggestion  would,  in  our
      view, be doomed to failure.  As the adjudicator sets out in Paragraphs
      28 to 34 of his determination, he found the  appellant  was  a  person
      whose word was not entitled to credit, for  a  substantial  number  of
      reasons.   In  that  context  there  is  no  reason  at  all  why  the
      Immigration Judge should be required to believe the appellant's  story
      in general or any particular aspect of it, including that part  of  it
      relating to  his  alleged  historic  and  present  dependence  on  his
      relative.

  18. That would be sufficient by itself to dispose of this appeal,  whether
      by reconsideration or otherwise.  There  is,  however,  an  additional
      point, which again was not brought to the attention of the High Court.
      The appellant has a particular problem in the light of the wording  of
      the Directive upon which he seeks to rely as explained  in  RG  [2007]
      UKAIT 00034.  At this point, and rather belatedly it may  be  thought,
      we may set out the relevant parts of reg 8  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
      under which the appellant claims to be an 'extended family member'.

           "Extended family member"
           8.-(1)       In these Regulations 'extended family member' means
           a person who is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  under
           regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) [which the appellant is not]  and
           who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or  (5).
           [there is no suggestion that the appellant could  qualify  under
           paragraph (3), (4), or (5)].


            2) A person satisfies the condition in  this  paragraph  if  the
               person is a relative of an EEA national, his  spouse  or  his
               civil partner and ---
                 a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
                    national also resides and is  dependent  upon  the  EEA
                    national or is a member of his household;
                 b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and
                    is accompanying the EEA national to the United  Kingdom
                    or wishes to join him there; or
                 c) the person satisfied the condition  in  paragraph  (a),
                    has joined the EEA national in the United  Kingdom  and
                    continues to be dependent upon him or to be a member of
                    his household.


      'EEA State' is defined in reg 2 as meaning in essence a  Member  State
      of the European Economic Area other than  the  United  Kingdom.   Thus
      residence in the United Kingdom does not qualify  under  reg  8(2)(a).
      In RG this Tribunal attempted to provide interpretive  guidance  on  a
      number of issues relating to reg 8(2).  We have no reason  to  suppose
      the guidance there provided was wrong.  The first point is  that  sub-
      paras (a), (b) and (c) are genuine alternatives.  The second point  is
      that the tenses are important.  A  person  may  therefore  qualify  by
      currently meeting the requirements of sub-para (a), or by  having  met
      them in the past and by currently meeting the requirements  of  either
      sub-para (b) or sub-para (c).  As the definition of  'extended  family
      member' is relevant both to those who intend to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom and to those already here, a definition which includes current
      residence outside the United Kingdom is not inappropriate.

  19. As we have said, residence in the United Kingdom does  not  count  for
      the purposes of sub-para (a).  And in the present case, as in RG,  the
      appellant and his family member have not  lived  together  in  an  EEA
      country other than the United Kingdom.  It follows that the  appellant
      cannot meet the requirement of reg 8(2)(a).  That is the burden of the
      argument based on Jia, which, as we have  indicated  is  misconceived.
      Even if the appellant were to be regarded in the past to have met  the
      requirements of sub-para (a), however, he would still not be entitled,
      because he does not currently meet the requirements of either sub-para
      (b) or sub-para (c).  Sub-para (b) is clearly on its terms relevant to
      a person travelling to the United Kingdom to join a  relative  who  is
      already here; and sub-para (c) relates to a person  who  'has  joined'
      his EEA national relative here.   For  the  reasons  given  in  RG  at
      paragraphs 12 to 16, there is no reason to give  the  wording  of  reg
      8(2)(b) and (c) any meaning other than its ordinary meaning; and there
      is nothing in the Directive 2004/38/EC requiring any other meaning  to
      be given  to them.  The appellant is not a person who has  joined  his
      relative in the United Kingdom: he  is  a  person  whom  his  relative
      joined.  He cannot meet the requirements of reg 8(2), even if sub-para
      (a) is ignored.

  20. The Immigration Judge made no material error law.  We order  that  his
      determination shall stand.











                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
