

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

    NS (Iraq: perceived collaborator: relocation) Iraq CG [2007] UKAIT 00046

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2006                              |On 12 April 2007           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen
                          Immigration Judge Pirotta
                              Mr A A Lloyd, JP

                                   Between
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of the Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr J Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


1.   An Iraqi who is perceived as a collaborator as a consequence of his
    work for the UN, an NGO, the Multi-National Force, the Coalition
    Provisional Authority or a foreign contractor, and who has attracted
    the hostility of an armed group, faces a real risk of persecution on
    return to his home area.

2.   Ability to relocate in Iraq to an area other than the KRG for such a
    person would depend on the circumstances of the case, including such
    matters as the reach of the group which has targeted him.

3.   Relocation to the KRG for any Iraqi is in general only feasible if the
    person concerned would be allowed to enter and legally reside in the
    area of relocation, and has family, community and/or political links
    there enabling them to survive.

 4. LM [2006] UKAIT Iraq CG 00060 (guidance on Christian women perceived as
    collaborators and internal relocation to KRG) is here considered and
    extended.  The guidance in RA (Christians) Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00091
    remains for the time being valid in cases concerning Christians with no
    other distinguishing profile.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of  Iraq.    He  appeals  to  the  Tribunal
    against the Secretary of State's decision of 31 March  2006  to  remove
    him as an illegal entrant from the United Kingdom.  The hearing  before
    us took place on 16 October 2006.  Mr A Bandegani of the Refugee  Legal
    Centre appeared on behalf of the appellant.  Mr  J  Jones  appeared  on
    behalf  the Secretary of State.

2.   There had been an earlier hearing on 13 September 2006  which  had  had
    to be adjourned essentially because the expert report  upon  which  the
    appellant  relied  had  only  very  recently  been  received   by   the
    appellant's representative and Mrs Da Silva who at that  time  appeared
    on behalf of the Secretary of State did not have time to go through the
    report properly.   In addition, she was disadvantaged by not having the
    relevant operational guidance note which we considered would also be of
    assistance.

3.   It is relevant also to mention that at a case management hearing on  27
    April 2006 it was confirmed by Mrs White, who at that time appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a Yezidi, there was no challenge to the work that he  had
    carried out for the coalition forces and that there were no credibility
    issues concerning his activities in Iraq.

    THE APPELLANT'S   EVIDENCE

4.   The appellant's account of his history which  he  says  caused  him  to
    flee Iraq and come to the United Kingdom is set out  in  his  statement
    dated 15 June 2005.   In that statement he said that  he  was  born  in
    1980 in Bashika, a small town near Mosul in the north of Iraq, and that
    he has lived there with his family all his life.   His family  were  of
    the Yezidi religion and they are discriminated against because  Muslims
    believe them to be devil worshippers.

5.   In summary, he said that he feared for his life in Iraq because he  had
    been working as a translator for the coalition forces in Mosul and  his
    life had repeatedly  been  threatened  by  the  terrorist  organisation
    Qaedat Al-Tawheed wal Jihad.

6.   With regard to being a Yezidi the appellant said  that  it  is  obvious
    you are Yezidi because people you work with or people in  town  go  and
    pray throughout the day whereas the Yezidis do not.    Also  they  fast
    for just three days in December as opposed to observing  Ramadan.    He
    said that many fanatical Muslims believe that if they could not convert
    a Yezidi to Islam, killing a Yezidi  was  a  step  forward  to  gaining
    paradise.  He said that he did not practice his religion but there  was
    no way he could be Muslim.

7.   He had trained as a nurse and qualified in December 2001 but  found  it
    difficult to get  work.    He  applied  to  be  a  translator  for  the
    coalition forces and was accepted straight away and  he  began  working
    for the US Army in December 2003.   He worked at the US  Army  Base  in
    Mosul called Camp Freedom.   He said that he worked all the  time  from
    then until the time when he escaped from Iraq.  He was not sure when he
    left Iraq but he arrived in the United Kingdom on 20  May  2005  having
    previously spent two weeks in Syria and was then hidden on a  ship  and
    took two to three months to get  to  the  United  Kingdom.    It  would
    follow from that that he ceased his work as a translator and fled  from
    Iraq in approximately February 2005.

8.   The appellant then went on to describe his translating  activities  and
    the people for whom he worked at the camp.   He said his family did not
    mind him working for the coalition forces and he was able to give  them
    money as well.  He said that he had to be very secret about what he was
    doing and he was warned by other translators to  stop  doing  his  work
    because as soon as the terrorists  knew  about  his  job  he  would  be
    killed.

9.   He said that a month before the fall of  Saddam  he  had  USA  tattooed
    just below his shoulder on his right arm.  He  had  known  this  was  a
    dangerous thing to do but he had done it for a bet.

10.  He said that around the three months before  he  fled  Iraq  terrorists
    started to kill  some  of  the  Iraqi  soldiers  and  workers  for  the
    coalition forces from his base.  He said  that  Qaedat  Al-Tawheed  wal
    Jihad were the most powerful of the terrorists because they  had  money
    and communication networks, but most of  the  groups  worked  together,
    transferring information such as people's names.   He  said  that  when
    the terrorists captured people they interrogated them  for  information
    about other Iraqis working  for  the  coalition  forces  and  also  got
    information from spies on the base, Iraqi workers and indeed from  some
    US soldiers known  as  "black  sheep".    He  saw  DVDs  of  two  other
    translators being interrogated, tortured and beheaded by the terrorists
    for working for the coalition forces and for being Christian.   He  was
    also told that in the mosque a fatwa had been  announced  by  the  Imam
    against people working for the coalition forces and  that  they  should
    all quit as their duty to Islam.

11.  He said that in the last three months before he fled Iraq  he  received
    a letter at home from the terrorists saying "we are  Qaedat  Al-Tawheed
    wal Jihad" and then a verse from  the  Koran  with  which  he  was  not
    familiar as a Yezidi and then they said that they  knew  his  name  and
    that he should quit and join Islam or he faced death.   After receiving
    this letter he knew he had to try to escape from Iraq as his  life  was
    in danger, that he needed to raise money to pay an  agent  so  he  went
    into hiding but he  kept  working  and  changed  his  location  between
    various houses.

12.  A similar warning letter was received at  his  house  about  two  weeks
    after the first one and subsequently a  third  letter  threatening  him
    again with death as it was the third warning.   He  did  not  keep  the
    letters because if he was captured with those letters  on  him  by  the
    group he would be put to death.   He also said  that  after  the  third
    letter the terrorists put his name on the mosque called  Haiba  Khatoon
    in an area of Mosul and he was told  about  this  by  friends.    As  a
    consequence it would  be  the  case  that  any  terrorist  group  which
    captured him would know that Qaedat Al-Tawheed wal Jihad  were  looking
    for him and such blacklists were on  many  mosques.   He  kept  hearing
    different stories about interpreters or members  of  the  armed  forces
    being captured and killed.

13.  About a month before he left Iraq he was told by people from  his  town
    that five people had been killed by Qaedat  Al-Tawheed  wal  Jihad  for
    being  Yezidi  and  for  working  for  the  coalition  forces.    Their
    mutilated bodies were brought back to his village  to  be  buried.   He
    also said that on one day not long before he left he was shot at whilst
    driving his car home after work.  Thereafter he changed his car but  he
    did not believe that this would really work.   He said that  there  was
    nothing the US Army could do to protect Iraqi  people  working  at  the
    base once they were outside the base.  He was afraid to the  extent  he
    did not feel he could go into Mosul in  case  someone  recognised  him.
    He could not go to the Iraqi police  because  they  could  not  protect
    themselves.  He did not know who the terrorists  were  and  the  police
    could not protect him from everyone in Mosul.

14.  He then went on to give details of how it was  he  was  able  to  leave
    Iraq by paying a large sum of money to an agent and the details of  his
    escape from Iraq and his travel to the United Kingdom.

15.  In conclusion he said that he could not go elsewhere  in  Iraq  because
    Qaedat-Al-Tawheed wal Jihad are everywhere in Iraq and would be able to
    capture him because they had  lists  of  names  and  probably  had  his
    picture.   He said that everyone in Iraq has to carry an  ID  card  and
    because some of the terrorists put on police uniforms, when you  showed
    your ID card at the checkpoint the terrorists  could  easily  see  your
    name or recognise your face and they would see that  he  was  on  their
    list.   He said that there  is  no  protection  in  Baghdad,  Basra  or
    Falluja and that the terrorists can reach everyone  whether  he  is  an
    interpreter, policeman  or  anyone  and  the  coalition  forces  cannot
    protect him because he is not allowed to live on  the  base.   He  also
    said that if he went to another city people would know he was not  from
    there because he has a Mosul accent and they would ask  themselves  why
    he had travelled from his city.

     SUBMISSIONS

16.  In his submissions Mr Jones referred to the Operational  Guidance  Note
    of 12 January 2006.  He took us to Section 3.8 which in its various sub-
    paragraphs is concerned with the situation for perceived  collaborators
    in Iraq.   He drew our attention to the reference to Al-Qaeda  in  Iraq
    which was the group which the appellant blamed  for  past  persecution.
    It could be seen that a loose coalition of insurgent  groups  including
    guerrillas from Al- Qaeda in Iraq were believed to have  a  controlling
    presence in a number of cities including Mosul.  It could be seen  that
    amongst  others  translators  had  been  perceived   as   traitors   or
    collaborators and had been killed by armed groups.    It  was  accepted
    that the police force outside the Kurdistan Regional  government  (KRG)
    area was not effective to provide security to ordinary Iraqis.

17.  The Operational Guidance Note should be read together with the  Country
    of Origin Information Report on Iraq of April 2006.  Mr Jones  referred
    us to paragraphs 6.22, 6.23, 6.26, 6.31-6.32 and 6.54-55.   Again there
    were references to  people  perceived  as  collaborators  as  including
    interpreters and to the security situation in Mosul.  There was mention
    also at paragraph 6.129 of the group Al-Tawhid wal Jihad which had been
    referred to by the appellant.   The expert, Dr Fatah,  said  that  this
    group had translated itself into Al Qaeda in Iraq.   It could  be  seen
    from  this  report  that  people  such  as  translators  were  seen  as
    legitimate targets by the armed groups.

18.  He also referred to the question of relocation to  the  KRG.    It  was
    accepted that this was probably not feasible for  the  appellant.    It
    could be seen from paragraph 2.12 of the Operational Guidance Note that
    internal relocation to the KRG might pose real difficulties.    Freedom
    of movement in  Iraq  was  severely  restricted  due  to  the  security
    situation and the existence of military checkpoints.

19.  Mr Jones also referred to page 106  of  the  appellant's  bundle  which
    comprised the UNHCR October 2005 guidelines.  From this it would appear
    that relocation to the north would depend on ethnicity and whether  the
    person was  a  security  risk  and  whether  they  had  a  sponsor,  so
    relocation could take place in limited circumstances.

20.  Mr Jones also referred to the determination in LM 2006] UKAIT  0060  in
    particular at page 20 concerning risk to  people  associated  with  the
    multi-national force.  He  accepted  that  the  appellant  fitted  that
    profile.   These in effect were the salient points with regard to  risk
    in the appellant's home area and protection and relocation to  the  KRG
    for the appellant.   It was not possible to point to a Kurdish  sponsor
    in the KRG for the appellant, and the Tribunal would wish  to  come  to
    its own views on that.

21.  As regards  relocation  elsewhere,  this  could  be  possible  but  the
    assessment of risk looking globally at the position for  the  appellant
    depended upon his location so there would be a real risk if the  multi-
    national forces in one place had left for  another  location.   In  his
    case it was necessary to consider the situation in his home area  where
    he would be at high risk. There was a paucity of evidence about risk in
    the provinces handed over by the  Multi-National  Force  (MNF)  to  the
    Iraqi authorities.

22.  With regard to the expert report of Dr  Fatah,  Mr  Jones  argued  that
    paragraph 225 of that report had not been properly explained,  in  that
    Dr Fatah had not said why the appellant would be at  risk  if  he  were
    seen to be a Kurd.  A lot depended on the individual's  location.    It
    was questioned therefore why there would be a risk throughout Iraq  and
    why he could not relocate elsewhere and the  report  did  not  properly
    quantify the assessment.

23.  We stated to Mr Bandegani that in the light of Mr Jones'  very  helpful
    submissions we only wished to hear from him with regard  to  relocation
    elsewhere in Iraq other than the north.

24.  Mr Bandegani  argued  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  specific
    targeting by insurgents in central and southern Iraq.  He  referred  us
    to page 3 of his skeleton.  He referred to the  scale  of  co-operation
    between  insurgent  groups  which  had  developed  to  a  more   formal
    connection.   There was an increase in attacks on soft targets and  the
    types of targeting attacks  had  grown  in  their  sophistication.   He
    referred also to page 92 of the main bundle  which  showed  that  lists
    were used in Iraq and they were used by  insurgent  groups  other  than
    those mentioned in the Operational Guidance  Note.   Page  285  of  the
    bundle dealt with the  reach  of  the  particular  group  in  question.
    Human Rights Association documents had been received about intimidation
    causing displacement and executions based only on  the  victim's  name.
    There were references to secret prisons and to the use  of  mosques  by
    insurgents.  The insurgent groups had a common agenda  in  Iraq.    The
    Secretary of State had accepted in the Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report for April 2006 that had been put in that part of  the  strategic
    goal  of  these  groups  was  to  target  those  who  facilitated   the
    occupation.  He referred also to the Local News document.

25.  With regard to risk throughout Iraq, reference was made to page  96  of
    the bundle.   There was no evidence that the increase in targeting  and
    collaboration  was  limited  to  the  Mosul  area.   Lists  were   used
    throughout Iraq and names posted in mosques  were  used  to  facilitate
    this and the type of attack that the appellant  feared  had  increased.
    It made no difference that he had ceased doing  this  work.   Paragraph
    6.572 of the Country of Origin Information  Report  referred  to  this.
    Also it was the case that the Yezidi were seen as a distinct group  and
    they had not been subsumed into the category of Kurds and the appellant
    did not speak Kurdish.

26.  Mr Bandegani referred also  to  paragraph  77  of  the  expert  report.
    Being a Yezidi was a risk-increasing factor.   The ability to  relocate
    in central and southern Iraq was  severely  inhibited  by  the  general
    security situation.   It could be seen from  the  Operational  Guidance
    Note that there were a number of checkpoints both military and  illegal
    and these were real limits on freedom of movement.    The  increase  of
    Islamic radicalisation in Iraq point underlined the  relevance  of  the
    appellant being Yezidi.  He did not go to the mosque on Fridays and did
    not pray five times a day and he could not  be  expected  to  deny  his
    ethnicity and religion and change to accommodate this and therefore  he
    would be recognised as being a non-Muslim.   This  effected  relocation
    and his ability to  get  elsewhere.    There  had  been  a  significant
    increase in deaths in Iraq  and  a  disproportionate  number  of  those
    killed were young men like the  appellant.   The  Operational  Guidance
    Note did not have regard to the deterioration  since  January  and  the
    rise of Islamic fundamentalism.   Page 6 of the skeleton and  paragraph
    159 of the expert report were  relevant  to  this.   More  recent  news
    reports had been put in and were to be found in the new bundle and  the
    smaller bundle.

27.  After  consideration  we  informed  the  representatives  that  we  had
    decided that this appeal was to be allowed and that  we  would  provide
    our full reasons in a full and written determination which we now do.

     CONCLUSIONS

28.  In the light of the acceptance of the credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account, we can go straight to the objective evidence and  assess  risk
    accordingly.  Before doing so, however, it is important to set out  the
    guiding legal principles.

      The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification)  Regulations  S12006/2525  (hereafter  the  "Protection
    Regulations"), together with the Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules, Cmnd 6918  (hereafter  "the  Cm  6918  Rules"),  which  in  part
    implement EU Council Directive 2004/93/EC on minimum standards for  the
    qualification and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
    persons as refugees or as  persons  who  otherwise  need  international
    protection and the content of the protection granted, came  into  force
    on 9 October 2006.

     The Protection Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of acts  of
    persecution (Regulation 5),  actors  of  persecution  or  serious  harm
    (Regulation 3) and actors of protection (Regulation 4). Regulation 4 in
    its material parts states:

         "1)  In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a person eligible
         for humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or serious
         harm can be provided by:
              (a) the State; or
              (b) any party or  organisation,  including  any  international
             organisation, controlling the State or a substantial  part  of
             the territory of the State.
         (2)  Protection shall be regarded as generally  provided  when  the
         actors mentioned in paragraph 1(a) and (b) take reasonable steps to
         prevent the persecution or suffering of serious harm  by  operating
         an effective  legal  system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
         punishment of acts constituting persecution or  serious  harm,  and
         the  person  mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  has  access   to   such
         protection.
         ..."


     The amended Immigration Rules (Cm6918) contain among other  provisions,
    paragraph 339K, which deals with the approach to  past  persecution  in
    the following terms:


         "339K.  The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated".


     Also pertinent to  this  appeal  is  paragraph  339O  headed  "Internal
    Relocation". This states:

         "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:
             (a)  a grant of asylum if in part of the country of  origin  a
             person would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted,
             and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part
             of the country; or
             (b)  a grant of humanitarian protection  if  in  part  of  the
             country of return a person would  not  face  a  real  risk  of
             suffering serious harm,  and  the  person  can  reasonably  be
             expected to stay in that part of the country.
         (ii) In examining whether a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  or
         country of return meets the requirements in (i)  the  Secretary  of
         State, when making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or
         humanitarian  protection,  will  have   regard   to   the   general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the person.
         (iii)    (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return
         to the country of origin or country of return".


     In considering the proper approach to the issue of internal  relocation
    we have also to apply the principles set out  in  the  House  of  Lords
    judgment in  Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5  which  adopts  the  criteria  now
    contained in paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance.

     The new Regulations and Rules also identify the right of  a  person  to
    be considered as to his or her eligibility for humanitarian protection.
    Paragraph 339C (in its first part) provides:

         "A person will be granted humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
         Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that
         (i)  he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of  entry
         in the United Kingdom;
         (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of
         the The Refugee or  Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
         (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
         (iii)    substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
         person concerned, if he returned to the country  of  return,  would
         face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, owing
         to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of  that
         country; and
         (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection".


     The same paragraph in its second part gives  a  definition  of  serious
harm:

         "Serious harm consists of:
         (i)  the death penalty or execution;
         (ii) unlawful killing;
         (iii)    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
         a person in the country of return; or
         (iv) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person
         by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international
         or internal armed conflict".


     Where below  we  refer  to  "risk"  or  "real  risk",  this  is  to  be
    understood as an  abbreviated  way  of  identifying  respectively:  (1)
    whether on return there is a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted
    under  the  Refugee  Convention;  (2)  whether  on  return  there   are
    substantial grounds for believing that a person would face a real  risk
    of suffering serious harm within the meaning of paragraph 339C  of  the
    amended  Immigration  Rules;  and  (3)  whether  on  return  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that a person would face a real  risk
    of being exposed to a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3
    ECHR.

     THE CURRENT SITUATION IN IRAQ

29.  The current security situation in Iraq  is  highly  volatile.   It  was
    said in a United Nations Security  Council (UNSC)  report  of  3  March
    2006 that: "The political transition and attempts to maintain  security
    by  the  Multinational  Force  and  Iraqi  security  forces  have  been
    accompanied  by  the  development  of  an  increasingly  complex  armed
    opposition capable of maintaining a consistently high level of  violent
    activity across the country". The high levels of violence  continue  to
    result  in  extensive  infringements  of  human  rights  in  Iraq.   An
    International Crisis Group report of 27 February  2006  comments  that:
    "Iraq's mosaic of communities  has  begun  to  fragment  along  ethnic,
    confessional and tribal lines, bringing  instability  and  violence  to
    many areas, especially those with mixed populations". A wide  range  of
    human rights problems was identified in the US State Department  Report
    of 8 March 2006, including a pervasive climate of  violence,  arbitrary
    deprivation of life, disappearances, torture and other  cruel,  inhuman
    or degrading  treatment  of  punishment,  impunity,  large  numbers  of
    internally displaced persons, a lack  of  transparency  and  widespread
    corruption at all levels  of  government,  and  discrimination  against
    women, ethnic and religious minorities.  Recent research (not  accepted
    by the US and British Governments) in the form of a study  produced  by
    the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore  (USA)
    claims that the death toll in  Iraq  following  the  invasion  is  over
    650,000:  1 in 40 of the entire population (October 2006). In a  report
    dated  19   May   2006,   commissioned   by   the   appellant's   legal
    representatives, Dr Rebwar Fatah, a  Middle  East  specialist,  writer,
    broadcaster and journalist concludes that even if  Iraq  is  not  in  a
    state of civil war, the security situation is extremely poor  and  this
    provides a platform for persecuting individuals and settling feuds.

30.  In the Operational Guidance Note for  Iraq,  which  is  a  Home  Office
    paper issued in January 2006, and is to be read in conjunction with the
    Country of Origin Information Report of October 2005,  it  is  said  at
    paragraph 2.3 that security risk assessments  in  June  2005  confirmed
    that the level of threat remains high  with  a  particular  upsurge  in
    violence around the country since the formation of  the  government  in
    late April 2005.   It is said that bombings, strikes against Iraqi  and
    Multinational Force installations and  convoys,  attacks  on  aircraft,
    hostage takings and targeted assassinations  against  Iraqi  civilians,
    including public figures, many of increasing scale and  sophistication,
    continue to be centred on Baghdad, Mosul, Ramadi and Tikrit.  It is  to
    be recalled that the appellant lived in  Bashika,  a  small  town  near
    Mosul and worked as a translator for the coalition forces in Mosul.

31.   Section  3  of  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  sets  out  the  main
    categories of claims.  Paragraph 3.8 and sub-paragraphs thereafter deal
    with the situation as regards perceived  collaborators.    Here  it  is
    said that claimants may claim that as a result of their  work  for  the
    UN, NGOs or foreign contractors or because of real or perceived support
    for the transitional Iraqi Government they face a real  risk  of  being
    targeted by insurgents.   US military intelligence officials are quoted
    as saying that they believe that three interconnected  groups  are  the
    most powerful actors in the Iraqi  insurgency  today.   Included  among
    these is Al-Qaeda in Iraq, and we see from the report of Dr Fatah dated
    19 May 2006 that the group formerly known  as  Jama-at  Al-Tawhid  wal-
    Jihad after September 2004 became known as Al-Qaeda in Iraq.  It is not
    disputed that this is the group to  which  the  appellant  referred  as
    having threatened him on three occasions and, he believed, shot at  him
    also.  At paragraph 3.8.2 of the Operational Guidance note it  is  said
    that a loose coalition of insurgent groups including Al-Qaeda  in  Iraq
    is believed to have a continuing presence in Falluja, Ramadi,  Samarra,
    Baqouba, Al-Qaim, Tal Afar and Mosul.  Amnesty  International  reported
    on 25 July 2005 that "hundreds of Iraqis  have  been  killed  by  armed
    groups because they were perceived as  'traitors'  or  'collaborators'.
    Among them  have  been  translators".    There  is  also  reference  at
    paragraph 6.23 of the April 2006 Country of Origin  Information  Report
    to targeting by armed groups of, among others, Iraqis working with  the
    MNF.   It is said in an Amnesty International Report of  25  July  2005
    that many of the killings of civilians are carried out in a  perfidious
    way with suicide bombers or others describing themselves as  civilians,
    or marked by appalling brutality.  A United  Nations  Security  Council
    Report of 3 March 2006 includes Baghdad, Mosul and the Western Province
    of Al-Ambar as having been experiencing the worst  of  the  destruction
    that has been taking place.   A UNHCR Report of October  2005  referred
    to the security situation remaining highly unstable in the centre areas
    as well as the northern governorates of Kirkuk and Mosul.  It  is  said
    at paragraph 6.55, referring again to the UNHCR Report of October 2005,
    that the security situation rapidly deteriorated on 10 November 2004 in
    Mosul when the city was overrun by  armed  insurgents  targeting  Iraqi
    police stations  and  security  forces.   Although  the  Multi-National
    Force/Iraqi  Security  Forces  (including  Kurdish   Peshmerga   units)
    restored control in  December  2004  the  security  situation  remained
    highly tense with daily security incidents. There  is  a  reference  at
    paragraph 6.129 to groups including Al-Tawhid wal-Jihad having repeated
    claimed responsibility for executing soldiers and police.

32.  There is a section in the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  of
    April  2006  on   perceived   collaborators.     This   makes   similar
    observations to those  contained  in  the  Operational  Guidance  Note.
    There is, for example, a quote from the UNHCR Report  of  October  2005
    that anyone associated with or seen to  be  supporting  the  new  Iraqi
    authorities has increasingly become the target of attacks.   An Amnesty
    International Report of 15 July 2005 notes that the  armed  groups  are
    resentful of people who co-operate  with  the  MNF.    People  such  as
    translators are seen as legitimate targets for the armed groups and the
    attacks on them are intended as punishment for perceived  collaboration
    and as a warning to others who might  consider  such  work.    A  Human
    Rights Watch Report of 3 October 2005 notes that  by  far  the  largest
    number of victims have been Iraqis who  worked  as  translators  or  in
    other jobs of the Coalition Provisional Authority, the US Government or
    other governments in  the  coalition.    Press  reports  and  anecdotal
    evidence reveal a pattern of threats and attacks including  the  murder
    of civilians who work with foreign governments in any capacity.

33.  Risk to Yazidis in  Iraq  was  considered  by  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal in NH (Iraq-Yazidis) Iraq CG [2004] UKIAT 00306 where  it  was
    concluded that a Yazidi did not face a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    breach of his human rights purely on account of his religion.  A  UNHCR
    report of October 2005 commented that: "the presence of radical Islamic
    groups and militias as well as the ongoing political power-wrangling of
    the various sectarian groups about Iraq's future, leave Yazidis exposed
    to violent assault and threats and curtails their traditional  ways  of
    living as observed for Christians,  Jewish  and  Mandaean  minorities."
    Attacks on, and killings of Yazidis are mentioned in  that  paper,  and
    also in a Reuters Report of 18 August 2005.

34.  This volume of evidence satisfies us entirely that  the  appellant  has
    made out his case as regards risk to him in his  home  area.    In  the
    light of the volume of evidence it is perhaps unsurprising  that  issue
    was not taken with his credibility, particularly bearing  in  mind  the
    point that was noted at the case  management  review  hearing  that  he
    speaks very good English.

35.   On  the  question  of  sufficiency  of   protection,   again   helpful
    information is to be found in the Operational Guidance  Note.    It  is
    said in terms at paragraph 3.8.4 that it is accepted  that  the  police
    force outside the KRG area is not effective enough to provide  security
    to ordinary Iraqis.   The report goes on to state that  sufficiency  of
    protection  in  central  and  southern  Iraq  is  not  currently  at  a
    reasonable level.  As someone who has shown he faces  a  real  risk  of
    persecutory harm the appellant  has therefore established insufficiency
    of protection in his home area.

36.  It is, however, important to go on  and  consider  the  possibility  of
    relocation.  It is said at the same paragraph, 3.8.6 of the Operational
    Guidance Note, that in the KRG area it can be argued that protection is
    at a reasonably  effective  level.   The  requirement  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 3390(i)(a) of HC 395 is that the Secretary of State will  not
    make a grant of asylum if in part of the country  of  origin  a  person
    would not have a well-founded fear of being persecuted and  the  person
    can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of  the  country.    In
    examining  whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  meets   this
    requirement, the Secretary of State when making his decision on whether
    to  grant  asylum,  will  have  regard  to  the  general  circumstances
    prevailing  in  that  part  of  the  country  and   to   the   personal
    circumstances of the person.   It is said at 3.8.7 of  the  Operational
    Guidance Note that there is freedom of movement in Iraq in  that  there
    are  no  formal  restrictions  within  the  country,  but   there   are
    limitations due to  the  numerous  military  and  illegal  checkpoints.
    Ease of movement within Iraq varies from place to  place  depending  on
    security restrictions and is the same for all Iraqis.

37.  Though Mr Jones  in  effect  conceded  that  the  appellant  could  not
    relocate to the KRG it may assist if we set out the evidence concerning
    the general situation in the KRG.  It is said at paragraph 2.6  of  the
    Operational Guidance Note that the general security  situation  in  the
    KRG area is  benign,  compared  to  the  rest  of  Iraq.   The  Kurdish
    Peshmerga continues to  control  the  three  Northern  Governorates  of
    Erbil, Dohuk and Sulaymaniyah, and since the fall of the Saddam Hussain
    regime it has also expanded its influence south into Kirkuk, Mosul  and
    Diyala Governorates.  It is said that the impact of the  insurgency  in
    the KRG area is not high. In its  October  2005  report,  UNHCR  stated
    that, though there continue  to  be  security  concerns  in  the  three
    Northern Governorates  and  the  economy  is  still  fragile,  acts  of
    violence are far less frequent than in the rest of the country,  and  a
    degree of political stability has been achieved. There  remain  serious
    protection concerns however, especially for people who do not originate
    from those areas.

38.  In the UNHCR Guidelines of October 2005 relating to the eligibility  of
    Iraqi asylum seekers it is  suggested  that  relocation  in  the  three
    Northern Governorates will depend on a variety of factors, the main one
    being whether the claimant would be allowed to enter and legally reside
    in the area of relocation and  whether  he/she  has  family,  community
    and/or  political  links  that  would  allow  for  his/her  protection,
    economic survival and integration.  Later in the  same  guidelines  (at
    p.51, paragraph 8) it is said  that  the  Kurdish  authorities  aim  at
    keeping the area "Kurdish" and are in principle reluctant to accept any
    increase of non-Kurdish populations in their areas of influence.  Hence
    the KRG authorities implement strict controls on the presence  of  non-
    Kurdish people in their areas. Whereas certain factors such  as  former
    Ba'ath Party membership or  a  criminal  record  would  clearly  entail
    denial of admission, otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  establish  clear
    criteria to  predict  who  will  be  admitted  or  rejected.  At  times
    decisions seem to  be  taken  in  a  discretionary  manner.  There  are
    checkpoints at the unofficial borders between Central Iraq and the KRG-
    administered area, and the area  is  regularly  patrolled  and  heavily
    mined.  Hence entry via  the  checkpoints  is,  practically,  the  only
    option available. At p.53-54, paragraph 21, somewhat  contrasting  with
    what was said at p.51 paragraph 8, it is said that the Kurdish  parties
    will  reject  anybody  who  does  not  originate  from  the  respective
    Governorate and does not have a Kurdish sponsor  to  guarantee  his/her
    entry and stay (Governorates of Erbil and Dohuk), or may be  considered
    to pose a security risk or is found  to  have  links  with  the  former
    government.  It seems that there is a difference between being admitted
    to the KRG area and obtaining a  residence  permit,  which  has  to  be
    applied for by anyone not from the Governorate in question.

39.  We go on to the issue which remained a matter of  dispute  between  the
    parties and that is the ability of the appellant  to  relocate  to  the
    centre or south of Iraq.  Mr Jones drew our attention to  paragraph  65
    of  the  Tribunal's  determination  in  LM  [2006]  UKAIT  00060  where
    reference is made to a number of general risk categories, which include
    people who are perceived as collaborating with  the  occupying  forces.
    Mr Jones made the point however, as we have noted above, that there was
    a paucity of evidence about risk to a person in  provinces  which  have
    been handed over  by the multi national force to the Iraqi authorities.
      Mr Bandegani drew our attention to a reference in the  UNHCR  Country
    of Origin Information Report on Iraq of October 2005 at page 92 of  his
    bundle to the use made  of  hit  lists  by  insurgents  in  Iraq.    He
    reminded us that the appellant's name had been put up in  a  mosque  by
    the group which he feared.   As regards the question of  the  reach  of
    that group, he reminded  us  of  paragraph  3.8.2  of  the  Operational
    Guidance Note, to which we have referred above, and he also referred us
    to the point to be found in the UNAMI Human Rights Report of 2006  that
    reports indicate that the militias and similar  groups  have  increased
    their activities in central and southern areas of the country and there
    are allegations that sectors of  the  new  security  forces  have  been
    infiltrated by militias responding to parallel  structures.   There  is
    also reference to increasing reports that mosques and  other  religious
    sites are allegedly used as  secret  prisons  and  operate  as  illegal
    courts.  It can be seen from page 95 of the bundle which is again  from
    the UNHCR Country of Origin Information Report on Iraq of October  2005
    that there is common cause between  foreign  and  Iraqi  Islamists  and
    former Ba'athists in wanting to disrupt and destroy the  new  situation
    in Iraq.   It was accepted by the Secretary of State in the Country  of
    Origin Information Report that part of the strategic goal is to  target
    people who facilitate the occupation.  As a  consequence  Mr  Bandegani
    argued that the appellant was at risk throughout Iraq.   He reminded us
    of the evidence concerning links between the insurgent groups including
    that which the appellant fears, referred to at paragraph 3.8.7  of  the
    Operational Guidance Note. The latest assessment in the UNHCR Report to
    which we have referred above, at page 96 of the bundle, puts the number
    of insurgents at 15,000 - 20,000 individuals.

40.  We accept that on the evidence there can be seen to  be  no  reasonable
    expectation that the appellant can stay in the centre or south of  Iraq
    away from  his  home  area.   It  has  been  accepted  that  he  is  of
    significant interest to an important insurgent organisation  which  has
    links with other organisations and which has not simply written letters
    threatening him but has posted his name in a mosque, which, we  accept,
    would lead  to  other  terrorist  organisations  being  alerted  to  an
    interest in him and take action against him themselves or hand him over
    to Al Qaeda in Iraq.   There is the additional risk factor of him being
    a Yezidi and as we accept, being identifiable as such since he does not
    go  to  the  mosque  and  does  not  pray  five  times  a  day  and  is
    understandably not prepared to change his religion.  In this context it
    is also relevant to note the evidence concerning the checkpoints  which
    are operated by insurgents as well as by the security forces, on  which
    comment can be found at page 16 of Dr Fatah's report.   There is a real
    risk that a person in the appellant's position moving around Iraq would
    come to the attention of the insurgents in this  manner.    We  do  not
    consider it will be possible for  him  to  maintain  the  kind  of  low
    profile such as to avoid this risk.  In his case we conclude that being
    a Yezidi is an additional risk factor, but we also  consider  that  the
    evidence as it is at present before us shows  that  a  person  who  has
    worked as a translator or in any other way such as to  be  regarded  by
    insurgents as a collaborator with the multi-national force and who  has
    been targeted by a significant insurgent group,  is  a  person  who  at
    present faces a real  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  perceived
    political opinion in his home area in Iraq.  Unless he can satisfy  the
    criteria identified in paragraph 36 above, he will be unable to  access
    the KRG by way of relocation. Whether he can relocate elsewhere in Iraq
    must be a question of fact in each case, depending upon such matters as
    the reach of the group which has targeted him.  In general,  given  the
    kind of hit lists and information networks that exist, as well  as  the
    number of illegal  checkpoints,  we  would  anticipate  that  a  person
    satisfying all the other criteria set out above would usually  be  able
    to cross this threshold also.   Accordingly this appeal is allowed.





Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Allen
                     Material considered by the Tribunal




UNHCR Guidelines Relating  to  the  Eligibility  of  Iraqi  Asylum  Seekers:
October 2005

Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Iraq:        12 January 2006

International Crisis Group Report:  15 February 2006

UNAMI (UN Assistance Mission for Iraq) Human Rights Report:    1 March -
     30 April 2006

United Nations Security Council Report: 3 March 2006

US State Department Report:     8 March 2006

Home Office Country of Origin Information Report:     April 2006

Expert Report of Dr Rebwar Fatah:   19 May 2006

