
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            *STARRED*

            GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                    Determination Promulgated
On 11 April 2006                        On 11 May 2006

                                   Before

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr A Voliere of Messrs Andrews Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

The requirement in para 281 that a marriage be "subsisting" is  not  limited
to considering whether there  has  been  a  valid  marriage  which  formally
continues.  The word requires an  assessment  of  the  current  relationship
between the parties and a decision as to whether in the  broadest  sense  it
comprises a marriage properly described as "subsisting".

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Ghana,  seeks  reconsideration  of  the
     determination of Mr P D Southern, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
     decision of  the  Respondent  on  23  November  2004  to  refuse  entry
     clearance under paragraph 281 of HC 395  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
     present and settled in the UK.

  2. The following sub-paragraphs of paragraph  281  are  relevant  to  this
     appeal.

           (i)         the applicant is married to  a  person  present  and
           settled in the UK;  and
           (iii) each of the parties intends to live permanently  with  the
                 other as his or her spouse and the marriage is  subsisting;
                 and
           (v)   the parties will be able to maintain  themselves  and  any
                 dependants adequately without recourse to public funds;

Background to the Appeal

  3. The Immigration Judge accepted that the Appellant and the Sponsor  were
     married in 1982 and lived together in Ghana for 2  years  between  1982
     and 1984, and they had 2 children together, both of whom are now adults
     and live in Ghana.  He  also  accepted  the  medical  evidence  of  the
     Sponsor's ill-health. However on the basis of extensive inconsistencies
     and unreliability in the evidence, he did not  accept  that  they  were
     together after 1984. He noted material inconsistencies  concerning  the
     alleged remittances by the Sponsor to Ghana and concluded that such  as
     were sent to the Appellant in her own name in 2000  were  intended  not
     just for her but also the children. The evidence as  a  whole  did  not
     amount to regular support for her over the years, and the resumption of
     payments to her in her own name in 2005 had to do with this application
     for entry clearance.  His material conclusions are as follows:


           40. ..... I move on to  consider  the  financial  situation  the
           Appellant would find herself in if  she  were  living  with  the
           Sponsor in the context of his present  financial  circumstances.
           It is unambiguously clear that the Appellant's husband  requires
           all the money that he presently receives  to  meet  his  current
           level of expenditure.  He has confirmed that he has  no  savings
           and the  evidence  indicates  that  he  finds  it  necessary  to
           withdraw the whole of his benefits each time a  benefit  payment
           is received into his post office account.
           43. Considering all this together I find that there are no spare
           or surplus funds available to the Appellant's  husband  to  meet
           the additional cost that would arise from providing for his wife
           should she join him in the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  said,  of
           course, that his  wife  could  seek  employment.   However,  the
           difficulty with this is that her language is Twi, she  has  been
           unable to find employment in Ghana, and there is no evidence  at
           all that she would be able to find  work  upon  her  arrival  in
           United Kingdom.  Put another way, she has not demonstrated, on a
           balance of probabilities, that she would be able to find work in
           order to contribute towards the household income.
           45. The marriage was not, I  find,  subsisting  during  the  two
           decades the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  were  apart  and  the
           Appellant  has  not  demonstrated,  again  on   a   balance   of
           probabilities,  that  the  marriage  has  once  again  become  a
           subsisting one because she has accepted an invitation  from  the
           Sponsor to come to care for  him  as  his  health  continues  to
           deteriorate.
           46. Even if I were wrong about that,  this  appeal  would  still
           fail since the Appellant has not demonstrated, on a  balance  of
           probabilities, that  she  and  the  Sponsor  would  be  able  to
           maintain  themselves  adequately  without  further  recourse  to
           public funds.  There is no evidence that the Appellant would  be
           able  to  find  work.   Indeed  I  find  on   the   balance   of
           probabilities that she would not be able to do so, at least  not
           for the foreseeable future.
           47. In view of these findings of  fact  it  is  clear  that  the
           decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was the correct one  and
           that this appeal cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.....
           49. [In relation to Article 8] I have taken careful  account  of
           the health difficulties suffered by the Sponsor.   I  have  also
           noted that the appeal has been argued on the basis that  if  the
           Appellant were allowed to join her husband in United Kingdom she
           could help with his care  and  thereby  lessen  the  burden  now
           accepted by Social Services. I have also taken  account  of  the
           fact that the Appellant's husband cannot, realistically,  travel
           to Ghana to visit the Appellant and her  relatives.  Even  if  I
           were wrong to find, as I do, that the marriage ceased  to  be  a
           subsisting one many years ago and even if the correct view  were
           that by virtue of being married family life continues  to  exist
           between  them,  these  matters  do  not,  I  find,   amount   to
           exceptionality. The long period of separation arose not  because
           of any decisions  in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  but
           because of the decision by the Sponsor to leave, and  travel  to
           Germany and, his asylum appeal having failed there, to enter the
           United Kingdom unlawfully rather than return home to Ghana.

  4. The grounds submitted on behalf of the Appellant were somewhat rambling
     and repetitious, and the explanation for this  became  apparent  to  us
     when Mr Voliere made his 2 hour opening submissions. In  essence  there
     is no challenge to the Immigration Judge's rejection of the  Article  8
     appeal. The challenge relates to the appeal under the Immigration Rules
     only. Mr Voliere's submissions are  that  the  Immigration  Judge  made
     material errors of law in his understanding of  what  was  required  to
     satisfy the maintenance requirements of Rule 281 (v); in what is  meant
     in Rule 281 (iii) by  a  "subsisting"  marriage;  and  in  the  adverse
     credibility findings that underpinned his conclusions.

Meaning of the words "and the marriage is subsisting"

  5. Most of the issues raised are specific to this appeal, but  one  matter
     arises of wider significance, concerning the proper construction of the
     words in paragraph 281 (iii) "and the marriage is  subsisting"  and  we
     shall deal with this first.  This  determination  is  starred  for  our
     assessment of this issue.

  6. The Immigration Judge concluded in paragraph [45] of his  determination
     that the marriage in this appeal was  not  subsisting  during  the  two
     decades the parties were apart and did  not  become  a  subsisting  one
     again because the Appellant accepted an invitation from the Sponsor  to
     come and care for him  as  his  health  continued  to  deteriorate.  In
     reaching this conclusion he plainly assessed the  relationship  between
     the parties to the marriage rather than the more  limited  approach  of
     whether  the  marriage  entered  into  by  the  parties  in  1982   had
     subsequently not been dissolved. The sustainability  of  this  approach
     was called into  question  by  a  reported  decision  of  the  Tribunal
     promulgated on 13 December 2005, some 2  weeks  after  the  Immigration
     Judge's determination itself was promulgated, so he could not have been
     aware of it.  The decision  is  BK  and  Others  (Spouses:  Marriage  -
     meaning of  "subsisting")  Turkey  [2005]  UKAIT  00174.  The  relevant
     passages are as follows.


           27. Further, we took the view that the Rule is written as it  is
           for the reason that the first question to be answered is whether
           each of the parties to the marriage intends to live  permanently
           with the  other.  The  second  question,  that  of  whether  the
           marriage is subsisting, is, in our view, by  way  of  a  double-
           check in relation to the legal status of the relationship,  that
           is to say its framework, as opposed to the nature and quality of
           the substance of the relationship. For our part we find that  it
           is not arguable that the Immigration Judge can be said  to  have
           erred in considering that aspect before coming to the words that
           follow the word 'and' in 352A (iv)  to  which  Mr  Johnson  drew
           attention, in the second aspect of sub-paragraph (iv) of 352A.


           28.  We  find  that  there  is  no  support,  whether   in   any
           jurisprudence, or in the content of the  Rule  itself,  for  the
           meaning of the word 'subsists' that Mr Johnson contends for. Nor
           is there support for the test that he suggests in order to  show
           that a marriage subsists. It is difficult to conceive how such a
           test could operate. As Ms  Hooper  put  it,  would  there  be  a
           requirement  to  show  on  balance   that   the   parties   were
           'desperately in love',  or  would  'just  putting  up  with  one
           another' do? It is also difficult, we consider, to conceive what
           the purpose of such a test would be, as it would  be  bound,  in
           our view, to cover an examination of many if not all of the same
           or similar matters to those considered in the first part of  the
           sub-paragraph. It would be a double hurdle in effect,  contained
           in Rules intended to promote family reunion.


           29. We note that the Concise Oxford Dictionary,  ninth  edition,
           at page 1389 defines subsist as: 'keep oneself  alive;  be  kept
           alive; remain in  being;  exist;  be  attributable  to;  provide
           sustenance for.'


           30. Thus, the ordinary meaning of the word includes the  meaning
           'exist'. Mr Johnson sought to argue  that  it  meant  more  than
           this. Again, we find that there is no support for  his  argument
           to be found in the ordinary meaning of the word.


           31. We find that once having  conducted  the  enquiry  into  the
           intention of the parties so  far  as  their  commitment  to  the
           relationship is concerned, the second part of the Rule  requires
           enquiry into the question  whether  the  marriage  continues  to
           exist in law. This, we suggest, completes the enquiry  into  the
           relationship, so that it is  shown  to  have  both  the  genuine
           substance of a committed relationship, with the  intention  that
           it should continue and be demonstrated through cohabitation, and
           the legal framework required to enable it to exist, or  subsist,
           in law.

  7. It will first be noted that  that  the  Tribunal  in  BK  (Turkey)  was
     concerned  with  paragraph  352A  of  HC  395.  This  deals  with   the
     requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or remain  in
     United Kingdom as the spouse of a refugee. However  sub-paragraph  (iv)
     of that paragraph is expressed in  identical  terms  to  paragraph  281
     (iii) and like considerations must apply to its  construction  as  they
     must to other paragraphs in the Rules expressed in the same terms.

  8. The Tribunal in BK (Turkey) concluded that the question of whether  the
     marriage is subsisting is by way of a double-check in relation  to  the
     legal status of the relationship, that is  to  say  its  framework,  as
     opposed to the nature and quality of the substance of the relationship.
     There are however serious problems with this interpretation.

  9. The first is that this construction does not  reflect  the  Rule  as  a
     whole. Sub-paragraphs (i) of both 281 and 352A require, as  a  starting
     point that the applicant "is married" to a person who is either present
     and settled in the UK or is granted asylum. That is  expressed  in  the
     present tense. It is not a statement of historic fact that  requires  a
     separate  double-check  as  to  the  current  legal   status   of   the
     relationship. If there is no legally valid marriage at the time of  the
     decision, then the application never gets off the ground by  virtue  of
     sub-paragraph (i).

 10. Moreover, if the BK (Turkey) interpretation is correct, and  given  the
     terms of sub-paragraph  (i),  then  the  words  "and  the  marriage  is
     subsisting" would be entirely redundant to the operation of the Rule as
     a whole. If  one  starts  with  the  reasonable  presumption  that  the
     draftsman of the Rules did not intend meaningless repetition, then  the
     question arises as to whether there is some other material factor  that
     requires addressing in the context of a marriage  application  that  is
     not covered elsewhere. Again an analysis of the Rule as a  whole  shows
     that there is. Just as we have said  that  sub-paragraph  (i)  requires
     there to be a current legally valid marriage, so the remainder of  sub-
     paragraphs 281 (iii) and 352A (iv) require that "each  of  the  parties
     intends to live permanently with the other as his or her spouse".  That
     goes to the substance of the relationship rather than the form, and  is
     looking at the future of that relationship from the perspective of  the
     present intentions of the parties. What is manifestly  missing  between
     the current existence of a legally valid marriage and the view  of  the
     intentions of the parties for the future is an assessment of the nature
     of the current relationship between the  parties  and  whether  in  the
     broadest  sense  it  comprises  a  subsisting  marriage.  That  in  our
     judgement is the correct interpretation.  Sub-paragraphs  (i)  in  each
     Rule relate to the legal  formalities.  Both  parts  of  sub-paragraphs
     (iii) and (iv), in each  respectively,  relate  to  the  assessment  of
     distinct aspects of the substance of the relationship.

 11. We gain support in this conclusion from  paragraph  295A(i)(a)  of  the
     Rules, which deals with the requirements for leave to enter the  United
     Kingdom with a view to settlement as the unmarried partner of a  person
     present and settled in United Kingdom. This requires that
           "the applicant is the unmarried partner of a person present  and
           settled in United Kingdom or who is on the same  occasion  being
           admitted  for  settlement  and  the  parties  have  been  living
           together in a relationship akin to marriage which has  subsisted
           for two years or more;"

 12. Here we see the use of the word "subsisted" in a context  that  plainly
     relates to the substance of a relationship rather  than  to  its  legal
     formality.  The context is a  little  different  but  this  formulation
     provides illumination as to the meaning of the draftsman of the Rules.

 13. The Tribunal in BK (Turkey) then identified  some  definitions  of  the
     word  "subsist"  in  the  Concise  Oxford  Dictionary.   However,  with
     respect, we  do  not  consider  that  these  definitions  add  anything
     material to the issue before us. That issue is not about what "subsist"
     means, but is about what is or  is  not  subsisting.  In  other  words,
     whether the word "subsist"  means  "exist"  or  "remain  in  being"  is
     neutral as to whether we must assess the formal legal validity  of  the
     marriage or the substantive relationship.

 14. The Tribunal in BK (Turkey) in paragraph [28] draws  attention  to  the
     difficulties  for  Immigration  Judges  in  assessing  the   minds   of
     individual appellants. It is indeed a difficult problem but it  is  one
     with which we all have to grapple regularly and is  not  a  reason  for
     ducking the legitimate task set for  us.  An  Immigration  Judge,  when
     assessing the subsistence of a marriage will plainly have  to  bear  in
     mind the cultural context and the wide differences that  exist  between
     individual lifestyles, whether by choice, or by  circumstances,  or  by
     economic necessity. He will also be able to  put  the  claim  into  the
     context of the history of the relationship and to assess whether and to
     what extent  this  illuminates  the  nature  of  the  parties'  present
     relationship and future intentions.

 15. Finally we should record that neither Mr Voliere nor Mr  Deller  sought
     to support the BK (Turkey) analysis

 16. Thus we conclude that the assessment in BK (Turkey) of what is meant by
     the words "and the marriage is subsisting" is mistaken and  should  not
     be followed.

 17. We then turn to the issues specific to this  appeal,  which  relate  to
     maintenance and  the  subsistence  of  the  marriage,  as  well  as  to
     overlapping issues on credibility.

Maintenance

 18. With regard to maintenance, it was  submitted  by  Mr  Voliere  in  his
     grounds  and  oral  submissions  that  both  the  Respondent  and   the
     Immigration Judge erred in their understanding of paragraph 281 (v), by
     misdirecting themselves to whether the arrival of the  Appellant  would
     require "further" recourse to public funds, whereas the  scope  of  the
     maintenance  requirement  was  limited  to  there  being   "additional"
     recourse.

 19. The reality is that the scope of the maintenance requirements  relating
     to recourse to public funds under paragraph 281 and  in  other  similar
     formulations in the Rules is specified in  Rule  6A  in  the  following
     terms.

           For the purpose of these Rules, a person is not to  be  regarded
           as having (or  potentially  having)  recourse  to  public  funds
           merely because he is (or will be) reliant in whole or in part on
           public funds provided to his Sponsor, unless as a result of  his
           being in United Kingdom the Sponsor is (or would be) entitled to
           increased or additional funds".

 20. We can see no material error of law by the  Immigration  Judge  arising
     from this submission by Mr Voliere. It is true that in his  summary  in
     paragraph 46, the Immigration Judge used the words "further recourse to
     public funds" rather  than  entitlement  to  "increased  or  additional
     funds". However when one looks at his detailed  analysis,  particularly
     in paragraphs [39]-[43], it is plain that he correctly  identified  and
     applied the appropriate law. After  painstaking  consideration  of  the
     evidence, including the Sponsor's income and expenditure, he found that
     the Sponsor was wholly dependent on public funds; he was not  satisfied
     that any material sums were  sent  by  the  Sponsor  to  Ghana  to  the
     Appellant, and accordingly there would be  no  saving  implied  in  her
     coming to the UK; the Sponsor had difficulty meeting his bills from his
     income, even without the presence of the Appellant; and there  were  no
     surplus funds. On these established facts, the arrival of the Appellant
     would inevitably result in increased or additional recourse  to  public
     funds as the Immigration Judge sustainably held.

 21. The remaining challenges by  Mr  Voliere  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
     assessment of the maintenance issue amount in reality to  nothing  more
     than disagreement with his findings of fact.

 22. In part they relate to his challenge to the Immigration Judge's adverse
     credibility findings that the Appellant had  failed  to  establish  the
     payment of remittances to her  by  the  Sponsor  on  any  sustained  or
     regular basis in Ghana. As these are relevant also to the  question  of
     the subsistence of the marriage,  we  shall  deal  with  them  in  that
     context later. We would record here simply that we have rejected  these
     submissions.

 23.  The  remaining  submissions  concerning  maintenance  relate  to   the
     Immigration Judge's finding that the Appellant would be unable to  find
     employment. Mr Voliere argued that the Immigration  Judge  should  have
     had regard to the Respondent's "guidance notes" to the effect that


           "If the applicant or sponsor have skills or qualifications which
           offer a reasonable chance of obtaining employment they should be
           viewed as sufficient to satisfy the maintenance requirement."

 24. The Immigration Judge reached the  following  conclusion  in  paragraph
     [43] concerning the Appellant's employment prospects in the UK.


           "The difficulty with this is that her language is Twi,  she  has
           been unable to  find  employment  in  Ghana,  and  there  is  no
           evidence at all that she would be able to  find  work  upon  her
           arrival in the UK.  Put another way, she has  not  demonstrated,
           on the balance of probabilities that she would be able  to  find
           work in order to contribute towards the household income."

 25. Mr Voliere argued that the Appellant had domestic skills as  a  cleaner
     and had worked as a market trader in Ghana and this should be  regarded
     as sufficient to meet  the  requirements  of  the  guidance  notes.  We
     consider that the Immigration Judge's assessment was fully open to  him
     on the evidence. The burden of proof  is  upon  the  Appellant  to  the
     balance of probabilities.  If she could speak English it was for her to
     produce evidence of it, as well  as  evidence  of  any  other  relevant
     skills she might have.  She did not  do  so.   Moreover  the  so-called
     skills identified by Mr Voliere are in reality  no  more  than  limited
     experience in unskilled work that could not offer any reasonable chance
     of her obtaining employment in the UK. Additionally,  we  observe  from
     the evidence, including the medical evidence relating to  the  Sponsor,
     that the Appellant would on coming to the UK undertake the care of  the
     Sponsor.  That  would  limit  the  possibility   of   her   undertaking
     employment, even if she could find any.

 26. Thus  we  conclude  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  finding  that  the
     Appellant had failed to satisfy the requirements of Rule 281 (v) as  to
     maintenance is sound and sustainable. As the Appellant has  to  satisfy
     each and every requirement of the relevant Rule, her appeal  under  the
     Rules was bound to fail on this basis alone.

Subsistence of the Marriage

 27. Mr Voliere's challenge over the Immigration Judge's  rejection  of  the
     subsistence  of  the  marriage   essentially   concerns   the   adverse
     credibility findings, and these as we have indicated  overlap  to  some
     extent with the maintenance issue. We  shall  deal  with  Mr  Voliere's
     submissions concerning all these outstanding issues now together.

 28. First however we would record our concern at the manner of Mr Voliere's
     submissions to us. We expect advocates to base their  submissions  upon
     the evidence, and when asked to be  able  to  identify  the  evidential
     basis  for   those   submissions.   Mr   Voliere   came   without   any
     contemporaneous notes from the hearing before the Immigration Judge. We
     do not know if he actually made any. On several occasions when we asked
     him to identify the evidential basis for a submission he said that  the
     Sponsor had given oral evidence to that effect. He  then  described  in
     detail what the Sponsor had allegedly said. However his account was not
     reflected in the Immigration Judge's record of proceedings, nor in  the
     HOPO's note, which Mr Deller checked for us.   We  do  not,  therefore,
     know upon what basis Mr Voliere was able to recall these  matters.   We
     deprecate it.

 29. An example of this (but not the only one) arose in his  primary  attack
     upon  the  Immigration  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings,  which
     related to his assessment  of  the  alleged  remittances  sent  by  the
     Sponsor to the Appellant in Ghana. This matter is of relevance  to  the
     issues both of maintenance and the  subsistence  of  the  marriage.  Mr
     Voliere had submitted in his bundle to the Immigration Judge  a  number
     of money transfer receipts from the Sponsor to  persons  in  Ghana.  He
     provided no summary or analysis of them. The Immigration Judge  plainly
     went to a great deal of trouble producing a schedule of  the  transfers
     so that he could make sense of them. In that he was  compelled  by  his
     diligence to do Mr Voliere's work for him.  The  schedule  demonstrated
     that in 2000 there were 8 transfers to the  Appellant  in  her  married
     name. From 2000 until February 2005 there were no  transfers  addressed
     to the Appellant. However  in  this  period  there  were  33  transfers
     addressed to Madam Akosua Konadu and one to Joseph  Kwarbenc.  Then  in
     2005 transfers resumed to the Appellant. The Immigration Judge noted at
     paragraph [38] that Georgina Konadu was  the  Appellant's  maiden  name
     according to her marriage certificate. However  she  never  appears  to
     have used the name Akosua. The Immigration Judge also noted that in the
     Appellant's visa application form she gave her mother's first  name  as
     Akosua, though her surname was given as Pokuaah, not  Konadu.  In  all,
     the Immigration Judge was given no satisfactory explanation as  to  why
     some payments were made for 2000 to the Appellant and then there was  a
     gap of a number of years  when  payments  were  made  possibly  to  her
     mother, and then in 2005 the payments resumed to the Appellant. He drew
     adverse conclusions from this.

 30. We asked Mr Voliere if there  was  any  explanation  for  this  in  the
     evidence. He first said that the Sponsor said in oral evidence that  he
     changed to using the Appellant's first name. We then asked why in  that
     case the Sponsor changed it back again in 2005. Mr Voliere then changed
     tack and said that some of the payments were to the Appellant's  mother
     intended for the Appellant as they lived in  the  same  household  and,
     especially at the beginning, because she was more able  to  obtain  the
     money than the Appellant, as she was known at the collection point.  We
     asked if there was any evidence that the Appellant and her mother lived
     in the same household at this time, and he could provide none. We asked
     why, if the mother was better able  to  get  the  payments,  the  early
     payments were to the Appellant. He said the Sponsor's oral evidence was
     that this was to facilitate payment. We asked why in that case did  the
     payments to the mother continue after her death. He  said  it  was  for
     consistency. We stress that Mr Voliere indicated  that  the  evidential
     basis for all his answers to our questions lay in what the Sponsor said
     in oral  evidence.  However  there  is  no  support  for  that  in  the
     Immigration  Judge's  record  of   proceedings   or   in   the   HOPO's
     contemporaneous note.

 31. We consider that the Immigration  Judge  was  fully  entitled  to  draw
     adverse conclusions concerning the alleged remittances on the  evidence
     before him as a whole. Indeed in addition  to  the  problems  described
     above about the  payees,  the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  gave  very
     different accounts of  how  much  money,  if  any,  was  sent.  As  the
     Immigration Judge recorded in paragraph [39],  the  Appellant  said  in
     interview she received �50 every two to three months, yet the Sponsor's
     evidence was that he was sending up to 4 times that amount. Mr  Voliere
     said that the Appellant's answer may have been inaccurate  because  she
     did not know the precise amount sent, or was mistaken over the exchange
     rate. We asked him if he had suggested that to the Immigration Judge in
     oral submissions and he confirmed that he had  not,  even  though  this
     inconsistency was a matter that the HOPO had highlighted  in  his  oral
     submissions. We consider that Mr Voliere's attempts to explain away the
     materiality of the inconsistencies only  made  matters  worse  for  the
     Appellant.

 32. Mr Voliere then submitted that  the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
     identified by the Immigration Judge were not fatal to the  application.
     We disagree. The many inconsistencies go to the heart of the claim that
     there has been a continuing and  meaningful  relationship  between  the
     Sponsor and the Appellant over the twenty years they have lived  apart.
     Apart from the discrepancies over the alleged remittances,  there  were
     inconsistencies over when  they  first  met  and  how  long  they  were
     together. The Appellant lied to conceal her previous  visa  application
     as a visitor in 1997/8.  She said did not  know  of  the  alleged  visa
     applications for her allegedly made by the Sponsor in 1998/9, of  which
     there is no record. In paragraph [35] the Immigration Judge  identifies
     a discrepancy on the marriage certificate which appears  to  have  been
     signed by the Sponsor in Kumasi  Ghana in 2003, at which time he was in
     the UK.

 33. In short, we consider that the Immigration Judge's adverse  credibility
     findings are in all respects properly reasoned, soundly  based  on  the
     evidence and sustainable. They support his overall conclusions  as  set
     out in paragraph 3 above. There is no merit in the contrary submissions
     in the grounds as amplified before us by Mr Voliere.

Decision

 34. The Immigration Judge did not make a material  error  of  law  and  the
     original determination of the appeal shall stand.








      Signed
      Dated        12 April 2006


           S L Batiste
           Senior Immigration Judge


