
                  RK ("purpose" of family visit) Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT
00045

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 March 2006                                |On 24 April 2006           |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   Mr D K Allen, Senior Immigration Judge
                               Mr C P O'Brian
                                Dr T Okitikpi

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Muthusagaran of Turpin, Miller & Higgins,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Lonsdale, Home Office Presenting Officer

In order to give rise to an appealable  decision,  the  evidence  must  show
that the purpose of a family visit was to visit a member of the  applicant's
family, as defined in the Immigration Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
2003.  It cannot be assumed simply from  the  fact  that  a  person  falling
within that definition lives in the United Kingdom that the purpose  was  to
visit them.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   She  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge, Mrs S M Agnew, against the Entry Clearance Officer's
    decision of 10 January 2005 refusing entry clearance for the purpose of
    a family visit.  In a determination promulgated on  13  September  2005
    the Immigration Judge  allowed  the  appeal.   Subsequently  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer sought and was granted an order  for  reconsideration
    of the appeal, on the basis that the appellant did not fall within  the
    requirements of the Immigration Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
    2003 and therefore did not have a right of appeal.

2.    The  hearing  before  us  took  place  on  10  March  2006.     Ms   S
    Muthusagaran, of Turpin, Miller  &  Higgins,  Solicitors,  appeared  on
    behalf of the appellant, and Ms K Lonsdale appeared on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.

3.   The appellant, together with her husband,  A, applied to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom for a  family  visit.    In  her  application  form  the
    appellant said that she was going to the United  Kingdom  in  order  to
    visit her nephew's son, L.   She was asked whether she had  any  family
    or close friends in the United Kingdom and mentioned her sister R.  She
    gave the full address of the person with whom she would be staying as S
    and  gave  her  address.   Her  husband  gave  essentially   the   same
    information in his form.  He was interviewed, and when asked why he was
    going to the United Kingdom said he wanted to see his grandson who  had
    a brain tumour and had had surgery.  The exact relationship was said to
    be that the child was his nephew's son.  A and the  appellant  did  not
    have any children.

4.   There was a sponsorship declaration from J, who is  married  to  S  and
    they live at the address given by  the  appellant  on  her  application
    form.   In his sponsorship declaration J states that the appellant  and
    her husband are related to his wife in that A is the real brother of  R
    who is the mother of J's wife.   He described the circumstances of  the
    proposed visit being as a consequence of the diagnosis of their son, L,
    as having a brain tumour.  This had led to him  being  in  and  out  of
    hospital many times and he was  currently  receiving  chemotherapy  and
    this will be followed by radiotherapy.  He refers to his wife's  mother
    as being elderly and suffering from diabetes and being looked after  by
    her daughter-in-law with whom she lives together with a son  and  their
    four year old daughter.  He states that L had been to  Bangladesh  four
    times and each time had a very good relationship  with  Mr A  and  the
    appellant who had never had children of their own.  He also  said  that
    they needed A and the appellant to help  them  manage  and  look  after
    their house and care for their other children as it had been very  hard
    for them and their children over the last few months.

5.   The application was refused firstly because the  couple  were  not  the
    grandparents of L but A was his grandmother's brother.  Secondly it was
    considered that their circumstances in Bangladesh were quite modest and
    thirdly it was unfortunately the case that in the light  of  his  son's
    illness J had lost his job and was in receipt of public funds.

6.   The Immigration Judge, as we have noted above, allowed the  appellant's
    appeal and also allowed the appeal  of  her  husband.    There  was  no
    challenge by the Entry Clearance Officer to the decision  allowing  A's
    appeal. With regard to the appellant, however,  it  is  contended  that
    since she is married to the uncle of S she is not a  family  member  of
    that family for the purposes of the 2003 Regulations and therefore  did
    not have a right of appeal.

7.   At the hearing before us  Ms Muthusagaran had put in a  helpful  bundle
    which included a family tree and other documents to which we will refer
    in due course.   She referred us to  Section  90  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which makes it clear in  sub-section  1
    that a right of appeal in the case of a person who  applies  for  entry
    clearance for the purpose of entering the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
    only exists if the application was made for the purpose of  visiting  a
    member of the applicant's family, and the reference to a member of  the
    applicant's family is to be construed in accordance  with  regulations,
    which are the Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003.

8.   Ms Muthusagaran argued that there  was  not  an  equation  to  be  made
    between family member and sponsor.  The term sponsor was generally used
    very loosely as could be  seen  from  the  determination  where  J  was
    referred to as the sponsor.  It could mean the financial sponsor or the
    person providing accommodation or the family member.  It was a question
    of intention to visit a member of the applicant's family.  It could  be
    seen for example from paragraph 4 of the determination in A's case that
    R was referred to as his  sponsor.   There  was  also  a  reference  at
    paragraph 7 of that determination to the fact  that  his  sister  among
    others lived in the United Kingdom.   There was a reference to J  being
    the sponsor, but the sponsor did not have  to  be  the  relative.   The
    question was whether on the balance of probabilities the appellant  had
    intended to visit her sister-in-law.  It was clear from the family tree
    that they were a close knit family.   The appellant had been  proposing
    to travel with her husband, whose sister was  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This question had not been raised before the Immigration Judge and  nor
    was it raised in the  refusal  letter.   The  appellant  had  not  been
    represented at the hearing and had not been in a position to  recognise
    this legal issue.  In all the circumstances the Immigration Judge could
    not be criticised for not considering this point.

9.   The second facet was whether there was an intention  to  visit.   There
    was evidence in this regard as could be seen from page 44 of the bundle
    in the sponsorship declaration.  R was referred to there at paragraph 3
    and paragraph 5.  She was also referred to in the grounds of appeal  to
    the Immigration Judge, to be found at page 52 of the bundle.    It  was
    clear from the reference in the appellant's grounds of appeal  at  page
    58 of the bundle that she intended to visit  her  sister-in-law  R  and
    therefore the application was within the rules.  She would be  unlikely
    not to choose to visit her sister-in-law as she was  unwell  and  lived
    near to J and his wife.  It was of course the case that R was  referred
    to in the appellant's husband's determination  as  being  his  sponsor.
    There was no requirement for a  list  of  those  people  who  would  be
    visited.  At page 16 of the interview A had been  asked  how  long  his
    sister had been in the United Kingdom and he  had  responded  that  she
    went there in what he referred to  as  the  Pakistan  period,  and  her
    husband was a British  citizen.  She  had  gone  in  1975.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer had therefore been made aware of R and there  was  no
    doubt expressed as to the relationship. It was therefore only  natural,
    based on the evidence at the time, that they were going to visit  R  as
    well as J and his wife.

10.  If that were not clear then it was clear  from  the  sponsor's  witness
    statement which post-dated the Immigration Judge's determination. As to
    why the Tribunal should admit that, it had not been in issue before the
    Immigration Judge so there had been no need for  it  to  be  submitted.
    Also the appellant had been unrepresented and  not  in  a  position  to
    recognise it as an issue and not in a position to provide it.  Further,
    no submissions had been sent in by the Home Office and  the  point  had
    never been raised so there had been a  failure  to  assist  the  court.
    Further, the statement and supporting documents helped to  clarify  the
    issue now.

11.   Ms  Lonsdale  opposed  these  documents  being  put  in,   and   after
    consideration we concluded that it would not be proper for them  to  go
    in at this stage and that they could only be considered if  there  were
    an error of law in the Immigration Judge's determination.

12.  In her submissions, Ms Lonsdale argued  that  there  was  an  issue  of
    jurisdiction.   It had been clear to the Entry Clearance Officer who it
    was that the appellant proposed to visit and by  whom  she  was  to  be
    sponsored.   On the basis of what had been said to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer and  what  was  before  the  Immigration  Judge  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction arose.  If the Immigration Judge had no jurisdiction  then
    the Tribunal should not look at any further evidence.   There had  been
    nothing from the sister-in-law, R, before the Entry Clearance  Officer.
    There had been a sponsorship declaration from J and the only mention of
    R was in the application form when the appellant was asked whether  she
    had family or close friends in the United Kingdom.  It was  clear  from
    the papers that the intention was to visit the nephew  and  that  issue
    was properly dealt with in the determination which  had  not  concerned
    itself with issues  relating  to  the  appellant's  sister-in-law.  The
    grounds had proceeded on that basis and the appeal should also.

13.  It was also not the correct forum today to introduce a new sponsor.  It
    was too late to introduce the sister-in-law now. It was also clear from
    the determination who the sponsor was to be.   R was  not  the  sponsor
    and was not  to  be  considered  as  the  sponsor.   In  the  husband's
    determination the wrong  wording  had  been  used  in  paragraph  4  in
    describing his sister as the sponsor.  It  was  clear  on  reading  the
    determination that the Immigration Judge was aware who the sponsor  was
    to be and the purpose of the visit was to see his nephew's son.

14.  After  an  adjournment  we  communicated  to  the  representatives  our
    conclusion that there was a material error of law in the  determination
    in that the Immigration Judge did not have jurisdiction to consider the
    appeal of the appellant since she did not come within the family  visit
    regulations. We stated that we would provide full  reasoning  for  this
    conclusion in a written determination which we now do.

15.  It is, we think, common ground that the  appellant  cannot  succeed  if
    the family visit is to the proposed sponsor, as he described himself in
    the sponsorship declaration, and his  wife  in  order  to  visit  their
    child.  The appellant is married to the husband of J's wife's  mother's
    brother.   A, the appellant's husband, is therefore proposing to  visit
    his wife's uncle.

16.  There is a definition of "member of the applicant's family" set out  at
    paragraph 2 of the Immigration  Appeals  (Family  Visitor)  Regulations
    2003.   This has to be any of the following persons.

    (a)   the  applicant's   spouse,   father,   mother,   son,   daughter,
         grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister,
         uncle, aunt, nephew, niece or first cousin;


    (b)  the father, mother, brother or sister of the applicant's spouse;


    (c)  the spouse of the applicant's son or daughter;


    (d)  the applicant's  stepfather,  stepmother,  stepson,  stepdaughter,
         stepbrother or stepsister; or


    (e)  a person with whom the applicant has  lived  as  a  member  of  an
         unmarried couple for at least two of the three years before the day
         on which his application for entry clearance was made.


17.  The purpose of the visit on the part of the appellant was, as  we  have
    set out above, to see L, whom she described as her nephew's son.   L is
    in fact the son of the appellant's husband's sister's daughter.  It  is
    clear therefore that he does not come within the definition of  "member
    of the applicant's family" as set out in Regulation 2, and it  is  also
    the case that L's parents, J and S do not come within that definition.

18.  It is however argued on the appellant's behalf by Ms Muthusagaran  that
    the wording of the legislation and as a consequence the regulations, is
    such as to permit this case to fall within the regulations since, it is
    contended, the appellant should properly be construed as having made an
    application for entry clearance for the purpose of visiting a member of
    her family, that being her sister-in-law R.    If  that  contention  is
    made out then the claim could in theory  succeed  since  R,  being  the
    sister  of  the  appellant's  husband,  falls  within  the  appropriate
    definition at Regulation 2(1)(b).   As we have seen, Section 90 of  the
    Act only permits an appeal if the application was made for the  purpose
    of visiting a member of the applicant's family.

19.  However, we can find no indication that any such  purpose  with  regard
    to R was ever expressed by or on behalf of the appellant.  As  we  have
    seen, she described the purpose of the visit  as  being  to  visit  her
    nephew's son L, and clearly that, particularly as fleshed  out  in  the
    sponsorship declaration, could be seen as  embracing  an  intention  to
    visit L's parents as well.   It is clear for example from paragraphs  6
    and 7 of the United Kingdom that J and his wife  wished  the  appellant
    and her husband to come to the  United  Kingdom  because  of  the  good
    relationship they had with L and also his twin O  and  also  to  assist
    them in looking after the children given the very difficult time that J
    and S had been experiencing.   The only mention of R in the application
    form is under the section where the appellant was asked whether she had
    any family or close friends in the United  Kingdom  and  therefore  she
    quite properly named R.  There is  no  suggestion  in  the  sponsorship
    declaration of any intention to visit R. There is  mention  of  her  as
    living with her son, daughter-in-law and their four year  old  daughter
    and being elderly and suffering from diabetes and being looked after by
    her daughter-in-law.   There is no suggestion in A's interview  of  any
    intention to visit R.  The purpose for going to the United Kingdom  was
    said to be to visit his grandson who had a brain  tumour  and  had  had
    surgery.

20.  We do not think that the legislation can  properly  be  interpreted  in
    the manner contended for in this case.  It is  specifically  stated  at
    Section 90(1) that the application has to be made for  the  purpose  of
    visiting a member of the applicant's family.  The fact  that  a  person
    might incidentally visit a member of their family  as  defined  in  the
    Family Visitor Regulations while in the United Kingdom cannot,  to  our
    mind, be equated with the proposed  purpose  of  the  visit.   In  this
    regard we have not ignored the most recent statement  of  J,  which  is
    dated 3 March 2006.   In that, at paragraph 7, it is said that  it  was
    always intended that the appellant and  her  husband  would  visit  his
    mother-in-law R as well as him and his wife and  children  and  it  was
    inconceivable that such a visit would take place without  not  visiting
    R.   That is not,  however,  something  that  was  made  clear  on  the
    application form or in the sponsorship  declaration  or  at  interview.
    As we have stated above, we do not consider that Section 90(1)  of  the
    2002 Act can be interpreted in the way which it is argued for  in  this
    case.   The fact that there is a relative in  the  United  Kingdom  who
    comes within the Family Visitor Regulations does not automatically mean
    that the purpose of the visit was to visit that person.  In  this  case
    there was an absence of any indication in the relevant documentation or
    in the interview that the purpose of the visit was to visit R.  We  are
    prepared to accept that someone can have a purpose to visit  more  than
    one person, and that there can sometimes be more than one sponsor,  but
    the evidence does not support the contention that  R  fulfilled  either
    role.

21.  Accordingly, we have concluded that the  Immigration  Judge  materially
    erred in allowing  this  appeal.  She  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    consider it, since the persons whom the  appellant  proposed  to  visit
    were not members of her family within the definition in the Immigration
    Appeals (Family  Visitor)  Regulations  2003.   The  Immigration  Judge
    therefore materially erred in law in assuming jurisdiction  in  a  case
    where she did not have  jurisdiction.  We  declare  that  the  decision
    against which the appellant purported to  appeal  was  not  a  decision
    carrying a right of appeal under the 2002  Act,  that  the  Immigration
    Judge accordingly had no jurisdiction, and that the  determination  can
    have no effect.





Signed                                  Date

D K Allen
Senior Immigration Judge




