
KB (para: 320(7A):  "false representations") Albania [2009] UKAIT 00043


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at:  Procession House                                   Date of
Hearing: 8 September 2009




                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey



                                   Between

                                     KB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, TIRANA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Alfred Qinani (the sponsor)
For the Respondent:          Ms M. Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


A genuine document may contain a false representation.  If it does, refusal
under para. 320(7A) is lawful.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Albania.  She applied  to  the  respondent
   for entry clearance with a view to settlement in the  United  Kingdom  as
   the wife of the sponsor.  Her application was refused.  She  appealed  to
   the  Tribunal,  and  an  Immigration  Judge  allowed  her  appeal.    The
   respondent sought and obtained an order for  reconsideration.   Thus  the
   matter comes before us.

2. The sponsor is a British citizen, and, apparently,  also  a  national  of
   Albania.  He came to the United Kingdom in October 1998.  He said that he
   was Kosovan, and claimed asylum.  Apparently  without  any  very  serious
   enquiry into his nationality, the Secretary of State granted him  refugee
   status.  After he had had that status for a number of  years  he  applied
   for British citizenship.  In doing so, he repeated  the  falsehood  about
   his nationality, stating that he had  been  born  in  Morin,  in  Kosovo.
   Again apparently without any very serious enquiries as to his nationality
   he was granted British citizenship, and a British passport was issued  to
   him on 16 March 2006 recording his birth in Morin.

3. The sponsor then travelled to Albania, met his wife and married her.

4. The sponsor's history does not appear to be  an  unusual  one.   Although
   the Tribunal and hence the public tend  to  hear  about  cases  in  which
   applications to the Secretary of State are refused, it  is  usually  said
   wrongly, it appears that the result in many successful  applications  may
   be equally wrong. Section 4 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
   Act 2002 substitutes a new s40  in  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981.
   Subsection (3) of that section enables the Secretary of State to  deprive
   a person of "a citizenship status which results from his registration  or
   naturalisation" if it was obtained by  fraud,  false  representation,  or
   concealment of a material fact.  The decision to deprive a person of  his
   citizenship in this way carries a right of appeal to this  Tribunal.   In
   the only such cases of which the Tribunal has previously been aware,  the
   Secretary of State proposed to prove the fraud or false representation by
   means  of  a  reminiscence  of  a  telephone  conversation   between   an
   unspecified British official and an unspecified Albanian official.  There
   was to be no verification of the latter's status or knowledge, and, other
   than the British official's assurance, no evidence that the interlocutors
   were talking about the same person.  The Secretary of  State's  decisions
   were in due course withdrawn.

5. In the  present  case,  the  facts  came  to  light  in  the  appellant's
   application, because she gave  what  the  sponsor  admits  are  the  true
   details of her husband's birth, in Kukes, Albania on 7 April  1978.   She
   produced his birth certificate as evidence of that.  She  also,  however,
   supported her application with a copy of the sponsor's British  passport,
   showing his birth in Morin, Kosovo, on  7  April  1981.   The  respondent
   considered the facts before him and, on the evidence, was  not  satisfied
   that the appellant and the sponsor had established that they intended  to
   live together permanently as husband and wife, as required  by  paragraph
   281(iii) of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395.   The
   application was refused for that reason, as well as under para 320  (7A),
   which provides as follows:

       "320....  The following grounds for the refusal of  entry  clearance
       or leave to enter apply:

       Grounds on which entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
       Kingdom is to be refused


       ....


       (7A) Where false representations have been made or  false  documents
       have been submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
       whether or not to the applicant's knowledge) or material facts  have
       not been disclosed, in relation to the application."

6.   The Immigration Judge heard evidence from the  sponsor.   He  concluded
   that at the date of the decision the appellant and the sponsor did indeed
   intend to live together permanently as husband and wife.  He  thus  found
   that the requirements of para 281(iii) were satisfied.  On para 320 (7A),
   he recorded the sponsor's evidence as follows:

           "At the time he made his application for asylum  in  the  United
           Kingdom, he did not speak good English.  He said his father  had
           been working in Kosovo at the time and he came here from  Kosovo
           where he had been helping his father.  He says this is where the
           error arose from.  He had then successfully  claimed  asylum  in
           this country."

7.  He noted that the grounds of appeal alleged  that  the  discrepancy  was
   "nothing more than an administrative  error  made  with  respect  to  the
   details of his place and date of birth, without the sponsor's  knowledge,
   when he claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom."   The  Immigration  Judge
   went on to say this:

           "15. It seems to me that paragraph 320 (7A) must be  founded  on
           allegation of a false representation, or a  deliberate  omission
           to disclose facts. Its effect is to impose a  mandatory  refusal
           on  the  application  even  if  the  misrepresentation  was  not
           material to the application.  It follows that the decision-maker
           must be satisfied to a high standard that false  representations
           have been made or, false  documents  or  information  have  been
           submitted, or material facts have not been disclosed.

       16. The appellant in this  case  did  not,  in  my  view,  make  any
           misrepresentation herself she gave her husband's date of  birth,
           as she knew it, as 7th April 1978.   The  respondent's  case  is
           essentially  that  the  sponsor's  British  passport  is  false.
           However there is no allegation that it  is  a  forgery,  and  no
           dispute that it relates to  the  sponsor.   Although  a  genuine
           document can be fraudulently obtained and could  therefore  fall
           within the ambit of the rule, it would require more  by  way  of
           proof than a bare assertion,  to  establish  that  it  had  been
           fraudulently obtained.  With respect to the passport in order to
           declare it fraudulently obtained, it would have to be shown that
           misrepresentations were made to the Home Office on  application.
           The allegations on which the decision is based would have to  be
           formulated in a much more specific and  detailed  manner  taking
           into account assertions made by the sponsor in the past as  well
           as any applications he has made.  The implications here is  that
           the sponsor fraudulently obtained,  refugee  status,  indefinite
           leave to remain, naturalisation and a passport.  Much  more  was
           needed to sustain this allegation.  Moreover, if  the  intention
           is  to  impugn  his  immigration  and  national  status  in  its
           entirety, this is far too serious to  be  done  by  implication,
           which, essentially, is the effect of  adopted  the  criteria  of
           paragraph 320 (7A).  The implications of the  use  of  paragraph
           320 (7A) in this instance are that appellant could never succeed
           in her application where she adduces  her  marriage  certificate
           and a copy of her husband's passport.  This  is,  in  effect,  a
           permanent bar to her entry into the United Kingdom.   Yet  there
           has been no attempt to declare that the sponsor is not  in  fact
           settled in the United Kingdom for purposes of paragraph 281.  It
           seems  to  me  that  where  an  allegation  of   such   profound
           consequence in made it is necessary that the  allegation  should
           be fully supported by the evidence adduced by the respondent. "




 8. The Immigration Judge thus concluded that there was no basis for  saying
   that para 320 (7A) applied to the case.  In view of his findings on  para
   281, he therefore allowed the appeal.  The  grounds  for  reconsideration
   are  that  the  Immigration  Judge  materially  erred  in  law   in   his
   interpretation of para 320 (7A).

9.   Before us the sponsor showed us his passport.  He repeated the  account
   he  had  given  to  the  Immigration  Judge,  adding  that  he  had  been
   represented by solicitors both at the time he claimed asylum and  at  the
   time he applied for British citizenship, although he told us he could not
   remember who either firm had been.  He told us  that  the  original  mis-
   statement as to his place of birth had been an accident and that  he  had
   merely continued it involuntarily.  As we understand the matter, however,
   he accepts that he claimed asylum on an entirely false basis and that  he
   had no need to seek British citizenship; to that extent it  is  difficult
   to see how the perpetuation of the falsehood could be described as in any
   sense involuntary.

10.  It does not appear to us that there is any doubt  about  the  facts  in
   this case.  There is also no doubt that British citizenship  was  granted
   to the sponsor, and that the passport is a genuine document.  But it is a
   genuine document which incorporates false information. Para 320  (7A)  is
   widely drafted, and in our view it is perfectly clear  that  as  well  as
   applying to false documents, it applies to genuine  documents  containing
   false information.  The Immigration Judge erred in reading  para  320(7A)
   as though it applied  only  to  false  documents.   The  falsity  of  the
   information  contained  in  the  passport  produced  in  support  of  the
   application is amply sufficient to justify the  invocation  of  para  320
   (7A).

11. For those reasons,  the  Immigration  Judge  materially  erred  in  law.
   Refusal under para 320(7A) is mandatory, and we accordingly substitute  a
   determination dismissing the appellant's appeal.

12. Before us, Ms Tanner served on the sponsor a Notice  of  Decision  under
   s40 of the British Nationality Act 1981, depriving  the  sponsor  of  his
   citizenship.   We  advised  the  sponsor  to  seek  legal  assistance  in
   connection with it.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT






