

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Begum (false documents and false statements) [2015] UKUT 00041 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Promulgated on               |
|2 October 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                               MEHMOODA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.

A document which is not itself 'false'  within  the  meaning  of  A  v  SSHD
[2010] EWCA Civ 773 may fall equally foul of para 320(7A) if it  contains  a
statement that is, to a relevant person's knowledge, untrue.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.   She  applied  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer for a visa for a visit to the United Kingdom to visit
    her son and daughter-in-law.  She had been to the United Kingdom  on  a
    number of previous occasions on visit visas  and  it  is  said  without
    dissent from the Secretary of State or the Entry Clearance Officer that
    on those previous occasions she complied with the terms of her visa.

 2. On the present occasion, the application was supported in usual form by
    documents relating to the sponsor's income and the accommodation  which
    the appellant would have if  she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    accommodation was the sponsor's home; there  is  no  dispute  that  the
    accommodation there would be perfectly adequate for the appellant.

 3. The difficulty arises because the accommodation report was the  subject
    of investigation by the Entry Clearance Officer and at that  stage  the
    information received by the Entry Clearance Officer was that the report
    and indeed its purported author were disowned by the organisation,  CEA
    Homes,  which  appear  to  have  produced   the   report.    In   those
    circumstances the application was refused.  The appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  At a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Y J Jones on 30 January 2014, the sponsor gave oral evidence and  there
    was cross-examination and submissions were made.  Judge Jones concluded
    that the substantive requirements of the immigration rules in  relation
    to visitors were met but she concluded that  this  was,  as  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had said, an application which  fell  to  be  refused
    under the general grounds of refusal,  specifically  because  either  a
    false representation had been  made,  or  a  false  document  had  been
    produced.  It is that finding of hers which is now the subject  of  the
    appellant's appeal.  She has been today,  ably  and  at  short  notice,
    represented by Mr Biggs who has made submissions based upon  A  v  SSHD
    [2010] EWCA Civ 773 which emphasises first of  all  the  difference  in
    approach between cases  where  there  is  what  within  the  definition
    applied by that decision is a false  document  and  other  cases  where
    falsity is asserted.

 4. The starting point is paragraph 320(7A) of the Statement of Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395  (as  amended).   That  provides  that  entry
    clearance is to be refused:

          "(7A)  where  false  representations  have  been  made  or   false
          documents or information  have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not
          material to the application, and whether or not to the applicant's
          knowledge), or material facts have not been disclosed, in relation
          to the application...."

 5. The gloss placed on those words  by  A  is  that  falsity  carries  the
    meaning of deliberately dishonest, rather than merely  incorrect.   The
    question then is whether the Entry Clearance  Officer  has  established
    that any incorrect statement was intended to deceive.  The other  words
    of the paragraph are not however, said to  carry  anything  other  than
    their ordinary meaning, that is to say that  where  there  is  such  an
    intention, it is irrelevant whether the  matter  was  material  to  the
    application and it  is  irrelevant  whether  the  falsity  was  to  the
    applicant's knowledge.

 6. What then is the false statement said to be in the present  case?   The
    letter from CEA Homes, which was obtained by the sponsor  and  sent  to
    his mother, began with an assertion that the author of the  letter  had
    inspected the house.  That statement was not true; the  author  of  the
    letter had not inspected the house; it is said that he had been to  the
    house, but in his capacity as a property consultant or  expert  he  had
    made no inspection of the house.  It is not said that  his  description
    of the house was incorrect in any respect.  The statement which was not
    correct was that he had inspected it.  The sponsor knew that the author
    of the letter  had  not  inspected  the  house;  but  sent  the  letter
    containing the statement that the author of the  letter  had  inspected
    the house to his mother in order to assist in supporting her visit visa
    application.  We  say  that  because  no  other  explanation  has  been
    provided for why he should suddenly send his mother a letter about  the
    accommodation in a house she knew.

 7. The Judge, having heard the evidence which included a  clear  statement
    by the sponsor that he always knew that the author of  the  letter  had
    not inspected the house, wrote this:

          "28.  Having  considered  all  the  documents  and  the   evidence
              carefully Mr Dar the sponsor has always stated that CEA Homes
              did not inspect his property yet he forwarded a  letter  from
              them saying that they  had  inspected  the  property  to  the
              appellant who then submitted it with her  application.   This
              was a mistake on his part and I am sure if  he  had  realised
              the possible consequences he would not  have  relied  on  the
              letter  from  CEA  Homes  to  support   his   mother's   visa
              application.


          29.   Regrettably, the law  is  very  strict  in  respect  of  the
              submission of a false document and I find it to be  false  on
              the basis that the document  claims  that  the  property  was
              inspected when it was not.  I also find  on  the  balance  of
              probabilities that the letter is a genuine  letter  from  CEA
              Homes which they have denied because of an argument  with  Mr
              Dar about the cost of providing a letter.


          30.   I have found that the claim by CEA Homes to  have  inspected
              the property is false and that the document  containing  that
              false claim dated  22  April  2013  was  submitted  with  the
              application and that the sponsor knew that there was a  claim
              within the letter that was false."

    And on that basis she reached the conclusion to which we  have  already
    alluded.

 8. Mr Biggs has argued that the judge erred in her approach to the law  as
    set out in A. As set out in A, a document is only  to  be  regarded  as
    false if it is either fraudulently amended or itself  a  forgery.   The
    judge's conclusion that the document was a false document was therefore
    not justified either by the evidence or by her other  conclusions.   On
    the contrary the document was to that extent a document which  was  not
    false but it contained  a  statement  which  was  not  the  truth,  the
    statement being  that  the  property  has  been  inspected.   In  those
    circumstances Mr Biggs argues that the judge erred in law and  to  that
    extent we accept Mr Biggs' argument.

 9. The question then,  is  whether  that  is  sufficient  to  require  the
    determination to be set aside.  On that, the position  is  as  follows.
    First the statement that the house had  been  examined  was  an  untrue
    statement.  Secondly,  it  is  a  statement  that,  despite  Mr  Biggs'
    submissions to the contrary, was clearly  material;  it  was  the  only
    statement which validated the document for the purposes  of  supporting
    the claim that the accommodation would be adequate.  If  the  statement
    had been made by a person who avowedly had not visited the property  it
    would not  have  been  regarded  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as
    sufficient for the purposes.  Thirdly, the maker of the  statement  was
    clearly aware that the statement was false, that is to say the maker of
    the statement said he  had  inspected  a  property  which  he  had  not
    inspected.   Fourthly, the sponsor has always said that  he  knew  that
    the statement was false.  Mr Biggs' submission was that  there  was  no
    clear evidence that at the time the sponsor submitted the  document  he
    was aware that it contained the  statement  that  the  house  had  been
    inspected.  But  the  sponsor's  position  has  always  been  that  the
    contents of the letter were in all other respects accurate  and  it  is
    simply not plausible that the sponsor had read all  the  words  of  the
    letter other than the opening phrase indicating that the house had been
    inspected.

10. Despite the error of law by the judge in treating the letter as a false
    document,  her  conclusion  at  paragraph  30  is,  in  our  judgement,
    unassailable.  The statement was a false statement.  It was  dishonest,
    both by its maker and in the form of its production by the sponsor, and
    in those circumstances, applying as we do, the  interpretation  of  the
    Rules as set out in  A,  there  was  a  false  representation  made  in
    connection with this application.  It  therefore  fell  to  be  refused
    under paragraph 320(7A).  The consequences  of  a  refusal  under  that
    paragraph are, as has been noted, both mandatory and draconian.  As the
    judge said, it was a bad mistake by the sponsor to  submit  a  document
    which contained a statement which he knew to be false.   But  that  was
    the judge's conclusion and although, as we have said, she erred in  the
    characterisation of precisely where the falsity lay,  her  findings  of
    fact were clearly open to her  and  in  our  judgement  were  virtually
    inevitable on the material before her.

11. For those reasons, we dismiss the appeal.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 12 November 2014
