

|VM (FGM-risks-Mungiki-Kikuyu/Gikuyu) Kenya CG [2008] UKAIT 00049     |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal                                      |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                                 |
|Heard at: Field House                                                |
|                             |        |                              |
|Heard on: 9 November and 18  |        |                              |
|December 2007                |        |                              |
|                             |        |                              |
|Before:                                                              |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis                                      |
|Mrs E Hurst JP                                                       |
|                                                                     |
|Between                                                              |
|VM                                                                   |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|                                                                     |
|Appellant                                                            |
|                                                                     |
|and                                                                  |
|                             |        |                              |
|                                                                     |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                           |
|Respondent                                                           |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp of Counsel instructed by Switalski
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:     Mr Chama Omar Matata (Swahili - English)


     1. It is important to determine whether a Kenyan  claimant  who  fears
        FGM belongs to an ethnic group amongst which FGM is  practised.  If
        so, she may be a member  of  a  particular  social  group  for  the
        purposes of the 1951 Refugee Convention


     2. Uncircumcised women in Kenya, whether Gikuyu/Kikuyu or not, are not
        as such, at real risk of FGM.

     3. There is evidence that the Mungiki organisation seeks to impose FGM
        and other forms of violence, on women and children other than those
        who have been initiated into their sect. In particular, such  women
        and children include the wives, partners, children and other female
        family members of those  men  who  have  taken  the  Mungiki  oath.
        Insufficient protection is available from  the  Kenyan  authorities
        for such persons.

     4. It may be possible for a woman not wishing to undergo FGM  herself,
        or not wishing her child to do so, to relocate to another community
        which does not follow the practice of FGM.

     5. In general:

          a) those who practise FGM are not reasonably likely  (particularly
             in urban areas), to seek to inflict FGM upon women from  ethnic
             groups or sub-groups which do not practise FGM;
          b) a woman or her child who comes from, or  becomes  connected  by
             marriage, partnership or other family ties, to an ethnic  group
             (or sub-group) where FGM is practised will be at real risk only
             if the evidence shows that  she  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
             required by her  parents,  grandparents,  or  by  others  in  a
             position of power and influence over her,  to  undergo  FGM  or
             allow her child to undergo it.


     6. Internal relocation may be available in Kenya to a woman who is  at
        real risk of forced FGM in her home area if the evidence shows: (i)
        she is not reasonably likely to encounter anyone in  the  place  of
        relocation who would be in a position of power and  influence  over
        her and who would use that power and influence to  require  her  to
        undergo FGM, or would cause her presence in the place of relocation
        to become known to such a person or persons (e.g. the Mungiki); and
        (ii) that the relocation is reasonable taking into account all  the
        relevant factors including the religious and cultural context,  the
        position of women within Kenyan society and the  need  for  kinship
        links in the place of relocation in order to sustain such  movement
        successfully. In particular, in the case of a woman  from  a  rural
        area in Kenya, internal relocation to some other  region  or  urban
        centre will not be available unless her circumstances are such that
        she will be able to survive economically (see Januzi v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department and others [2006] UKHL 5).


     7. This guidance supersedes that in FK (FGM  -  Risk  and  Relocation)
        Kenya CG [2007] UKAIT 00041.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the reconsideration of the appeal of the Appellant, a national
      of Kenya, whose date of birth  is  given  as  12  December  1974.  The
      Appellant arrived in the UK on 31 August 2002 and claimed asylum on 10
      September 2002. She appeals the decision of the Respondent made on  19
      February 2004, to give directions for her removal to Kenya,  following
      refusal to grant leave to enter or remain in the UK on asylum or human
      rights grounds.

   2. The Appellant appealed to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  ["the
      Tribunal") pursuant to section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002, (the 2002 Act), and the Tribunal has  borne  in  mind
      the grounds of appeal set out in that notice, which refer  to  alleged
      prospective breach of the 1951 Convention relating to  the  Status  of
      Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, as well as prospective breach  of  the
      1950 European Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
      Fundamental Freedoms [ECHR), as that Convention has been  incorporated
      into United Kingdom domestic law by the Human Rights Act 1998.


   3. Briefly, the procedural history of the matter is this.  The  Appellant
      claims that she left Kenya accompanied by  an  agent,  with  whom  she
      arrived in the UK and who spoke to the Immigration Officer on arrival.
      The agent made all the arrangements. The Appellant  has  never  had  a
      passport or other travel document.

   4. A screening form  was  completed  on  10  September  2002;  a  written
      statement of  evidence  lodged,  dated  17  September  2002,  and  the
      Appellant was interviewed on behalf of the Respondent  on  7  November
      2002. The Respondent set out his reasons for refusing to recognize the
      Appellant as a refugee and refusing to grant leave to enter or  remain
      on human rights grounds in a letter dated 11 February 2004.

   5. The Appellant appealed to an Adjudicator, Mr David A W H Chandler. Her
      appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds but  allowed  on  human  rights
      grounds under article 3 ECHR in a determination issued on 24 May 2004.
      The Respondent appealed to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal [IAT) and a
      Vice President of the IAT gave permission  to  appeal  on  14  October
      2004.

   6. By a determination issued on 31 January 2005, the Tribunal allowed the
      Respondent's appeal, finding that there  was  an  internal  relocation
      alternative available to the Appellant in Kenya so that she was not at
      real risk of serious harm contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

   7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  and
      permission was granted by a Vice President on 29  March  2005  on  the
      ground that it  was  difficult  to  see  any  significant  differences
      between the situation which the Court of Appeal addressed in P  and  M
      [2004] EWCA Civ 1640 and the situation in this case.

   8. By judgment issued on 31 January 2006, the Court of Appeal allowed the
      Appellant's appeal to the extent that there was an order for  remittal
      to the Tribunal  for  reconsideration  of  the  question  of  internal
      relocation, upon which question the Court of  Appeal  found  that  the
      Tribunal had erred [VNM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 47).

   9. On 15 February 2007 the Tribunal decided that the previous  panel  had
      fallen into material error of law and that there should  be  a  second
      stage reconsideration, in the following terms:

          1. "Mr Fripp, on behalf of the  appellant,  conceded  and  we  are
             satisfied that the adjudicator made a material error of law  in
             his determination  of  the  appeal.   This  was  identified  in
             paragraph 21 of the judgement of Wilson LJ, with whom the other
             members of the court agreed,  in  their  determination  of  the
             appeal by  the  appellant  against  the  determination  of  the
             tribunal in the instant case, reported as  VNM  v  SSHD  [2006]
             EWCA Civ 47, in which he said:

           "My view, however, is that there was indeed an error of  law  in
             the  adjudicator's  determination  of  this   point.   I   have
             considerable sympathy for  him  in  that  he  lacked  any  oral
             assistance on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  and  had  to
             collect the latter's points as best he could from  the  refusal
             letter. But there was a material gap in the expression  of  the
             adjudicator's reasoning: for he did not purport  to  explain  -
             and there is nothing in his earlier paragraphs  to  demonstrate
             that he had considered - why, lacking access to state  records,
             the Mungiki would be likely to discover that the appellant  had
             returned to Kenya or, if so, to discover where in Kenya she had
             gone. In her statement the appellant had  baldly  averred  that
             she would be so discovered. Her proposition may be  valid;  but
             its validity is not self-evident and  needed  to  be  expressly
             considered."


          2. We are not able to undertake the further reconsideration  which
             is required since Ms Donnelly, who represents  the  respondent,
             did not have a copy of, and therefore  had  not  been  able  to
             consider, the expert  report  from  Dr  Ben  Knighton  dated  8
             February 2007.


          3. Mr Fripp, on behalf of the appellant,  identified  as  possible
             issues to be determined at  the  second  stage  reconsideration
             hearing the following:


              i) whether the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  of  a
                 breach of her article 3 rights throughout Kenya;


             ii) if  not,  did  the  Robinson/Januzi  test  in  relation  to
                 internal relocation apply to an article 3 claim;


            iii) if so, did the appellant satisfy that test;


             iv) if so could the tribunal reconsider the appellant's  appeal
                 on asylum grounds in the light of the decision of the Court
                 of Appeal in 'P' and 'M' v SSHD [2004] UKAIT EWCA Civ 1640;


              v) if not, would the appellant  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
                 (subsidiary) protection having regard to  paragraph  23  of
                 the AIT Practice Directions as amended on 9 October 2006.


          4.  We  therefore  adjourn  the  appeal   for   a   second   stage
             reconsideration of the appellant's appeal".

  10. It is in this way that the matter comes before us now. At  the  outset
      of the hearing we satisfied  ourselves  that  the  Appellant  and  the
      interpreter were able to understand one another. We are also satisfied
      that  they  continued  to  understand  one  another   throughout   the
      proceedings and that the Appellant (who did not  give  oral  evidence)
      was  able  to  understand,  and  to  otherwise  participate   in   the
      proceedings appropriately, including being able to follow  the  expert
      evidence of Dr Knighton and the submissions of the representatives.

  11. We have before us  all  the  documents  referred  to  above  including
      interview records, and the Respondent's letter of 11 February 2004, in
      which  he  sets  out  his  reasons  for   refusing   the   Appellant's
      application.  Also before us were the parties' bundles and authorities
      which are detailed at the end of this determination, as  well  as  the
      parties' skeleton arguments.

  12. The matter first came before  us  on  9  November  2007  when  it  was
      adjourned part-heard, for lack of court time, to 18 December 2007 when
      the oral hearing was concluded.  Not  long  after,  there  followed  a
      series of extraordinary events in Kenya, as  a  result  of  which  the
      parties were invited to lodge further submissions should they so  wish
      as the Tribunal and the  parties  were  concerned  that  the  Tribunal
      should have before it all relevant evidence. An  administrative  delay
      in sending out directions meant that the further  written  submissions
      of the Appellant,  and  documentary  evidence  relied  upon  were  not
      received by the Tribunal until late February 2008.

  13. The Respondent has lodged no further submissions or evidence.

  14. On 26 February 2008 the Court of Appeal issued  its  judgment  in  the
      case of FK (Kenya) v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  119,  holding  that  the
      determination of the appeal of FK by the Tribunal could not stand.

  15. On 25 March 2008 we received a letter from the Appellant's solicitors,
      Switalski's, referring to the power sharing agreement made between the
      leaders of the main parties in Kenya and attaching an article from the
      Economist of 28 February 2008 and an article from IRIN dated  1  March
      2008, to which we return below.

The Facts of the Appellant's Case

  16. As Mr Fripp states in his skeleton argument, the claimed factual basis
      of the Appellant's  claim  to  international  protection  is  usefully
      summarized by  Wilson  LJ  at  paras  3-10  of  his  judgment  in  the
      proceedings before the Court of Appeal in VNM:

        "3.      The appellant is a member of the Kikuyu tribe and  is  now
           31 years old. She was brought up in a  village  about  30  miles
           outside Nairobi and ran a business selling clothes. In 2000  she
           began to cohabit with her boyfriend. Shortly thereafter he began
           to show an interest in the notorious Mungiki sect. There  was  a
           mass of objective evidence  before  the  adjudicator  about  the
           Mungiki. The adjudicator summarised it as follows:


              "the Mungiki is a cultural and political  movement  based  in
              part on Kikuyu ethnic traditions which are  controversial  in
              mainstream Kenyan society. The  CIPU  Report,  describes  the
              organisation  as  small  [but]  the  Appellant   produces   a
              considerable amount of  background  material  which  suggests
              that it is larger and more powerful  than  suggested  by  the
              CIPU  Report.  Its  leadership  claims  to  have  2   million
              members."


        4. The adjudicator  accepted  that  a  BBC  news  report  dated  11
           February 2003 provided a  reasonably  accurate  picture  of  the
           sect. The report stated:


              "Their holy communion is  tobacco-sniffing,  their  hairstyle
              that of the Mau Mau dreadlocks and the origin of the sect  is
              still shrouded in mystery.
              Since the late 1990's, the sect has left behind  a  trail  of
              blood in its rejection of the trappings of  Western  culture.
              ... Inspired by the bloody Mau Mau rebellion  of  the  1950's
              against the British colonial rule, thousands of young Kenyans
              - mostly drawn from  Kenya's  largest  tribe,  the  Kikuyu  -
              flocked to the sect whose doctrines are based on  traditional
              practices."


           The report went on to indicate that one of the practices of  the
           sect was forcibly to inflict Female Genital Mutilation (FGM).


        5. By October 2001 the appellant's boyfriend had joined the Mungiki
           and he was soon elected as its leader in the village, also  near
           Nairobi, where she and he had set up home. Early in  April  2002
           he told her that she should also join the movement but, being  a
           Christian, she refused.  About  three  days  later  a  group  of
           Mungiki elders, including her boyfriend, confronted her at home.
           They were carrying blood and rotten meat, both of which they use
           in their ceremonies, and also a razor with which to inflict  FGM
           upon her. She pretended that she needed to go  to  the  lavatory
           and from there she ran to her mother's home in another  village.
           Her mother sought to hide her. A few days later, however,  while
           she, her mother and her sisters were having lunch,  the  Mungiki
           came to the house, blew a trumpet and took hold of each of them.
           In the event the men did  not  inflict  FGM  on  the  appellant.
           Instead, however, either one or more of them raped her. When she
           recovered, friends took her to hospital.


        6. Upon discharge from hospital she returned to her family home but
           found that her mother and sisters  were  missing.  She  reported
           both her rape and the disappearance of her family to the  police
           but was told that they could take no action because the  Mungiki
           were very strong and the government was unable to control  them.
           She thereupon fled to Nairobi and  stayed  with  a  friend.  She
           became aware that her boyfriend and other members of the Mungiki
           were still looking for her.  She  also  discovered  that,  as  a
           result of the rape, she  had  become  pregnant.  She  was  still
           unaware of what had happened  to  her  mother  and  sisters.  In
           August 2002, following an attack by the  Mungiki  on  an  estate
           close to where she was  staying,  she  managed  to  arrange  her
           flight to the U.K.


        7. In January 2003 she duly gave birth to  a  girl,  for  whom  she
           continues to care. She is still  unaware  of  the  fate  of  her
           mother and  sisters.  In  the  U.K.  she  has  undergone  weekly
           counselling in respect of her experiences and in particular  her
           rape; has been undergoing psychiatric treatment;  and  has  been
           prescribed  anti-depressants  and   tranquillisers.   Upon   his
           examination of her  in  April  2004,  Dr  Buller,  a  consultant
           psychiatrist,  considered  that  the  appellant  was  clinically
           depressed and displayed many of the symptoms  of  Post-Traumatic
           Stress Disorder and he expressed concern that her forced  return
           to Kenya might well lead  to  a  further  deterioration  in  her
           mental health, including the possibility that she would, as  she
           has previously done, consider whether  to  commit  suicide.  The
           adjudicator rejected the appellant's appeal  under  the  Refugee
           Convention 1951 upon the basis that her fear of  persecution  in
           Kenya could  not  be  considered  to  be  "for  reasons  of  ...
           membership of a particular social group".


        8. In upholding her appeal under the Convention of  1950,  however,
           the adjudicator held that the infliction of FGM would  obviously
           infringe her right not to be subjected to inhuman  or  degrading
           treatment under Article  3;  and  that  the  objective  material
           before him indicated that there was no reasonable willingness on
           the part of the Kenyan enforcement  agencies  to  protect  women
           from being forced  by  the  Mungiki  to  undergo  it.  Then  the
           adjudicator addressed the possibility of internal relocation.


   9. In this last regard it is important to note four matters:


            a) In his refusal letter the Secretary of State had pointed out
               that Kenya had an area of 224,000 square miles; that in  his
               view, regardless of the truth of her  claim,  the  appellant
               could safely relocate to a different  area  of  the  country
               from that which she had previously  occupied;  and  that  it
               would be reasonable to expect her to relocate there.


            b) In her grounds of appeal to the  adjudicator  the  appellant
               had complained that there was,  on  the  contrary,  no  real
               option of internal flight and that in any event it would not
               be reasonable.


            c) In a statement placed before the adjudicator  the  appellant
               had said:


                    "I am afraid to be returned to any part of Kenya and not
                    to a specific area...
                    All of Kenya has Mungiki who can travel freely around it
                    and the Mungiki following are already spread  everywhere
                    in Kenya. I would not be safe and my daughter would  not
                    be safe...
                    If I was returned to Kenya I would be discovered by  the
                    Mungiki  people.  I  am  afraid  because  I   know   [my
                    boyfriend] and the way the  Mungiki  people  operate.  I
                    think [my boyfriend] and the group would make an example
                    of me...
                    Yes, if I went back to Kenya, at the very least I  would
                    be circumcised because Mungiki people would find me  and
                    circumcise me."


            d) The hearing before the adjudicator inevitably  lacked  focus
               because no one appeared for the Secretary of State, with the
               result that there was no cross-examination of the  appellant
               and no greater stress was laid on his behalf upon any one of
               the points which had been made in his  refusal  letter  than
               upon any of the others.


  10. In paragraph 42 of his determination the adjudicator found that:


             "The Respondent  has  contended  that  internal  flight  is  an
             option.  The  absence  of  a  representative  means   that   no
             particular area of Kenya has been identified. I note  that  the
             Appellant is a Kikuyu which is the predominant tribe in  Kenya.
             I note also that  the  Mungiki  sect  is  largely  Kikuyu.  The
             problems faced by this Appellant all occurred  within  a  short
             distance  of  Nairobi,  the  capital  and  largest   and   most
             cosmopolitan city in Kenya. The Appellant makes the point  that
             if she is free to travel anywhere in Kenya  so  are  those  who
             wish to persecute her. I accept that internal flight is not  an
             option."


  17. The Court of Appeal in VNM found that both the  Adjudicator  at  first
      instance, and the Tribunal on appeal, had materially erred in law:

       24. In my view the deficiency in the tribunal's  reasoning  lies  in
           its failure to consider whether, working from the  foot  of  its
           conclusion that the Mungiki would be unlikely  to  discover  the
           appellant in a different part of Kenya, it would nevertheless be
           unreasonable to expect her to relocate there. Mr  Tam  seeks  to
           persuade us that this second point had not been taken  below  on
           behalf of the appellant. Although  it  often  seems  regrettably
           difficult for this court to discern precisely which points  have
           been argued below, it is clear, as I have  shown  in  [9(a)  and
           (b)] above, that, quite apart from the issue as to  whether  the
           appellant's different whereabouts in Kenya would be  discovered,
           she and the Secretary of State were also expressly at odds as to
           whether it  would  be  reasonable  for  her  to  relocate  in  a
           different area of Kenya. There was, to put it at its lowest,  no
           basis upon which the tribunal could conclude that  such  was  no
           longer a second issue; and  indeed  it  did  not  so  aver.  Put
           shortly, it failed to address the second issue in any way.


       25. It seems likely that the result of the appeals to the  House  of
           Lords from the decisions of this court in Januzi v. SSHD  [2003]
           EWCA Civ 1187 and in Hamid, Gaafar and Mohammed v.  SSHD  [2005]
           EWCA Civ 1219, due to have been heard  together  on  18  and  19
           January 2006, will clarify issues as to the  arguably  different
           factors  relevant  to  enquiries  into  the  reasonableness   of
           internal relocation in the context of  claims  for  asylum,  for
           protection under Article 8 of the Convention of 1950 and, so one
           would hope albeit perhaps not directly  raised,  for  protection
           under Article 3 of that Convention. In particular the result may
           illumine whether the enquiry in  the  present  case  should,  as
           dicta of this court in E v. SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1032; [2004] QB
           531 at [67] suggest, embrace consideration  of  the  appellant's
           situation in the U.K. But, putting that contentious issue to one
           side, it is obvious that the reasonableness of her relocation in
           a  different  part  of  Kenya  requires  consideration  of   the
           practicability of her settling elsewhere; consideration  of  her
           ability convincingly to present to those in  her  new  milieu  a
           false history relating to herself and to her daughter, including
           the latter's  paternity,  and  a  false  explanation  for  their
           arrival  there;  and,  in   the   light   of   her   substantial
           psychological vulnerability, consideration  of  her  ability  to
           sustain beyond the short term a reasonable life for them both on
           that false basis.


       26. Until his receipt of the supplementary skeleton  argument  filed
           by Mr Fripp, who came late to  the  case,  on  the  day  of  the
           hearing before us, the Secretary of State could  not  reasonably
           have anticipated that this appeal would turn on  the  tribunal's
           failure to address the second issue.  Nevertheless  Mr  Tam  has
           sought to deal with the point and  does  not  indicate  that  he
           would welcome further time  before  concluding  his  submissions
           upon it. In part the trouble stems from the slightly  unfocussed
           terms in which the tribunal proffered the point  upon  which  it
           granted permission to appeal. At all events I would  permit  the
           appellant so to amend her Notice as to  take  the  point;  would
           allow the appeal  by  reference  to  it;  would  set  aside  the
           tribunal's determination; would remit the Secretary  of  State's
           appeal from the adjudicator for fresh hearing by the Asylum  and
           Immigration Tribunal; and would recommend to the  tribunal  that
           it should not hear the appeal until determination by  the  House
           of Lords of the appeals in  Januzi  and  in  Hamid,  Gaafar  and
           Mohammed above.

The Case Of FK

  18. It is helpful at this stage to set out the Tribunal's guidance in  the
      case of FK. The Court of Appeal noted the summary  guidance  given  by
      the Tribunal in FK, and that they  had  not  been  invited  to  decide
      whether the global appraisal of risk in sub-paragraphs (2) to  (4)  of
      that guidance fully reflects the accepted evidence, because FK and her
      daughter manifestly come within the real-risk  category  described  at
      (4).

        "5.      The decision of the AIT, before  whom  the  appellant  was
           represented by an advocate from the Refugee Legal Centre and the
           respondent by  a  presenting  officer,  is  extremely  thorough.
           Helpfully, it concludes with the following summary, intended  to
           give guidance to other tribunals:


           (1)   It is important to determine whether the claimant  belongs
               to an ethnic group, amongst which group FGM is practiced. If
               so she may be a member of a particular social group for  the
               purposes of the 1951 Geneva Convention.


           (2)   All uncircumcised women in Kenya, whether Kikuyu  or  not,
               are not as  such  at  real  risk  of  FGM.  The  statistical
               evidence shows that at least fifty per cent, if not more, of
               women in Kenya  have  not  been  the  subject  of  FGM.  The
               objective evidence shows an increasing pressure  to  abstain
               from such a practice  both  by  many  of  the  churches  and
               communities,  by   the   government   and   non-governmental
               agencies, by the promotion  of  an  alternative  "initiation
               rite".


           (3)   The decision to undergo FGM is one made by the  individual
               if adult or by the parents if a child. Such a decision  will
               no doubt be reflective of the  cultural  norms  which  exist
               within the particular community in which the woman or  child
               resides. It is, however, possible for a woman not wishing to
               embrace the initiation of FGM for herself or her  family  to
               live in  a  community  which  does  not  subscribe  to  such
               practises. Those who practice FGM are not reasonably  likely
               (particularly in urban areas) to seek  to  inflict  it  upon
               women from non-practising ethnic groups (or sub-groups).




           (4)   A woman will only be at real risk if  she  comes  from  an
               ethnic group (or sub-group) where FGM is practised  and  the
               evidence shows that she is reasonably likely to be  required
               by her parents or by others, in  a  position  of  power  and
               influence over her to undergo FGM.


           (5)   There is no evidence that the Mungiki seek to  impose  FGM
               upon women or communities other than  those  who  have  been
               initiated into their particular sect. The objective evidence
               speaks of the Mungiki as being involved in organised  crime,
               transportation in urban areas and in public order  offences.
               There  is  no  evidence  that  they  are  engaged   in   any
               significant activity such  as  imposing  FGM  on  groups  or
               communities who  do  not  support  their  political/cultural
               aims.


           (6)   The authorities are motivated to act against  the  Mungiki
               and in the past a significant number  of  arrests  including
               the arrest of one of  the  leaders.  The  Mungiki  seeks  to
               reflect the traditional or cultural base of the Kikuyu.  The
               sect generally is not  found  in  areas  occupied  by  those
               tribes whose ethnic groups (or  sub-groups)  which  are  not
               Kikuyu or which do not contain an element of the Kikuyu.


           (7)   Internal relocation will be available in Kenya to a  woman
               who is at real risk of FGM in her home area if the  evidence
               shows,(sic) (i) she is not reasonably  likely  to  encounter
               anyone in the place of relocation who would be in a position
               of power and influence over her and who would use that power
               and influence to require her to undergo FGM;  and  (ii)  she
               can reasonably be expected to live  in  that  place,  having
               regard to the general circumstance prevailing in it and  the
               personal circumstances of the appellant (paragraph  3390  of
               HC 395 (as amended). In the case of a  woman  from  a  rural
               area in Kenya, internal relocation to some other  region  or
               urban centre will not be available unless her  circumstances
               are such that she will be able to survive economically  (see
               Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Office  and  Others
               [2006] UKHL 5).


           (8)   In considering internal relocation it is important to bear
               in mind the religious and/or cultural  context  particularly
               whether there is any family or sub-clan support available to
               the woman in the area proposed. It may be considered that it
               would be easier for a member of the Kikuyu tribe to relocate
               to an area with a similar tribal culture and support, rather
               than relocating into a  different  area.  That  having  been
               said,  however,  much  will  depend  upon   the   individual
               circumstances of the woman and  of  the  availability  of  a
               support structure within the proposed area of return.


           (9)   Credibility will usually have an important part to play in
               determining whether a woman is at risk. In  considering  the
               issue of relocation it is  important  that  the  family  and
               extended  family   situation   and   context   be   examined
               particularly as to  cultural  context,  education,  economic
               lifestyle and work experience."


  19. In that light, we set out some detail about FK and  the  core  of  the
      findings of the Court of Appeal in FK, which are to be  found  in  the
      judgment of Sedley LJ. It is important  to  note  that  the  Court  of
      Appeal did not find it possible to uphold Mr  Jorro's  complaint  that
      the Tribunal's appraisal of the expert evidence was so  flawed  as  to
      undermine their overall conclusion about the  situation  of  women  in
      Kenya. Their findings, however contentious, lay within their remit and
      were supported by evidence. What remained for the Court of  Appeal  to
      consider was whether, against that background,  the  Tribunal  made  a
      proper and adequate appraisal of the Appellant's own prospects of safe
      relocation with her daughter. In that regard, it was  found  that  the
      Tribunal in FK had materially erred in its treatment of the  testimony
      of Dr Knighton, when  considering  and  assessing  the  risks  to  the
      Appellant upon  return  to  Kenya,  and  that  the  Tribunal  had  not
      addressed adequately the questions of the reasonableness and safety of
      moving elsewhere in Kenya.

  20. Presumably the position is the same for the Appellant in this case and
      the daughter (IWM) to whom she gave birth in the UK on 5 January 2003.
      It must also be recalled that the Appellant has a son, (EMM)  born  on
      19 February 2007. It was accepted by Mr Walker that the  fact  of  the
      existence of the Appellant's son was to be taken into account  by  the
      Tribunal based upon the information provided as to the child's  birth,
      within the skeleton argument.

  21. At paragraphs 21 -30 the Court of Appeal in FK come to the nub of  the
      case and their reasons for  finding  that  the  determination  of  the
      Appellant's case cannot stand:

        21.      Mr Jorro's critique of the tribunal's reasoning is that it
           fails entirely, or at  least  adequately,  to  engage  with  the
           specificity of the appellant's case:  that  she  would  probably
           need to relocate to a Kikuyu area in order to survive;  that  in
           any Kikuyu area, and equally in a non-Kikuyu area where her name
           would show her to be Kikuyu, there was a real risk that  Mungiki
           would sooner or later locate  her;  and  that,  irrespective  of
           whether the local community welcomed them, they were  likely  to
           exact revenge upon a mother and daughter who had violated tribal
           custom by fleeing from a Mungiki elder to whom  her  grandfather
           had given the daughter in marriage in return for  a  dowry,  and
           had done so in order to avoid both the marriage and the  genital
           mutilation to which the mother, under coercion,  had  consented.
           He points out that  Dr  Knighton's  report  gives  explicit  and
           documented support to this possibility but is not referred to by
           the tribunal.


        22.      It was on these grounds that the appellant  was  found  to
           have a fear which was both genuine and, were she  to  return  to
           her home village, well-founded. The tribunal had therefore to be
           satisfied that, if she were to live elsewhere in Kenya, the fear
           would no longer be well-founded. They begin this part  of  their
           determination (�83) by noting that there are tribal areas  where
           there is no societal pressure to undergo FGM,  and  that  Musoma
           and Mombassa are multi-ethnic towns; but they base no finding on
           this, since the appellant's case turned not on societal pressure
           but on the risk of direct victimisation. This meant, if  nothing
           else, considering with very great care whether the Mungiki,  who
           had killed the appellant's husband for refusing to join them  as
           his father had done, and who had evidently  attempted  to  track
           down the appellant and her daughter when they fled  to  Nairobi,
           might by enquiry or by rumour learn where they were now  living.
           If there was a real  risk  that  they  might  do  so,  it  would
           arguably be impossible to exclude a real risk of  abduction  and
           enforced genital mutilation.


        23.      In our judgment the tribunal has failed to engage properly
           with this critical issue. Earlier  in  their  determination  (at
           �81) they say:  "No  example  has  been  adduced  before  us  of
           communities being  targeted  by  the  Mungiki,  particularly  to
           undergo FGM."  This is a surprising assertion: what had happened
           to the appellant and her family was  a  very  clear  example  of
           exactly this process. It is set in context, no  doubt,  by  what
           they go on to note: that there are evidently millions of  Kenyan
           women who are not required to undergo FGM and who therefore,  it
           can be inferred, escape the attention of Mungiki. But that, like
           the first sentence of �103,  cited  above,  does  not  meet  the
           particularity of the appellant's case.


        24.      Nor, with  respect,  does  the  second  sentence  of  that
           paragraph do so. On the very clear evidence before the  tribunal
           - both the  appellant's  specific  evidence  and  Dr  Knighton's
           generic evidence - the penetration of Mungiki  into  communities
           where they have as yet no influence has little or nothing to  do
           with whether they are welcomed. That is not how they operate. On
           the evidence, they operate by recruiting individuals where  they
           can and, for the rest, by imposing their customs  and  practices
           on the community by violence and intimidation.


        25.      The tribunal's earlier remark  (at  �81)  that  "If  whole
           communities came under such pressure with such violence,  it  is
           perhaps surprising that nothing in the media has been published"
           is not only speculative but appears to overlook  the  fact  that
           the material part of Dr Knighton's report gives sources  in  the
           Kenyan press, the second of them derived from a statement by the
           provincial chief  of  police  for  Nairobi,  for  the  Mungiki's
           revanchist  policy  and  practice  towards   renegades.   If   a
           distinction is intended by the tribunal between the  penetration
           of communities and the oppression of them, it does not  seem  to
           us illuminating in the present context.


        26.      It is in �101 that the tribunal set out to deal  with  the
           case they have set out in the previous paragraph. They begin  by
           describing that case as a generalised statement,  which  in  our
           judgment it is not.  They  then  assert  that  there  is  little
           support for it in the detail of the  evidence.  For  reasons  we
           have already given, this too is incorrect:  both  the  appellant
           and Dr Knighton had given detailed evidence  capable  of  making
           out the case. Contrary to what the tribunal next  assert,  there
           was every reason, given  such  evidence,  to  suppose  that  the
           appellant both had been and would remain of particular  interest
           to the sect because of what happened  in  Kiambu  in  2002.  The
           finding in the final sentence of the paragraph seems  to  us  to
           verge on the perverse: by focusing solely (and dubiously) on the
           appellant and her father, it ignores the real agent of mischief,
           her father-in-law, and  the  strong  likelihood  that  both  the
           insult to him and the elder's lost  dowry  would  be  very  well
           remembered.


        27.      A similar imbalance is apparent in �103-4. The  suggestion
           that  only  the  willing  are  drawn  into  the  Mungiki  orbit,
           contrasting the father-in-law on the one hand with the appellant
           and her husband on the other, fails  to  take  account  of  what
           happened first to her husband, who was murdered, and then to the
           appellant's  daughter,  who  narrowly  escaped  FGM.   And   the
           tribunal's further  finding  that  "there  is  nothing  advanced
           before us to indicate  that  [Mungiki]  seek  systematically  to
           impose FGM upon non-initiates" overlooks the clear evidence that
           FGM is initiation, and that the appellant,  in  fear  after  the
           killing of her husband, had agreed to  it:  clear  evidence,  in
           other words, of systematic imposition.


        28.      Lastly, the finding that there was no  reason  to  suppose
           that the appellant would necessarily stand out  in  a  community
           where FGM is not practised fails to engage  with  Dr  Knighton's
           evidence that her name would always identify her as Kikuyu and -
           to Mungiki - as a renegade. Whether  her  name  stands  out  may
           therefore be beside the point: the question is  whether  it  may
           sooner or later enable her to be identified and targeted.


        29.      For all these reasons we consider that the specificity  of
           the appellant's case -  which, we reiterate, relates not to  the
           existence of a well-founded fear in her home village but to  the
           reasonableness and safety of moving elsewhere in Kenya - has not
           been adequately addressed. We would add in this connection  that
           the reasonableness of a particular relocation is not necessarily
           confined to what is objectively to  be  feared  there,  although
           that is ordinarily conclusive. There  may  be  cases  where  the
           tribunal is satisfied that, objectively, the  appellant  can  be
           safe on relocation, but the appellant is so traumatised by  past
           events that she remains in  genuine  terror  of  being  returned
           there. The Home Secretary, by her counsel, accepts  that  cogent
           evidence to such effect may  be  relevant  to  whether  internal
           relocation is unduly harsh.


       30. In spite of the time that has gone by - not, so far as we  know,
           through the fault of the appellant or her advisers - it seems to
           us that this case requires remission to  the  AIT  so  that  the
           critical issue of the reasonableness of internal relocation  can
           be  properly  determined.  We  invite   counsel's   submissions,
           initially in writing, as to what form  the  remission  ought  to
           take.




  22. We have very much to the  forefront  of  our  minds  the  similarities
      between the facts in the case of FK and the facts in this case and  we
      are mindful of the reasons given by the Court of  Appeal  for  holding
      that the appraisal of Dr Knighton's evidence is flawed.

The Issues

  23. In the case of FK the question whether she is a refugee  is  in  play,
      but only insofar as the issue of internal relocation is concerned,  it
      being accepted that FK and her daughter each has a  well-founded  fear
      of being persecuted in their home area, by  having  FGM  and/or  worse
      violence imposed upon them, at the hands of the Mungiki, from whom the
      state would be unwilling or unable to  protect them, as  well  as  the
      question whether she and/or her daughter faces a real risk of  serious
      harm contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

  24. In the appeal before us, as matters stand, only Articles 3 and 8  ECHR
      are clearly in play given the history which we have outlined.

  25. A number of points arises, as indicated in the reasons for finding  an
      error of law, as to the scope of the reconsideration before  us  which
      were not specifically dealt with by the Tribunal when  directing  that
      there be a second stage reconsideration:

      . Can the Appellant revive her claim to refugee recognition?


      . If yes, is she a refugee by  reason  of  there  being  no  internal
        protection alternative available to her and her children?


      . If she cannot rely here upon a claim to  refugee  status,  has  she
        made good a claim to humanitarian protection?


      . Has she made good her case under article 3 ECHR?


      . Or is it the law that she must show that there  is  either  a  real
        risk of her experiencing serious harm contrary to  article  3  ECHR
        throughout the whole of Kenya? Or, is the  case  that  it  must  be
        shown that there is such a real risk in her  home  area,  and  that
        there is no other part of Kenya to which it would be reasonable  to
        require her and her daughter and son to relocate to?

      . Will removal of the Appellant and her two children to  Kenya  cause
        the UK to be in breach of its obligations under article  8  of  the
        ECHR?

Revival of the Claim to Recognition as a Refugee

  26. As Mr Fripp has argued, although the Appellant did not, at  the  time,
      appeal the adjudicator's decision to refuse  to  recognize  her  as  a
      refugee, which was based upon his finding that it had not  been  shown
      that the Appellant's fear of being persecuted was for one or  more  of
      the reasons set out in Article 1(A)(2) of the 1951 Refugee Convention,
      in hindsight, it appears plain that the Adjudicator erred  in  law  in
      rejecting the Appellant's refugee claim on the basis of his conclusion
      that women did not  constitute  a  particular  social  group  for  the
      purposes of the Refugee Convention.

  27. Mr Fripp  draws  attention  to  a  number  of  cases  to  support  his
      contention in this regard:

      . P and M v SSHD[2004] EWCA Civ 1640


      . SSHD v Fornah; K v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46, [2007] 1AC  412,  [2006]  3
        WLR 733

      . FK (FGM - risk and relocation) Kenya CG [2007] AIT 00041 (and  now,
        of course, the judgment of the Court of Appeal in FK  on  unrelated
        points. The Court of Appeal heard the appeal of FK in December 2007
        and in a  judgment  of  26  February  2008  ([2008]  EWCA  Civ119),
        remitted the appeal of FK to the Tribunal to enable full and proper
        determination of  the  critical  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of
        internal relocation.

  28. Mr Fripp submits that it is strongly in the  interest  of  timely  and
      comprehensive resolution of the  Appellant's  claim  to  international
      protection that the Tribunal now consider not only whether  Article  3
      ECHR avails the Appellant, but also  whether  she  is  a  refugee.  He
      relies upon DK (Serbia) and Ors v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1747  at  paras
      20-22 to support his argument  that  there  is  a  greater  degree  of
      flexibility within reconsideration proceedings under section  103A  of
      the 2002 Act than was previously possible (this case falling under the
      transitional provisions as it does is to be treated as if it began its
      life under the current Tribunal regime).

  29. In short, Mr Fripp says that the point is 'Robinson obvious' and  that
      as it has, in effect  been  so  within  these  proceedings  since  the
      hearing before the Court of Appeal on 19 December 2005,  it  is  right
      that it be dealt with now, rather than the Appellant  having  to  make
      yet further applications.

  30. Although the matter had been listed as an  intended  country  guidance
      case, there was no skeleton argument lodged by the  Respondent  at  or
      before the hearing on 9 November 2007, so that  when  the  matter  was
      adjourned part-heard, for  lack  of  time,  after  receipt  of  expert
      evidence from Dr Benjamin Paul Knighton (see below), it  was  directed
      that the Respondent file and serve a skeleton argument, addressing all
      the issues, including the questions whether the  concept  of  internal
      relocation and its associated  learning  applies  when  considering  a
      deciding a case under Article 3 ECHR; and as to whether the  Appellant
      could now revive her claim to recognition as a refugee, in  the  light
      of jurisprudence that has clarified the meaning of 'particular  social
      group' when considering women who fear FGM, the Appellant relying upon
      the submission that it is now a "Robinson obvious" point.

  31. Mr Walker, in his skeleton argument of 14 December  2007  makes  clear
      that the Respondent  relies  upon  the  case  of  FK  (FGM-  risk  and
      relocation) Kenya CG [2007] UKAIT 00041 as he takes the view that  the
      Appellant's situation is on all fours with that  of  FK  so  that  her
      appeal should be dismissed. The Respondent  submits  that  in  FK  the
      Tribunal made findings when considering the evidence presented  by  Dr
      Knighton, which he had again presented in this appeal, and  that  this
      Tribunal should follow FK in dismissing this appeal.

  32. The Respondent has lodged no  further  skeleton  argument  or  written
      submissions in these proceedings.

  33. The skeleton argument of 14 December 2007 does not address the  issues
      relating to Article 3 ECHR or to the proposed revival of the claim  to
      recognition as a refugee. We therefore proceeded on the basis that the
      refugee appeal was to be included as potentially live  before  us  and
      requested Mr Walker to address us upon those points at the  reconvened
      hearing on 14 December 2007, but he had no real point to make, whether
      for or against revival of the refugee claim  or  in  relation  to  the
      existence or otherwise of an 'internal relocation test' within article
      3 ECHR.

  34. We turn then, to consider whether the refugee claim is to  be  treated
      as in play. A key point, when reviewing the history of this  case,  is
      that the adjudicator who decided the appeal, Mr  David  Chandler,  did
      not have the benefit of hearing from a presenting officer,  and  thus,
      as the Court of Appeal has stated, the hearing lacked focus.

  35. The adjudicator reaches his  findings  on  the  question  whether  the
      Appellant is a refugee at paragraph 33 of his determination, where  we
      see that Counsel for the Appellant relied upon the case  of  Shah  and
      Islam [1999] Imm AR 283 to support the Appellant's claim that she is a
      refugee by reason of her membership of the particular social group  of
      women in Kenya. The adjudicator did  not  agree  because,  he  states,
      "...the overall  picture  does  not  show  that  women  in  Kenya  are
      unprotected by the state to  the  same  extent  as  in  Pakistan...The
      government appears to be alive to gender concerns."

  36. Counsel for the Appellant then apparently agreed with the  adjudicator
      that the Appellant could not claim to be a member of the social  group
      "women facing FGM" as this would be outside the definition provided in
      Shah and Islam."

  37. Mr Fripp, who has more recently come to represent the  Appellant,  had
      to accept that there was no challenge on behalf of  the  Appellant  to
      the refugee aspect of the adjudicator's decision. It must be said that
      this is somewhat surprising given the adjudicator's dubious  reasoning
      and findings. However, that cannot be regarded as  the  fault  of  the
      Appellant who must, perforce, rely upon her lawyers. Mr Fripp  submits
      that the issue has been 'live' since this matter was itself before the
      Court of Appeal, although it would not appear that the Court of Appeal
      was specifically requested to consider the arguments now raised, as Mr
      Fripp conceded before the Court of Appeal that because  the  Appellant
      did not cross appeal the decision of the adjudicator, no  question  of
      legal error on the part of the tribunal in that regard could arise. Mr
      Walker may perhaps be regarded  as  resting  his  submission  on  this
      point.

  38. Mr Fripp refers us to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in P and M v
      SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1640. We note that neither  the  adjudicator  nor
      the parties had the benefit of this guidance  as  it  was  not  issued
      until 8 December 2004, whereas the adjudicator heard the appeal on  10
      May 2004. However, the Court takes the view that 'women in Kenya'  are
      capable of forming a  particular  social  group  for  the  purpose  of
      Article 1A2 of the 1952 Refugee Convention:

        37.      First, on the evidence available, there was no reason  why
           the Adjudicator should not have  come  to  the  conclusion  that
           women in Kenya are a particular social group.  If  the  position
           was not made clear by the decision in Shah & Islam, it  is  made
           clear by the decision of the Australian High Court in  Applicant
           S v MIMA [2004] 8 CA 25,  that  we  would  apply  also  in  this
           jurisdiction.  The Adjudicator's decision  was  correct  on  her
           findings of fact as to the position of women in Kenyan  society.



39.   Mr Fripp further relies upon subsequent express  endorsement  of  that
      judgment in speeches in the House of Lords in SSHD v Fornah  and  K  v
      SSHD [2006] UKHL 46, [2007] 1 AC 412,  [2006]  3  WLR  733.  Per  Lord
      Bingham of Cornhill at [26] and [31], expressing views concurred in by
      other members of their Lordships' House:

       26. First, claims based on fear  of  FGM  have  been  recognised  or
           upheld in courts all round the world. Such decisions  have  been
           made in England and Wales (Yake v Secretary  of  State  for  the
           Home  Department,  19  January  2000,  unreported;  P  and  M  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  1640
           [2005] Imm AR 84), the United States (In re Kasinga (1996) 21  I
           & N Dec 357, Abankwah v Immigration and  Naturalization  Service
           185 F 3d 18 (2d Cir 1999), Mohammed v Gonzales 400 F 3d 785 (9th
           Cir 2005), Australia  (RRT  N97/19046,  unreported,  16  October
           1997), Austria  (GZ  220.268/0-XI/33/00,  unreported,  21  March
           2002), and Canada (Re B(PV) [1994] CRDD No 12, 10 May 1994;  and
           Compendium of Decisions, Immigration and Refugee Board, February
           2003, pp 31-35). Secondly, such  agreement  is  consistent  with
           clearly expressed opinions of the UNHCR. Representative  of  its
           consistent view is a memorandum of 10 May 1994 on Female Genital
           Mutilation, which in para 7 says:


               "On this basis, we must  conclude  that  FGM,  which  causes
               severe pain as well as permanent physical harm, amounts to a
               violation of human  rights,  including  the  rights  of  the
               child, and can be regarded as persecution. The toleration of
               these acts by the authorities, or the unwillingness  of  the
               authorities to provide protection against them,  amounts  to
               official acquiescence. Therefore, a woman can be  considered
               as a refugee if she or her daughters/dependents  fear  being
               compelled to undergo FGM against their will; or,  she  fears
               persecution  for  refusing  to  undergo  or  to  allow   her
               daughters to undergo the practice."...


       31. Departing from the submission made below, but with  the  support
           of the UNHCR, Miss Webber for  the  second  appellant  submitted
           that "women in Sierra Leone" was the particular social group  of
           which the second appellant was a member. This is a submission to
           be appraised  in  the  context  of  Sierra  Leonean  society  as
           revealed by the  undisputed  evidence,  and  without  resort  to
           extraneous generalisation. On that evidence, I  think  it  clear
           that women in Sierra Leone are a  group  of  persons  sharing  a
           common characteristic which, without  a  fundamental  change  in
           social mores  is  unchangeable,  namely  a  position  of  social
           inferiority as compared with men. They are perceived by  society
           as inferior. That is true of all  women,  those  who  accept  or
           willingly embrace their inferior position and those who do  not.
           To define the group in this way is not to define it by reference
           to the persecution complained of: it is a  characteristic  which
           would exist even if FGM were not practised, although FGM  is  an
           extreme and very cruel  expression  of  male  dominance.  It  is
           nothing to the point that FGM in Sierra Leone is carried out  by
           women: such was usually the case in  Cameroon  (GZ,  above)  and
           sometimes in Nigeria (RRT N97/19046, above), but  this  did  not
           defeat the applicant's asylum  claim.  Most  vicious  initiatory
           rituals are in fact perpetuated by  those  who  were  themselves
           subject to the ritual as initiates and see no reason why  others
           should not share their experience. Nor is it  pertinent  that  a
           practice  is  widely  practised  and  accepted,   a   contention
           considered and rejected  in  Mohammed  v  Gonzales,  above.  The
           contrast with male circumcision is obvious: where performed  for
           ritualistic rather than health reasons, male circumcision may be
           seen as symbolising the dominance of the male. FGM may ensure  a
           young woman's acceptance in Sierra Leonean society, but  she  is
           accepted  on  the  basis  of  institutionalised  inferiority.  I
           cannot, with respect, agree with Auld LJ that FGM  "is  not,  in
           the circumstances in which it  is  practised  in  Sierra  Leone,
           discriminatory in such a way as to  set  those  who  undergo  it
           apart  from  society".  As  I  have  said,  FGM  is  an  extreme
           expression of the discrimination to which all  women  in  Sierra
           Leone are subject, as much those who have already undergone  the
           process  as  those  who  have  not.  I  find  no  difficulty  in
           recognising women in Sierra Leone as a particular  social  group
           for purposes of article 1A(2). Had this submission been  at  the
           forefront of the second appellant's case in the Court of Appeal,
           and  had  that  court  had  the  benefit  of  the  UNHCR's  very
           articulate argument, it might, I think, have  reached  the  same
           conclusion. If, however, that wider social group were thought to
           fall outside the established jurisprudence,  a  view  I  do  not
           share,  I  would  accept  the  alternative  and  less   favoured
           definition advanced by the second appellant and the UNHCR of the
           particular social group to which the second appellant  belonged:
           intact women in Sierra Leone. This was the solution favoured  by
           Arden LJ, and in my opinion it meets the Convention tests. There
           is a common characteristic of intactness. There is a  perception
           of these women by society as a distinct group. And it is  not  a
           group defined by persecution: it would be a  recognisable  group
           even if FGM were entirely voluntary, not performed by  force  or
           as a result of social pressure.


40.   Per Baroness Hale of Richmond at 108:


           "108. While the Quijano decision explains why Mrs K's  case  had
               to reach this House, it is much harder to explain  why  Miss
               Fornah's had to do so. We have been  referred  to  case  law
               from many different jurisdictions  in  which  FGM  has  been
               held, not only to be  persecution,  but  persecution  for  a
               Convention reason. We have been  referred  to  none  at  all
               where it has not. The United Kingdom is apparently alone  in
               the civilised world in rejecting such a  claim.  Nor  do  we
               reject them all: the Court of Appeal in P and M v  Secretary
               of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1640;
               [2005] Imm AR 84 had no difficulty in accepting the claim of
               a young Kenyan Kikuyu woman who feared that her father would
               force her to undergo FGM."

41.   We were then referred to FK (FGM) -  risk  and  relocation)  Kenya  CG
      [2007] AIT 00041, at [63], the AIT accepted that the  evidence  before
      it


           "strongly supports the view, in the light of  the  proper  legal
           criteria now clarified by [Fornah] that Kenyan  women  belonging
           to those ethnic groups where FGM is practiced are properly to be
           regarded as falling within a particular  social  group  for  the
           purpose of being a refugee...".




  42. We would agree with Mr Fripp that it is strongly in  the  interest  of
      timely and comprehensive  resolution  of  the  Appellant's  protection
      claim  that  the  AIT  be  able  to  consider  not  only  whether  the
      Appellant's removal would breach article 3 ECHR but also  whether  the
      Appellant, given  the  clarification  of  the  law  in  the  decisions
      referred to above, is a refugee.

43.    Procedurally,  the  situation  appears  to  be   as   follows.    The
      Appellant's appeal to the Court of Appeal from the  IAT  led  to  that
      Court's remittal to AIT by application of section 103B (4)  NIAA  2002
      (as amended): Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)
      Act 2004 (Commencement No 5 and Transitional Provisions)  Order  2005.
      It might appear that the present  proceedings  may  be  rendered  more
      comprehensive only by  the  Appellant's  bringing  of  an  out-of-time
      application for reconsideration of the  Adjudicator's  decision  under
      section  103A  NIAA  2002,  leading  to  grant   of   an   Order   for
      Reconsideration and formal  inclusion  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to
      Refugee  Convention  status  within   the   scope   of   the   present
      reconsideration.  Against that, the judgment of Latham LJ  giving  the
      judgment of the Court of Appeal in DK (Serbia) &  ors  v  SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1747  [20]-[22] suggests that in reconsideration  proceedings
      under section 103A NIAA 2002 a more flexible approach than  previously
      possible might be required:

        20.      For my part, I consider that the reasoning of the Tribunal
           was essentially sound  as  to  the  jurisdictional  ambit  of  a
           reconsideration. But that does not provide the  complete  answer
           to what should be  the  scope  in  practice  of  any  particular
           reconsideration.  The  jurisdiction  is  one  which   is   being
           exercised by the same tribunal, conceptually, both at the  first
           hearing of the appeal, and then  at  any  reconsideration.  That
           seems to me to be the key to the way in  which  reconsiderations
           should be managed in procedural terms.


        1. In the first instance, in relation to the identification of  any
           error or errors of law, that should normally  be  restricted  to
           those  grounds  upon  which  the   immigration   judge   ordered
           reconsideration, and any point which properly falls  within  the
           category  of  an  obvious  or  manifest  point   of   Convention
           jurisprudence,  as  described  in  Robinson  (supra).  Therefore
           parties should expect a direction either  from  the  immigration
           judge   ordering   reconsideration   or    the    Tribunal    on
           reconsideration  restricting  argument  to  the  points  of  law
           identified  by  the  immigration   judge   when   ordering   the
           reconsideration. Nothing in either the 2004 Act  or  the  rules,
           however, expressly precludes an applicant from raising points of
           law in respect of which he was not successful at the application
           stage itself. And there is no appellate  machinery  which  would
           enable an applicant who is successful in obtaining an order  for
           reconsideration  to  challenge  the  grounds  upon   which   the
           immigration judge ordered such reconsideration. It must  however
           be very much  the  exception,  rather  than  the  rule,  that  a
           Tribunal will permit other grounds to be argued. But clearly the
           Tribunal needs to be alert to the possibility of an error of law
           other than that identified by the immigration  judge,  otherwise
           its own decision may be unlawful.


        1.  As  far  as  what  has  been  called  the  second  stage  of  a
           reconsideration is concerned, the fact that it  is,  as  I  have
           said, conceptually a reconsideration by the same body which made
           the original decision, carries with it a number of consequences.
           The most important is  that  any  body  asked  to  reconsider  a
           decision on the grounds of  an  identified  error  of  law  will
           approach its reconsideration  on  the  basis  that  any  factual
           findings  and  conclusions  or  judgments  arising  from   those
           findings which are unaffected by the error of law  need  not  be
           revisited. It is not a rehearing: Parliament chose  not  to  use
           that concept, presumably for good reasons. And the fact that the
           reconsideration may be carried out by a differently  constituted
           tribunal or a different Immigration Judge does  not  affect  the
           general principle of the 2004 Act, which is that the process  of
           reconsideration is carried out by the  same  body  as  made  the
           original decision. The  right  approach,  in  my  view,  to  the
           directions which should be considered by the  immigration  judge
           ordering  reconsideration  or  the  Tribunal  carrying  out  the
           reconsideration   is   to   assume,   notionally,    that    the
           reconsideration will  be,  or  is  being,  carried  out  by  the
           original decision maker.

44.   Mr Fripp has argued, and we would agree with him, that the ability  to
      raise "an obvious  or  manifest  point  of  Convention  jurisprudence"
      presumably applies to 'protection claims' whether  under  the  Refugee
      Convention or under article 3 ECHR: there is no  principled  basis  at
      all for any other conclusion.  Once this is accepted,  and  given  the
      unitary nature of the reconsideration process, there is no reason why,
      faced with a relatively unusual situation such as the present  one,  a
      claimant should not be allowed to revive consideration of the  Refugee
      Convention aspect of the protection claim.

45.   On this basis, though with some reticence, Mr Fripp suggests that  the
      Tribunal is able to raise the question of Convention reason under  the
      Refugee Convention in present proceedings.  Thereafter, says Mr Fripp,
      resolution of that aspect of the appeal would turn on consideration of
      internal relocation issues, the  Adjudicator's  earlier  consideration
      whether applied to article 3 ECHR or to the Refugee  Convention  being
      erroneous for the reasons given by the Court of Appeal.

46.   We find ourselves in agreement with Mr Fripp as to the way forward  in
      this regard, for the reasons that he has advanced. Like  him  we  also
      express some reticence, but we bear in mind all of  the  jurisprudence
      and the other relevant factors to which he has so  ably  referred  us,
      not least of which are the 'unitary nature'  of  the  reconsideration,
      the undesirability of yet further applications and proceedings in this
      matter,  and,  extremely  importantly,  that  the  decision   of   the
      adjudicator was wrong in law. We accept that the latter is a 'Robinson
      obvious' point and bear in mind  that  any  such  point  can  only  be
      'Robinson  obvious'  in  a  situation  where  the  law  is   correctly
      understood, argued, and applied by those  responsible  for  so  doing.
      Whilst the argument should, of course, have been raised earlier by her
      lawyers, upon whom the Appellant must rely, in particular  before  the
      Court of Appeal, she is not to be treated as fixed with their failings
      so that she is left  without  recourse.  It  is  understood  that  the
      present representatives were only involved relatively recently so that
      in the circumstances it may be regarded as  understandable  that  this
      was not done.

47.   We therefore proceed on the basis  contended  for  by  Mr  Fripp,  and
      applying the guidance of the House of Lords, and of  Lord  Bingham  in
      particular, as summarized above, in Fornah and K; namely, on the basis
      that the refugee appeal is live before us.

  48. In those circumstances, we re-visit the question of  the  issues  that
      are now before us in the light of the current legal  framework  as  it
      applies to this case, albeit that the appeal began  under  a  previous
      regime.

  49. In the event that we are wrong in treating the refugee appeal as  live
      before us, then our consideration and finding  in  this  determination
      will serve to deal obiter with the Refugee Convention issue,  and,  as
      Mr Fripp submits, the Appellant will in due course  have  to  consider
      (taking into account the outcome of the reconsideration of  article  3
      ECHR issues) whether  to  enter  into  correspondence  with  the  SSHD
      seeking acknowledgment of representations  as  amounting  to  a  fresh
      claim to protection as a refugee, under para 353 Immigration Rules  HC
      395.

  50. Apart from the refugee appeal, article 3 ECHR is in play before us, on
      the basis that the Appellant has already shown that  she  is  at  real
      risk of serious harm contrary to Article 3 in her home area, by reason
      of her fear of forced FGM, whether in  respect  of  herself  only,  or
      herself and her daughter.

  51. In his skeleton argument, Mr Fripp has also submitted  that  following
      the Practice Direction of 9 October 2006, consideration must be  given
      to the question whether the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  humanitarian
      protection, although we cannot see that he has pursued  this  argument
      in his oral submissions. However, given the history of the matter  and
      what we have said relating to the  unitary  nature  of  the  AIT,  its
      proceedings, and the transitional provisions, it seems to us  that  in
      the light of the Practice Direction, it would follow that humanitarian
      protection would fall to be considered in the event that  we  were  to
      find that the Appellant is not a refugee, and that procedurally,  that
      aspect would fall to be  considered  before  moving  to  consider  the
      article 3 aspect.

  52. The provisions of SI [2006] No.2525 "The Refugee or Person in Need  of
      International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006"  now  bring
      into United Kingdom domestic law the Council  of  the  European  Union
      Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on 'minimum standards'  for  the
      qualification and status  of  third  country  nationals  or  stateless
      persons as refugees or as person who otherwise need protection and the
      content of the protection granted, normally referred to in the  United
      Kingdom as the Qualification  Directive.   Commensurate  changes  were
      made in the Immigration Rules by means of Statement of Changes in  the
      Immigration Rules also taking effect on 9 October 2006.

  53. The determination we have made  has  approached  the  issues  in  this
      appeal from the perspective of the 2006 Regulations and in  particular
      has applied the definitions contained there, in deciding  whether  the
      Appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  We have also
      applied the amended Immigration Rules.  These  have  permitted  us  to
      consider whether the Appellant is in need of  Humanitarian  Protection
      as being at risk of serious harm, as defined in paragraph 339C of  the
      Rules.  Finally, we have gone on to consider whether the Appellant  is
      at risk of a violation of her human rights under the provisions of the
      ECHR.

  54. The burden of proof is upon the Appellant.  The standard of proof  has
      been  defined  as  a  'reasonable  degree  of  likelihood',  sometimes
      expressed as 'a reasonable chance' or a  'serious  possibility'.   The
      question is answered by looking at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
      assessed at the time of  hearing  the  appeal.   We  regard  the  same
      standard as applying in  essence  in  human  rights  appeals  although
      sometimes expressed as 'substantial grounds for believing'.   Although
      the 2006 Regulations make no express  reference  to  the  standard  of
      proof in asylum appeals, there is no suggestion that  the  Regulations
      or the Directions were intended to introduce a change  in  either  the
      burden or  standard  of  proof.   The  amended  Rules,  however,  deal
      expressly with the standard of proof in deciding whether the Appellant
      is in need of Humanitarian Protection.

  55. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules defines a person eligible  for
      Humanitarian Protection, as a person who does not qualify as a refugee
      but in respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for
      believing that the person concerned, if returned, would  face  a  real
      risk of suffering serious harm.  It seems to us that  this  replicates
      the standard of proof familiar in the  former  jurisprudence  and,  by
      implication, applies the same standard in asylum cases.

  56. Accordingly, where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' this is  to
      be understood as an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:

      i.   whether  on  return  there  is  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
        persecuted under the Geneva Convention;


      ii.  whether on return there are substantial grounds for believing the
        person would face a real risk of suffering serious harm within  the
        meaning of paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and


      iii. whether on return there are substantial  grounds  for  believing
        that the person would face a real risk of being exposed to  a  real
        risk of treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

  57. In reaching our conclusions as to whether the  Appellant  will  be  at
      real risk on return, we have been further  mindful  that  the  amended
      Immigration Rules (Cm 6198) contain among other provisions,  paragraph
      339K which deals with the approach to  past  persecution  and  serious
      harm, and paragraph 339O headed "Internal Relocation".

  58. It follows that the questions to be answered here are:

      . Whether there is a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
        Appellant and /or her  daughter,  from  the  authorities,  anywhere
        outside her home area in Kenya, so that she would  not  then  be  a
        refugee or at real risk of serious harm contrary to article 3.


      . Whether,  in  the  event  that  there  is  such  a  sufficiency  of
        protection, it would nevertheless be  unreasonable,  in  the  sense
        that it would be unduly harsh to  require  the  Appellant  and  her
        children to relocate to the place (one of the places) where  it  is
        said that she may reasonably be expected to  go,  so  that  she  is
        nevertheless a refugee.


      . Whether, if the Appellant is not a  refugee,  she  is  entitled  to
        humanitarian protection.


      . Whether, in considering and deciding a claimed  prospective  breach
        of article 3 ECHR, there is a requirement to apply the  concept  of
        'internal flight' or 'internal relocation' or 'internal  protection
        alternative.'


      . Whether, further or in the alternative, removal would  be  contrary
        to the United Kingdom's obligations under article 8 of the ECHR.

  59. Before deciding any of these issues, we return to the evidence  before
      us, and consider next the expert evidence  of  Dr  Knighton  which  is
      relevant to the questions that we have  identified,  as  well  as  the
      other  background  evidence  to  which  the  parties  have  drawn  our
      attention.

The Expert Evidence of Dr Knighton

  60. As was noted by the Court of Appeal in FK, Dr  Knighton's  credentials
      are impressive. He is a fellow of the Royal Anthropological  Institute
      and gives this account of his qualifications:

        "I have lived and  worked  in  Uganda  and  Kenya  for  nine  years
        altogether, starting in  January  1984.   My  work  there  for  the
        Anglican  church  involved  hundreds  of  interviews  to  test  the
        probity, financial and personal inter alia, of many  categories  of
        people.  Most of my time in the UK since 1983 has been spent in the
        study and research of East Africa, including my doctoral thesis  in
        the University of Durham (Knighton 1990).  I lived south  of  Mount
        Kenya and worked among the Ag?k?y? (Kikuyu) from  1991-8.   I  have
        returned there in connection with my academic work  about  annually
        on average, and did so in December-January 2005, when I interviewed
        Ag?k?y? women about their initiation which involved Female  Genital
        Cutting (FGC) in every case.  I have taken an interest in  M?ingiki
        (Mungiki in the English press) for more than four years.  I am part
        of the African Studies circle in  University  of  Oxford  and  Ph.D
        Programme Leader in the Oxford Centre for Mission Studies.  I  have
        ongoing contact with  many  Kenyans  and  Ag?k?y?,  some  among  my
        research students.  I am thus in a relatively advantageous position
        to understand the context from which FK, 'the Appellant', comes.

  61. Since then, we note (page  C1-C2  of  the  Appellant's  bundle,  first
      report of Dr Knighton in this matter, 8 February  2007)  that  he  has
      made a further visit to Kenya in November-December 2006  during  which
      time he undertook field work in and around Karen, Ngong, and  when  in
      Central Province, stayed at the vicarage at Wangige, whilst conducting
      interviews.

  62. He states at paragraph 2 that he has  read  the  relevant  documentary
      evidence in this matter as there listed, and that the Appellant is not
      known to him, nor is any member of her family, so that he is  able  to
      be as objective as  possible  about  the  case,  which  would  be  his
      academic tendency in any event.

  63. Dr Knighton has prepared reports dated 8 February 2007 and 24  October
      2007 (Appellant's bundle, section C, pp C1-C61 and pp  C62-C108).  His
      second report is able to include responses to findings and conclusions
      reached by the Tribunal in FK (which determination  was,  it  will  be
      recalled, remitted by the Court of Appeal on 26 February 2008).

  64. Before hearing oral evidence from Dr Knighton, we requested  that  the
      Appellant's  daughter  leave  the  hearing  room,  accompanied  by  an
      appropriate carer, our having taken the view that it was  not  in  her
      best interests to remain to hear the rest of  the  proceedings  or  to
      witness any response her mother may have  during  the  course  of  the
      hearing.

  65. In summary, as stated in his two reports,  Dr  Knighton's  opinion  is
      that given the particular history, characteristics  and  circumstances
      of this of the Appellant, a lone Gikuyu woman who has a young daughter
      (a child born of rape) and a young son, who has  defied  the  Mungiki,
      who has no home or known  family  members  to  turn  to,  and  who  is
      unlikely to be able to seek protection with a new husband, she  cannot
      return in safety to Kenya.

  66. Given the history of the matter, we here set out a  detailed  summary,
      the oral evidence of Dr Knighton, who adopted the content of  his  two
      reports, bearing in mind the width and complexity of  the  issues  and
      that we are 'looking at a moving target'.

  67. Dr Knighton explained that the Tribunal has used "Kikuyu" whereas  the
      orthography that he uses is "Gikuyu". Kikuyu is from the Imperial  age
      and is an Anglicisation.  The orthography is Gikuyu, also written with
      vowel marks to help with the pronunciation.

  68. "Mbara" means "Sub-clan"- most easily represented by a portion of land
      marked out by a clan member from forestland and is very important  for
      the determination of land rights.   It  is  very  difficult  to  split
      family title without agreement of all the elders of a sub-clan - it is
      important socially and economically and the  sub-clan  has  unity  and
      follows the same customs.

  69. The level below, that is between the Gikuyu  people  and  Mbara.   The
      strata used to be age and class but that is now vestigial.  Agikuyu is
      the tribe and is hardly ever a political people because it is so large
      but it is limited by language and united in  particular  by  the  next
      level down, the clans, which are matrilineal and known  as  "the  nine
      clans" and they still figure in feminine names  and  the  sub-clan  is
      part of the clan and a person remains in a clan until they marry  out.
      The "full nine" is the correct  number  which  of  course  means  ten.
      Mbara is the unit below the  clan.   Districts  reflect  this  in  the
      Nyeri, Kirinyagu, Murangu, and Kiambu - where they were expanding when
      the British arrived.  Kiambu spread west  and  are  widely  dispersed.
      They spread wide and there  are  other  areas  of  Kikuyu  across  the
      country often where British settlers are.

  70. The terms FGC and FGM are not used locally in Kenya, although they are
      referred to on occasion in the English press.  The used term is female
      circumcision and circumcision. "Cut"  is  less  pejorative  and  value
      laden as a term and is a word used in Kenya rather than mutilation.  A
      great many people do not see the cutting  as  a  form  of  mutilation,
      rather it is seen as an act which is enhancing of a  woman's  standing
      and seniority.

  71. The normal strategy for someone in the position of the Appellant,  who
      was moving around inside Kenya, would be, if she were able to identify
      a member of her family or her husband's family, to rely  on  them,  if
      possible. The usual strategy is to move around with your kith and  kin
      - this is famously how Nairobi  is  made  up  and  reinforced  by  the
      British - you will be known/recognised in Nairobi  as  being  of  your
      tribe.

  72. For many reasons, people do live elsewhere than with their tribe.  For
      example, land appropriation,  to  do  business,  to  escape  problems.
      However, the Kikuyu are notorious for colonising  Kenya  in  terms  of
      business and land appropriation.  Business is done by who you know and
      who you can trust - very much to the  forefront  today  is  resentment
      against the Kikuyu because of their advantages in the past and they do
      tend to do better.  For them, that the President may  be  removed  may
      mean it is very difficult to buy land even though much of the land  is
      still in common ownership in  Kenya  and  most  are  pastoralists  and
      anyone coming as a new person comes at the mercy of  the  pastoralists
      who practise very high levels of FGC except the Turkana who are in the
      north west rift in a very difficult area of Kenya.

  73. As to whether successful relocation is connected to or dependent  upon
      the sex of the individual, Dr Knighton stated that normally the son or
      first son is required to go out and open a new "Kibeka" - a  tract  of
      land, and once he has done this, he then attracts  women  around  him.
      Kikuyu women can be very enterprising and are to  the  fore  in  local
      markets and can be big as cereal dealers.

  74. At page 40, paragraph17, of his report, the possibilities of  internal
      relocation are referred to, and the question was raised with him as to
      how "the city" as a place of relocation applies to this Appellant.  Dr
      Knighton noted that the Appellant has had a  secondary  education  and
      shown early proclivity to trade, but that this depends on being in the
      forefront of the public eye, meeting people and  knowing  people.   In
      the slums there will be a Mungiki presence and a Gikuyu presence.  The
      more you trade the more you become known, and when  there  are  Gikuyu
      and where there are Gikuyu there are Mungiki or there  were  recently,
      or will be in future, Mungiki.  The Mungiki  are,  said  Dr  Knighton,
      luminous in the transport area, and are very often "Mutatu Touts" -  a
      person who shoos people into taxis and takes the money from them.

  75. In terms of transport, including in the country areas, the Mutatu are,
      said Dr Knighton, very, very important.  There are large buses  to  do
      long journeys and of course lorries. These buses and lorries are slow.
       The railway is slow and is not a real passenger business and in  fact
      is decreasing in the number of passengers  it  carries.   Most  people
      rely on Mutatu.  The Gikuyu are dominant in the  Mutatu  in  ownership
      and in running it.  In 2006 there was a newspaper  report  which  says
      that the Mungiki have returned to the whole  country  via  the  Mutatu
      industry.

  76. As to what forms of Mungiki are on the transport, Dr Knighton observed
      that David Anderson in Oxford has written to say that the Mungiki  are
      an urban protection racket over controlling the Mutatu, but  they  are
      also very much present in rural areas where people have  been  oathed,
      including because of land clashes.  The Mungiki are, in the main, said
      Dr Knighton, a core of unemployed, semi-dispossessed Gikuyu youth with
      distinctly dim prospects of  becoming  honoured  men.   This  was  the
      bedrock of the Mau Mau and  the  children  of  the  Mau  Mau  are  the
      Mungiki.  It is not just a socio-political organization,  it  is  also
      religious.  He referred to his first report - religion is used through
      the secret oath of secrecy and loyalty and in this it is close to  the
      Mau Mau.  There is reliance on the wrath of God and there are  similar
      methods and initiation to the Mau Mau.  Backsliders from  the  Mungiki
      are murdered in Nairobi and it is very difficult  for  researchers  to
      penetrate the organisation. The oath is  very  strong  and  secretive:
      "May this oath kill me if I disclose the secrets of the oath".   Other
      Mungiki will lean  on  potential  backsliders  and  that  is  why  the
      government finds it so difficult to deal with them -  there  had  been
      eight years of emergency powers under British rule to  deal  with  the
      Mau Mau.  Now, the government is speaking of use of  emergency  powers
      again and it has spoken of the Mungiki as a "national crisis".

  77.  Referred  to  his  written  evidence  at  C41,   regarding   internal
      relocation, Dr Knighton  was  asked  to  comment  on  someone  in  the
      Appellant's position, seeking to escape a risk  of  contact  with  the
      Mungiki, in particular as to what ability she would have to develop  a
      new tribe, new Mbara, family.

  78. Dr Knighton was clear that the only tried and tested route is to marry
      out of the tribe.  This is very  difficult  when  there  are  children
      because children belong  to  the  first  husband  and  the  system  is
      patriarchal in that the wife goes to live in the husband's house.  But
      even in Meru, to the west,  women who  have  married  into  a  cutting
      tribe or family, find that even their husband cannot guarantee  bodily
      integrity.  Gikuyu women also have a reputation for leaving a marriage
      with all the household goods so there is a reluctance  to  marry  such
      women (who have left a husband) even if they  will  engage  in  sexual
      relations.  Further, if you marry a Gikuyu you do not know if he  will
      turn into a Mungiki.

  79. Dr Knighton was referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in VNM
      (D45, paragraph 25) (Mr  Fripp  read  to  the  words  to  the  end  of
      paragraph 25). He was then asked  how  practicable  it  is,  for  this
      appellant, seeking to avoid her own tribe, to maintain a false account
      of her identity and history or to say nothing about her background. Dr
      Knighton explained that society in Kenya is not as private as  in  the
      United Kingdom - there is no such  proverb  as  "home  is  a  castle".
      People like to associate communally and go to church and meet.  People
      are concerned with where you are from and who your father is.  What is
      your sub-clan will be the second question after  what  is  your  name.
      Even in an urban area you do not belong to Nairobi, you belong to  the
      land outside Nairobi where you have come from and where you want to be
      buried.  Most people want to be buried in their homeland.  This  is  a
      normal part of daily intercourse to pry, to ask questions - you cannot
      come from nowhere and you will be pinpointed and connections  will  be
      made.  That is so even here in the UK.  In her home area and wandering
      across Kenya are the platoons of Mungiki and they will know of her  as
      a one time leader's  wife.   Wangiku  is  a  thoroughfare.   The  same
      applies to Kiambu and other areas.

  80. As to how much interest a person would take, given that this story  is
      in the past, Dr Kinghton's evidence was that it is an event in Mungiki
      history, and a person who had taken the Mungiki  oath  would  be  duty
      bound to report the Appellant's presence.  Also it is good gossip  and
      would come out unless an individual took pity on her.

  81. At the time when Dr Knighton gave his evidence, we did  not  yet  have
      the benefit of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case  of  FK
      in  which  Dr  Knighton's  evidence  upon  very  similar  issues   was
      considered. (See tab L of the appellant's bundle  of  authorities  and
      see page 17 of FK at paragraph 66). Asked to comment on the Tribunal's
      view of his evidence in that case, Dr Knighton stated  that  it  is  a
      rather mangled understanding of what he was  saying.   It  is  true  a
      substantial number of Gikuyu do not cut their daughters, but there  is
      no division in district/territorial terms of  this,  neighbours  would
      not even  know  because  the  cutting  is  done  secretly  now.   Even
      government employed medics will perform it.  So there  are  Mbara  who
      will perform it even though Christian and some who, with influence  of
      the church, will not.  A mother may be against and a  grandmother  for
      it and if she is father's  mother  then  she  (grandmother)  may  win.
      There is a great deal of diversity and the finding by the Tribunal  at
      para 66 that there are many areas within the Gikuyu territory in which
      the inhabitants do not seek to practise FGM, does not hold.  It is not
      static either, because Mungiki bring back FGC and the rise  of  secret
      communal ceremonies have been known.  There used to be public communal
      ceremonies of cutting and the British stopped them.

  82. Dr Knighton was taken to paragraph 67  of  the  determination  of  the
      Tribunal in FK where the  Tribunal  expresses  disagreement  with  the
      opinion of Dr Knighton that church  communities  in  Kenya  would  not
      provide protection to the Appellant. Asked to  comment,  he  explained
      that he was taken to Africa by the church and worked  for  the  church
      for nine years. Importantly, the  church  does  not  come  to  replace
      culture but to establish itself as the  church  and  has  hardly  even
      tried to  change  the  socio-cultural  base  and  has  even  tried  to
      reinforce the land based, self  sufficiency  goal  and  the  Kenyatta,
      Kiabi line of self- sufficiency holds.  The  Kenyan  Church  does  not
      have the long Augustinian tradition of the Western Church.  Rather, it
      is the extended family of the Kenyan nation as a whole and there is no
      social service and there are no abbeys or  church-based  organisations
      to run institutions to provide shelter to persons, whether  ladies  or
      children.  After the police round up people or round up children  they
      will be returned home.   It  is,  in  his  personal  experience,  very
      difficult to run church-based  organisation  against  this  tradition.
      The church does not accommodate  people.   A  domestic  servant  or  a
      spouse is the only woman who will be taken in, plus divorced women  do
      return to their families.  There is now murderous pressure on land and
      self-sufficiency is increasingly difficult.

  83. Dr Knighton was of the opinion that domestic  service  is  an  'escape
      route' for some women, but one would be considering  the  'ex-patriot'
      service because of the Appellant's age and her  children.  Usually  no
      cash is paid and the benefits are all in kind.  It is usually a  phase
      in life for poor young girls from poor families  who  then  go  on  to
      marry.  The usual form of protection is a husband, but a Gikuyu  woman
      with a son is unlikely to find a husband  because  you  do  not  bring
      another man's son into your  home  and  in  addition  there  are  also
      inheritance problems.

  84. Ex-patriots usually have staff who are of Gikuyu origin,  so  even  in
      the ex-patriot community there is a strong Gikuyu presence.  Also  one
      would need a recommendation from an ex-patriot or  to  go  through  an
      agency, or one would need to be the relative of an existing employee.

  85. Dr Knighton stated, referring to his supplementary  report,  that  the
      year 2007 has brought the most intense violence yet from  the  Mungiki
      ('Muingiki'  as  he  refers  to  them)  and  the  most   violent   and
      unrestrained response from the police, following  a  decision  by  the
      inner cabinet of President Kibaki to  confront  the  Mungiki  with  no
      holds barred. This destabilized areas where Mungiki activity has  been
      visible to the authorities. It follows  clashes  between  Mungiki  and
      police in Kiambu district in March and April with police alleging  112
      deaths in June around highly  populated  Gikuyu  areas,  including  27
      killed by the Mungiki, of whom 11 were police officers (Daily Nation 3
      July 2007).

  86. The Archbishop of the Anglican Church  of  Kenya,  the  Most  Reverend
      Benjamin Nzimbi said that "...the peace that had in the past  been  in
      the country was being replaced with fear. These killings  are  scaring
      and we ask  the  Government  to  intervene  now  and  find  a  lasting
      solutions (sic) to these senseless criminal attacks" (Daily  Nation  9
      July 2007). Dr Knighton continued that  scores  of  bodies  have  been
      found in Ngong forest, apparently dumped there by anti-Mungiki  police
      squads, having been killed at close quarters (Mukinda, Fred  "Killings
      Linked to the War Against the Mungiki sect", Daily Nation  23  October
      2007). There remains plenty of lethal activity in Kiambu (which  is  a
      town, district centre and district but not a village as stated by  the
      Tribunal in FK). Reference is made to the shooting dead by  police  of
      two suspected Mungiki said to have been engaged in extortion.

  87. Young women who discover that their partners are or may be Mungiki are
      obliged to remain with them or risk ill treatment including gang  rape
      and other forms of torture and serious harm should they try  to  leave
      the home and they dare not divulge that a partner is or may be Mungiki
      (Daily Nation, 27 September 2007).

  88. Nobel Laureate Wangari Maathai has submitted that in  the  first  nine
      months of 2007 the police had shot dead 476 suspects, at least  50  in
      circumstances indicating summary  execution  [Daily  Nation  9  August
      2007).

  89. Dr Knighton noted that the Tribunal in FK had stated that he  had  not
      given any specific figures for membership of the  Mungiki.  He  points
      out that there is inevitably no reliable census  of  membership  of  a
      secret society, but that he did give a range of reported numbers  that
      newspapers have seen fit to print and country  reports  to  quote.  He
      draws attention in his supplemental report  to  more  recent  figures,
      mostly going back to Mungiki leaders, who do know best,  if  believed,
      as it is they who keep registers of members:

        "The  exact  membership  figures  of   the   movement   remain   as
        controversial as  its  operations,  ranging  from  1.5  million,  2
        million, 4 million and more recently 7 million,  according  to  its
        leaders. (Daily Nation, 24 June 2007).


        Sadly, the Kenya government's iron-clad  response  to  the  Mungiki
        extremists - estimated at between 1.5  and  2  million  and  mainly
        youths between 18 and 40 years, with  400,000  of  them  as  women-
        reveals an unsettling lack of appreciation in official  circles  of
        the depth and complexity of Africa's youth crisis. (Kagwanja, Peter
        'Africa Insight' : When Africa  ignores  the  youth,  its  warlords
        celebrate' (Daily Nation, 22 June 2007)."


90.   Dr Knighton points out that when giving evidence in FK,  he       gave
      500,000 as a very likely bottom- of -the -range estimate of those  who
      have been oathed. Even Archbishop Beecher considered that  95  percent
      of his own Anglican Agikiyu had been oathed by the Mau Mau.

91.   Although the Mungiki is abhorrent to the much larger middle  class  of
      today, it is perfectly possible that many more have  been  oathed,  if
      insincerely, than 500,000. He points  out  that  at  para  34  of  its
      determination in FK, the Tribunal states that half a  million  Agikuyu
      are said to amount to '1.47 per cent' of the Agikikyu. However,  since
      it is accepted that there are at least 6 million Agikuyu of all  ages,
      this indicates that there are at  least  8.5  per  cent  of  the  post
      adolescent population who are Mungiki, or one in 12. Yet, at  para  71
      of the determination in FK, the Tribunal does  not  take  note  of  Dr
      Knighton's evidence as to the minimum figure of 500,000, and then goes
      on to hold that this would in any event represent  but  a  very  small
      percentage indeed of the Gikuyu population as  a  whole.  Dr  Knighton
      adds, referring to his supplemental report (C66) that  the  percentage
      of about 1 in 12 or 1 in 13 is a  significant  number,  in  particular
      when it is considered that children are not registered.

  92. Dr Knighton states that  whilst  JA  (Mungiki-Not  a  Religion)  Kenya
      [2004] UKIAT 00266 found the Mungiki to  be  'small',  that  does  not
      alter the facts on the ground. Further the news in  2007  clearly  and
      widely portrays Mungiki to be one of the  biggest  challenges  to  the
      Kenyan state and to peace for its citizens.  Whatever  the  number  of
      active adherents at any one point in time, its impact is huge.

  93. As to what is stated in the Appellant's submissions  in  FK  regarding
      FGM, (FGC as Dr Knighton prefers), (para 50) he reiterates  that  only
      those women well past child bearing age would be spared  FGC  if  that
      were to be forced. As to para 81 of FK, of course the  Mungiki  target
      small numbers if they want to force actual operations of FGC.

  94. On the matter of figures and statistics, Dr Knighton  noted  that  the
      Tribunal in FK had held that 'many millions' of women and  girls  have
      not been subject to FGC, but even on KHDS figures, only two million at
      the most, more likely 1.5 including infants and young  children,  have
      not experienced FGC. Assuming that adolescent girls or 'young  women',
      constitute a quarter of the female population, then we are talking  of
      850,000 young females, of whom 561,000 might not have  undergone  FGC,
      certainly not 'many  millions'.   The  Kenya  Demographic  and  Health
      Survey (KDHS) statistics cannot be relied upon as hard facts.  He  had
      dealt with them  meticulously  before  the  Tribunal,  explaining  the
      necessary  caveats,  in  particular  under  reporting,  for   numerous
      reasons. The outcome of this scrutiny is that 34 percent is  a  figure
      on the extreme bottom range of the proportion of Agikuyu over 15 years
      of age who have experienced FGC, whilst the top end could be around 50
      percent. Of course, all statistics in the region, except where customs
      are near universal, should be taken with a great deal of caution.  For
      example, a Zambain research student reported a respondent stating that
      he had a black and white television when she knew full  well  that  he
      had no television at all. The desire to appear  acceptable  to  modern
      trends can be very deceptive. It is still  possible  that  any  marked
      changes in this very private area  of  life  are  more  due  to  under
      reporting than to a shift in practice. [We recall the concern  of  the
      late President Jomo Kenyatta that an end to FGM would signal  the  end
      of the Gikuyu tribe (A51]).

  95. With regard to the wider issue of risk to women in Kenya, at  para  42
      of the determination in FK, it is stated that the  Tribunal  were  not
      addressed on that wider issue, but, Dr Knighton pointed  out,  he  had
      dealt with the matter at length at paras 5-9 of his first report  (C6-
      C17, and also paras 10-12, C17-C22), see post].

  96. As to the Tribunal's view in FK, at para 83, that the Appellant  could
      go to live in another tribal area, such as that of the Luo  and  Luyia
      who do not practise FGM, in particular Musoma, Dr Knighton referred to
      an earlier report of his in  another  matter,  in  which  he  included
      evidence of a Gikukyu woman being at real risk  of  forced  FGM  in  a
      strongly Luyia area.

  97. Regarding the report of a German agency (this is a  reference  to  the
      German Development  Organization,  which  is  quoted  by  Miss  Sigley
      Presenting Officer, in her submissions to the Tribunal in JA  (above).
      This  organization's  report  refers  to  a:  "'successful'  education
      programme aimed  at  eradicating  FGM  in  Kenya,  which  involves  an
      alternative rite of passage in which girls were taken through all  the
      formalities attending FGM but not the actual cut. Some  five  thousand
      girls had participated.  Those  who  had  been  circumcised  were  now
      condemning FGM in impressive numbers".

  98. Dr Knighton points out that reliance  upon  this  report  ignores  his
      evidence from a Gikuyu woman campaigner against FGM who was  committed
      to promoting the alternative, that this programme had, if anything,  a
      negative effect in deterring young girls who were later going  in  for
      the 'real thing'. In his  judgment,  her  evidence  has  the  ring  of
      objectivity and not self-interest.

  99. Dr Knighton deals with what he refers to as the 'NGO industry' at para
      10 of his first report (C17-C20). The explicit aims of an NGO  project
      tell little if what it actually accomplishes in the  long  term...when
      we see an NGO fulminating against  FGM,  what  we  see  mostly  is  an
      expression of the West's  abhorrence  of  a  selected  African  custom
      (though its origins are Semitic) rather than any fundamental change in
      the custom and its practitioners. Kenyan NGOs national presence can be
      interpreted as office premises in a number of  urban  centres  with  a
      limited number of office workers. The shift toward advocacy means that
      an NGO may have no hands  on  project,  and  refuge  accommodation  is
      extremely rare, for it  would  be  inundated  by  the  poorly  housed.
      Although there is mention of the Centre for Rehabilitation  of  Abused
      Women (CREAW), which provides legal aid to abused women, there  is  no
      mention that the safe house for 15 women ever found the  funding  that
      it needed (IRIN 25 October 2005). The  V-Day  Safe  House  for  Girls,
      started in 2002 in Narok, a semi-arid area, is  said  to  operate  the
      first safe house in Kenya for young  Maasai  girls  (Daily  Nation,  8
      December 2004). World Vision is said  to  have  a  rescue  centre  for
      Sabawot girls on Mount Elgon (Daily Nation  8.12  2004).  Whether  the
      personal funding continues for the planned 40  bed  safe  house  after
      2004 is not at all clear.

 100. The UN Family Planning Association of Uganda  claims  to  produce  and
      disseminate information, education and communication focused on  youth
      sexual and reproductive health, but not  to  implement  its  teaching.
      Maendeleo Ya Wanawake (MYWO 2000) claims to have  600,000  groups  and
      two million members paying an annual subscription of KSh 20 each,  but
      it does not answer all enquiries and has not finished constructing its
      website which was last updated in June 2000. Its Advocacy Strategy for
      the Elimination of FGM has been funded by the Ford FoundatIon, yet  it
      offers nothing for young women who choose to leave home to  avoid  it.
      The Chair is a KANU MP. Although MYWO has been  a  means  of  aligning
      women with a political party, it has  not  enjoyed  the  mass  support
      which KANU lost in the 1960s.

 101. NGO's will apply for what funding is available, but that any NGO  will
      achieve its stated aims can never be presumed. There are  said  to  be
      80,000  development  projects  in  Africa  spending  $2-3  billion  pa
      (Cleobury and Morgan 2004) with a general lack of  accountability  and
      indulging in 'mission creep', following  funding  availability  rather
      than their own expertise. If  7  NGOs  followed  up  by  Cleobury  and
      Morgan, six had vanished. In de Waal's words [1997:143): "...there  is
      in fact a tendency  towards  systemic  duplicity.  The  language  that
      relief agencies use to their peers, donors,  and  constituents,  is  a
      systemic  distortion  of  the  realities  of   their   work   on   the
      ground...This is the language  of  pragmatic  deals,  compromises  and
      turning a blind eye."

 102. Dr Knighton was reminded that he has given evidence  about  the  level
      and mode of transportation rates by the Gikuyu. Asked to   comment  on
      the conclusion by the Tribunal in FK  that  most  activities   are  in
      Nairobi and the absence of arrests shows a lack  of  activity  by  the
      Mungiki, he said that the reports are in Nairobi papers  and  Nairobi-
      based, and the reports come into Nairobi.  This stretch of  Kiambu  is
      very much the breeding ground of the Mungiki, incidents  are  recorded
      in the area although less than the slums of Nairobi.  Mungiki has been
      particularly strong in these areas.  There  are  many  more  areas  of
      societies of Mungiki  wielding power over the masses in Kiambu. Groups
      of men go out at night after dark and stop anyone going out  and  they
      insist that they escort people  home  and  insist  on  payment  of  50
      shillings.  The Mungiki are willing to  attack  the  police  and  they
      disrespect the police.

 103. Dr Knighton said that he has been advised by a Christian  pastor  with
      integrity that he should not risk interviewing a Mungiki.   There  has
      been 'the mother of all crackdowns' on the Mungiki and the Mungiki say
      they will 'fight fire with fire' so this finding, (by the Tribunal  in
      FK) that because there are no reports nothing is happening, is  wrong.
      Now we have heard that police have shot 500 in the back of  the  head.
      The Kenyans do not think that the Mungiki have gone away.  Numbers  of
      Members of Parliament are implicated with the  Mungiki  and  Professor
      Anderson supports him on this. An election is due and he was going  in
      two weeks to Kenya. Everyone fears that  the  Mungiki  are  the  youth
      wingers, the warriors to support the political parties.  It is fair to
      say that the president has tried to deal with them because most voters
      do not like the Mungiki and so a shoot to kill policy  has  been  used
      against this politico-religious movement of great persistence over the
      years.

 104. Dr Knighton was asked to comment on para 82 of  FK.  (We  here  insert
      para 82 for completeness):

        "82.     There are millions of Kikuyu women in Kenya who live their
              lives in a way which might not find approval by  the  Mungiki
              sect members.  As we have indicated, there is nothing  within
              the  objective  evidence  to  indicate  any   widespread   or
              significant targeting of such  women  by  the  Mungiki  sect.
              The activities of this sect,  as  can  be  gleaned  from  the
              reports, link  it  more  to  their  criminal  activities  and
              business  interests  rather  than  seeking  to  enforce   the
              widespread use of FGM.  Were an individual  to  frequent  the
              minibus premises in Nairobi she is more  likely  to  come  to
              meet Mungiki sect members than were she to live in a town  or
              village  that  did  not  espouse  such  values  as  the  sect
              reflects."


 105. In Dr Knighton's opinion, it is very generalised and he was  not  sure
      where the Tribunal  took  their  figures  from.  He  referred  to  his
      supplemental report.  850,000 eligible  Gikuyu  women  have  not  been
      circumcised.  Those  against  the  Mungiki  and  FGC  may  be  in  the
      Pentecostal and other Churches.  They are against the Mungiki who  are
      a minority of the Gikuyu, but are a virulent minority that  penetrates
      all activities save perhaps in the Protestant Churches. He stated that
      he did not want to sensationalise, but that the Mungiki  have  assumed
      targets against women.  The main form of disciplining women is at  the
      level of the home and the sub-clan and it is mother,  grandmother  and
      aunt who will persuade and carry power.

 106. Paragraph 83 (of FK) - refers to the Luo. The Luo do  not  circumcise.
      But because it is said that FGC prevents HIV, which has been backed by
      the USA and the Bill Gates Foundation, it is now being taken up.

 107. Asked could the Appellant go to a Luo area to be safe, as the Tribunal
      in FK had suggested, Dr Knighton replied that when  the  Tribunal  say
      'Musoomu' in the determination in FK they mean  Kusumo  which  is  the
      third largest town in Kenya.  "Musoma" is an "educated person".   What
      they were doing here, said Dr Knighton, was to look, in his  presence,
      for an area to which the Appellant might relocate.  The Luo are a very
      self confident people who hope to have the next president.  Their land
      is  very,  very  overcrowded  and  unhealthy  and  there  is  no  land
      available.  Also they are at odds with the Gikuyu so there would be  a
      problem.  The election will be between the Luo  young  blood  and  the
      Gikuyu.  There is a great deal of animosity between the  Luo  and  the
      Gikuyu and very little trust.  The Luo had the wrong end of the  stick
      after the end of independence and the Gikuyu the right end.  There  is
      fighting between the Luo and the Gikuyu.

 108. In cross examination, Mr Walker noted that Dr Knighton had said that a
      colleague had an interpretation of the Mungiki as  a  quasi  religious
      group. Dr Knighton agreed  that  Anderson  wrote  to  give  a  secular
      interpretation of them as an urban group based on protection  rackets.
      As to whether the Mungiki had changed since its  conception,  he  said
      that it was founded in 1989 on a religious basis on the other side  of
      the Rift Valley when the Gikuyu were pushed out by the  Kalenjin.   It
      is still a politico-religious movement which does not  depend  on  any
      particular leader.  Of course it changes and it has confrontation with
      and collaboration with agents of the  state  -  there  are  membership
      drives.  People are obliged to go underground.

 109. The  ethos  is  not  a  'mafia'  ethos,  it  is  seen  as  a  form  of
      traditionalism and Kenyans see a religious side, not a  Mafia.  It  is
      not  so  simple  as  traditionalists  wanting  to  go  back  to  their
      forefathers, it is the answer to marginalisation in  the  contemporary
      world.  As to how that sits with  protectionism  and  vigilantism,  Dr
      Knighton said that it is a form of discipline  and  of  power  and  an
      alternative government.  It is taking power  back  and  promoting  the
      unity of the people - the oath is one of unity, like the Mau Mau,  and
      so  the  old  chiefs  and  loyalists   and   collaborators   will   be
      marginalised.

 110. Mr Walker pointed out that  before  the  Immigration  Judge  at  first
      hearing (page 80 of the February 2007 bundle) there is an  article  by
      Grace N. Wamue.  She describes the Mungiki as mostly low  earners,  as
      Jua Kali - running small businesses  in  the  open  air.  Dr  Knighton
      agreed that many of the Mungiki are poorly educated. Many of them  are
      against Western education whereas  most  Kenyans  are  incredibly  for
      education. Although they have money and power  over  land  and  people
      from their activities of extortion and theft such as  'selling  title'
      to land that they do not own.

 111. Dr Knighton agreed that to go to school until 19 years of  age  equals
      being well educated. The Appellant's husband was an  estate  agent  in
      Nairobi. As to whether that would be a "middle class"  occupation,  Dr
      Knighton did not know. It was unclear whether he was involved  in  the
      unlawful selling of land or had been targeted for  membership  of  the
      Mungiki because of his work. He was relatively young, living  at  home
      in his family area and had not spread his wings.  Dr Knighton does not
      confine the Mungiki merely to the Jua Kali.   Many  are  in  transport
      too, or living on a little patch of land.

 112. The Appellant's husband lived in Nairobi, just thirteen miles from his
      home.  Dr Knighton would not class this as  well  off,  although  they
      might have become so.  The Mungiki also  inhabit  government  offices.
      The husband very quickly became the Chair of  Wangiku  branch  in  the
      location so that would go toward becoming middle class.   A  youth  in
      Kenya  equals  at  least  up  to  35  years  and  it  will  attract  a
      discontented older person as well as a discontented youth.

 113. The appellant is believed to be Roman  Catholic.  The  Roman  Catholic
      Church in Kenya has never taken a public stance against FGC and saw it
      as a means of benefiting at the distress  of  the  Protestants.   That
      does not stop some individuals from standing out against it.

 114. Dr Knighton understood that the Appellant has not undergone  FGC.  One
      can assume that it was not done to her sisters  either,  because  they
      reached marriageable age and normally it would be done at  around  the
      time of the arrival of menses. He agreed that it is very difficult  to
      know how many undergo FGC after 13 years old. The 2003 survey  by  the
      KDHS only interviewed those between 15 and 49. Dr Knighton had done  a
      calculation that if you added in the women of 50  and  over  it  would
      equal 41% of the population and of the Gikuyu  population  43%.   That
      assumes  that  the  sample  was  representative  and  he   knows   the
      interviewers did not go to outlying areas in Kenya, and  assumes  that
      people were truthful with the young surveyors.  He regards the  survey
      as showing a minimum rate of FGC.  The more rhetoric there is  in  the
      media the more secret it becomes or the more they want to  please  the
      interviewer so that it is not a question of importing hard facts but a
      matter of social negotiations.

 115. To add in those  aged  50  and  over  would  include  women  who  were
      subjected to it before. There have been changes since the Missionaries
      attacked the practice in the 1920s.  The Wamue family were against it.
      It is taken to be a Protestant family given the use  of  Isaiah  as  a
      name.

 116. It was put to Dr Knighton  that  he  had  explained  about  Gikuyu  in
      Nairobi and that it is difficult for them to move outside. Dr Knighton
      was clear that he did not say that.  Rather, he  said  they  are  very
      happy to go anywhere where they can insert themselves without too much
      trouble.

 117. As to whether the Mungiki have a base in Mombassa, Dr Knighton  stated
      that it rises and falls with the position of the Agikuyu who are there
      because it is a port.  There is low-level paid employment or there are
      shops and small traders and so the Mungiki is present.  He  was  there
      in 1997 and the Agikuyu were driven out.  It is  a  coastal  area  and
      very Islamic as a place and there are local politics and it is not  an
      anonymous place. It is not to be regarded as a melting pot. There  are
      many tribes represented. There are Mungiki in  Mombassa.  Dr  Knighton
      had read a report only the day of the hearing, of the  Mungiki  saying
      "we are opening an "official branch" now" implying that there had been
      an unofficial branch before.

 118. At page 35 the Kenyan police were accused over deaths - he  said  that
      the Mungiki were fighting fire with fire.  The police  are  doing  the
      same and they have shot more people than the  Mungiki.   Whether  they
      shot the right people he does not know.  The strength of this response
      shows that they have been unable to  deal  with  the  Mungiki  despite
      crackdown after crackdown.  The Cabinet  is  not  at  one.   An  Inner
      Cabinet Minister is often accused of being pro-Mungiki.  Many say that
      talking and reconciliation will bring the Mungiki into the  fold.  The
      Mungiki have been used by the government as its strong arm.   But  the
      Luo leader uses the Luo Taliban in  the  slums  of  Kibera.   The  Luo
      vigilante group in the slums of Nairobi who fight in  the  slums  take
      the name Taliban from the Afghans and use it for  their  own  purpose.
      They also take names such as "Hitler" and the like.

 119. As to relocation, Dr Knighton was referred to FK at paragraphs 67  and
      93 bottom of page 17 "We can see  little  reason  ..."  and  asked  to
      comment. We set out those two paragraphs for completeness.


        "67.It is noted that there is opposition to the practice from  many
           churches both  Pentecostal  and  Roman  Catholic.   Dr  Knighton
           speaks  of  the  lack  of  feasibility  of   individual   church
           congregations giving refuge in the long term.  Such seems to us,
           however,  to  fundamentally  misunderstand  the  nature  of  the
           relocation which is being sought.    Clearly  it  would  not  be
           right to expect an individual to remain in hiding or be sent  to
           some remote area in a dry desert  or  a  cold  climate  to  live
           virtually as a prisoner.  However, from what  we  understand  of
           church culture in Kenya a church informs the  morality  and  the
           community spirit of the community  which  forms  around  it  and
           worships  within  it.   There  may  indeed  be  churches  which,
           according to Dr Knighton, would  say  one  thing  and  practice
           another.  We are concerned, however, with  those  congregations,
           and we find that there would be many, who provide  a  focus  for
           the community.  We do not consider that Dr Knighton's view, that
           such church communities would demand that the individual be self
           sufficient, is consonant with the evidence  showing  the  active
           work done by the church to help all of the congregation.  It  is
           difficult to understand what he means by such terms.  We can see
           little reason why a caring  church  community  would  not  offer
           assistance and support. There are a  number  of  CBOs  and  NGOs
           operating within Kenya.   We have regard to the letter from  the
           British High Commission in Nairobi of  14 November  2005.   All
           these organisations that are set out therein  could  potentially
           provide support and assistance. The letter from the British High
           Commission is, as we so find, fairly balanced in its response to
           the questions posed.  There are indeed high unemployment  rates,
           "throughout Kenya the CPO's, NGOs and self-help groups  do  give
           assistance to the destitute and those girls and woman attempting
           to avoid FGM".   Dr Knighton sought to dismiss  that  letter  as
           emanating from an organisation with  a  "cloistered  existence".
           Once again that is somewhat of an overstatement of reality.  For
           our part we can see no basis for  that  statement.   It  is  the
           function of the embassy to be well informed and there is nothing
           to indicate that it is not so.


        93.      The  appellant  in  her  village  worshipped  as  part  of
           Christian family.  There is no reason to believe that she  would
           not be welcome in other churchgoing  communities.   We  have  no
           doubt that a caring church community would offer  assistance  to
           the appellant in order for her  to  establish  herself  and  her
           family.  After all, her own experience  has  been  of  receiving
           considerable generosity from a church with which  she  had  only
           the briefest association; the Priest  being  willing  indeed  to
           provide the funds for her to come to the UK.  It is of course to
           be recognised that without her husband the appellant may be at a
           disadvantage.  However, there must be many  widows  who  survive
           within the Kikuyu community".


 120. Dr Knighton said he was unclear as to  where  the  Tribunal  got  this
      information from.  It was not from him.  The  first  sentence  is  not
      factual because the Roman Catholic Church has not spoken  out  against
      FGC and the church does  not  provide  accommodation  -  help  can  be
      prayer, visiting, laying on of hands, famine relief. He has  not  seen
      any offer  of  short  term  accommodation.   He  has  seen  occasional
      payments of school fees and perhaps the odd hostel for a  young  girl,
      but it is very infrequent and very, very hard to sustain.

 121. Paras 40 - 43 of FK  refer  to  Catholic  relief.  This  is  pastoral,
      assistance with access to water, health, education,  vaccination,  but
      not organising how people can live outside the community.   Mr  Walker
      referred to page 43 - last paragraph and suggested that  it  can't  be
      said CRS is not helping people with HIV outside  their  community.  Dr
      Knighton replied that para 41 is about the CRS in Kenya and  there  is
      nothing there on accommodation. Paras 42-43 are  primarily  on  Uganda
      and  42-43  do  not  mention  Kenya.  Emergency  support  provided  is
      temporary until people can go home  or  feed  themselves  again.   The
      micro finances are for those who can convince the NGO  that  they  can
      repay the loan.  If she (the Appellant) had a clean bill of health and
      a home, he was of the view that this Appellant could  benefit  from  a
      micro finance loan, but the more you do business the more the  Mungiki
      is likely to identify you.


 122. As to whether the Appellant could go to Mombassa, Dr  Knighton  stated
      that there are Agikuyu there and so it cannot be ruled out that  there
      are Mungiki there, even if it is wished that they are not there.  Most
      would wish that they are not there. There have always been Agikuyu  in
      Mombassa.  People in Mombassa do not  regard  it  as  home  and  still
      regard home as the homeland.  The  population  of  Mombassa  does  not
      exceed half a million.  Nairobi is 3,000,000 to 4,000,000.   Then  you
      have Kisumu, perhaps Eldoret and then after that Kenya is increasingly
      rural.

 123. As to the chances of the Appellant fitting into a community of half  a
      million, she is recognisably Agikuyu and is  immediately  put  in  the
      slot by those there - she will not be anonymous and people  will  want
      to know more and more about her.  In Mombassa these are coastal people
      and they look very different.  They have Melanesian influences and are
      Muslim and go about in black robes.  This appellant could not  pretend
      to be one of them.  Dr Knighton has been there a number of  times  and
      had students there.  He is returning to Mombassa at the  end  of  next
      year.  He first went to Nairobi in  1984  and  lived  in  the  Central
      Province mostly and progressed towards the Ugandan borders. He  worked
      for the Anglican Church across the whole country and has students  and
      colleagues across the country from the Ethiopian border to the Maasai.
       He visits their homes whenever he can.

 124. Mr Walker stated that the appellant fears the Mungiki would  find  her
      and attempt to force FGC upon her.  This is a fear of hers. As to  the
      likelihood of that, Dr Knighton stated that the risk  is  not  limited
      just to the Mungiki.  If she fell into a larger family of  Agikuyu  or
      even a Gikuyu family with pro-FGC ideas or  that  became  pro-FGC  she
      would be at risk.  He says there is a  serious  possibility  that  the
      Mungiki will find her and that she will  be  forced  to  undergo  FGC.
      There was a trial of Mungiki in 2006 in which the DPP offered security
      to witnesses.  Also,  in  2007  the  government  offered  security  to
      witnesses.  If they didn't do so no one would testify or give evidence
      that would convict a Mungiki.  The DPP was offering safe haven  abroad
      to witnesses and whistleblowers (see pages C91 - C92) If the Appellant
      were an ordinary member of the public this would not  apply,  but  she
      has annoyed the Mungiki in Wangiku, and her husband would be conscious
      of having to set an example and he  and  the  platoon  would  need  to
      avenge.  The Mungiki will mix in Nairobi and all the  places  they  go
      to, unpredictably, according to the casual employment  and  their  own
      family networks that they pick up.  The Appellant's husband  may  have
      been shot in the back of the head, but his  followers  will  not  have
      forgotten that a wife has shamed her  husband  and  has  been  against
      discipline.  Gikuyu women may be headstrong and get up and go, but the
      men will say this is very bad.

 125. Mr Walker put it to Dr Knighton that there is a large  population  who
      would say that the Appellant  was  right  to  leave  her  husband.  Dr
      Knighton replied that they would not say she was right or that she had
      a right to leave her husband.  What goes on inside the home is  to  be
      withstood.  But it is right that the Mungiki have taken  a  battering.
      He stood firmly by his opinion that the normal situation is to find  a
      man and she would need to marry outside her clan.

 126. Dr Knighton agreed that there must, of course, be single women working
      in banks and the like. They may delay marriage  that  is  all.   There
      will  be  women  whose  men  have  left  them  who  are  coping,  with
      difficulty, with the support of  kin,  namely  parents,  siblings  etc
      where the individual woman has  a  home  -  an  urban/rural  exchange.
      Salaries are not sufficient to live  upon.  You  have  to  live  by  a
      variety of means, most of which rely on kith and  kin.  The  appellant
      was able to use her own money to leave. Presumably she sold  goods  to
      do so - divested herself.

 127. In re-examination it was put to Dr Knighton that he had said that  the
      Appellant would have annoyed the Mungiki locally and  her  husband  or
      his supporters would recall  this.   The  Appellant  says  her  family
      disappeared and because, she says,  of  her,  and  the  same  reasons.
      Could she enquire safely of their whereabouts?

 128. Dr Knighton replied that she is Mrs _________.  She may want  to  call
      herself Ms _________.  She may possibly be able to use ethnic networks
      to try to trace her mother and siblings, but  there  is  a  risk  that
      someone will tell the Mungiki to get money, or out of loyalty  to  the
      Mungiki.  The police will not help  and  she  risks  exposure  to  the
      Mungiki.  Most Mungiki will be unaware of the husband's anger and  his
      platoon but one does not  know  where  the  husband  and  his  Mungiki
      platoon are, or when they will come to hear of her, and so her fear is
      with reason.

 129. Asked about some headstrong Kikuyu women leaving  the  home,  he  said
      that they  often  "wear  the  trousers"  and  may  be  headstrong  and
      outspoken - for example the Minister of Justice  whom  he  knows.   It
      does not mean one gets social approval and one gets to such a position
      only from a position of strength, via the upper or  the  middle  class
      family, the elite.  There are not many  that  climb  that  ladder.  He
      added that where a woman has separated from her husband or partner, he
      expects to see her go home to her family, or if  none,  to  her  rural
      homeland.  The response is not automatically  to  welcome  such  women
      because of the problems it causes.

 130. We asked Dr Knighton whether he had any  comment  on  the  Operational
      Guidance  Note  (Respondent's  OGN,  3  September  2007,  Respondent's
      bundle, pp47-57). He referred  to  page  49,  2.8  of  the  OGN,  John
      Githongo, there mentioned, is a friend of his.  He has had  to  leave.
      It has been said that because the mass of the Mungiki are poor they do
      not have access to office, but they  do  enrich  themselves  by  their
      activities and they have numbers in the police and the government  and
      this is one reason why they are still  around  -  if  your  Member  of
      Parliament is 'batting' for you he can make the bureaucracy yield.

 131. As to para 2.10 - domestic violence is widespread.  This  gives  space
      for the Mungiki to spread.  There are women Mungiki and they  are,  of
      course, very much in favour of FGC,  and  girls  and  women,  a  great
      number, will undergo FGC. As to 3.62 on FGM - only four of the  groups
      did not practise.  The Teso are really Ugandan.  They are  up  against
      the Ugandan border.  The Turkana live in a very  hot  desert  and  are
      highly nomadic and it would  be  unreasonable  and  impossible  for  a
      Gikuyu woman to live in such conditions.  The Luo  have  already  been
      discussed and even then there  is  a  great  deal  of  FGC  (following
      publicity that it prevents HIV).  As far as he Luyia are concerned, Dr
      Knighton had come across a case in a Luyia town, of a  small  minority
      Agikuyu community, where the grandmother insisted  the  child  undergo
      FGC against the mother's wishes and she fled to Nairobi.  The  Mungiki
      will also be a feature then, albeit not in strong platoons.

 132. At page 55 - medical treatment - 4.44 of the OGN supports his  general
      analysis and it is terrible generality.  He concluded that this survey
      of Kenya as a whole  on  mental  health,  mental  health  care,  seems
      reasonable.

 133. Having referred to the OGN, we set out an  extract  for  completeness,
      this being the most up to  date  background  report  in  the  form  of
      documentary evidence that we have before us from the Respondent,  (the
      others being the March 2006 United States Department  Report  (USSDR);
      Country of Origin Information Report (COIR) April 2003; IRBC  Research
      Response on FGM, 16 February 2005, upon which the OGN draws,  together
      with a December 2005 article 'banking on women'; BBC News  6  November
      2007: Kenya police accused over deaths,  and  internet  articles  from
      Catholic Relief Service, Kenya, 2007):

        "3.6.2. Treatment. The law prohibits FGM; but it is still practised
              particularly  in  the   rural   areas.   According   to   the
              Government's August 2004 Demographic and Health  Survey,  32%
              of the women had undergone FGM. FGM is usually  performed  at
              an early age. In September 2004, an international  conference
              on FGM in Nairobi reported that, of the  county's  42  ethnic
              groups, only four (the Luo, Luhya, Teso and Turkana) did  not
              practise FGM. According to an NGO (Development of Women), the
              percentage of girls undergoing the procedure was  80%-90%  in
              some districts of Eastern Nyanza and Rift Valley Provinces.


        3.6.3.   In 2006 there was more public awareness and programmes  to
              stop  the  practice,  in  which  government  officials  often
              participated. Some churches and NGOs provide shelter to girls
              fleeing their homes to  avoid  the  practice,  but  community
              elders  and  some  politicians  frequently  interfered   with
              attempts to stop the practice. A media report in January 2006
              noted that the frequency had dropped in one district  to  54%
              compared to 93% in 1999. In  2005  there  were  a  number  of
              arrests of individuals accused of  applying  forced  FGM.  In
              2006 government officials continued to attempt to  stem  FGM.
              In December 2006 the provincial commissioner of  Rift  Valley
              Province was quoted as having declared that any civil servant
              condoning or supporting FGM(such as nurses or  local  chiefs)
              would be fired. He added that the parents of girls  subjected
              to the practice would be arrested.


              At 3.6.5. and 3.6.6. there is reference to  examples  of  the
              authorities  arresting  and  prosecuting  those  accused   of
              performing forced  FGM  and  to  the  creation  of  'no  cut'
              initiation rites  for  girls,  for  example,  by  the  Family
              Planning  Association  of   Kenya   ('initiate   me   through
              education').


        3.6.7 Internal relocation. The law provides for freedom of movement
             and  the  government  generally   respected   that   right   in
             practice... FGM is a regionalized practice, mainly in  Eastern,
             Nyanza and Rift Valley Provinces. Having regard to the guidance
             in FK,...it is unlikely to be unduly harsh for those  who  fear
             being forced to undergo or perform FGM to  internally  relocate
             to another region to escape this threat."


134.  As to the Mungiki, the OGN has this to say:


        "Mungiki Sect


        APOLOGETICS  RESEARCH  RESOURCES  ON  RELIGIOUS  MOVEMENTS,  CULTS,
        SECTS, WORLD RELIGIONS AND RELATED ISSUES HAS REPORTED  ON  MUNGIKI
        THAT:  "THE FORMATION OF MUNGIKI SECT REMAINS  A  MYSTERY  TO  MANY
        KENYANS. THERE HAVE BEEN CONTRADICTING STATEMENTS. SOME REPORTS SAY
        THE GROUP POSSIBLY STARTED IN 1988 WITH THE  AIM  OF  TOPPLING  THE
        GOVERNMENT OF IMMEDIATE FORMER PRESIDENT OF KENYA, DANIEL  TOROTICH
        ARAP MOI. THOSE WHO SHARE THIS THINKING BELIEVE THE  GROUP  WAS  AN
        OFFSHOOT OF MWAKENYA, AN UNDERGROUND MOVEMENT  FORMED  IN  1979  TO
        CHALLENGE THE KENYA AFRICAN NATIONAL  UNION  (KANU)  REGIME.  OTHER
        REPORTS INDICATE THAT MUNGIKI WAS FOUNDED IN  1987  BY  SOME  YOUNG
        SCHOOLBOYS." (APOLOGETICS RESEARCH RESOURCES) [41]


        Confronted by authorities, their swift defence would be that theirs
        was a group of traditionalists interested  only  in  re-introducing
        and promoting traditional way  of  life  among  the  Kikuyu  ethnic
        group. They posed as a traditional religious group, but an  unusual
        one because taking snuff during worship was  their  trademark.  But
        their hardline stand against  Western  idiologies  put  them  on  a
        collision course with the police. They started stripping  naked  in
        public, ladies wearing miniskirts and long trousers, and  violently
        promoted female cut [Female circumcision - AI]. They  would  engage
        police in fierce running battles, and on  a  number  of  occasions,
        violently raided  police  stations  to  'free  arrested  members'."
        (Apologetics Research Resources) [41]


        Their  violent  activities  intensified.  They  systematically  and
        forcefully  began  taking  over  management  of  commuter   service
        vehicles, popularly known as  Matatu.  In  March  last  year,  they
        clashed with a vigilante group  in  Nairobi,  and  later  unleashed
        terror on residents of a slum area, killing 23 people and  injuring
        several others.  This  prompted  the  government  to  outlaw  their
        grouping. They however, continued to exist, and  even  more  openly
        propagated  their  warlike   activities."   (Apologetics   Research
        Resources) [41]


        BBC News has reported in  an  article  'Kenya's  secretive  Mungiki
        sect', dated 24 May 2007, that: "Today, Mungiki followers no longer
        sniff tobacco in public and  have  traded  in  the  dreadlocks  and
        unkempt appearance  for  neat  haircuts  and  business  suits.  The
        religious bit is just a camouflage. It's more like  an  army  unit.
        They extort, engage in fraud, robbery, murder and even kidnap their
        victims. Media reports say the sect has evolved over the years into
        an organised and intimidating underworld gang  with  bases  in  the
        capital, Nairobi, and parts of Central and Rift  Valley  Provinces.
        They control public transport routes and demand illegal levies from
        operators. Mungiki  followers  reign  supreme  within  city  slums,
        notably Mathare in the east  of  the  capital.  Here  they  provide
        illegal water and electricity connections to hundreds of  makeshift
        shacks." (BBC News, 24 May 2007) [10f]


        The BBC article also reports that: "Residents  of  the  slums  also
        have to pay a levy to the  sect  to  be  able  to  access  communal
        toilets and for security during the night  in  the  crime  infested
        slums. Following the latest gruesome murders,  the  government  has
        vowed to wipe out the group  but  many  Kenyans  feel  there  is  a
        lukewarm approach to counter activities of the sect. Its leadership
        has openly claimed to have two million members around  the  country
        and to have infiltrated government offices, factories, schools  and
        the armed forces. "Mungiki  is  a  politically  motivated  gang  of
        youths," says Ken Ouko, a sociology lecturer at the  University  of
        Nairobi. Mr Ouko suggests that security  forces  should  infiltrate
        Mungiki to be able to counter its growing influence in  Kenya.  But
        the  sect  is  known  to  operate  in  secrecy,  a  fact  that   is
        complicating efforts by the police to identify its members  as  the
        crackdown on them continues." (BBC News, 24 May 2007) [10f]."

135.        As to women and as to  FGM  and  HIV/AIDS,  the  OGN  states  as
      follows:

        "Women


        ALTHOUGH ALL  FORMS  OF  VIOLENCE  AGAINST  WOMEN  ARE  PROHIBITED,
        DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  AGAINST  WOMEN  WAS  A  SERIOUS  AND  WIDESPREAD
        PROBLEM. THE  PENAL  CODE  DOES  NOT  CONTAIN  SPECIFIC  PROVISIONS
        AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, BUT TREATS  IT  AS  AN  ASSAULT.  POLICE
        GENERALLY WOULD NOT INVESTIGATE  IN  CASES  OF  DOMESTIC  VIOLENCE,
        WHICH THEY  CONSIDERED  PRIVATE  FAMILY  MATTERS.  THE  2004  KENYA
        DEMOGRAPHIC AND HEALTH SURVEY REVEALED THAT MORE THAN HALF OF WOMEN
        HAD EXPERIENCED DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AFTER THE AGE OF 15  YEARS.  WIFE
        BEATING WAS PREVALENT AND LARGELY  CONDONED  BY  MUCH  OF  SOCIETY.
        NGOS, INCLUDING THE LAW  SOCIETY  OF  KENYA,  PROVIDED  FREE  LEGAL
        ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC  VIOLENCE.  ON  JULY  14,  [2006]
        PRESIDENT KIBAKI SIGNED INTO LAW THE  SEXUAL  OFFENSES  ACT,  WHICH
        CRIMINALIZED RAPE, DEFILEMENT, CHILD PORNOGRAPHY AND  SEX  TOURISM,
        AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT; THE LAW HAD NOT BEEN IMPLEMENTED  BY  YEAR'S
        END." (US STATE DEPARTMENT:  HUMAN  RIGHTS  PRACTICES  KENYA  2006)
        [4A](SECTION 5)


        The  new  law  maintained  the  existing  penalty  of  up  to  life
        imprisonment for rape, although actual sentences  usually  were  no
        longer than 10 years. The law  established  minimum  sentences  for
        both rape and defilement, with higher penalties for the latter. The
        rate of prosecution remained low because  of  cultural  inhibitions
        against publicly discussing sex,  a  fear  of  retribution  against
        victims, the disinclination of  police  to  intervene  in  domestic
        disputes, and the unavailability of  doctors  who  otherwise  might
        provide  the   necessary   evidence   for   conviction.   Moreover,
        traditional culture permitted a husband to discipline his  wife  by
        physical means. Neither the new law nor  previously  existing  laws
        specifically prohibit spousal rape. According to police statistics,
        there were 2,736 rapes nationwide during the year  [2006]  compared
        with 2,867 reported in 2005.Available statistics underreported  the
        problem, since social mores discouraged women  from  going  outside
        their families or ethnic  groups  to  report  sexual  abuse.  Human
        rights groups estimated that over  16,000  rapes  were  perpetrated
        annually." (US State Department: Human Rights Practices Kenya 2006)
        [4a](section 5)


        Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)


        The law prohibits FGM, but  is  still  practiced,  particularly  in
        rural areas. According to  the  UN  Children's  Fund  (UNICEF),  32
        percent of women  had  undergone  FGM.  In  2004  an  international
        conference on FGM in Nairobi reported  that  of  the  country's  42
        ethnic groups, only  four  (the  Luo,  Luhya,  Teso,  and  Turkana,
        comprising  25  percent  of  the  country's  population)  did   not
        traditionally practice FGM.  According  to  the  NGO  Maendeleo  Ya
        Wanawake (Development of Women), the percentage of girls undergoing
        the procedure was 80  to  90  percent  in  some  districts  of  the
        Eastern, Nyanza, and Rift Valley provinces. There were more  public
        awareness and programs to stop the  practice  in  which  government
        officials often participated. For example, in December a  Methodist
        and a Presbyterian church group  conducted  alternative  ceremonies
        for 500  girls  and  boys."  (US  State  Department:  Human  Rights
        Practices Kenya 2006) [4a](section 5)


        FGM usually was performed at an early age. Some churches  and  NGOs
        provided shelter to  girls  who  fled  their  homes  to  avoid  the
        practice, but community elders frequently interfered with  attempts
        to stop the  practice.  A  January  media  report  noted  that  the
        frequency had dropped in one district to 54 percent compared to  93
        percent in 1999 before awareness  campaigns  began  targeting  FGM.
        Despite anti-FGM programs, which increasingly focused on young  men
        to convince them to marry women who had not  undergone  FGM,  women
        and children who had not undergone FGM faced  social  stigma."  (US
        State Department: Human Rights Practices Kenya  2006)  [4a](section
        5)


        In December 2005 there were a  number  of  arrests  of  individuals
        accused of applying forced FGM.  For  example,  four  parents  were
        arrested along with a man who performed FGM. In mid - December 2005
        a woman in Nyandarua District plead guilty in court for  subjecting
        four girls to FGM.  During  the  same  month,  the  Kuria  district
        commissioner called for police to arrest parents who  forced  their
        daughters to undergo the procedure.  In  April  2005  17  girls  in
        Marakwet District fled to avoid  FGM  and  were  given  shelter  in
        Eldoret by the NGO Center for Human Rights and Democracy. In  April
        2005 police  forcibly  removed  the  girls  from  the  shelter  and
        returned them to their villages. According to a  media  report,  20
        girls were still in hiding with the aid of  a  church  in  Marakwet
        District three years after they fled  their  homes  to  avoid  FGM.
        Government officials continued to attempt to stem FGM. In December,
        the provincial commissioner of the Rift Valley Province was  quoted
        as having declared that any civil servant condoning  or  supporting
        FGM (such as nurses or local chiefs) would be fired. He added  that
        the parents of girls subjected to the practice would be  arrested."
        (US  State  Department:  Human   Rights   Practices   Kenya   2006)
        [4a](section 5)


        HIV/AIDS


        The [HIV/AIDS] epidemic in Kenya peaked in the late 1990s  with  an
        overall HIV prevalence of 10% in adults; this  declined  to  7%  in
        2003, and the most recent sentinel surveillance evidence  indicates
        that adult prevalence has now  fallen  to  6.1%  as  of  end  2004.
        (UNGASS)[8a](p5) Currently all provincial hospitals and 70 district
        hospitals are  providing  comprehensive  HIV  care  including  core
        components of counselling services, prevention and treatment of OIs
        [opportunistic infections] and ARV [anti-retro virals]. ... Because
        of reduced costs, mobilisation of resources, and the development of
        guidelines and systems, there has been a six-fold increase  in  the
        number of patients on ARV therapy, from 3,000 patients in  2002  to
        54,000 by September 2005 (Report on the Joint AIDS Programme Review
        2005, NACC). Just over nineteen and a half percent (19.7%) of women
        and men with advanced HIV infection received antiretroviral therapy
        in the first 3 quarters of 2005." (UNGASS) [8a] (p26)"


 136. That we have referred here to the above mentioned  evidence  does  not
      mean that we have not had regard to the  other  articles  and  reports
      dealing with the situation in Kenya and with the Mungiki and with FGM,
      which have been produced by the parties, all of which we  have  listed
      in Annex A to this determination, and all of which we have borne fully
      in mind, and some of which we refer to further below.

 137. We have, in  addition,  borne  in  mind  the  reports  concerning  the
      Appellant from clinicians, therapists and counsellors:

       a. Psychiatric reports of Dr Christopher Buller dated 27th April 2005
          and 17th November 2006  (A's  bundle  section  A  pp  162-177  and
          section B pp 1-21);


       b. Letter of Karen Williams CPN for SW Yorkshire  Mental  Health  NHS
          Trust dated 22nd January 2007, with annex copy note of  Dawn  Hart
          CPN (A's bundle section B pp 22-24);


       c. Report(s) of Anne Wilkinson of  Kirklees  Rape  and  Sexual  Abuse
          Counselling Centre dated 28th April 2004  and  19th  January  2007
          (A's bundle section A pp 37-38, section B p 25)


 138. Dr Buller, in the 2006 report, notes  some  improvement  in  that  the
      Appellant is not any longer suffering full blown post traumatic stress
      disorder and there is no longer active suicidal ideation, although she
      is affected by the loss of her family and may be mildly or  moderately
      depressed, which depression may be attributable  to  these  continuing
      proceedings. Despite previous rape, she had progressed to  being  able
      to have a relationship with a man, although  there  remained  fear  of
      groups of men. The doctor, does, however, state  that  he  would  have
      significant concern  should  the  Appellant  be  subjected  to  forced
      removal to Kenya, specifically that she may attempt to take her  life,
      and that her ability  to  care  for  her  children  may  be  adversely
      affected.

 139. Karen Williams, Community Psychiatric  Nurse,  in  her  letter  of  22
      January 2007 states that the Appellant was referred to  the  Community
      Mental health team in June 2003 suffering from Post  Traumatic  Stress
      Disorder  (PTSD),  moderate  depression,  social  isolation  and  poor
      authorization, these mental health problems  were  felt  to  be  as  a
      result of her traumatic experiences in Kenya, including rape  and  the
      loss of her mother and siblings.  Ms Williams or her  colleagues  have
      monitored the Appellant since 2003 and  in  2006  her  anti-depressant
      medication was reduced due to her pregnancy. However, due to  definite
      decline, in October 2006 she  began  taking  medication  again,  which
      resulted in improved mood and ability to cope with daily tasks. She is
      a good mother to her daughter who  has  settled  well  at  school.  Ms
      Williams relies upon a statement of Dawn Hart, a colleague who  worked
      with her, dated 3 March 2005, in which it  is  also  stated  that  the
      Appellant is a good mother to her daughter. But concern  is  expressed
      at the negative effects upon the Appellant of these  proceedings,  and
      it is her opinion at that time that should the Appellant  be  forcibly
      returned to Kenya, she may attempt to take her life.

 140. Anne Wilkinson, of Kirklees Rape and Sexual Abuse  Counselling  Centre
      refers in her report to the counselling that the  Appellant  has  been
      undergoing since August 2003. As of 19 January 2007,  it  remains  her
      opinion that the Appellant continues to need  counselling  because  of
      her mental health problems of depression and suicidal  ideation  as  a
      result of rape and other abuse endured in Kenya, the  loss  of  family
      members, and as a result of the prolongation of these proceedings.

 141. We are mindful that these reports are not dealing with the up to  date
      position as of today, but remind ourselves that the  Appellant's  case
      is not based upon resistance to her return by  reason  of  her  mental
      health alone, rather her state of health as  reflected  at  the  times
      when these reports were written, is to be considered as  part  of  her
      personal history and characteristics when deciding whether she  is  at
      real risk on return, and in relation to article 8 ECHR.

 142.  In  addition,  we  have,  of  course  taken  into  consideration  the
      statements of the Appellant herself, bearing in mind that there is  no
      challenge to her credibility.


The Law and the Burden and Standard of Proof


143.  In reaching our decision we have borne fully in mind the relevant  law
      and immigration rules, including the 1951 Convention relating  to  the
      Status of  Refugees  and  its  1967  Protocol,  and  the  Handbook  on
      Procedures  and  Criteria  for  Determining   Refugee   Status   ('The
      Handbook') (Geneva, January 2000). By Article 1(a) (2) of the  Refugee
      Convention the term "refugee" shall apply to any person who:-

           "Owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
           race, religion, nationality, membership of a  particular  social
           group or political  opinion,  is  outside  the  country  of  his
           nationality, and is unable, or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence  is  unable,  or,  owing  to  such  fear,  is
           unwilling to return to it."

144.  We remind ourselves of the provisions of  The  Refugee  or  Person  in
      Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006, and
      of the other directions we have set out at paras 51-56 above.


145.  The Appellant places specific reliance on Article 3 of the  ECHR.   It
      is for an Appellant to show that there  are  substantial  grounds  for
      believing that he or she is at real risk of ill-treatment contrary  to
      Article  3  ECHR,  which  prohibits  torture,  inhuman  or   degrading
      treatment or punishment.  Where there is a failure to show a breach of
      Article 3, there may be a breach of the right to  physical  and  moral
      integrity under Article 8.  Unlike Article 3,  Article  8  rights  are
      qualified rights protecting the  right  to  respect  for  private  and
      family life, home and correspondence.  It is for an Appellant to  show
      that one or more of such qualified rights is engaged and that there is
      an interference with such a right or rights.

146.  In coming to our determination, following Section 85 (4) of  the  2002
      Act, we may take into account evidence about any matter which we think
      relevant to the substance of the decision,  including  evidence  which
      concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.

Submissions, Consideration and Findings

 147. Mr Walker in his submission placed reliance upon the written  skeleton
      argument, which itself relies, as we have indicated, solely  upon  the
      guidance in the case of FK to which we have referred in  great  detail
      above, so that we do not repeat those points here.

 148. There is no challenge to the credibility  of  the  Appellant  and  the
      relevant facts are as summarized above, in  particular,  although  not
      exclusively, in the summary from the Court of Appeal.

 149. Mr Walker submitted that because  there  had  not  been  a  presenting
      officer before the adjudicator there was very  little  evidence  about
      the Appellant's family in Kenya. That may be  so,  but  there  was  no
      application  for  an  adjournment  and  no  written  submissions  were
      provided by the Respondent which might have drawn  the  focus  of  the
      adjudicator and  the  Appellant's  then  Counsel  to  the  point.  The
      situation serves to  highlight  the  importance  of  the  presence  of
      properly prepared representatives for each of the  parties  at  appeal
      hearings. Had that been the position before the adjudicator,  then  we
      may not be where we are now. It is recalled that the Appellant was not
      permitted to give oral evidence before the Tribunal. Mr Walker made no
      request that the Appellant be called to give oral evidence before us.

 150. The Appellant's evidence as to her family members in Kenya is  to  the
      effect that her mother and sisters disappeared at the  time  when  the
      Appellant was raped by the Mungiki, and  have  not  been  seen  since.
      Although the rapes, the threats of forced FGM on the Appellant and her
      mother and sisters, and the disappearance of her family  members  were
      all reported to the police by the Appellant  and  they  were  informed
      where they could find the members of the Mungiki, including her former
      boyfriend, _________, the police did nothing and  did  not  arrest  or
      detain anyone in  connection  with  these  incidents.  The  background
      evidence, for example, Amnesty  International,  USSDR,  CIPU/COIR/OGN;
      Human Rights Watch, shows that there continues  to  be  a  culture  of
      impunity within the Kenyan authorities, including the police and other
      security forces, and insurmountable obstacles are faced by victims  of
      rape and domestic violence who seek to bring perpetrators to justice.

 151. We find that the  Respondent  cannot  and  does  not  now  impugn  the
      credibility and reliability of the Appellant and her claim, so that we
      are concerned here with  deciding  whether,  on  the  facts  there  is
      evidence to show to the reasonable degree of likelihood that her  case
      is made good.

 152. Whilst Mr Walker sought to rely upon  the  negative  findings  of  the
      Tribunal in FK in relation to Dr Knighton and his evidence, he did not
      go so far as to formally challenge his credibility or reliability,  as
      opposed to the form of his expression of his opinion evidence.

 153. We find that Dr Knighton  was  understandably  concerned  at  what  he
      perceived to be the attack upon him and his reputation by the Tribunal
      in FK, which may have led to a certain sharpness of tone,  if  we  may
      put it that way, when he began giving his evidence before us, although
      that had dissipated before long. We  would  respectfully  concur  with
      Sedley LJ in his view that Dr Knighton's credentials  are  impressive,
      and we have also noted the  extensive  bibliography  attached  to  his
      reports. It is plain that Dr Knighton is a highly  respected  academic
      who is also steeped in the  ways  of  Kenyan  society,  including  its
      churches, and  who  has  a  deep  and  wide  level  of  knowledge  and
      understanding of the Kenyan people. In our judgment,  in  his  reports
      and in his oral evidence, he has at all times striven to  provide  the
      Tribunal with knowledge and information frankly and to the best of his
      knowledge, belief and understanding, with the  aim  of  assisting  the
      Tribunal in its task, and we can find no  reason  why  we  should  not
      receive and accept his expert evidence on the  basis  that  he  is  an
      unbiased and accurate witness. He has made plain that he does not know
      the Appellant and that he has approached his task objectively.

 154. We recall that Dr Knighton expressed the view that the Tribunal in  FK
      did not like the view of the church that he had portrayed and that the
      Tribunal was seeking ways and reasons  to  show  that  this  Appellant
      could return to Kenya in safety. We simply mention briefly  here  that
      although it may have so seemed  to  Dr  Knighton,  the  Tribunal  will
      rather have been seeking to fulfil its task of ensuring that  all  the
      relevant probative evidence necessary to making a decision in the case
      was actually before it. Sometimes, where the parties  have  not  dealt
      with such matters, it is necessary for the Tribunal  itself  to  raise
      them.

 155. The great importance of kin, of close family,  within  Kenyan  society
      and the way of life has been clearly highlighted by  Dr  Knighton.  We
      note that  enormous  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  family  by  each
      individual, as an entity that sustains the individual  throughout  his
      or her whole life, not just during childhood; in economic, social  and
      cultural forms, as well as in the form more focussed upon latterly  in
      European society of emotional and psychological reliance, as more  and
      more individuals have been able  to  become  economically  independent
      within European society  over  time,  and  to  form  more  social  and
      cultural links outside the family.

 156. That the Appellant  continues  to  attach  importance  to  her  family
      members, and continues to be adversely affected in her  mental  health
      by what is to her the loss of those family members,  is  evidenced  in
      the reports of the clinicians and therapists to which we have  already
      referred.

 157. Her case, said Mr Walker, was that she feared  forced  FGM  after  her
      husband had become a member of the Mungiki. From the  evidence  of  Dr
      Knighton and from the IRBC  response  to  information  request  of  16
      February 2005, we had before us some statistics regarding FGM and  the
      latter document referred to research published  in  July  2004  (Kenya
      Demographic and Health Survey (KHDS)) which showed that the prevalence
      of FGM varied according to certain factors such as age, education  and
      ethnicity.

 158. Mr Walker submitted, placing reliance upon the research,  that  as  an
      adult Gikuyu woman who is a Christian, who is educated,  and  who  has
      not had  to  undergo  FGM  because  of  any  family  constraints,  the
      Appellant would not be at real risk of forced FGM on return  to  Kenya
      now.

 159. Mr Walker  relied  upon  paragraph  67  of  FK  as  showing  that  the
      Appellant, as a Christian, would be able to rely upon  the  assistance
      of the church to meet her needs so that she was able to live in safety
      in Kenya with her children. At page three of the IRBC document,  there
      was reference to intervention by the Austrian Embassy in Nairobi,  and
      by a Kenyan church, to rescue 500 school girls from forced FGM  in  or
      about February 2005.

 160. However, we note that  this  report  does  not  state  what  form  the
      intervention  took,  nor  what  continuing  assistance,  if  any,  was
      afforded to the children. In addition, we note from the same paragraph
      of that document, that in 2003 and 2004, some 100 children  and  young
      women were forced to undergo FGM, whilst some 800 more were in  hiding
      from or under pressure from parents to undergo forced FGM.


 161. In any event, we are satisfied that  the  church  in  Kenya  does  not
      provide continuing quotidien support to women, whether  with  children
      or otherwise, and that the kind of assistance provided  is  much  more
      limited, and pastoral  in  nature,  as  stated  by  Dr  Knighton.  For
      example, the provision of help can be prayer, visiting, laying  on  of
      hands, famine relief (see para 119 above). We are satisfied that  this
      Appellant cannot turn to the church in Kenya to provide  her,  in  any
      durable, sustainable way shape or form, with a home  or  access  to  a
      home, or employment or access to employment, or safety, or  access  to
      safety. This is because the church in Kenya is unable to  provide  any
      of these. There simply is no such provision.

 162. Mr Walker submitted that Dr  Knighton  had  accepted  that  there  are
      differing views as to the nature of the Mungiki. He pointed  out  that
      the COIR states that they are outlawed (as was shown by the  BBC  News
      article of 6 November 2007 stating that police had been accused of the
      execution style killing of almost 500 persons said to be Mungiki), and
      are associated with extortion from small traders and taxi drivers.  Dr
      Knighton had said that they  are  able  to  infiltrate  all  tiers  of
      government  and  police  and  so  influence  politics,  whereas  other
      evidence says they are just involved in extortion  and  'gangsterism'.
      The Appellant's husband was an estate agent who became  involved  with
      the Mungiki it is said. Dr Knighton had agreed that the  Mungiki  were
      mainly from the uneducated, the lower levels of Kenyan society,  whose
      basic tenets are return to traditionalism and rejection of  the  mores
      of western society. Mr Walker queried whether an  estate  agent  could
      become a high level member of the sect. However, this seemed to us  to
      be seeking to re-open the assessment of primary factual  matters  that
      are not in issue before us now, there having been no challenge so  far
      as we understand it, as previously indicated, to  the  credibility  of
      the Appellant and her claim.

 163. As to the reach  of  the  Mungiki  and  whether  the  Appellant  could
      relocate, Mr Walker submitted that there was no evidence to show  that
      the Mungiki could have information on people  throughout  Kenya  given
      its large population, and Dr Knighton had confirmed that Mombassa  was
      a 'melting pot' of tribes and nationalities, so that it was  difficult
      to see how, on the facts  of  the  Appellant's  case,  her  return  to
      Mombassa could become known.

 164. Further, in the case of FK, Dr Knighton's evidence had been criticized
      because he said that no-one could return to Kenya without the  Mungiki
      finding out. The Tribunal had found that Dr Knighton made generalized,
      un-informed comments, was partisan, and was  therefore  wrong  in  his
      overall picture of the level to  which  the  Mungiki  had  infiltrated
      Kenyan society.

 165. With the benefit of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in FK,  as  we
      have said, it is now clear that the appraisal by the Tribunal in FK of
      the evidence of Dr Knighton  was  held  to  be  unfair  and  otherwise
      flawed.

 166. We remind ourselves that Dr Knighton was very emphatic that he was not
      saying that Mombassa is a 'melting pot'. Rather, he  was  saying  that
      there are persons living there from numbers of  different  tribes  and
      backgrounds, but that this does not mean that everyone blends  into  a
      'melting pot'. Far from it, in  this  case.  Dr  Knighton's  evidence,
      which we accept and adopt,  was  that  the  Appellant  is  immediately
      identifiable as Gikuyu by her name and  appearance,  and  that  Kenyan
      society is one in which probing questions are asked of  all  newcomers
      to a place, so that her arrival would not go un-noticed.  Further,  as
      we understood his evidence, other Gikuyu, who  may  also  be  Mungiki,
      would take note of her presence and sooner or later,  by  transfer  of
      information, including via the Matatu, and whether for money or out of
      loyalty to the  Mungiki,  the  Mungiki  would  come  to  know  of  her
      presence, and she would thereby come to be linked to her  husband  and
      to past events, and would be  at  real  risk  of  retribution  through
      forced FGM or worse. Moreover, her daughter, as her female child, born
      of rape by a Mungiki, would likewise be at real  risk,  with  all  the
      attendant anguish and suffering that risk places upon  the  Appellant,
      to which must also be added anguish and suffering over the future well-
      being of her son.

 167. We take note that Dr Knighton  was  also  extremely  emphatic  in  his
      reassertion of his evidence before the Tribunal in  FK,  including  in
      relation to his assessment of  the  size,  nature  and  reach  of  the
      Mungiki. Further, in cross examination he very  firmly  stood  by  his
      evidence that the way for a woman such as the Appellant to survive  in
      Kenya would be for her to find a man to marry and  in  that  way  have
      access  to  land,  but  this  Appellant  would,  in   her   particular
      circumstances, need to marry outside her clan, which she was  unlikely
      to be able to do.

 168. We note from the documentary evidence, including  the  USSDR,  Amnesty
      International and Human Rights Watch, that the Law of Succession which
      governs inheritance rights, provides for equal consideration  of  male
      and female children; however, in practice  most  inheritance  problems
      did not come  before  the  courts.  Women  often  were  excluded  from
      inheritance settlements, particularly if  married,  or  given  smaller
      shares than male claimants were given. Moreover, a widow cannot be the
      sole  administrator  of  her  husband's  estate  unless  she  has  her
      children's  consent.   Most   customary   law   disadvantages   women,
      particularly in property rights and inheritance.  For  example,  under
      the customary law of most ethnic groups, a woman cannot  inherit  land
      and must live on the land as a guest of males  who  are  relatives  by
      blood or marriage. Wife inheritance was practiced in some communities,
      which restricted a woman's right to choose her mate and placed her  at
      risk of contracting a sexually transmitted disease such as HIV/AIDS.

 169. Women made up approximately 75 percent of the agricultural work  force
      and had become active in  urban  small  businesses.  Nonetheless,  the
      average monthly income of women was approximately two-thirds  that  of
      men, and women held only an estimated 5 percent of land titles.  Women
      had difficulty moving into non-traditional fields, were promoted  more
      slowly than men, and were laid off more. Societal  discrimination  was
      most apparent in rural areas.

 170. Maendeleo Ya Wanawake, the  nation's  best-known  women's  rights  and
      welfare organization, was established as a  non-political  NGO  during
      the colonial era, but was aligned closely with the ruling  KANU  party
      and consequently suffered diminished  credibility  as  an  independent
      body. A growing number of women's organizations  were  active  in  the
      field of women's rights, including FIDA; the National Council of Women
      of Kenya; the  National  Commission  on  the  Status  of  Women;   the
      Education Centre for Women in Democracy,  and  the  League  of  Kenyan
      Women Voters.

 171. The Women's Political Caucus, formed in 1997, continued to lobby  over
      matters of concern to women and to increase the influence of women  on
      government policy.

 172. It is noted from the article in the Daily Nation of  Monday  September
      15 2003, that two NARC Members of Parliament had spoken in  public  in
      support of the outlawed Mungiki sect and had called  upon  the  police
      not to harass its members.  It  is  also  noted  from  the  background
      evidence that the members of the  Mungiki  are  predominantly  of  the
      Gikuyu tribe. They support  female  circumcision,  a  return  to  some
      Gikuyu traditions, and have been known for their long,  unkempt  hair,
      for taking snuff, wielding weapons and for  having  been  involved  in
      recent violence that hit some  city  slums  and  other  parts  of  the
      country.

 173. It is clear that this involvement in violence is not a new  departure.
      The evidence reveals that in March 2002 Mungiki were  involved  in  an
      attack in Nairobi when at  least  23  people  were  killed.  This  was
      apparently retaliation against a local vigilante group  known  as  the
      Taliban. It was following this massacre that the Mungiki  was  banned.
      However, despite the  ban,  the  Mungiki  group  was  able  to  become
      increasingly active in the pre-election period, during which hundreds,
      some armed, held rallies in support of the ruling party  KANU.  Police
      did not intervene. The group also expressed threats  to  use  violence
      against anyone who insulted President Moi.

 174. That involvement in violence pre and post election is an aspect of the
      matter to which we return below, in the light or very  recent  unhappy
      developments in the course of the election that has just taken place.

 175. We observe that although there is now a Children's Act of 1 March 2002
      to outlaw FGM, child prostitution and child  labour,  these  practices
      did not cease, and a number of girls  fled  their  homes  after  their
      community refused to recognize an alternative rite. We also note  that
      whilst the Children Act 2001 enables prosecution of any who subject  a
      minor to genital cutting, there have  been  only  one  or  two  actual
      prosecutions referred to and sentences have been  lenient  (two  years
      probation for subjecting a fifteen  year  old  girl  to  FGM,  Amnesty
      International 2004, C9-C11).

 176. For those over eighteen years of age, there  is  only  the  remedy  of
      seeking a prosecution for ordinary assault. Laws and  decrees  against
      FGM and other sexual violence in Kenya are not  applied,  despite  the
      fulminations of politicians and NGO leaders, which, says Dr  Knighton,
      and there would appear to be force in what he says, is for consumption
      by Western donors. Police in general are most reluctant  to  interfere
      in domestic matters and  in  FGM  in  particular,  because  it  is  an
      acknowledged custom across Kenya. We find that there is a low level of
      trust in the police, especially to produce arrests or convictions, not
      least because the perpetrator can be expected to bribe his way out  of
      the criminal justice system. We find that there are no  government  or
      government funded, or church or NGO shelters or refuges to  provide  a
      sufficiency of protection to women who fear being  forced  to  undergo
      FGM.

 177. From the evidence of Dr Knighton, the reports to which he  refers  and
      the other reports produced to us, it is noted that when women separate
      from their husbands they are often expelled from their homes with only
      their clothing.  Women's  property  rights  violations  are  not  only
      discriminatory, they may prove fatal. The HIV/AIDS epidemic  magnifies
      the devastation of women's property rights violations in  Kenya  where
      about 15% of the population between the ages of 15 and 49 is  infected
      with HIV/AIDS.

 178. We find that a woman's access to  property  usually  hinges  upon  her
      relationship to a man,  as  Dr  Knighton  has  stated,  and  when  the
      relationship ends the woman stands a good chance of losing  her  home,
      the family to which she belongs, namely that of her husband or partner
      and its support in economic, social, emotional and cultural  forms  as
      well as her form of financial  support.  The  devastating  effects  of
      these  deprivations,  including   poverty,   disease,   violence   and
      homelessness  -  harm  women,  their  children  and  Kenya's   overall
      development. It would appear that for decades, government has  ignored
      this  problem.  Bills  that  may  have  assisted  have  languished  in
      Parliament; government ministries have had no  appropriate  programmes
      to promote equal  property  rights,  and  at  every  level  government
      officials shrug off this injustice, saying that they do  not  want  to
      interfere with culture.

 179. Mr Walker submitted that the Kenyan government was doing its  best  to
      eradicate FGM. We note that the OGN states that in 2006 the government
      of Kenya "continued to attempt to stem"  FGM.  We  have  to  say  that
      whilst all efforts to eradicate the practice, not least because it  is
      said to be against the law in Kenya, are to be welcomed, nevertheless,
      'continuing to attempt to stem', apparently by attempting to prosecute
      a handful of persons, and threatening persons such as nurses with loss
      of their jobs and or prosecution, falls well short, in  our  judgment,
      of providing a sufficiency of protection to the  women  and  girls  of
      Kenya who are at risk from the practice.

 180. The more so for persons similarly situated to the Appellant who is  of
      adverse interest to the Mungiki. The  Appellant,  if  Dr  Knighton  is
      correct in his opinion, and we have found no good evidential reason to
      reject it, based as it is  upon  his  research  and  the  evidence  of
      persons he has interviewed, as well as other cases in connection  with
      which he has prepared expert reports, and upon journal, newspaper  and
      background reports, would sooner or later (he does not  say  that  she
      would necessarily be discovered immediately on  return)  come  to  the
      attention of the Mungiki who  would  then  avenge  the  sect  and  her
      husband, despite the passage of time since she left the country.

 181. We see no reason to reject Dr Knighton's analysis of  the  countrywide
      information network of the Gikuyu and of the  Mungiki  in  particular,
      who may well be regarded as the children of the Mau  Mau,  and  as  an
      organization that both uses and is used  by  government.  A  BBC  news
      report of February 2003 describes the  Mungiki  as  a  secretive  sect
      whose origins are unclear, and which, since the 1990s has left  behind
      a trail of blood in its rejection of western culture. It is said to be
      the politically motivated wing of a religious organization,  and  akin
      to an army unit. Mostly drawn from the Gikuyu and inspired by the  Mau
      Mau rebellion of the 1950's against British colonial  rule,  thousands
      of young Kenyans flock to the sect. It is claimed  by  the  leadership
      that it has at least 2 million members around  the  country  who  have
      infiltrated government organizations, offices, factories and  schools.
      They have been involved in battles with the  police  and  have  raided
      police stations to free detained  members.  Instead,  or  as  well  as
      clubs, machetes and  swords,  they  are  now  wielding  AK-47  assault
      rifles. Other articles suggest that the authorities are  unwilling  or
      unable to control the Mungiki.

 182. Force is given to the latter point when the actions of the Mungiki  at
      election times are examined. At such times it appears that the Mungiki
      acquire sudden prominence and a sudden ease of access  to  sectors  of
      towns and cities where they have been able to commit acts of violence,
      not only in the earlier election as mentioned above.

 183. We turn to consider the articles and reports lodged by  the  Appellant
      to address the most recent violence around and post the December  2007
      election.

 184. From the Economist of 3rd January 2008, we note this:

        "The mayhem  that  killed  hundreds  of  people  following  Kenya's
        election on 27 December completes a depressing cycle of  democratic
        abuses in Africa's biggest countries...In stealing the election, Mr
        Kibaki has also invited  a dangerous backlash  against  his  Gikuyu
        tribe, the country's largest.  Tense  tribal  divisions  have  long
        threatened to widen as the minority  groups,  including  opposition
        leader Raila Odinga's Luo, have come to feel  marginalized  by  the
        concentration of power in Gikuyu hands.  If  the  current  violence
        does evolve into something worse, perhaps even civil war, Mr Kibaki
        and his henchman will bear much of the blame"

185.  In the accompanying article, the Economist recorded  the  reaction  in
      Kenya following the flawed election:

        "The reaction to the swearing-in  was  immediate.  Nairobi's  slums
        exploded in rage.  The poor killed each other. Across  the  country
        came a swelling up of tribal violence, sometimes Kikuyu against Mr.
        Odinga's Luo tribe, more often Luo and other tribes against Kikuyu.
        Hundreds have been killed so far and 80,000 displaced.  Gang  rapes
        and mutilations are widespread. Police  have  orders  to  shoot  to
        kill.  There has been looting  in  Kisumu,  riots  in  Mombasa  and
        pitched battles in  Eldoret...  Kikuyu  hiding  in  a  church  near
        Eldoret were burned alive by a mob...


        Taken together, this amounts to a pulling  apart  of  Kenya's  rich
        national  fabric.   Some  97%  of  Kikuyu  voted  for  Mr.  Kibaki.
        Everywhere else he was  trounced.   Muslims,  for  instance,  voted
        against Mr. Kibaki by 70% or more.  The Kikuyu highlands encircling
        the glaciers of Mount Kenya increasingly feel like a state within a
        state. The division is even more troubling when  the  parliamentary
        vote is taken into account.  Mr.  Kibaki  lost  half  his  cabinet,
        including  his  vice-president,  as  well  as  a  large  number  of
        seemingly unassailable members of parliament.  This government  may
        find it impossible to pass a budget."

 186. These events go to undermine the picture of  full  ethnic  integration
      set out in the Tribunal's previous determination in FK. They  strongly
      support  the  evidence  of  Dr  Knighton  concerning   the   continued
      importance of ethnic grouping in Kenyan society.

 187. Of particular note in the ongoing reports is the  theme  of  increased
      division between members of different racial groups, and  of  violence
      between members of  different  groups.   This  possesses  obvious  and
      immediate relevance to the Appellant before  us,  whose  prospects  of
      relocation depend upon her paradoxically separating herself from other
      Gikuyu and in particular from those of  her  own  family,  mbari,  and
      area, to which she would otherwise be expected to look for protection.
       There is also reference  to  an  upward  spiral  of  sexual  violence
      against women and female children in Kenya, against  a  background  of
      more generalized violence caused by the election and its sequelae.  In
      "Gang rape spirals in violent Kenya" (BBC  News,  23rd  January  2008)
      this phenomenon is described:


        "Every day women turn up at the doors of  Nairobi's  hospitals  and
        clinics telling the same story.


           "I could not run away. They gagged my mouth and pinned me down,"
           one woman remembers.


           "After raping me they blindfolded me and  led  me  to  a  nearby
           forest. That's where they left me."


        Her experience - doctors, officials and the UN say - is  echoed  by
        hundreds of other women who have survived a  spiralling  number  of
        sexual attacks.


        Many are gang rapes, carried out by groups of armed men.


        Staff in the Nairobi Women's Hospital  -  one  of  Kenya's  leading
        centres for the treatment of rape and sexual violence  -  say  they
        have seen double the number of cases affecting women, teenagers and
        girls since January.


           "Since the beginning of the month, we have had 140 cases of rape
           and defilement," said Rahab Ngugi, patient services  manager  at
           the hospital.


           "We were used to seeing an average of about four  cases  a  day,
           now there is an average of between eight and 10."


        Almost half of the cases at the hospital's specialised  clinic  are
        girls under the age of 18, Ms Ngugi said.  One case was a two-year-
        old baby girl.


        She knows that such a dramatic rise in numbers  presenting  at  the
        clinic indicates that the reality beyond is far worse.


        Tip of iceberg


        Only a small percentage of women actually come to  receive  medical
        treatment and counselling in the immediate aftermath  of  a  sexual
        attack, she said.  It means they do not get  access  to  the  drugs
        which might prevent the onset of HIV.


           "It is the tip of the iceberg," Ms Ngugi said.  "At any time  of
           unrest,  of  violence,  or  rioting,  women  and  children   are
           targeted.  It is revenge, it is war.  People  are  fighting  and
           the weakest ones get abused."


        ...


        "Women's position of relative weakness in society is emphasised  in
        times of conflict" Kathleen Cravero, Director of the UNDP's  Bureau
        for Crisis Prevention and Recovery said.


           "Battles  are  fought  on  women's  bodies   as   much   as   on
           battlefields.  It is not so much that women are targeted in some
           deliberate way but their vulnerability makes them  easy  targets
           for anger, for frustration, and for people wanting to cripple or
           paralyse other segments of the community in which they live."


        She says there is no evidence as yet that Kenya's  high  levels  of
        sexual violence are ethnically motivated rather than  opportunistic
        and criminal.


        But the doubling of rape cases, she says, is "a very,  very  strong
        indicator of a serious problem" adding that the actual numbers  are
        without doubt far higher."


 188. This evidence points to the sharply increased vulnerability  of  women
      (such as the Appellant) or female children (such  as  the  Appellant's
      young daughter) to sexual violence, whether motivated by  race  or  by
      opportunism or otherwise.  In their particular  cases  isolation  from
      other Gikuyu is likely to increase the risk to them exponentially.

 189. An aspect of the current situation highlighted by the reports  is  the
      strengthening of the Mungiki sect by the onset of disorder.  We recall
      the evidence of Dr Knighton that at least some senior politicians were
      suspected of association with the Mungiki for political ends, and that
      at election times the Mungiki (and their Luo opponents, the  so-called
      "Luo Taliban") might be called upon by politicians belonging to  their
      tribes.  In "Kenyans "forcibly recruited to fight""  (BBC  News,  29th
      January 2008) the BBC described  the  Mungiki  coming  into  the  Rift
      Valley town of Naivasha, without  restraint  by  the  authorities,  in
      order to press-gang Kikuyu into violence against other ethnic groups:


        "A Kenyan (who wishes to remain anonymous) in the Rift Valley  town
        of Naivasha describes how members of an outlawed sect - the Mungiki
        - are forcibly recruiting members of their Kikuyu ethnic  group  to
        kill non-Kikuyus - allied to the opposition.


        The BBC observed that: "Kenyan politics is polarised and because of
        this, when a community feels threatened, groupings or  gangs  arise
        in their defence."


 190. The violence appears to have affected  even  educated  and  successful
      Kenyans, a university professor of Luo background married to a  Kikuyu
      describing the resulting attack by a mob upon  their  home  ("Targeted
      for marrying a Kikuyu" (BBC News, 30th January 2008)).  The  scope  of
      the violence which had by then occurred, and of the  de  facto  ethnic
      partition this enforced, was described by the Economist at the end  of
      January ("Kenya: More mayhem than mediation" (Economist, 31st  January
      2008)):


        "The Rift Valley has become a hub for much of the  ethnic  violence
        that has worsened sharply in the past fortnight.  In Nakuru, north-
        west of Naivasha, at least 80 people have been killed.  Now  it  is
        often a case of simple revenge, Kikuyus striking back against their
        Luo and Kalenjin tormentors who, in turn, did most of  the  killing
        immediately after the disputed election of December 27th.  At least
        1,000 have since died and 200,000 been  driven  from  their  homes.
        The cycle of bloodshed may be gathering its own momentum beyond the
        control of Kenya's political leaders...


        In any event, the shooting dead,  in  separate  incidents,  of  two
        Orange MPs, set off more spasms of lethal riots  in  the  capital's
        slums and elsewhere.  One was Mugabe Were, a Luhya who was  popular
        in Nairobi; the other was David Too,  a  Kalenjin.   In  the  Luos'
        provincial  capital,  Kisumu,  more  Kikuyus  were  butchered   and
        "necklaced" with burning tyres by Luo youths.


        Kenya is rife with rumour. Some say there are furious disagreements
        within Mr. Kibaki's circle in State House. Others say he is  poised
        to impose a state of emergency. Among  Kikuyus,  there  is  fearful
        talk of Luo militias loyal to Mr. Odinga being trained in  southern
        Sudan...


        All sides realise that an escalation in violence from  machetes  to
        machineguns would be ruinous for all Kenyans. So far,  the  use  of
        traditional weapons,  including  clubs  and  poisoned  arrows,  has
        caused the flight of several hundred thousand Kenyans who  belonged
        to ethnic minorities in their places of abode-for instance, Luos in
        Central Province and Kikuyus in the west. Wholesale  slaughter  has
        yet to occur on the scale of  Rwanda  in  1994,  but  the  prospect
        hovers in people's minds. Indeed, the  fear  spreading  across  the
        country may offer Mr. Annan his best chance of success.


        ... if there is no breakthrough, Kenya could tear apart  even  more
        drastically along ethnic lines, with Mr. Kibaki's  Kikuyu-dominated
        government controlling the wealthy centre  of  the  country  up  to
        Nakuru, north-west of Nairobi, while Mr. Odinga's Orange opposition
        holds sway over the west and  much  of  the  north.   Most  of  the
        Kalenjin people in the Rift Valley are hostile to Kikuyu  political
        domination.


        For many Kenyans this  is  both  an  appalling  and,  until  recent
        events, incredible prospect.  The country's largest newspaper,  the
        Daily Nation, which had slightly favoured  Mr.  Kibaki  during  the
        election campaign,  has  lost  patience  with  him.   An  editorial
        declared  that  the  government's  "inertia  and  ineptitude"  were
        "exposing base instincts and  driving  the  country  back  to  pre-
        colonial times".

 191. An article in the National Post (one of the two main Canadian national
      newspapers), recorded that:


        "During the last few weeks, the world  has  watched  in  horror  as
        rival gangs of Kenyan slum dwellers attack and  kill  one  another.
        Even Members of Parliament are now being targeted.


        The anti-government vigilantes from the Luo tribe have come to call
        themselves "Taliban" (this despite the  fact  that  these  Luo  are
        mostly non-Muslims).  Pitted  against  them  are  the  Kikuyu  --in
        particular, Kikuyu followers of the "Mungiki.


        On Jan. 9, Maina Kiai, head of the state-funded National Commission
        of Human Rights, accused President Mwai Kibaki's  Kikuyu  dominated
        government of "activating" members  of  this  mysterious,  formally
        banned sect. Government  spokesmen  have  dismissed  the  claim  as
        groundless. But Muthoni Wanyeki, the chairperson of an  independent
        Kenya-based human rights  monitoring  group,  suggests  politicians
        from both  tribes  are  financing  and  encouraging  semi-organized
        tribal militias. Given  the  Mungiki  sect's  particularly  violent
        history, it would be surprising if one side  or  the  other  hadn't
        sought to co-opt them."


      ("From Mau Mau to Mungiki: 50 Years Later, Kenya  is  Still  a  Bloody
      Mess" (National Post (Canada), 5th February 2008).


 192. Accounts of ethnic violence  and  division  have  continued.   On  7th
      February  the  Economist  returned  to  the  subject  ("Kenya:  Ethnic
      cleansing in Luoland"):


        "As the road approaches  Kisumu,  Kenya's  third-biggest  city  and
        capital of the  Luos,  the  country's  third-biggest  but  angriest
        ethnic group, it becomes littered with rubble and  burnt  vehicles.
        A man beats at a  smouldering  ambulance's  number-plate  with  his
        machete.  "See," he explains, "this belongs to  the  government  of
        Kenya." Mobs cry out for their fellow Luo, Raila Odinga, to be made
        president of Kenya.  They plead for guns.  An earnest man pushes to
        the front of one mob.  "What we  are  saying  is  give  violence  a
        second chance."


        On a bridge outside Oyugis, a small town a couple of  hours'  drive
        south of Kisumu, angry Luos have overturned a lorry, pulled down  a
        telegraph pole and are waiting.  When  your  (white)  correspondent
        happens along, they take aim with stones, machetes and  poles.  But
        what they wanted was a Kikuyu to kill-any  Kikuyu.   All  the  main
        roads in the area are punctuated with road blocks.  Some travellers
        do not get through.  At least 25  have  been  hacked  to  death  or
        killed with poisoned arrows in Nyanza in the past few days.


        Across Luoland, from the  unlettered  to  the  university-educated,
        they tell the same tale of woe: that they have been politically and
        economically   maltreated   since   independence.    Provision   of
        electricity and roads  is  far  worse  than  in  Kikuyuland.   Many
        government projects in Nyanza, including cotton- and  rice-growing,
        have failed.  It irks  Luos  that  the  fish  they  catch  in  Lake
        Victoria are processed by Kikuyus in distant Central  Province.   A
        brain drain of able Luos into Kenya's civil service has  dried  up.
        Luos say that a Luo name is sometimes a handicap in getting  a  job
        in business.  Poverty among Luos has risen, even as Kenya's economy
        has grown.


        In the past few weeks, Kisumu has  been  ethnically  cleansed.  The
        Luos have driven out 20,000 or so  Kikuyus  from  a  population  of
        380,000; few will return.  Every Kikuyu business and home has  been
        looted and burned.  The UN recently chose Kisumu as  a  "millennium
        city", with plans to turn it into a kind of hub.  Now many  of  its
        streets are gutted and charred.  Thousands of jobs have been  lost;
        nearly three-quarters of Kisumu's people are out of work...


        Nobody has been angelic


        Kenya's 4m or so Luos, most of them in Nyanza, voted overwhelmingly
        for Mr. Odinga in the disputed  election  on  December  27th.   The
        Kikuyu-led party backing his rival, the incumbent  president,  Mwai
        Kibaki, was most blatant in ensuring that his tally of votes in the
        Kikuyu heartland north of the capital, Nairobi, was inflated.   But
        Mr. Odinga's Orange Democratic  Movement  was  not  spotless;  some
        ballot boxes in Nyanza were reportedly stuffed on his  behalf.   In
        any event, nearly all  Luos  still  want  Mr.  Kibaki  forced  from
        office.  If he stays, they say, it will mean civil war.  There is a
        risk that Luoland might peel off-and a further risk that Mr. Kibaki
        may feel forced to send in troops to stop that happening.  For  the
        time being, the Luo areas look ungovernable by Mr. Kibaki or by any
        Kikuyu-led administration.


        In other parts of Kenya, not  just  in  Luoland,  the  mood  is  so
        febrile that it is hard  to  see  how  the  social  fabric  can  be
        restored.  Atrocities have been widespread.  Most of the Luhya (the
        country's second-biggest group, unrelated to the Luo), most of  the
        ten or so Kalenjin-speaking peoples of the  Rift  Valley,  most  of
        Kenya's Muslims and most of Kenya's poor in  the  vast  slums  that
        ring Nairobi backed Mr. Odinga.  Many of them are angry.  Some have
        vented their  spleen  against  Kikuyus  living  among  them,  often
        chasing them away, burning their houses  and  shops  and  sometimes
        killing them.


        The violence has been especially bad in parts of  the  Rift  Valley
        where  different  groups  had  intermingled  as  a  result  of  the
        redistribution of former white-owned land since  independence.   In
        other parts of the country, especially in  the  Kikuyu  heartlands,
        Mr. Kibaki's backers have treated Luos with similar harshness.


        But it is wrong to paint  a  picture  simply  of  Kikuyus  and  the
        closely related Embu and Meru, who together make up  about  28%  of
        Kenyans,  pitted  against  the  rest.   Many  groups   have   mixed
        allegiances. Most of the Kamba, Kenya's fifth group, which has been
        traditionally well-represented in the army,  backed  a  54-year-old
        former foreign minister, Kalonzo Musyoka, who won about 9%  of  the
        presidential poll and was promptly appointed vice-president by  Mr.
        Kibaki.  As a result, many Kamba may rally to his cause-and perhaps
        even join a pro-Kibaki coalition in the (so far unlikely) event  of
        a fresh election.  Other tribes, such  as  the  Kisii  (6%  of  the
        total) have been divided, though most of  them  voted  against  Mr.
        Kibaki.


        Amid this messy ethnic mayhem, peace talks in Nairobi look unlikely
        to restore calm any time soon.  A former UN secretary-general, Kofi
        Annan,  has  managed  to  bring  representatives  of  Mr.  Kibaki's
        government and Mr. Odinga's  movement  to  the  negotiating  table,
        which is progress of a kind.  But the president has so far shown no
        sign of making serious concessions.  Mr. Annan  has  also  gathered
        some of the country's leading  businessmen  to  stress  the  damage
        being done to the economy.  Tourism and agriculture have been badly
        hit...  Meanwhile, the human toll is rising. The  local  Red  Cross
        says that more than 1,000 people have been killed in the past  five
        weeks or so, and more than 300,000 displaced."


 193. There is evidence that recent events have strengthened the  reach  and
      power of the Mungiki.  On 11th February 2008 BBC News ("Kenyan militia
      strike back") reported that:


        "First they sent leaflets saying they would avenge the killings  of
        their tribesmen when violence  flared  following  Kenya's  disputed
        election. Then they told other tribes to leave certain areas.


        People's fears had come true.  The Mungiki were back.


        Hundreds  of  men  wielding  machetes  and  clubs,  attacked  their
        opponents beheading and dismembering them in characteristic style.


        The violence has largely abated for now, as  politicians  negotiate
        their way towards a political settlement, but the  re-emergence  of
        this quasi-religious group could plague Kenya for years to come.


        The Mungiki has been outlawed by the authorities, with whom it  has
        been engaged in a protracted battle spanning more than 20 years.


        At first they styled themselves as the guardians of Kenya's largest
        community, the Kikuyu, who  include  President  Mwai  Kibaki  among
        their number, saying they would re-establish ancient traditions.


        Attracting large numbers  of  jobless  teenagers,  the  group  soon
        became an underground youth wing for politicians, who  used  it  to
        unleash terror on their opponents.


        Mungiki  became  a  criminal  gang  terrorising  urban  slums   and
        demanding protection money from transport operators.


        "We received leaflets warning us to leave or face death," Amunga, a
        resident of a town in central Kenya, told the BBC.


        "They said they would behead anyone who supported  the  opposition.
        They gave us just seven days to leave.""


194.  The article referred to other  ethnically  based  militias  formed  to
      combat the Mungiki, namely the Luo Taliban and a parallel organization
      amongst a subgroup of the Kalenjin tribe.  Concerning  the  resurgence
      of the Mungiki the BBC News article stated that:


        "Re-emergence


        Before the elections, police vowed to eliminate  the  Mungiki  once
        and for all.


        At one point  human  right  organisations  accused  the  police  of
        executing more than 500 members of the group.


        Although the police denied the accusation, the recovery of hundreds
        of bullet-ridden bodies on the outskirts of Nairobi made some think
        the Mungiki had at last been wiped out.


        But the post-election violence appears to have  breathed  new  life
        into this group.


        Their re-emergence followed the killing of hundreds of  Kikuyus  in
        opposition strongholds in western Kenya.


        The Mungiki scented blood and wanted vengeance.


        Soon Mungiki gangs were  attacking  members  of  other  tribes  and
        hacking them to death.


        It is not clear who finances the  Mungiki,  although  it  has  been
        suggested they are in the payroll of some politicians.


        Recently the Mungiki have been confronting women wearing  trousers,
        forcing them to change into skirts or long dresses.


        They say wearing trousers goes against the Kikuyu culture.


        It is feared that if the electoral crisis persists, the gangs could
        become even more dangerous."


 195. Unhappily, Dr Knighton's predictions would  appear  to  have  come  to
      pass, although there has since  been  the  more  potentially  positive
      development of the agreement brokered by Kofi  Annan,  whereby  Kibaki
      remains president and Odinga becomes prime minister. It remains to  be
      seen how effective an agreement it is.

 196. We recall that on 26th February 2008 a  power  sharing  agreement  was
      made between  the  leaders  of  the  main  parties.   The  Appellant's
      solicitors have written on 20 March 2008, to state, put  simply,  that
      (i) the Appellant was entitled to succeed, on the evidence, as at  the
      time  of  the  hearing,  for  reasons  set  out   in   contemporaneous
      submissions;  (ii)  her  need   for   international   protection   was
      particularly  emphasized  given  dramatic  post-election  developments
      involving inter-tribal violence and ethnic  separation,  addressed  in
      written further submissions of 17th February  2008;  (iii)  the  power
      sharing agreement may  resolve  immediate  violent  conflict,  but  is
      unlikely in the short to medium term to resolve the  increased  ethnic
      separation and mistrust engendered  by  events  since  December  2007,
      whilst the continuation of the agreement is provisional upon continued
      willingness to share power  on  the  part  of  longstanding  political
      opponents  who  have  already  failed  once  to  do  so  successfully.
      Accordingly any suggestion that the power  sharing  agreement  removes
      risk to the Appellant would be ill-founded.

 197. In this context we note two judgments of highly respected sources,  to
      which the Appellant  has  referred.   The  United  Nations  Integrated
      Regional Information Network [IRIN] in an article dated 29th  February
      2008 (attached) states that:

        "NAIROBI, 29 February 2008 (IRIN) -  While  lauding  the  agreement
        between  Kenya's  two  main  political  parties  on  power-sharing,
        humanitarian actors say the hard work has yet to begin - resettling
        the displaced and reconciling all Kenyans.


        [...]


        Under their agreement, Kibaki and Odinga will share power, with the
        creation of a prime minister's post to accommodate Odinga's  Orange
        Democratic Movement.

        In Nakuru, IDPs had mixed reactions to the deal. "Most IDPs here in
        the camp [almost entirely Kikuyu] feel President  Kibaki  has  sold
        them out - they see this agreement as strengthening their enemies,"
        Jesse Njoroge, the camp's coordinator, told IRIN. "Similarly,  many
        Kalenjin people in town feel  shortchanged  -  the  post  of  prime
        minister, they feel, should have gone to William Ruto, and so  they
        feel all the hard work they did in the run-up to the  election  has
        been lost to Nyanza Province."

        The Nakuru Showground is hosting at least 12,800 IDPs.

           "The announcement has had no major effect here,"  Njoroge  said.
           "The IDPs feel that an agreement at the national level does  not
           guarantee their safety and security at the  grassroots  level  -
           these agreements don't always trickle down."

        He said the IDPs would only consider returning to  the  homes  once
        the security situation improved significantly, "to  a  point  where
        they are able to live safely side  by  side  with  the  people  who
        evicted them.  A few IDPs are ready to leave the camp yet they  are
        waiting to see if they will be compensated for what they've  lost,"
        he said.

        He added: "What is important is not co-existence of leaders, but co-
        existence of Kenyans.""

198.  The Economist  journal of 28th February 2008 states:

        "Mr Odinga will become prime minister, with wide-ranging  executive
        powers; Mr Kibaki will stay as president.  Cabinet  posts  will  be
        shared between  their  nominees.   Parliament  will  entrench  some
        constitutional amendments to shift the  balance  of  power  between
        president and prime minister.


        It remains to be seen  how  the  sharing  of  power  will  work  in
        practice, especially after all the bad blood that  has  been  spilt
        between the pair over many years.  But the creation of the post  of
        prime minister, which had not existed, was a victory for Mr Odinga.
         Mr Kibaki's people had previously insisted that, if there were  to
        be a prime minister, he should have limited executive powers. This,
        it seems, will not be the case.


        The  other  most  ticklish  issue  was  whether  the   presidential
        election, which most independent  observers  reckoned  was  rigged,
        would be run again-and, if so, when. It is unlikely to be  held  in
        the near future.  But it remained unclear whether Mr  Kibaki  would
        serve a full five-year presidential term.


        It will take time for confidence to be  rebuilt.  Well  over  1,000
        people have been killed in the post-election  violence.   At  least
        300,000 people have been displaced by  ethnic  cleansing.  Many  of
        them will be wary of returning to their old  homes  soon.   Kenya's
        economy has taken a bad knock. Above all, the country's  reputation
        as a hub of stability and moderation in a volatile region has  been
        sorely damaged.  Even if the  agreement  signed  this  week  holds,
        things will not easily return to normal."


 199. At the core of the present case is the proposition that a Gikuyu woman
      in Kenyan society is expected  to  look  for  protection  to  her  own
      husband or partner, to her mbari, or to  members  of  her  tribe.   In
      seeking to establish herself away from her own area (as the  Appellant
      would have to do, given earlier acceptance of risk to her in her  home
      area) a woman in the  Appellant's  position  would  have  to  look  to
      precisely those groups, we find, despite the fact that this would also
      carry a risk of eventual discovery by her potential persecutors.

 200. We note here the BBC News report of 29 April 2008 (Kenya  banned  sect
      members killed) of killings  of  and  seemingly  by  the  Mungiki,  in
      particular the killing by beheading, a few weeks ago, of the  wife  of
      one of the jailed leaders of the Mungiki, and  the  shooting  dead  of
      Charles Ndungu, said to be the Chair of the sect's political wing :

        "Kenyan police have shot dead two members of the outlawed Mungiki
        sect in a chase in a slum of the capital.


        Police spokesman Eric Kiraithe confirmed that the two had been
        evading arrest and were killed after they ignored orders to
        surrender.
        The incident comes a day after Charles Ndungu, chairman of the
        sect's political wing, was shot dead.


        No date has been given for talks due to be held between the new
        government and Mungiki leaders to stop the violence.


        There have been fears that the planned meeting would be aborted
        following Mr Ndungu's killing, but sect members have not commented
        on the incident.


        Police have denied involvement in the killing and have launched an
        investigation.


        They suspect he may have been killed by a rival group within the
        Mungiki sect.


        The Mungiki, mainly drawn from President Mwai Kibaki's Kikuyu
        ethnic group, run transport rackets in the capital, Nairobi, and
        are likened to Kenya's version of the mafia.






        Deadly riots


        Correspondents say the sect has a large presence in Dandora slum to
        the east of the capital, the scene of Tuesday's shooting.


           "The two were wanted for a robbery and a string of murders and
           beheading within and outside Nairobi and our officers caught up
           with them in Dandora," Mr Kiraithe told the BBC News website.


        Two weeks ago the wife of the Mungiki's jailed leader was found
        beheaded, sparking deadly riots in the capital and surrounding
        areas.
        It was only after Kenya's new Prime Minister Raila Odinga agreed to
        meet the group and address their concerns, that threats of further
        disruption were withdrawn.


        Last year, more than 100 suspected sect members were killed in a
        police crackdown after a series of grisly beheadings blamed on the
        sect.


        Sect members accuse the police of extra-judicial killings and want
        a special unit set up to counter their activities to be disbanded."

Refugee Convention Reason

 201. The Appellant contends that she is a member  of  a  particular  social
      group for the purposes of Article 1(a)(2) of the Refugee Convention.

 202. In ZH (Women as a Particular Social Group) Iran CG [2003] UKIAT  00207
      Ouseley J, President of the IAT as he then was,, in  starting  with  a
      consideration of the case of Islam and Shah  (above),  begins  with  a
      caution which we consider worth repeating here:

        "We  emphasise  what  both  Lord  Steyn  and  Lord  Hoffmann  said:
        everything depends on the evidence and  findings  of  fact  in  the
        particular case: 'generalisations as  to  the  place  of  women  in
        particular countries are out of place when dealing with  issues  of
        refugee status".

203.  Membership of a social group is a concept that has  been  the  subject
      of considerable litigation. The characteristics of a particular social
      group can be  identified  both  in  negative  and  positive  form.  As
      extracted from the leading case law (including Ward v  Canada[1993]  2
      SCR 689; Shah and Islam [1999] INLR 144,  Montoya - v  -  SSHD  [2002]
      EWCA Civ 620, and SSHD -v- Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567) these can be
      summarised as follows:

        a.  There  is  no  requirement  for  there  to  be   a   voluntary,
           associational relationship

        b. Members need not be  homogenous  nor  does  the  group  have  to
           exhibit any particular degree of internal cohesion


        c. A particular social group may include large numbers of persons.


        d. The group may not be defined simply on basis of a shared fear of
           being persecuted. The persecution must  exist  independently  of
           and not be used to define the social group.

 204. Following this  three  categories  of  the  "particular  social  group
      concept" can be identified:


        a. Groups defined by  an  innate  or  unchangeable  characteristic;
           whatever the common characteristic that  defines  the  group  it
           must be one that the members of the group either  cannot  change
           or should not be required to change because it is fundamental to
           their individual identities or conscience.


        b. Groups  whose  members  voluntarily  associate  for  reasons  so
           fundamental to their human  dignity  that  they  should  not  be
           forced to forsake the association

        and

         . Groups associated by a former voluntary status, unalterable  due
           to historical permanence.


 205. In the light of all the evidence that is before us, in particular, but
      not limited to that to which we have specifically referred, bearing in
      mind that the question whether a person is a member  of  a  particular
      social group is a mixed question of fact and law, we find  that  women
      (and girls) in Kenya have the innate characteristic  of  being  female
      and that the  background  evidence  to  which  we  have  referred,  in
      particular at paras 168-179 above, shows that women and girls in Kenya
      are discriminated against in  the  law  of  the  country  and  in  the
      enforcement of such laws as do exist, in  particular  in  relation  to
      protection from sexual and other  violence  including  rape,  FGM  and
      domestic violence. We recall the extremely rare event of a prosecution
      relating to FGM, and the sentence of a probation order in  respect  of
      the offence  of  performing  FGM  on  a  girl  of  15  years  (Amnesty
      International). Whilst male circumcision does take place in Kenya, the
      evidence does not show that either the act or its consequences may  be
      properly regarded as inflicting serious harm comparable to that  which
      is inflicted by FGM. We find that neither the  criminal  law  nor  the
      civil law provides effective protection to women  and  girls  in  this
      regard.

 206. The background information before us makes clear that  female  genital
      mutilation is increasingly internationally recognised  as  a  form  of
      violence against women. Indeed, in the UK, on 3 March 2004, the Female
      Genital Mutilation Act 2003 came into  force,  creating  a  number  of
      criminal offences which may be committed either in the UK  or  abroad.
      The consequences of FGM for physical, psychological and  psycho-sexual
      health of women and girls are  devastating  and  in  many  cases  life
      threatening.


 207. Health risks and complications associated with FGM  itself  depend  on
      the gravity of the  mutilation,  hygienic  conditions,  skill  of  the
      operator and the struggle of the victim. But whether immediate or long
      term,  they  are  grave  in  terms  of  physical   and   psychological
      mutilation. Harmful effects including pain, vaginal  tract  infections
      and difficulty giving birth continue during life. Complications giving
      birth are significant.  Subjection to FGM is therefore not simply  one
      event but an event with continuing consequences.

 208. According to the background information there have  been  attempts  by
      the Kenyan state to ban FGM and by churches and civic groups to  stamp
      out the practice. This has not been successful. In some areas  of  the
      country the number of girls and women subjected to FGM  is  increasing
      despite the procedure having to be carried out away from state medical
      facilities. Despite the world abhorrence for the practice it is  still
      not illegal for all women. There was sparse if any evidence before  us
      of the punishments meted out to those who subject women  or  girls  to
      FGM or acquiesce in such practices. The evidence indicated  that  none
      had been charged prior to the  implementation  of  the  December  2001
      legislation despite  the  two  presidential  decrees  having  been  in
      existence for over 10 years. The high prevalence of  FGM  (up  to  53%
      overall and as high as 90% in some  areas  -  UN  Integrated  Regional
      Information Networks 11.02.03) together with the increasing numbers in
      some areas, indicates either a lack of willingness on the part of  the
      state to enforce its own decrees or an inability to do so in the  face
      of the cultural demands for it to occur.


 209. On the totality of the evidence, we find that there is active  support
      for the Mungiki on the part of some members of Parliament and a  level
      of infiltration by Mungiki into government through its members  taking
      posts in central and local government offices. We  do  find  that  the
      influence of the Mungiki and the government's response to it  and  its
      beliefs and actions, are such as to show that the government is to  be
      regarded as reluctant to act against the Mungiki, in effect  condoning
      its actions , or is unable  to do so.

 210. We further find that there is discrimination against women  and  girls
      in relation to the provisions of the law and its enforcement  in  both
      family and property law, so that  they  are,  in  general,  unable  to
      achieve civil or economic independence  from  their  fathers  or  male
      partners, or from family. This  is  particularly  so  in  relation  to
      customary law which prevails and is adhered to country wide,  as  well
      as statute law.

 211. The Appellant also needs to show  a  causal  nexus  between  the  harm
      feared and membership of the social group in question.  In  Islam  and
      Shah, no  final  choice  was  made  between  the  'but  for'  and  the
      'effective cause' tests, but the 'but for' test was said to require  a
      taking into account of the context in which the  causal  question  was
      raised and of the broad policy of the (Refugee)  Convention."  In  our
      judgment, the Appellant's case would meet either test.

 212. Like Lord Bingham in Fornah and K (above) when referring to  women  in
      Sierra Leone, we find no difficulty in recognizing women in Kenya as a
      particular social group for the purposes of Article 1A2 of the Refugee
      Convention. Were we to be wrong in so finding, then like his Lordship,
      we would accept the alternative and less favoured definition to  which
      he refers (para 31 of his judgment, above), that of : "intact women in
      Kenya".

 213. The circumstances in Kenya, as we have found them  to  be,  suggest  a
      degree of risk in the light of which, we find that the Appellant, (and
      her daughter) if returned face a real risk of being  persecuted  under
      the Refugee Convention and/ or of ill-treatment contrary to Article  3
      ECHR, namely torture, inhuman and degrading treatment,  by  reason  of
      membership of a particular social group, namely women (girls) in Kenya
      (alternatively intact women (girls) in Kenya) either at the  hands  of
      the Mungiki or at the hands of members of other tribes by reason of  a
      Gikuyu background, and from whom  the  authorities  are  unwilling  or
      unable to  protect her (them).

 214. We therefore find that it has been shown, the primary facts not  being
      in issue,  that  the  Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
      persecuted in her home area in Kenya at the hands of  members  of  the
      Mungiki, from whom the state is unwilling or unable to protect her, by
      reason of her membership of the  particular  social  group"  women  in
      Kenya" (alternatively 'intact women (girls)'). As, in fact,  it  would
      seem does her daughter.

 215. We make clear that we find that the Appellant has made good  her  case
      under both the Refugee Convention and article 3 of the ECHR, (as would
      have her daughter were she an appellant) based upon the evidence  that
      she had produced, for the reasons argued by Mr Fripp, as at  the  date
      of the hearing on 18 December 2007.

 Internal Relocation

 216. We turn next to consider whether the Appellant has shown that she  has
      a well-founded fear of being persecuted throughout the country. It may
      be possible for a woman not wishing to undergo  FGM  herself,  or  not
      wishing her child to do so, to relocate  to  another  community  which
      does not follow the practice of FGM. A thorough examination of all the
      relevant factors must be undertaken in each case, given  the  position
      of women within Kenyan society and the usual need for kinship links in
      the  place  of  relocation  in  order   to   sustain   such   movement
      successfully.  For example, we recall, under the customary law of most
      ethnic groups, a woman cannot inherit land and must live on  the  land
      as a guest of males who were relatives by blood or marriage.

 217. We find that it is plain from the evidence following the events  post-
      election, that the Mungiki, the primary source of relevant risk to the
      Appellant,  have  been   emboldened   and   strengthened   by   recent
      developments, and are likely to remain so into the medium  term  given
      the  paralysis  of  state  structures,  the  recourse  to  Mungiki  as
      "protectors" of other Gikuyu, and the strong motivation for  continued
      alliance with the Mungiki on the part  of  at  least  some  government
      politicians.

 218. Second, in those areas  formerly  considered  as  potential  areas  of
      relocation, we are satisfied that the Appellant was in  any  event  at
      real risk of discovery in any area  of  relocation,  by  the  Mungiki,
      sooner or later, via their network, whether by a member or through the
      loyalty of a non-member to the Mungiki, given her  particular  history
      and characteristics, and that the Appellant  is  now  likely  to  face
      relevant risks as a Gikuyu. We do not say  that  the  Appellant  would
      necessarily be identified by the Mungiki or  those  who  would  inform
      them immediately, for example, on arrival in  Mombassa  with  her  two
      young children. But we are satisfied that sooner or later  information
      about her is reasonably likely to be passed  to  Agikuyu  networks  in
      Mombassa (or elsewhere in Kenya) and thence to the Matatu  and  so  to
      the Mungiki. She is obviously a lone Gikuyu woman  with  two  children
      who is not from Mombassa and questions would be  asked  by  those  who
      surrounded her and her children as to her antecedents and her  reasons
      for moving to Mombassa, with her two children. We see no reason not to
      accept Dr Knighton's analysis and opinion on the  workings  of  Kenyan
      society in this respect. Moreover, we are satisfied  that  she  is  at
      additional risk post-election by virtue of her Gikuyu origins.

 219. These risks, in turn are likely to be exacerbated by  her  absence  of
      male or non-Gikuyu protection.  On the evidence set out  above,  those
      risks include death, physical harm, and sexual violence (which even if
      opportunistic, would be  increasingly  likely  given  the  unprotected
      status of a Gikuyu woman outside Gikuyu majority areas). Whilst we  do
      not find that the Appellant would be at real risk of being  persecuted
      or of other serious harm on return to Kenya simply as a Gikuyu  woman,
      without more, the new risks, if we may call them that, post  election,
      when  regarded  cumulatively  with  the  pre-election  risks  to  this
      particular Appellant, do, we find, only serve to increase  the  weight
      of evidence going to show that there is real risk to her on return  to
      Kenya now.

 220. We find  that  the  Appellant's  vulnerability  is  increased  by  her
      responsibility for two young children, one a daughter, who despite her
      young age would be herself a potential  target  for  sexual  violence.
      This is an aspect of the Appellant's own vulnerability to persecution:
      see paras 51-53 UNHCR Handbook (also relevant as to  the  question  of
      the Appellant's own physical and emotional health)  and  article  9(2)
      Council Directive (2004/83/EC) of 29 April 2004 on  minimum  standards
      for the  qualification  and  status  of  third  country  nationals  or
      stateless persons  as  refugees  or  as  persons  who  otherwise  need
      international protection and the content of the protection granted.

 221. This not only increases the risk in the Appellant's home  area,  where
      the Tribunal had already accepted that she could not go by  reason  of
      relevant risk to her: in effect the rising risk level means  that  she
      cannot go elsewhere without facing relevant risk.

 222. In addition, we are satisfied that it has  been  shown  that  even  if
      relevant risk  is  not  effectively  nationwide,  then  no  reasonable
      internal relocation alternative arises, not only for reasons developed
      at  length  in  previous  evidence  and  submissions  (including   the
      Appellant's health as set out in the relevant reports,  which  at  the
      very least compromises yet further her ability to care for and  defend
      herself and her children), but also now because:



        i) Among Gikuyu the influence of the Mungiki is likely to be deeper
           and more pervasive  than  previously,  by  reason  both  of  its
           ability to inflict retribution unhindered by the state  and  its
           de facto role as  defender  of  Gikuyu  communities  from  other
           militias, such the as Luo Taliban.  This greatly  increases  the
           risk of detection of the Appellant by Mungiki  attached  to  any
           attempt at relocation and the motivation of other  Gikuyu,  even
           if not themselves Mungiki, to act as informers to them;


       ii) the claimed option of relocation to non-Gikuyu areas relied upon
           on behalf of SSHD has effectively been foreclosed by  the  large
           scale ethnic division in Kenya, enforced by violence, seen since
           the elections and unlikely to disappear in the short  or  medium
           term due to  the  political  stalemate  between  government  and
           opposition.  Insofar as violence has decreased,  this  evidently
           is due to the effective partition of almost the whole  territory
           of the country following so-called ethnic cleansing of  minority
           populations;


      iii) The very recent beheading of the wife  of  one  of  the  Mungiki
           sect's leaders (BBC  News  29  April  2008)  can  only  increase
           concerns as to the risks to family members of those belonging to
           the  Mungiki  sect,  particularly  those  who  may  have  had  a
           leadership role, as did the Appellant's partner.


       iv) Assuming that it were actually to be  safe  for  the  Appellant,
           with her children, to relocate, which we have not found, we  ask
           whether it would be reasonable to require her to do so.  We  are
           satisfied that the economic circumstances which would  permit  a
           lone  Gikuyu   woman   with   two   young   children   and   the
           characteristics and history of this Appellant,   to  survive  in
           Kenya, have been shown on the  evidence  not  to  exist  in  the
           absence of assistance from family  and  fellow  mbari  or  tribe
           members. Even if the Appellant could, pre-election,  have  found
           work of some lawful nature, for example as a domestic servant to
           ex-patriots, through an agency, of which we are  not  persuaded,
           not least bearing in mind her ethic origin, compromised  health,
           and her need to  provide  safety  and  care  to  her  two  young
           children,  any  such  possibility  has  now  been  fundamentally
           undermined  as  a  consequence  of  post-election  violence  and
           division;


        v) Other socio-economic circumstances, because of the  large  scale
           displacement of populations and disruption in  food  and  health
           systems brought about by the post-election violence  and  ethnic
           division, would additionally  tend  to  show  relocation  to  be
           unreasonable in the sense that it would be unduly harsh.


 223. We find, for all the above reasons, that the Appellant has shown  both
      that there is no sufficiency of protection from  being  persecuted  or
      from experiencing other serious harm in any part of Kenya.

 224. The Appellant is, (as is her daughter) as we have  already  found,  at
      real risk of being persecuted  and/or  of  ill-treatment  contrary  to
      Article  3  ECHR  (not  only  FGM,  but  other  punishment   for   her
      disobedience to imposed social custom in breach of female subservience
      in Gikuyu society) throughout  the  territory  of  Kenya  for  reasons
      outlined most particularly in the evidence of  Dr.  Ben  Knighton,  in
      particular  the  extent  of  Gikuyu  distribution  within  Kenya,  the
      proliferation of Mungiki within the Gikuyu community throughout Kenya,
      the extent to which a newcomer's history is likely to  emerge  in  the
      community of attempted relocation.  As the Tribunal has accepted in FK
      (FGM) - risk and relocation) Kenya CG [2007] AIT 00041,  there  is  no
      sufficiency of protection in Kenya for  a  woman  in  the  Appellant's
      position.

 225. The Appellant also points to the factors highlighted by the  Court  of
      Appeal previously (VNM, at para 25):

        "But, putting that contentious issue to one  side,  it  is  obvious
        that the reasonableness of her relocation in a  different  part  of
        Kenya requires consideration of the practicability of her  settling
        elsewhere; consideration of her ability convincingly to present  to
        those in her new milieu a false history relating to herself and  to
        her  daughter,  including  the  latter's  paternity,  and  a  false
        explanation for their arrival there;  and,  in  the  light  of  her
        substantial  psychological  vulnerability,  consideration  of   her
        ability to sustain beyond the short term a reasonable life for them
        both on that false basis.".


 226. We find, in relation to the refugee aspect  of  the  appeal,  and,  if
      right and necessary in law to do so,  in  respect  of  the  article  3
      aspect of the appeal, that the Respondent has not identified any place
      in Kenya outside her home area where she might either live in  safety,
      or to where it would be reasonable, or not unduly harsh to expect  her
      to go, in the light of the evidence that  she  has  produced.  We  are
      satisfied that none of the towns mentioned such as Mombassa,  nor  the
      rural areas, avails the Appellant as a place of safety or as  a  place
      to which it would be reasonable in the sense  that  it  would  not  be
      unduly harsh, to require her and her two  small  children  to  go.  It
      follows that the Appellant has made good her  claims  under  both  the
      Refugee Convention and article 3 ECHR, having shown that there  is  no
      sufficiency of protection available to her anywhere in  Kenya  whether
      at the time of her departure, date of the decision appealed or today.

 227. In so finding we make clear that whilst the power sharing agreement is
      a development that is very  much  to  be  welcomed,  and  may  resolve
      immediate violent conflict, in our judgment  it  is  unlikely  in  the
      short to medium term to resolve the increased  ethnic  separation  and
      mistrust engendered by events since December 2007. We are mindful that
      Kibaki and Odinga are long standing  political  opponents  whose  past
      record of power-sharing has been unsuccessful. We  are  not  persuaded
      that the power-sharing agreement reduces  or  removes  the  real  risk
      faced by this Appellant on return to Kenya.

 228. In those circumstances, it follows that the Appellant is not  entitled
      to humanitarian protection. However, as we have made clear, the answer
      to the question whether the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  revive  the
      refugee aspect of her appeal was  not  entirely  straightforward.  For
      completeness, therefore, we add that even if  she  is  not  a  refugee
      because there is no Refugee Convention ground, or because we are wrong
      in holding that she may revive her  appeal  on  refugee  grounds,  she
      would nevertheless make good a case for humanitarian protection  under
      Para 3390, although it has been no active part  of  her  argued  case,
      based upon the evidence that is before us, for the same reasons as  we
      have given above relating to the Refugee Convention and to  article  3
      ECHR, upon which she has substantively relied. Under Article 15(b)  of
      the Qualification Directive she is entitled to a status and to  rights
      not dissimilar in very many respects to those of a refugee  under  the
      Refugee Convention.

 229. Given the importance to the Appellant of  achieving  finality  in  the
      present litigation, she has asked through Mr Fripp, that the Tribunal,
      even if satisfied that the Appellant faces  relevant  risk  throughout
      Kenya, set out a finding  in  the  alternative  addressing  in  detail
      issues of internal relocation.  We are mindful of the adverse  effects
      upon the Appellant of the prolongation of  these  proceedings  as  has
      been highlighted by  the  clinicians  and  therapists  who  have  been
      working with her. We are also mindful of the need within the  law  for
      certainty and finality.

 230. However, given the findings in favour of the Appellant which  we  have
      already made, in relation to the refugee, humanitarian protection  and
      article 3 ECHR aspects of this appeal, we find that is it not strictly
      necessary for us to consider the position in the alternative. Further,
      we are aware that there are differing opinions upon the issue, and  we
      are mindful that we received no assistance from the Respondent on  the
      point. We therefore conclude that  this  is  a  matter  best  left  to
      another occasion.

Article 8 ECHR

231.  In addition or in the further alternative, the Appellant  relies  upon
      article 8 ECHR.

232.  The Representatives lodged, or we have had regard  to,  the  following
      cases:

         . R(Iran) and Others v SSHD [2005]INLR 637
         . AG(Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801
         . HB(Ethiopia) and Ors v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1713
         . Huang[2007] UKHL 11
         . Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31
         . Senthuran v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 950
         . Mukarakar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045
         . MT(Zimbabwe) v SSHD[2007]EWCA Civ 455
         . AT(Guinea v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1889
         . CH(Jamaica) (Effects of delay-HB reaffirmed) [2007] EWCA Civ 792
         . KR(Iraq) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 514
         . AC v IAT [2003] EWHC 389
         . GS(Article 8-public interest not a fixity) Serbia and Montenegro
           [2005] UKAIT 00121
         .  MG(Assessing  interference  with  private  life)   Serbia   and
           Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113
         . AL(Serbia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1619
         .  AG  and  Others  (Policies;  executive  discretions;  Tribunals
           powers) Kosovo[2007] UKAIT 00082.
         . AB(Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1302 6 December 2007


  233. Insofar as Article 8 rights are concerned, applying the  guidance  in
       AG (Eritrea) (above), and, of course, that in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27
       and in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, we find that it is  clear  that  private
       and family life is enjoyed, in particular private life within the  UK
       and private life as it touches and concerns the right to respect  for
       physical and moral integrity and that removal of the Appellant  would
       interfere with that enjoyment. Family life is enjoyed  with  her  two
       children and whilst they would go with her to Kenya, the impact  upon
       them of removal, including upon their private life and the degree  to
       which their circumstances as  a  result  of  removal  would  have  an
       adverse effect upon their mother, including the  existing  degree  to
       which her health is compromised, and would  be  further  compromised,
       and the adverse affects upon her ability to care for her children  as
       a result, as well as  the  degree  to  which  their  own  rights  are
       adversely affected, within the scope set out by the Court  of  Appeal
       in AB (Jamaica), must all be taken into account. Mr  Walker  did  not
       seek to argue otherwise.

  234. We refer to paragraph  28  of  AG  (Eritrea):  the  threshold  to  be
       reached in order to engage Article 8 rights is not a high one.

  235. It is not in issue that the decision to remove is in accordance  with
       the law and it has not been argued that it does other than to meet  a
       legitimate aim, presumably the maintenance of immigration control  in
       the economic interests of the UK.

  236. The rights are engaged says the Appellant and the interference  would
       be serious and disproportionate.

  237. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since the end of  August
       2002, or more than 5 years in all.  It is already accepted  that,  at
       best, she would return to Kenya on the basis of an  expectation  that
       she could not contact her own family or return to her own home  area,
       by reason of the risk of persecution or  breach  of  article  3  ECHR
       rights.  She is a single mother both of whose children were  born  in
       the United Kingdom: her daughter on 5 January 2003 and her son on  19
       February 2007.  As Dr Buller observed (A's bundle section B pp 10-11)
       "[A] appears to have settled well in Huddersfield, and has  developed
       a supportive network of friends and also regularly  attends  a  local
       church. (The Appellant) has  also  been  attempting  to  pursue  some
       further education...".

  238. Not only the Appellant's life, but also the lives  of  her  children,
       would be seriously affected by removal from  the  United  Kingdom,  a
       factor relevant  on  the  analysis  of  Lord  Justice  Sedley  in  AB
       (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ1302.

  239. Mr Fripp  has  also  drawn  attention  to  an  earlier  case  holding
       similarly in that regard, per Jack J in R  (AC)  v  IAT  [2003]  EWHC
       Admin 389; [2003] INLR 507.

  240. In all the circumstances, for all the  above  reasons,  including  in
       particular, as we have stated, those in relation  to  the  article  3
       aspect of this appeal, in the light of the facts  of  this  case,  we
       find that the removal of the Appellant from the United Kingdom  would
       constitute a breach of her private life sufficiently  serious  to  be
       disproportionate to the legitimate public interest(s) engaged.



Conclusions

241.  In coming to our determination, we have been mindful of  the  guidance
      set out at sub-paragraphs 1-9 of paragraph 113 of FK, albeit  that  it
      does not remain intact following the judgment of the Court of  Appeal,
      the case having been remitted to the AIT for reconsideration in  order
      that the guidance might be considered after a  further  assessment  of
      all the evidence, in particular that of  Dr  Knighton.  The  Court  of
      Appeal in FK, per Sedley LJ at para 12, said this  of  the  Tribunal's
      guidance:


        "We have not been addressed on the tribunal's findings under  these
        heads. Without doubt  deliberately,  these  are  not  expressed  as
        conclusions because the tribunal have yet to come, as they do next,
        to the appellant's own situation. The provisional findings are,  in
        short, that within Kikuyu areas FGM  can  often  be  avoided;  that
        Mungiki are not as serious a threat there as Dr Knighton  suggests;
        and that in any event relocation to a non-Kikuyu area  is  feasible
        for a Kikuyu woman. We would comment only that  in  relation  to  a
        country where, despite laws forbidding it, up  to  half  the  women
        have undergone FGM and about a third are still expected or required
        to undergo it, it is particularly important to  keep  distinct  the
        existence of a risk to women and the possibility of  their  finding
        safe refuge from it."


242.  It is in that light and in the light of all the new evidence  that  we
      have now received, and of which the Tribunal in FK did  not  have  the
      benefit, that, we conclude that we are only able to  concur  with  the
      guidance in FK in part. In our view the correct current position is as
      follows:

          1.      It is important to determine whether a Kenyan claimant who
             fears FGM belongs to an  ethnic  group  amongst  which  FGM  is
             practised. If so, she may be a member of  a  particular  social
             group for the purposes of the 1951 Refugee Convention.


          2.      Uncircumcised women in  Kenya,  whether  Gikuyu/Kikuyu  or
             not, are not as such, at real risk of FGM.

          3. A decision to undergo FGM  is  said  to  be  one  made  by  the
             individual woman if an adult and  by  the  parent(s)  or  other
             family members (e.g. a grandparent) if a child. However,  since
             the practice is outlawed under the Children Act 2001, it  would
             not appear that an adult could lawfully consent on behalf of  a
             child. A child cannot lawfully consent to such a procedure.  In
             law, an adult woman who does not consent to FGM may  only  rely
             upon making a complaint of assault under the  criminal  law.  A
             woman may be placed under undue pressure by  family,  including
             her husband or  partner  and  his  family,  and/  or  community
             members, to agree to FGM for herself or for her  child  (see  6
             below). There are only one or two examples  of  prosecution  of
             those who have performed FGM, whether on children or women  and
             sentences have been lenient.


          4. It may be possible for a  woman  not  wishing  to  undergo  FGM
             herself, or not wishing her child to  do  so,  to  relocate  to
             another community which does not follow the practice of FGM.  A
             thorough examination  of  all  the  relevant  factors  must  be
             undertaken in each case given  the  position  of  women  within
             Kenyan society and the usual need  for  kinship  links  in  the
             place  of  relocation  in  order  to  sustain   such   movement
             successfully.  For example, under the  customary  law  of  most
             ethnic groups, a woman cannot inherit land and must live on the
             land as a guest  of  males  who  were  relatives  by  blood  or
             marriage.


          5. Those who practise FGM are not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             (particularly in urban areas), to  seek  to  inflict  FGM  upon
             women from ethnic groups or sub-groups which  do  not  practise
             FGM.


          6. In general, a woman and/or her child will only be at real  risk
             of FGM if she comes from, or  becomes  connected  by  marriage,
             partnership or other family ties, to an ethnic group  (or  sub-
             group) where FGM is practised and the evidence shows  that  she
             is  reasonably  likely  to  be   required   by   her   parents,
             grandparents, or by others in a position of power and influence
             over her, to undergo FGM.


          7. There is evidence that the Mungiki seek to impose FGM and other
             forms of violence on women and children other  than  those  who
             have been initiated into their sect. In particular, such  women
             and children include the wives, partners,  children  and  other
             female family members of those men who have taken  the  Mungiki
             oath. There is also evidence of the Mungiki imposing  political
             and cultural beliefs upon others, for example by confronting in
             public women who  are  wearing  trousers,  stripping  them  and
             forcing them to change into skirts or long dresses.


          8. The Mungiki is an organization that both uses and  is  used  by
             government, with links to some politicians. It is an  extremely
             secretive sect, the origins of which are unclear, whose members
             are oathed, and which, since at least the 1990s has left behind
             a trail of violence in its rejection of western culture. It  is
             said to be  the  politically  motivated  wing  of  a  religious
             organization, and to also have an armed wing akin  to  an  army
             unit. Mostly drawn from the Gikuyu/Kikuyu and inspired  by  the
             Mau Mau rebellion of the 1950's against British colonial  rule,
             thousands of young Kenyans flock to the sect. It is claimed  by
             the leadership that it has at least 2  million  members  around
             the  country,  many  of  whom   have   infiltrated   government
             organizations, offices, factories and schools, albeit mostly at
             a low level. They have been involved in battles with the police
             and have raided  police  stations  to  free  detained  members.
             Instead of or as well as clubs, machetes and swords, they  also
             use AK-47 assault rifles.  The  authorities  are  unwilling  or
             unable to control the  Mungiki  and  the  authorities  use  the
             Mungiki as agents  of  political  violence,  in  particular  at
             election time, which has been seen most recently following  the
             first elections of the new millennium and the elections  of  27
             December 2007.

          9. Through its Gikuyu/Kikuyu members who move around  the  country
             for work and those who run or are connected to the country wide
             taxi business (Matatu), the Mungiki has both a presence and  an
             information network, particularly in urban areas and around bus
             and other transport stations across the  country,  albeit  that
             the information network  is  not  one  that  necessarily  works
             speedily.


        10.      Internal relocation may be available in Kenya to  a  woman
             who is at real risk of forced FGM  in  her  home  area  if  the
             evidence shows, (i) she is not reasonably likely  to  encounter
             anyone in the place of relocation who would be in a position of
             power and influence over her and who would use that  power  and
             influence to require her to undergo FGM,  or  would  cause  her
             presence in the place of relocation to become known to  such  a
             person or persons (e.g. the Mungiki, in  particular  where  the
             appellant is a Gikuyu/Kikuyu woman, when  the  Mungiki  may  be
             expected to take more particular interest in  her  and  in  any
             Mungiki connections  that  she  may  have,  so  that  she  may,
             dependant upon her characteristics and history, then become  of
             adverse interest, and persecution or  other  serious  harm  may
             ensue. Although the Mungiki may  also  target  those  of  other
             ethnic origin, for example the Luo, for political reasons); and
             (ii) she can reasonably be expected  to  live  in  that  place,
             having regard to the general circumstances prevailing in it and
             the personal circumstances of the appellant (paragraph 3390  of
             HC 395).  In the case of a woman from a rural  area  in  Kenya,
             internal relocation to some other region or urban  centre  will
             not be available unless her circumstances  are  such  that  she
             will be able to survive economically (see Januzi v Secretary of
             State for the Home Office and Others [2006] UKHL 5).


        11.      In considering internal relocation it is important to bear
             in mind the religious and/or cultural context, particularly  as
             to whether there is any family or sub-clan support available to
             the woman in the proposed area of relocation.   In  general  it
             will be easier for a member of a particular tribe  to  relocate
             to an area where there are others from  her  tribe  to  provide
             shared culture and support, rather than relocating to  an  area
             populated by a different  tribe.  Much  will  depend  upon  the
             individual circumstances of the woman and the  availability  or
             otherwise of a support structure within the  proposed  area  of
             return.   See  also  4  above.  In  considering  the  issue  of
             relocation it is important that the situation of the family and
             extended  family  be  examined,  particularly  as  to  cultural
             context, education, economic lifestyle and work experience.

Decision

243.  The original Tribunal made a material error  of  law.   The  following
      decision is substituted.

      The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

      By reason of  paragraph  339C  (ii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
      Appellant is not entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.


      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).

      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).





Senior Immigration Judge Jarvis              Date: 14 May 2008
                                  ANNEXE A

|Respondent                                                               |
|        |Undated         |        |Map of Kenya                          |
|        |Circa 1974      |        |Map of distribution of ethnic groups  |
|        |                |        |in Kenya - from Map No. 501721, 1974, |
|        |                |        |Perry -Castaneda Library Map          |
|        |                |        |Collection (page 79)                  |
|        |April 2003      |        |Country Assessment Documents for Kenya|
|        |December 2005   |        |Banking on Women - internet article,  |
|        |                |        |(date unclear but at least December   |
|        |                |        |2005)                                 |
|        |March 8 2006    |        |U.S. State Report Country Assessment  |
|        |                |        |Documents for Kenya                   |
|        |Circa 2007      |        |Internet articles from Catholic Relief|
|        |                |        |Service, Kenya - 2007                 |
|        |January 2007    |        |Key Documents                         |
|        |6 March 2007    |        |USSDR on Kenya                        |
|        |4 April 2007    |        |FK (FGM - Risk and Relocation) Kenya  |
|        |                |        |CG [2007] UKA1T 00041                 |
|        |6 November 2007 |        |BBC News: 'Keizi'a police accused over|
|        |                |        |deaths'                               |
|        |3 September 2007|        |Operational Guidance Note, Kenya      |
|Appellant                                                                |
|        |Undated         |        |Appellant's Statement and Responses to|
|        |                |        |Reasons for Refusal                   |
|        |Undated         |        |Beyond Religion                       |
|        |Undated         |        |Censur -  Various News Articles       |
|        |Undated         |        |Chronology                            |
|        |Undated         |        |Human Rights Information Pack: Female |
|        |                |        |Genital Mutilation - Amnesty          |
|        |                |        |International                         |
|        |Undated         |        |Human Rights Information Pack: Stop   |
|        |                |        |Violence Against Women                |
|        |Undated         |        |Immigration and Nationality           |
|        |                |        |Directorate:                          |
|        |                |        |Human Rights Specific Groups:         |
|        |                |        |Guidelines                            |
|        |Undated         |        |Index                                 |
|        |Undated         |        |International Planned Parenthood      |
|        |                |        |Federation: Statement on Female       |
|        |                |        |Genital                               |
|        |                |        |Mutilation                            |
|        |Undated         |        |Kikuyu: Features of the Mungiki -     |
|        |                |        |The Politics of the Mungiki           |
|        |Undated         |        |News Article: Police Lethargy         |
|        |Undated         |        |News Articles: Selected Articles on   |
|        |                |        |the                                   |
|        |                |        |State of Religion on Africa           |
|        |Undated         |        |Net Message Board: Religious Cults    |
|        |                |        |And Sects - Mungiki                   |
|        |Undated         |        |Report from Amnesty International:    |
|        |                |        |Kenya                                 |
|        |Undated         |        |Report: Female Genital Mutilation     |
|        |Undated         |        |Report -  Metareligion: Mungiki Sect  |
|        |Undated         |        |Report - Religious Cults and Sects:   |
|        |                |        |Mungiki Disciples claim it is a       |
|        |                |        |home-grown                            |
|        |                |        |Religion                              |
|        |07 May 2000     |        |News Article - Sunday Nation: Secrets |
|        |                |        |of                                    |
|        |                |        |Mungiki Movement                      |
|        |September 2000  |        |Report - New Internationalist: Kenya  |
|        |                |        |-Retro Vision: Rise of Ethnic Sect    |
|        |                |        |Creates                               |
|        |                |        |Anxiety                               |
|        |23 October 2000 |        |News article - Daily Nation: What     |
|        |                |        |Makes                                 |
|        |                |        |Mungiki Tick                          |
|        |24 October 2000 |        |News article - The National (Nairobi):|
|        |                |        |                                      |
|        |                |        |Fury At Attacks Against Women         |
|        |27 October 2000 |        |News article - The National (Nairobi):|
|        |                |        |                                      |
|        |                |        |The Mungiki Mystique, Just Shattered  |
|        |                |        |To Pieces                             |
|        |01 November 2000|        |News article: The People of the       |
|        |                |        |Mungiki                               |
|        |                |        |And the Kikuyu Question               |
|        |09 December 2000|        |News article - Panafrican News Agency:|
|        |                |        |Mungiki Sect Members Torch Slum ViUage|
|        |14 December 2000|        |News article - CNN: Kenyan Women      |
|        |                |        |Lawyers Call for Law Against Female   |
|        |                |        |Circumcision                          |
|        |14 December 2000|        |News article - The Associated Press:  |
|        |                |        |Kenyans End Genital Mutilation        |
|        |09 September    |        |News article - Sunday National: Why   |
|        |2001            |        |Mungiki's Change?                     |
|        |18 November 2001|        |News article - East African Standard  |
|        |                |        |Is Mungiki A Religious Sect or a      |
|        |                |        |Political                             |
|        |                |        |Body?                                 |
|        |08 March 2002   |        |Amnesty International: Kenya Rape, The|
|        |                |        |                                      |
|        |                |        |Invisible Crime                       |
|        |13 March 2002   |        |Report - Genocide Watch News Monitor: |
|        |                |        |Africa                                |
|        |25 April 2002   |        |News Article: IRIN News Org: Kenya    |
|        |                |        |Rights Activists Decry Mungiki        |
|        |                |        |Circumcision Threat                   |
|        |03 August 2002  |        |News article: The East African        |
|        |                |        |Standard:                             |
|        |                |        |30 Naked Mungiki Men Arrested in      |
|        |                |        |City Swoop                            |
|        |19 December 2002|        |Letter from The Medical Foundation    |
|        |19 December 2002|        |Letter from Medical Foundation        |
|        |06 January 2003 |        |Letter from Ogunfeibo Solicitors      |
|        |06 January 2003 |        |Letter from Anthony Ogunfeibo & Co to |
|        |                |        |A                                     |
|        |13 January 2003 |        |Letter from Varvara Zhyvets, Therapist|
|        |                |        |Counsellor at Refugee Support Centre  |
|        |13 January 2003 |        |Report of Dr Liz Herbert, Department  |
|        |                |        |of Genitourinary Medicine             |
|        |13 January 2003 |        |Letter from Refugee Support Centre    |
|        |24 January 2003 |        |Letter from Department of             |
|        |                |        |Genitourinary                         |
|        |                |        |Medicine, Mayday University Hospital  |
|        |11 February 2003|        |BBC News: News article -Profile:      |
|        |                |        |Kenya's                               |
|        |                |        |Secretive Mungiki Sect                |
|        |13 February 2003|        |News article - American Anglican      |
|        |                |        |Council:                              |
|        |                |        |Shadowy Mungiki is Feared by Kenyan   |
|        |                |        |Churches and Government               |
|        |27 August 2003  |        |Letter from Kirklees - Rape and Sexual|
|        |                |        |Abuse Counselling Centre              |
|        |24 December 2003|        |News article: The Nation (Nairobi):   |
|        |                |        |Stripping Women Barbaric              |
|        |27 January 2004 |        |Letter from the Home Office           |
|        |27 January 2004 |        |Letter from Home Office requesting    |
|        |                |        |Medical Foundation Report             |
|        |12 February 2004|        |Letter from Anthony Ogunfeibo & Co    |
|        |24 April 2004   |        |Newspapers article - The East African |
|        |                |        |Standard (Nairobi): Get Circumcised,  |
|        |                |        |Mungiki Sect Tells Women              |
|        |27 April 2004   |        |Psychiatric Report of Dr BuUer        |
|        |28 April 2004   |        |Letter from Kirklees Counselling      |
|        |                |        |Centre                                |
|        |28 April 2004   |        |Report of Anne Wilkinson - Kirklees   |
|        |                |        |Rape and Sexual Abuse                 |
|        |24 May2004      |        |Determination of D Chandler allowing  |
|        |                |        |the Article 3 appea                   |
|        |28 June 2004    |        |Application for Permission to Appeal  |
|        |                |        |to the IAT                            |
|        |14 October 2004 |        |IAT Decision extending time to appeal |
|        |21 January 2005 |        |IAT Decision overturning Art 3        |
|        |                |        |decision of Adjudicator               |
|        |07 February 2005|        |Grounds of Application for permission |
|        |                |        |to appeal to the Court of Appeal      |
|        |29 March 2005   |        |IAT grant of permission to appeal     |
|        |27 April 2005   |        |Psychiatric Report of Dr Buller       |
|        |31 January 2006 |        |Judgement of Court of Appeal in VNM   |
|        |17 November 2006|        |Updated Evidence                      |
|        |                |        |Psychiatric Report of Dr Buller       |
|        |11 January 2007 |        |Updated Evidence                      |
|        |                |        |Update Statement of the Appellant     |
|        |19 January 2007 |        |Updated Evidence                      |
|        |                |        |Letter from Kirklees Rape & Sexual    |
|        |                |        |Abuse                                 |
|        |                |        |Counselling Centre                    |
|        |22 January 2007 |        |Updated Evidence                      |
|        |                |        |Letter from North East Community      |
|        |                |        |Mental                                |
|        |                |        |Health Team                           |
|        |08 February 2007|        |Expert Report of Ben Knighton         |
|        |24 October 2007 |        |Updated Expert Report of Ben Knighton |
|        |3 January 2008  |        |The Economist: "Kenya: A very African |
|        |                |        |coup"                                 |
|        |3 January 2008  |        |The Economist: "Kenya's Elections:    |
|        |                |        |Twilight robbery, daylight murder"    |
|        |23 January 2008 |        |BBC News: "Gang rape spirals in       |
|        |                |        |violent Kenya"                        |
|        |29 January 2008 |        |BBC News: "Kenyans "forcibly recruited|
|        |                |        |to fight"                             |
|        |30th January    |        |BBC News: "Targeted for marrying a    |
|        |2008            |        |Kikuyu"                               |
|        |31 January 2008 |        |The Economist: "Kenya: More mayhem    |
|        |                |        |than mediation"                       |
|        |5 February 2008 |        |National Post (Canada): "From Mau Mau |
|        |                |        |to Mun 50 Years Later, Kenya is Still |
|        |                |        |a Bloody Mess"                        |
|        |7 February 2008 |        |The Economist: 'Kenya: Ethnic         |
|        |                |        |cleansing in Luoland"                 |
|        |11th February   |        |BBC News: Kenyan militia strike back" |
|        |2008            |        |                                      |
|        |20 March 2008   |        |Letter from Switalski's Solicitors    |
|        |29 April 2008   |        |BBC News: Kenya banned sect members   |
|        |                |        |killed                                |



                                  ANNEXE B

|List of Authorities                                                      |
|        |Circa 1998      |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:     |
|        |                |        |Robinson (Anthonypillai Francis) v    |
|        |                |        |SSHD and AIT [1998] QB 929; [ 1mm AR  |
|        |                |        |568, CA (internal relocation          |
|        |                |        |principles: claimant entitled to      |
|        |                |        |refugee status if internal relocation |
|        |                |        |unduly harsh or unreasonable: pages   |
|        |                |        |939-940)                              |
|        |Circa  2001     |        |Decisions of IAT/AIT: Kacaj (Article  |
|        |                |        |3, Standard of Proof, Non-State       |
|        |                |        |Actors) Albania * [ UKIAT 00018 (19   |
|        |                |        |July 2001); [2001] INLR 354 (standard |
|        |                |        |of proof common as between article 3  |
|        |                |        |ECHR and/or Refugee Convention claims:|
|        |                |        |paras 35-39)                          |
|        |Circa  2002     |        |Decisions of the Administrative Court:|
|        |                |        |Dhima V Immigration Appeal Tribunal   |
|        |                |        |[2002] EWHC 80 (Admin); [ INLR 243    |
|        |                |        |(applying sufficiency of protection   |
|        |                |        |test to article 3 ECHR cases paras    |
|        |                |        |29-34)                                |
|        |Circa  2003     |        |Decisions of the Administrative Court:|
|        |                |        |R (AC) V IAT [2003] EWHC Admin 389;   |
|        |                |        |[2003] INLR 507 (Relevance of human   |
|        |                |        |rights of affected persons when not   |
|        |                |        |directly party to proceedings)        |
|        |Circa  2003     |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:     |
|        |                |        |Bagdanavicius et anor V SSHD 120031   |
|        |                |        |EWCA Civ 1605; [2004] 1WLR 1207;      |
|        |                |        |[2004] INLR 163 (comparison of factors|
|        |                |        |relevant on article 3 ECHR and/or     |
|        |                |        |Refugee Convention claims: para 55)   |
|        |Circa  2003     |        |Other:  Blake and Husain, Immigration,|
|        |                |        |Asylum, and Human Rights Oxford, 2003,|
|        |                |        |pp                                    |
|        |                |        |94-97 (comparison of factors relevant |
|        |                |        |on article 3 ECHR and/or Refugee      |
|        |                |        |Convention claims)                    |
|        |Circa  2004     |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:  AE |
|        |                |        |and FE v SSHD [ EWCA Civ 1032; [2004] |
|        |                |        |QB 531; [ INLR 475 (internal          |
|        |                |        |relocation principles: comparison not |
|        |                |        |with conditions in the United Kingdom |
|        |                |        |but with those in the area of habitual|
|        |                |        |residence: paras 23 and 64-67)        |
|        |22 September    |        |JA (Mungiki - not a religion) Kenya   |
|        |2004            |        |[2004] UKIAT00266                     |
|        |8 December 2004 |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:  P &|
|        |                |        |M v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 1640; [2005] |
|        |                |        |INLR 167 (Women in Kenya facing FGM as|
|        |                |        |social group for purposes of Refugee  |
|        |                |        |Convention: para 37)                  |
|        |Circa  2006     |        |Decisions of the House of Lords: SSHD |
|        |                |        |v Fornah; K v SSHD [ UKHL 46, [ 1 AC  |
|        |                |        |412; [2006]  3 WLR 733; 120071 INLR I |
|        |                |        |(Women facing FGM as social group for |
|        |                |        |purposes of Refugee Convention: paras |
|        |                |        |26, 31, 108)                          |
|        |31 January 2006 |        |VNM [2006] EWCA Civ 47                |
|        |15 February 2006|        |Decisions of the House of Lords:      |
|        |                |        |Januzi v SSHD; Hamid, Gaafar, and     |
|        |                |        |Mohammed v SSHD [ UKHL 5; [ INLR 118  |
|        |                |        |(Internal relocation: "reasonably     |
|        |                |        |normal life" test elucidated: paras 20|
|        |                |        |and 47)                               |
|        |Circa  2007     |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:  AH |
|        |                |        |(Sudan) [ EWCA Civ 297 (correct       |
|        |                |        |approach to internal relocation       |
|        |                |        |following Januzi pam 33)              |
|        |Circa  2007     |        |Decisions of the Court of Appeal:  DK |
|        |                |        |(Serbia) & ors v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ |
|        |                |        |1747; [2007] 2 All ER 483 (Continuity |
|        |                |        |of reconsideration process under 2002 |
|        |                |        |Act: paras 20-22)                     |
|        |Circa  2007     |        |Decisions of the European Court of    |
|        |                |        |Human Rights:  Salah Sheekh v The     |
|        |                |        |Netherlands (Application no. 1948/04) |
|        |                |        |[2007] ECHR 36 (approach to internal  |
|        |                |        |relocation in article 3 ECHR cases:   |
|        |                |        |paras 138-144)                        |
|        |Circa  2007     |        |Decisions of IAT/AIT:  FK (FGM)- risk |
|        |                |        |and relocation) Kenya CG [2007] AlT   |
|        |                |        |00041 (Kenya CG; Women in Kenya facing|
|        |                |        |FGM are social group for purposes of  |
|        |                |        |Refugee Convention: para 63)          |
|        |Circa  2007     |        |Decisions of IAT/AIT:  IM (Sufficiency|
|        |                |        |of protection) Malawi [2007] UKAIT    |
|        |                |        |00071 (continuing validity of         |
|        |                |        |Bagdanavicius comparison of factors   |
|        |                |        |relevant on article 3 ECHR and/or     |
|        |                |        |Refugee Convention claims: paras      |
|        |                |        |35-39)                                |
|        |26 February 2008|        |FK (Kenya) [2008] EWCA Civ 119        |








