
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

      OI (Notice of decision:  time calculations) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00042

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                       Date of Publication: 10 May 2006

                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                           Immigration Judge Bailey
                           Immigration Judge Peart


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent

Service of notices of immigration  decisions  is  governed  by  the  Notices
Regulations (SI 2003/658).  The requirements of service by post need  to  be
followed for service by post to be  effective;   and  the  deemed  times  in
those Regulations are of importance in calculating the time  for  appealing.
Similarly, the time for appealing itself is as set  out  in  the  Tribunal's
Procedure Rules even if there is other  or  misleading  information  in  the
Notice of Decision.  If the officer making the decision chooses not to  date
it or to indicate the method  of  service,  the  Appellant's  statements  on
those issues may well be unchallengeable.

                           DETERMINATION OF ISSUE

  1. The Appellant applied to the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  a  student
     visa.  His application form is dated 9 January 2006.  He was  refused.
     He submitted  a  notice  of  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
     Tribunal.  It contains an application for the extension of  time.   It
     was received in the Tribunal on 24 February 2006.

  2. Questions relating to whether the notice of appeal  was  in  time  and
     whether time should be extended are to be  determined  as  preliminary
     issues without a hearing and on the basis only of the matters set  out
     in rule 10(6).  Some issues raised by this appeal are of more  general
     application:  but the restrictions  imposed  by  the  Procedure  Rules
     still apply.

  3. We must describe the two principal formal documents  before  us.   The
     first is the notice of immigration decision,  refusing  the  Appellant
     his entry clearance.  At the top, there  are  spaces  for  the  post's
     reference, and the Appellant's name is entered.  The  first  paragraph
     of the text (which may well be in standard form) is as follows:

           "You have applied for entry clearance to enable you to study  in
           the UK and have completed an additional questionnaire to  assist
           your application.  I have carefully considered your  application
           on the basis of your passport, application  form,  supplementary
           questionnaire and  the  papers  you  have  provided.   You  have
           declared that the information you have  given  is  complete  and
           true to the best of your knowledge."

  4. There then follows the substantive refusal and reasons.  Then there is
     this:

           "I therefore refuse your application.


           Entry Clearance Officer:  I  M-W               Date  of  Refusal
                 "

  5. There are then some paragraphs indicating the  rights  of  appeal,  in
     accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the   Immigration   (Notices)
     Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/658), ending with the following:

           "TIME LIMIT FOR APPEALING
           The completed appeal form should arrive not later than  28  days
           after the date of this notice.  The completed appeal  form  must
           be signed and dated."

  6. Following that, and in fact  on  the  next  page  of  this  particular
     notice, is the following:

           "A notice (of which this is a copy) was  handed  to  me  at  The
           British Deputy High Commission, Lagos
           The contents have been translated to me in English
           Applicants'       Signature:       _________________       Date:
           __________________"

  7. The appeal form submitted by the Appellant is signed by him and  dated
     14/02/2006.  We need refer only to the first two sections of it.   The
     first section is headed "Your decision".  The notes at the top of  the
     form give the instruction "Please complete Section 1 of this  form  by
     referring to the notice of refusal that was sent to you by  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer".  The  Appellant  has  completed  that  section  by
     filling in the post reference number,  the  type  of  decision  ("non-
     settlement"), the name of the British Mission, the  date  of  service,
     which he has entered as "02/02/2006", the "Deadline to appeal",  which
     he has entered as "02/03/2006", and the method of service (post).  The
     notes to Section 2 are as follows:

           "The deadline to appeal is 28 calendar days from  the  date  you
           were served with the decision.  Your appeal must be received  by
           the Visa Section or the Tribunal by the end of this period.   In
           accordance with the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)
           Rules 2005, you must not send your appeal to both locations.


           If you know your appeal is late, or if you  are  not  sure  your
           appeal will be received by the deadline date, you must apply for
           an extension of time, and  give  your  reasons  for  failing  to
           submit your appeal in time, in the box."

  8. The Appellant has written the following in the box:

           "I  am  applying  for  extension  because   in   Nigeria,   visa
           application are sent to the embassy and return  by  the  embassy
           through post.  The date of refusal was 02/02/2006 but the  forms
           got back to me on the 13/02/2006.  I finally sent my  appeal  on
           the 15/02/2006."

  9. The appeal was sent to the Tribunal, not to the High Commission.   The
     Appellant completed the final  section  of  the  application  form  to
     indicate that he was sending the appeal to the Tribunal.   He  did  so
     and, as we have indicated, it was received on 24 February.

 10. The notice of refusal appears to us to raise a number of issues.   The
     first is that it is not dated.  Evidently the Appellant was  aware  by
     some means of its issue on 2 February, perhaps because it was sent  to
     him with a covering letter.  But we have not seen any such letter, and
     no appellant is required to send any letter from the  Entry  Clearance
     Officer (as distinct from the notice of decision) with his appeal.  It
     is, we think, right to say that the Notices Regulations do not require
     the notice of decision to be dated.  But the form of decision used  in
     this case appears to require a date, although none has  been  entered;
     and it is obviously  good  administrative  practice  to  date  such  a
     notice.  If the Entry Clearance Officer chooses not to enter a date on
     the notice of decision, it is very unlikely that  there  will  be  any
     evidence of the date of the decision other than that  offered  by  the
     Appellant.  It follows that, in the case of  an  undated  notice,  the
     Tribunal will generally have to accept the Appellant's statement as to
     the date of the decision.

 11. The next feature of the notice which causes concern is  the  statement
     about the time for appealing.  As we have  indicated,  the  notice  of
     decision requires a completed appeal form to arrive (whether with  the
     Respondent or with the Tribunal) "no later than 28 days after the date
     of this notice".  Even if there  were  a  date  on  the  notice,  that
     paragraph is simply wrong.  The time limit for an appeal by  a  person
     not in the United Kingdom is that set out in rule 7(2) of  the  Asylum
     and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, and is not later than
     twenty-eight days after he is served  with  notice  of  the  decision.
     Service of the decision itself  is  governed  not  by  the  Tribunal's
     Procedure Rules, but by the Notices  Regulations.   They  provide,  in
     Regulation 7, as follows:

           "Service of notice
           7(1)  A notice required to be given under regulation 4 [that is,
                 a notice of an appealable immigration decision] may be -
                    a) given by hand;
                    b) sent by fax;
                    c) sent by postal service in which delivery  or  receipt
                       is recorded to -
                       [the applicant's nominated or last known address]
           ...
           (4)   Where  a  notice  is  sent  by  post  in  accordance  with
                 paragraph (1)(c) it shall be deemed to  have  been  served,
                 unless the contrary is proved, -
                 (a)   ...
                 (b)   on the twenty-eighth day after it was posted if it is
                       sent to a place outside the United Kingdom.
           (5)   For the purposes of paragraph (4)  the  period  is  to  be
           calculated -
                 (a)   excluding the day on which the notice is  posted  ...
                 ."

 12. The expression of the time for appeal by relation to the date  of  the
     notice is therefore technically always wrong.  If service is  effected
     by hand on the day that the notice is dated, the twenty-eight days for
     appealing will indeed begin to run immediately, not because the period
     begins with the date of the notice, but because  it  begins  with  the
     service.  If the notice is sent by post,  the  twenty-eight  days  for
     appealing will under normal circumstances not begin to run  until  the
     expiry of twenty-eight days after the date of posting.   The  date  of
     the notice is never as such the appropriate  date  for  beginning  the
     period, and no statement to applicants should say that it is.

 13. Although there is, as we have indicated, a place on this notice for an
     endorsement of personal service, it has not been completed.  The first
     paragraph of the notice of refusal, which we have set out above,  does
     not suggest that there was any personal contact between the  Appellant
     and the Entry Clearance  Officer.   The  Appellant  asserts  that  the
     notice of decision was sent by post.  We see no reason at all to doubt
     that assertion.

 14. What we do not know, because neither party has provided  any  evidence
     of the matter, is whether the service by  post  was  effected  in  the
     manner specified  by  Regulation  7(1)(c).   It  is  clear  from  that
     Regulation that service by an ordinary (unrecorded) postal  system  is
     not effective  service  under  the  Regulations;   and,  as  presently
     advised, we should be inclined to  say  that  service  by  courier  or
     private document transmission service is also  not  permitted  by  the
     Regulations.  It is  clearly  open  to  Entry  Clearance  Officers  to
     indicate the method of service on the notice itself.   Clearly  it  is
     intended that they do so where service is by hand;  but if service  is
     effected by fax  or  by  post  under  Regulation  7(1)(c),  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer should say so.  If the Entry Clearance Officer  does
     not take the opportunity of saying so, the Tribunal is again  unlikely
     to have any evidence other than that of the Appellant.

 15. The Notices Regulations are clearly made for the benefit of those  who
     receive the notices, and as a result the Tribunal has  regularly  held
     that an  applicant  or  appellant  may  waive  a  requirement  of  the
     Regulations by submitting a notice of appeal even if  the  Regulations
     have not been fully complied with.  But an applicant  is  entitled  to
     require compliance with the Regulations, and if a notice has not  been
     served by one of the methods specified in Regulation 7(1), it has  not
     been lawfully served at all, and in that case time has not  yet  begun
     to run against any intending appellant.

 16. Our conclusions on the issues raised by this notice of  decision  are,
     first, that notices of decision should always be dated.  Secondly, the
     notice of decision should indicate the means by which it  was  served;
     if it was served by post, the notice of decision should  indicate  the
     date of posting and the particular postal service employed in order to
     show that service was in accordance with Regulation 7(1)(c).  Thirdly,
     notices of decision must contain  accurate  (rather  than  misleading)
     information about the time limit for appealing.

 17. We turn now to the notice of appeal in this case.  We understand  that
     there is a commonly-held view that the intention was that section 1 of
     the form should be completed by the Respondent.  Certainly its  terms,
     including a specified deadline for appealing, might be thought  to  be
     more appropriately the Respondent's responsibility.  But the notes  at
     the top of the form as issued  make  it  clear  that  it  is  for  the
     Appellant to complete section 1.  His task in doing so is likely to be
     of some difficulty.  He is required to indicate the date of service of
     the decision.  He must presumably calculate this  in  accordance  with
     Regulation 7 of the Notices Regulations.  We do not know whether he is
     provided with a copy of the  Regulations.   He  must  then  enter  the
     "deadline to appeal".  This he must calculate in accordance  with  the
     Tribunal's Procedure Rules.  We do not know  whether  he  is  provided
     with a copy of them.  In the present case, he  appears  to  have  been
     provided with an undated notice, no very specific indication as to the
     method of service and only misleading information about the  terms  of
     the Regulations and the Rules.  What is clear that in a case in  which
     so little of the formal  information  has  been  given  by  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer, the Appellant's entries in section 1 and section  2
     of the form will have the highest importance, as  they  will  in  many
     cases be unchallenged and unchallengeable assertions of fact as to the
     relevant dates.

 18. In the present case, the Appellant asserts that he received the notice
     of refusal on 13 February 2006.  If the service was indeed by post  on
     2 February, service would (under Regulation 7(4)) have  been  effected
     on 2 March 2006, from which he would have  had  twenty-eight  days  to
     appeal.  There is no reason  not  to  accept  his  statement  that  he
     received the form on 13 February, rather earlier than that allowed  by
     Regulation 7(4).  His twenty-eight  days  ran  from  13  February  and
     therefore expired on 13 March (rule 57(1)(a) provides that  the  first
     day is to be ignored in calculating the period of twenty-eight  days).
     The Appellant entered 2  March  2006  as  the  "deadline  to  appeal",
     probably because he was misled by the terms of the notice of decision.

 19. The Appellant filled in the form to apply for an  extension  of  time,
     probably because he did not know how long it would take for the  forms
     to get to the Tribunal in England.   In  fact,  their  arrival  on  24
     February 2006 was well in time and no question of  extension  of  time
     arises.

 20. The notes to section paragraph 2 of the form, which we  have  set  out
     above,  are  those  in  the  form  annexed  to  the  Rules.   We   are
     nevertheless mildly surprised to see that they assert that  the  Rules
     prevent notices of appeal being sent to both the  Respondent  and  the
     Tribunal.  The relevant rule is rule 6:

           "Giving notice of appeal
           6(1)  An appeal to the Tribunal may only be instituted by giving
                 notice of appeal against a relevant decision in  accordance
                 with these Rules.
           (2)   Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), notice of  appeal  must
                 be given by filing it with the Tribunal in accordance  with
                 rule 55(1) [which sets out the procedures  for  service  on
                 the Tribunal].
           ...
           (4)   A person who is outside the United Kingdom and  wishes  to
                 appeal against a decision of an entry clearance officer may
                 give notice of appeal either -
                 (a)   in accordance with paragraph (2);  or
                 (b)   by serving it on the entry clearance officer."


 21. Paragraph (4) of rule 6 does not end with the words  "but  not  both".
     We can see no reason why it should be interpreted as  including  those
     words.  We appreciate that it is administratively  convenient  if  the
     notice of appeal is served in only one place, but we  cannot  conceive
     what is the sanction against a person  who  serves  on  both  possible
     addressees.  We think it very unlikely that if one arrived in time and
     one arrived out of time he would be regarded as not having appealed in
     time.  In the context of this appeal, however, we do not need to reach
     a concluded view on that issue.

 22. For the reasons given in paragraph 19, the notice of  appeal  in  this
     case was in time.  The appeal will now proceed to determination.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


