

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

    Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties) [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on:                     |
|On 24 September 2014                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 YAN BOSSADI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant: Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr K Mak, Solicitor, MKM Solicitors


(1) Being  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
Immigration Rules requires being able to meet the  suitability  requirements
set out in paragraph 276ADE(1). It is  because  this  subparagraph  contains
suitability requirements that it  is  not  possible  for  foreign  criminals
relying on private life grounds to circumvent the provisions  of  the  Rules
dealing with deportation of foreign criminals.

(2) The requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE (vi) (in force from  9  July
2012 to 27 July 2014)   to show that a person "is aged 18  years  or  above,
has lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting  any
period of imprisonment) but has  no  ties  (including  social,  cultural  or
family) with the country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave
the UK", requires a rounded assessment as to  whether  a  person's  familial
ties could result in  support  to  him  in  the  event  of  his  return,  an
assessment taking into account both subjective and objective  considerations
and also consideration of  what lies within the  choice  of  a  claimant  to
achieve.



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 23 July 2013 the appellant (hereafter Secretary of State for the  Home
Department or  SSHD)  decided  to  make  a  deportation  order  against  the
respondent (hereafter the claimant) in accordance with  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007 on the ground that he was a foreign criminal  sentenced  to
a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months and someone who did not  fall
under any of the exceptions set out in s.33 of that Act.  The  claimant  who
was born in 1986 and is a national of the DRC had  a  history  of  offending
with  convictions  in  2002,  2004,  2005,  2006,  2008,  2009,  2010,  2011
culminating in a conviction at Croydon Crown Court for robbery  and  related
offences for which he received a sentence of  42  months  imprisonment.  The
claimant appealed against the SSHD's deportation order.  In a  determination
of 24 June 2014 a First tier Tribunal (FtT) panel comprising Judge  Abebrese
and NLM Richardson allowed his appeal  under  Articles  3  and  8  ECHR  and
paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The respondent was successful  in
obtaining a grant of permission to appeal, bringing the matter before us.

2. We are grateful to both parties for their submissions.  We  have  decided
that the FtT materially erred in law in several respects.

3. First, in relation to Article 3, its reasoning  is  seriously  deficient.
The entirety of the reasoning is set out at [14] as follows:

    "In respect of Article 3 the Tribunal is also of the view that  bearing
    in mind the facts and the circumstances of  this  particular  appellant
    and the tender age which he came into this country he would  have  been
    (sic) at risk in respect of Article 3 if he were to be removed  to  the
    DRC."


4. Disregarding the use above of an incorrect tense, the FtT  wholly  failed
to explain why it would be relevant to risk on return to the  DRC  that  the
claimant had left the DRC when he was around 4-5 years old.  In  submissions
the FtT had been alerted to a judgment of Phillips J in P (DRC), R  (on  the
application of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC
3879 (Admin) which considered that there was a  real  and  substantial  risk
that criminal deportees to the DRC would be subjected to  ill  treatment  on
return to that country. However, Philips J specified that he could not  bind
the respondent in relation to  other  cases  involving  the  deportation  of
convicted criminals to the DRC and went on to urge  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
consider giving further country guidance to clarify the issue.  Accordingly,
even if the FtT can be presumed to have had this judgment in  mind,  it  was
necessary for it to identify the evidence which caused it to  conclude  that
P(DRC) should be followed. In para 13 the FtT did refer to "the  appellant's
and his mother's evidence and the circumstances that he would  face  if  her
(sic) were to be deported to the DRC", but without any further  elaboration,
it is difficult to know what evidence concerning risk on return  it  had  in
mind here, if any; it may be that here it meant to address  only  Article  8
circumstances.

5. In the second place, the FtT erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules. Whilst concluding that the claimant could  not  meet  the
requirements of the Rules dealing with deportation of foreign  criminals  as
set out in paragraphs 399 and 398, it proceeded to  rule  that  he  met  the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE on the basis that he has  been  in  the  UK
for over 20 years and did not have any family, social or  cultural  ties  in
the DRC.  It clearly had in mind that the requirement set out  at  paragraph
276ADE(vi) that applied to the claimant was that he had to show that he  "is
aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for  less  than  20
years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no  ties  (including
social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would  have  to  go
if required to leave the U.K." Leaving aside that the FtT nowhere  explained
why the accepted fact that the claimant had four uncles in the DRC  was  not
to be possibly indicative that the claimant  still  had  family  ties  there
(see  further  below),  it  failed  to  understand  that   the   suitability
requirements are an integral part of paragraph 276ADE. Being  able  to  meet
the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  requires
being able to  meet  the  suitability  requirements  set  out  in  paragraph
276ADE(i)[1].  It  is  because  this   subparagraph   contains   suitability
requirements that it is  not  possible  for  foreign  criminals  relying  on
private life grounds to circumvent the provisions of the Rules dealing  with
deportation of foreign criminals. As from 28 July 2014 para 276ADE has  been
amended[2], but at both the date of application and decision  in  this  case
the relevant rule read as follows:

    "276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
    on the
    grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of  application,
    the applicant:
    (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
    1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
    (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
    private life in the UK; and
    (iii)  has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
    for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or
    (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
    half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any  period
    of imprisonment); or
    (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK  for
    less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has  no
    ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


6.  The  corresponding  suitability  provisions  of  S-LTR  in  Appendix  FM
provided:


    "S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.7. apply.
    S-LTR.1.2. The applicant is at the date of application the subject of a
    deportation order.
    S-LTR.1.3. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
    which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for at least 4 years.
    S-LTR.1.4. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
    which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for less  than  4  years
    but at least 12 months.
    S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law.
    S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not  fall   within   paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3.   to   1.5.),   character,
    associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them  to
    remain in the UK.
    ..."




7. Manifestly the claimant did not meet  the  suitability  requirements  set
out at S-LTR 1.2, 1.4 or 1.5.

8. In the third place, the FtT's consideration of the claimant's  Article  8
circumstances outside the Immigration  Rules  was  also  vitiated  by  legal
error. In [13] the FtT stated that:

    "As the appellant has satisfied the Immigration Rules the panel did not
    consider it necessary to make a separate finding on Article 8 but it is
    the view of the Tribunal that the appellant would  in  any  event  have
    satisfied the principles  and  criteria  laid  down  in  respecting  of
    freestanding Article 8..."

9. Given the consequential nature of the FtT's reasoning  here  -  reasoning
based on the flawed premise that the claimant stood  to  succeed  under  the
Rules - it is difficult in any event to sever  the  two  decisions.  Mr  Mak
sought to argue that the substance of the FtT's consideration of  Article  8
commenced earlier at [11] and that is true. But the reasoning it  relies  on
in this paragraph is problematic for several reasons, most notably  that  in
the course of addressing paragraphs 399 and 398 it  had  said  categorically
that it accepted that the deportation of the claimant was conducive  to  the
public good. Since in logic the FtT could only have concluded  the  claimant
succeeded under Article 8 if satisfied that the public good  served  by  his
deportation was  outweighed  by  other  factors,  adequate  explanation  was
needed as to why this was thought to be the case. All that the  FtT  offered
was its finding that the claimant "perhaps now  would  not  reoffend".  That
was plainly not enough.

10. In addition, there is the matter of the FtT's treatment of the issue  of
ties in the DRC. In considering this matter we must have regard, of  course,
to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in YM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

11. At [50]-[52] Aikens LJ stated:

    "50...On that basis, the  last  issue  arises:  did  YM  have  no  ties
    (including social, cultural and family) with  Uganda?  Before  us,  the
    parties assumed that this question had to be decided  as  at  the  time
    that the UT re-made the decision. It concluded that YM could  not  meet
    this "stringent" requirement. However, when  making  its  determination
    the UT did not have the benefit of the decision of the UT  in  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new rules) (Nigeria) v SSHD. In that case the  UT  stated,
    at [123], that:
          "The natural and ordinary meaning of the words 'ties' imports, we
          think, a concept involving something more than merely remote  and
          abstract  links  to  the  country  of  proposed  deportation  and
          removal. It involves there being a continued connection  to  life
          in that country; something that ties a claimant  to  his  or  her
          country of origin. If this were not the case then it would appear
          that  a  person's  nationality  of  the   country   of   proposed
          deportation could of  itself  lead  to  a  failure  to  meet  the
          requirements of the rule. This would render  the  application  of
          the rule, given the context within which  it  operates,  entirely
          meaningless".
           I agree with that construction.
    51. The UT in that case went on to  recognise  that  the  test  was  an
    exacting one. However, the exercise that had  to  be  conducted  was  a
    "rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances", which were  not
    to be  confined  to  "social,  cultural  and  family"  issues.  The  UT
    concluded, on the facts, that  Mr  Ogundimu  did  not  have  ties  with
    Nigeria, the country to which he would have  been  deported.  It  noted
    that his father might have ties but  they  were  not  the  ties  of  Mr
    Ogundimu himself "or any ties that could result in support to [him]  in
    the event of his return [to Nigeria]".
    52. I agree with the analysis of the UT in Ogundimu. Whether this is  a
    "hard -edged" factual enquiry,  or  a  question  of  "evaluation",  the
    question in this case is: what ties does YM himself  have  with  Uganda
    and would they support him in the event of  a  return  there.  Ties  of
    other relatives, particularly YM's mother, are irrelevant."
12. Whilst in the instant case  it  was  open  to  the  FtT  to  accept  the
claimant's and mother's evidence about the claimant's  lack  of  social  and
cultural ties in the DRC, it was (as already noted) part of  their  evidence
that he had four uncles living there. Following Ogundimu (and  now,  for  us
considering the case, YM), the FtT was required to consider in the  form  of
a rounded assessment whether the claimant's familial ties  could  result  in
support to him in the event of his return  to  the  DRC.  In  our  view  the
Strasbourg jurisprudence understands assessment of this  matter  to  require
the decision-maker to  take  into  account  both  subjective  and  objective
considerations and also to  consider  what  lies  within  the  choice  of  a
claimant to achieve.

13. In this case the FtT appears to have approached  the  matter  of  family
ties as a purely subjective one, reasoning that because  the  two  witnesses
said there would be no effective family ties in the DRC, that  must  be  the
case objectively. That was  at  odds  with  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  which
requires not only that assessment of ties has an  objective  as  well  as  a
subjective dimension but also that  such  assessment  must  consider,  as  a
relevant consideration, whether ties that are dormant can be revived.  Thus,
in Balogun v UK app. no. 60266/09 [2012] ECHR 614 at [51]  the  Court  noted
that whilst it accepted that the tie between a Nigerian  applicant  and  his
mother in Nigeria was "not a strong familial tie", nevertheless "it  is  one
that could be pursued and strengthened by the applicant if he  chose".  That
assessment was not undertaken by the FtT.

14. For the above reasons we conclude that the FtT materially erred  in  law
and in such a manner as to necessitate that its decision be set aside.

15. The appeal will be set down for an Upper Tribunal hearing  so  that  the
decision can be re-made. The parties must comply  with  separate  directions
that will accompany the notice of hearing.

16. The hearing will be set for a date in late February on  the  basis  that
by then the  Upper  Tribunal  is  likely  to  have  produced  fresh  country
guidance relating to  the  return  to  the  DRC  of  persons  with  criminal
convictions. If however, the aforementioned new country guidance is  not  to
hand by mid-March, it may be necessary for the Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
whether to proceed with this case nonetheless. It is a deportation case  and
should not be postponed further unless absolutely necessary.

17. It is to be  observed  that  in  the  context  of  a  re-making  of  the
decision, the next hearing will  require  specific  submissions  as  to  the
impact on the claimant of the provisions  of  s.117C  of  the  2002  Act  as
amended with effect from 28 July 2014.




                               Signed


                               Date:




                               Dr H H Storey


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] Renumbered 276ADE(1)(i) on 1 December 2013, by HC 803).
[2] As from 28 July 2014 the rule reads as follows:
    "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:
    (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
    1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
    (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
    private life in the UK; and
    (iii)  has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
    (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the  UK
    for at least 7 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or
    (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at least
    half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any  period
    of imprisonment); or
    (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK."


The corresponding suitability provisions of S-LTR in Appendix FM now state:
    "S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.7. apply.
    S-LTR.1.2. The applicant is currently  the  subject  of  a  deportation
    order.
    S-LTR.1.3. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
    which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for at least 4 years.
    S-LTR.1.4. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because they have been  convicted  of  an  offence  for
    which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for less  than  4  years
    but at least 12 months.
    S-LTR.1.5. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their
    offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law.
    S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
    not  fall   within   paragraphs   S-LTR.1.3.   to   1.5.),   character,
    associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them  to
    remain in the UK.
    ..."
It can be observed that as from 28 July 2014 the test no longer  focuses  on
ties with the country of return and whether they  have  been  lost,  but  on
whether there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  into  the
country of return.


