
DA (Section 3C - meaning and effect) Ghana [2007] UKAIT 00043

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                       Heard at: Field House
                                           Date of Hearing: 28 November 2006
                                         Date of Promulgation: 25 April 2007
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr Ahmed, of Aamir Zane Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) The prohibition on new applications in s3C(4) of the 1971  Act  must  be
given its proper force.  It is not open to the Secretary of State  to  treat
an entirely new application as merely a variation of an existing  one.   (2)
Once an application has been decided it is  not  capable  of  being  varied.
(3) Once a decision is the subject of a pending appeal, any variation  is  a
matter for the grounds of appeal, not a variation  under  s3C(5).   (4)  The
effect of s3C(4) is that there can be  only  one  application  that  is  the
subject of an appeal to the Tribunal.  Any matters on  which  the  appellant
relies to substantiate a claim  under  the  Immigration  Rules  need  to  be
argued in that appeal.  The determination of the appeal must be regarded  as
having decided the issues arising from the application  and  any  variations
of it.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The facts

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  He  appealed  to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the decision of the respondent on 21 June  2006  to  give
    directions for  his  removal  as  an  overstayer,  having  refused  his
    application for leave to remain as the unmarried partner of the sponsor
    and having decided that his removal would not breach his  rights  under
    the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant sought and obtained an  Order  for
    Reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is somewhat complex, but is not  in
    any doubt.  Before the Immigration Judge it was  largely  confirmed  by
    documents produced by the  respondent,  and  the  only  issue  of  fact
    outstanding was settled by the Immigration Judge's determination in the
    appellant's favour.  We may therefore set it out as follows.

      3 July 2001      Appellant entered United  Kingdom  and  was  granted
                         leave to  enter  as  a  student.   On  application
                         further leave was  granted,  the  last  period  of
                         leave expiring on 30 June 2004


      16 May 2004      The appellant applied for leave  to  remain  in  the
                         United Kingdom as the  unmarried  partner  of  the
                         sponsor.


       15 June 2004    The appellant withdrew his application for leave  to
                         remain as an unmarried partner,  recognising  that
                         he  did  not  meet   the   requirements   of   the
                         Immigration Rules, but asserting that he wished to
                         take a  full  part  in  the  upbringing  of  their
                         expected child.


      18 June 2004     The appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK
                         as a student.


      30 June 2004     The date of  expiry  of  the  appellant's  leave  to
                         remain as a student.


      1 July 2004      The appellant's application for leave to remain as a
                         student was refused on the ground  that  both  his
                         application for leave to remain  as  an  unmarried
                         partner and the terms of his  withdrawal  of  that
                         application suggested that he had no intention  to
                         leave  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  his
                         studies.


      5 July 2004      The appellant applied again for leave to  remain  in
                         the United Kingdom as the unmarried partner of the
                         sponsor ("the second application").


      3 December 2004  An  Adjudicator  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
                         against the decision of 1 July 2004  refusing  him
                         leave to remain as a student.   The  determination
                         was based not only on  the  reason  given  by  the
                         Secretary of State in the Notice of  Refusal  (see
                         above) but also  on  the  ground  that  there  was
                         before  the  Adjudicator  no   evidence   of   the
                         appellant's    financial    circumstances.     The
                         Adjudicator made no reference in his determination
                         to the appellant's intentions or application as an
                         unmarried  partner:  the  determination  does  not
                         appear to consider that aspect of the  appellant's
                         case.  The appellant did not  seek  permission  to
                         appeal against the Adjudicator's determination.


      7 January 2005   The appellant submitted an application for leave  to
                         remain as the unmarried  partner  of  the  sponsor
                         ("the third application").


      25 January 2005  The third application was returned to the  appellant
                         because  he  had  not  submitted   the   documents
                         required or enclosed the appropriate fee.


      28 January 2005  The appellant re-submitted  the  third  application,
                         within the time allowed by the Secretary of  State
                         for doing so.


      15 June 2006     The third application was refused.   The  letter  of
                         refusal made it clear  that  one  ground  for  the
                         refusal was that the appellant has  not  had  "any
                         leave to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
                         since the 30/06/04", and therefore cannot meet the
                         requirements of paragraph 295D(i) and (iv) of  the
                         Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395,
                         and that, in  addition,  as  sufficient  financial
                         evidence had not been submitted, the appellant had
                         not demonstrated that he  was  able  to  meet  the
                         requirements  of   paragraph   295D(ix).    Having
                         accordingly  treated   the   application   as   an
                         application outside the Rules on the grounds  that
                         the appellant's removal  would  breach  his  human
                         rights,  the  Secretary  of  State   refused   the
                         application and made  a  decision  to  remove  the
                         appellant by way of directions given under s10  of
                         the 1999 Act.  The appellant appealed, in time, on
                         grounds which are in entirely general terms,  save
                         for an assertion that the second  application  "is
                         still pending  with  the  respondent  for  further
                         consideration".

 3. The Immigration Judge considered the points put by the appellant: there
    was no representative of the respondent before him.  So far as concerns
    the question whether the appellant had leave at the time  he  made  his
    third  application,  the  Immigration  Judge  considered  s3C  of   the
    Immigration Act 1971, and a passage from  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law
    and Practice, Sixth Edition, paragraph 4.13.   He  concluded  that  the
    appellant could have varied his application for leave to  remain  as  a
    student by adding grounds relating to his intentions as  the  unmarried
    partner of the sponsor, but that:

        "It is quite clear to me that he had no real intention to  rely  on
        his student application at the time that he  submitted  his  second
        application for leave to remain as an unmarried partner.  The whole
        basis of this application was, I find, to secure for himself  long-
        term settlement in the UK. ...  I am satisfied that  the  appellant
        had no ... intention to vary his application which he submitted  on
        18 June 2004 when he  submitted  a  completely  different  type  of
        application on 5 July 2004."

 4. He accordingly found that the second application did not cause  s3C  to
    extend the appellant's leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    followed from that that the third application was submitted at  a  time
    when the appellant had no extant leave.

 5. The Immigration Judge went on to consider the other ground  upon  which
    the respondent had refused the application insofar as  it  depended  on
    the Immigration Rules.  His process for  doing  so  is  not  altogether
    clear, because he included in his determination what are apparently two
    standard paragraphs setting out the duties of an Immigration Judge,  of
    which the first, which  was  of  some  importance  in  determining  the
    appellant's compliance with the financial requirements  of  the  Rules,
    appears to ignore the  provisions  of  s85(4)  of  the  2002  Act.   He
    therefore did not  take  into  account  any  evidence  post-dating  the
    decision, but found that at the date  of  the  decision  the  appellant
    "would have had the finance  available  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 295D(ix)".

 6. So far as concerns the human  rights  grounds,  the  Immigration  Judge
    noted that there was no material before him to show  that  the  sponsor
    could not settle with the appellant  and  their  child  in  Ghana:  the
    evidence merely established that the appellant preferred to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  Alternatively, the appellant could go to Ghana and
    apply for entry clearance from abroad.  The Immigration Judge therefore
    found that the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  would  not
    breach his rights under Article 8.

Section 3C and its history

 7. Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 was inserted by the 1999 Act and
    amended by the 2002 Act.   Following  the  amendments  it  was  in  the
    following terms from 1 April 2003:

      "3C.  Continuation of leave pending variation decision
      (1)   This section applies if -
            (a)  a person has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                 United Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                 variation of the leave,
            (b)  the application for variation is  made  before  the  leave
                 expires, and
            (c)  the leave expires without the  application  for  variation
                 having been decided.
      (2)   The leave is extended by virtue  of  this  section  during  any
                 period when -
            (a)  the application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
                 withdrawn,
             (b)   an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could  be  brought  against
                 the decision on the application for variation (ignoring any
                 possibility of an appeal out of time with permission), or
            (c)  an appeal under that  section  against  that  decision  is
                 pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act.)
      (3)   Leave extended by virtue of this section  shall  lapse  if  the
             applicant leaves the United Kingdom.
      (4)   A person may not make an application for variation of his leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while  that  leave  is
             extended by virtue of this section.
      (5)   But subsection (4)  does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).
      (6)   In this section a reference to an application being decided  is
             a reference to notice of the decision being given in accordance
             with regulations under section  105  of  that  Act  (notice  of
             immigration decision).

    (Further changes were made with effect from 31 August 2006  by  s11  of
    the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2006.  They have no  effect
    on this appeal or on the matters we discuss here.)


 8. A note on the history of those provisions is necessary.  In  Suthendran
    v IAT [1977] AC 359, [1977] Imm AR 155 and R v IAT ex parte Subramaniam
    [1977] QB 190, [1976] Imm AR 155, the House of Lords and the  Court  of
    Appeal respectively decided  that  on  the  true  construction  of  the
    legislation (at that time s14 of the Immigration Act 1971) there was  a
    right of appeal against a refusal to vary or extend leave only  if  the
    applicant had leave at the date of the decision and at the date of  any
    subsequent Notice of Appeal.  These decisions, no doubt  correct,  were
    undoubtedly inconvenient.  It meant that a delay between an application
    and the decision on it would deprive the applicant of a right of appeal
    if his leave expired before the decision  was  made.   The  legislative
    response was the  Immigration  (Variation  of  Leave)  Order  1976  (SI
    1976/1572), which had the effect that if a person applied,  during  the
    currency of existing leave, for a variation or extension of leave,  his
    leave was extended until 28 days after the decision on the application.
     Thus he had leave both at the time of the decision and at the time  of
    any notice of appeal.

 9. Both s14 and the Variation of Leave Order were replaced  by  provisions
    in the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  appeals
    provisions of that Act no longer required there to be leave at the time
    of the Notice of Appeal, and the requirement that a person  have  leave
    at the date of the application is now sometimes (but not always) a part
    of the relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules although it  is  far
    from clear that it does not remain a statutory requirement.

10. The 1999 Act also inserted a new s3C into the  1971  Act.   Unlike  the
    present version, which we have set out above, s3C as it  was  in  force
    from 2 October 2000 until 1 April 2003 did not extend leave during  the
    course of an appeal: it extended the applicant's leave only up  to  the
    date of the decision and the period after the decision during which any
    in time Notice of Appeal against it could be given.  The section had at
    subss(3) and (4) provisions to precisely the same effect as  those  now
    contained in subss(4) and (5).

11. The position during the currency of an appeal was governed by paragraph
    17 of Schedule 4 to the  Act,  which  provided  that  while  an  appeal
    against a refusal to vary leave was pending, "the leave  to  which  the
    appeal relates and any conditions  subject  to  which  it  was  granted
    continue to have effect", but that  an  application  for  variation  of
    leave to enter or remain could not be made during the period  by  which
    leave was extended by  that  paragraph.   Thus  the  provisions  for  a
    response to  change  of  circumstances  were  somewhat  different.   An
    application made during  what  we  may  call  "s3C  leave"  was  always
    prohibited.  But during the period of extension provided by s3C  itself
    a current application could be varied; whereas there was  no  provision
    for variation during the extension provided by paragraph 17 of Schedule
    4.  That remained the position until s3C was replaced on 1 April  2003.
    The new provisions, which we have set out above, retain the  provisions
    prohibiting application but allow variation in subss(4) and  (5);  but,
    on their face, those provisions apply without distinction  to  all  the
    period of s3C leave specified by the three paragraphs of subs(2).

The Immigration Directorates' Instructions

12. The drafting of s3C is not particularly opaque, and it  might  well  be
    thought to be a relatively easy  task  to  distinguish  between  a  new
    application and a variation of an existing application, and to reach  a
    view about what is the period of time during which an  application  can
    be varied.  All these matters are, however,  thrown  into  considerable
    doubt by the publication  of  Immigration  Directorate's  Instructions.
    The Instructions we were shown by  the  appellant  are  dated  December
    2003, and Mr Avery did not suggest that they were not  current  at  the
    date of the hearing of this appeal.  (In fact subsequent  research  has
    shown that the relevant paragraphs (they are in s5 of Chapter 1 of  the
    IDIs) were substantially re-written in September  2006.   We  are  glad
    that that is so, but it is the  December  2003  version  that  was  the
    published position of the Home Office when the important events for the
    purposes of this appeal took place.)  That version contains two matters
    of instruction  to  caseworkers  that  are,  to  say  the  least,  very
    surprising.  The first is that a new application can be  treated  as  a
    variation of the original application, even if the new  application  is
    completely different.  A change from a student application to a  spouse
    application is given as a specific example.  The second  is  that  this
    position (that is to say that an  application  can  be  varied  by  its
    replacement by a completely different application)  continues  for  the
    whole of the period of s3C leave.

13. So far as concerns the first of those directions, we have  the  gravest
    doubts whether it can be  lawful.   An  application  for  variation  or
    extension of leave is not made in purely general terms.  It is made for
    a  specific  purpose  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  and,   following
    provisions also introduced under the 1999 Act and subsequently amended,
    has to be made in and on a specific form, and every application has  to
    be accompanied by documentation appropriate to the specific application
    being made.  Further, to take the example mentioned in the instructions
    themselves, an application for a variation of leave in order to  remain
    as a student is an application for leave which is different in  quality
    from an application for leave to remain as a spouse.  A student's leave
    is dependent on following a respectable course  successfully,  and  the
    leave has conditions relating to the course and restricting other work.
     A spouse's leave is linked to  the  marriage  and  has  no  conditions
    restricting work.  To describe an  application  for  student  leave  as
    being merely "varied" by being replaced by an application for leave  as
    a spouse distorts the meaning of the word "variation" in subs(5);  and,
    more crucially, it essentially nullifies the  prohibition  in  subs(4).
    If an application can be varied in that way, it  is  difficult  to  see
    that any new application is in fact prohibited at all.  That is why  we
    say that the provisions of the IDIs to that effect are of very doubtful
    legality.  The Secretary of State is entitled to grant leave  to  those
    who do not meet the requirements of statute or the  Immigration  Rules;
    but he is not entitled to tell applicants that he will  not  apply  the
    law.

14. So far as concerns the second remarkable feature of the IDIs  which  we
    have identified - that is, that the possibility  of  variation,  as  so
    largely interpreted, exists for the whole of the period of 3C  leave  -
    the explanation clear although disgraceful is to be found in the  terms
    of the December 2003 IDIs themselves.  It is clear  that,  although  by
    December 2003 the version of s3C introduced by the 2002 Act had been in
    force for nine months, and although by September 2006 it  had  been  in
    force for three and a half years, the version of the relevant  part  of
    the IDIs giving the Secretary of State's instructions to  his  officers
    between those dates took no account of the new  provisions  of  s3C  at
    all.  The reviser in December 2003 confines himself to the  law  as  it
    was before April 2003.  Thus, he  begins  by  explaining  how  s3C  was
    inserted by the 1999 Act, he gives the effect of s3C by reference  only
    to the 1999 Act, and he summarises the one-stop provisions of the  1999
    Act, which he describes at  paragraph  7  as  "new".   He  details  the
    provisions of paragraph 17 of Schedule 4 to that Act, and some  of  his
    other comments can apply only to the 1999 Act's s3C,  for  example  the
    reference in paragraph 5 to "the final ten working days of leave  under
    s3C".  In this context it is rather surprising to find a  reference  to
    the 2002 Act at paragraph 4.1, but that sole  reference  relates  to  a
    different point.

15. It is thus clear that all the remarks made in that version of the  IDIs
    about "leave extended by s3C" apply, in the draftsman's mind,  only  to
    the period specified by the original  version  of  s3C:  that  is,  the
    period between the application and the last date for giving  Notice  of
    Appeal against a decision on it.  Although the remarks are expressed in
    entirely general terms, and at the time when this version was in force,
    could no doubt be expected to extend to the whole of the  period  under
    s3C leave under the present version of that section, they are  entirely
    misleading.  Indeed, on his remarks on paragraph 17 of  Schedule  4  to
    the 1999 Act he makes it clear, during  an  appeal,  there  can  be  no
    application for variation of  leave.   Any  application  that  is  made
    should, he directs, be treated as "out of time"  unless  it  falls  for
    consideration on an appeal under the one-stop provisions  of  the  1999
    Act: that is to say, broadly speaking, if it relates to asylum or human
    rights.

16. Before us, both parties argued that the provisions of  the  IDIs  meant
    that a completely new set of circumstances advanced  by  the  appellant
    even at a very late stage of an appeal counted as a "variation" of  the
    application and had to be dealt with at the  appeal  hearing.   We  are
    satisfied that that is a misunderstanding of misleading IDIs.  The true
    position is as set out in the present version of the IDIs,  revised  in
    September 2006 but not known to Mr Avery, which have at  paragraph  3.2
    the following  wording  which  we  regard,  with  respect,  as  clearly
    correct:

        "However s3C makes a clear distinction between the decision on  the
        application  and  the  appeal  against  that  decision.   Once   an
        application has been decided it ceases to  be  an  application  and
        there is no longer any application to vary under  s3C(5).   So  any
        new information will fall to be dealt with during the course of the
        appeal rather than as a variation  of  the  original  application."
        (emphasis added)

17. Thus, despite the fact that s3C makes no distinction between the period
    of leave relating to the making of the decision and the period of leave
    relating to a pending appeal, there is still  a  distinction.   Section
    3C(5) ceases to have any force when the decision is made,  because  the
    application is merged in the decision and is no longer capable of being
    varied.  Any variation thereafter will be of the grounds of any appeal,
    which can be varied, but only with the leave of the Tribunal under Rule
    14 of the Tribunal's  Procedure  Rules,  and  only  within  the  limits
    appropriate to such variation.

18.  Once  this  distinction  is  understood  to  have  survived,   certain
    provisions even of the misleading earlier version of  the  IDIs  become
    rather easier to understand.  In particular, there is a  suggestion  in
    them that, on receipt of a new (that is to say varied) application, the
    original decision could and possibly should  be  revoked  and  replaced
    with a decision reflecting the variation in the application and the new
    facts relied on.  Obviously, such a provision, if understood to  extend
    to the whole of the period of s3C leave, as both parties before us said
    that it should be,  imports  a  capacity  in  the  appellant  to  bring
    proceedings to a halt by dramatically varying his claim at a late stage
    - perhaps even before the Court of Appeal.  But that  is  not  what  is
    meant.  The provisions for revoking a decision and replacing it with  a
    new one are understood as applying only to the period of s3C  leave  as
    it would have been under  the  1999  Act.   They  therefore  allow  the
    decision to be reconsidered if the new material  comes  in  within  the
    time for appealing against the decision - perhaps even in a  Notice  of
    Appeal.  That is an indulgence, because by  then  the  application  has
    ceased to be capable of variation,  but  it  is  no  doubt  a  sensible
    provision.  Once the time for appealing has expired, however, new facts
    and new arguments become a matter for  the  Tribunal  if  there  is  an
    appeal, but, if there is no appeal, will merely furnish the  basis  for
    an application made otherwise than during a period of existing leave.

19. We have described the possibility of  variation  in  the  short  period
    immediately after the decision as an indulgence, and that  is  what  it
    is.  It seems to us that, even if the possibility  of  variation  under
    s3C(5) is limited to the time before and immediately after the decision
    is made, the wide interpretation of the word, which still  features  in
    the  IDIs,  presents  the  same  problems  of  lawfulness  as  we  have
    identified earlier.  Parliament could have enacted a provision that any
    new application received during a particular period might (or must)  be
    treated as a variation of the original application, but it did  not  do
    that.  It prohibited new  applications.   Any  interpretation,  whether
    judicial or executive, must respect that prohibition and give effect to
    it.

Application to the present case

20. In the present case we are concerned with whether the third application
    was made validly at a time when the appellant had existing leave.   The
    appellant's argument is as follows:  (1)  His application for variation
    of leave in order to enable him to remain as a student was made in time
    and therefore generated leave under s3C from 30 June, when his existing
    leave expired.  (2)  That leave continued  to  the  date  of  decision,
    during the further period when an appeal could be brought, and  (as  he
    appealed) during the further period when the appeal was  pending.   (3)
    He therefore had leave under s3C when the second application was  made.
    (4)  The second application was therefore to be treated as a  variation
    of  the  student  application.   (5)   Whether  or  not   the   student
    application was withdrawn, any  decision  needed  to  reflect  the  new
    material contained in the variation.  (6)  Section 3C  leave  therefore
    continued until a decision on the unmarried  partner  elements  of  the
    application as varied.  (7)  No such decision had been  made  when  the
    third application was submitted.  (8)  Therefore the appellant had  s3C
    leave when the third application was submitted.   (9)   Therefore  that
    application should be regarded as a further variation of  the  original
    student application, made in time, whilst the appellant had current s3C
    leave.

21. Thus the question whether the third application was in time depends  on
    whether the second application could be and  was  a  variation  of  the
    student application.  The appellant argued that it could be and it was.
     Mr Avery took a similar view, on the basis of the IDIs, but  submitted
    that the appellant's argument failed for another reason,  to  which  we
    shall return  shortly.   The  Immigration  Judge  thought  that  second
    application could have been a variation of the student application but,
    on the facts, was not.  Our view is that it was not, because  it  could
    not be.  There  are  two  reasons.   The  first,  as  we  have  already
    indicated, is that in our view an application for leave to remain as an
    unmarried partner cannot be regarded as a "variation" of an application
    for leave to remain as a student, within the meaning of s3C(5).  It  is
    in application for leave for  a  different  purpose,  for  a  different
    period and under different conditions; and, under the provisions of the
    Immigration  (Leave  to  Remain)  (Prescribed  Forms  and   Procedures)
    Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/1712) it had to be made on a  different  form
    and accompanied, as the form required, by different documents.  If  the
    distinction between "variation" and "application" in s3C means anything
    (and it must, because of the prohibition on  applications  as  distinct
    from variations) then what the appellant did on 5 July  2004  was  not,
    and was not capable of being, a variation of his application for  leave
    to remain as a student.

22. Further, he could not vary his application on 5 July  2004  because  it
    had already been decided.  He had ceased to have a pending  application
    to vary.  Although the Secretary of State might have  decided,  in  the
    circumstances, to revoke his original decision, leaving the application
    outstanding, and then to treat it  as  varied  (by  some  new  material
    capable of amounting to a variation), he had no obligation  to  do  so,
    and there was no legitimate expectation that he would do so.

23. It follows  that,  so  far  as  this  appeal  is  concerned,  the  only
    application lawfully and  effectively  made  during  the  existence  of
    current leave was the student application.  The  appellant's  only  s3C
    leave expired at the end of the time  that  was  available  to  him  to
    appeal against the Adjudicator's determination (of the  appeal  against
    the decision on the student application) in December 2004.   The  third
    application was made outside that time and so was not made  during  the
    currency of existing leave.

24. The Immigration Judge could not but have reached that conclusion if  he
    had applied what in our view was the correct interpretation of the law.
     His error is accordingly entirely immaterial.

25.  Mr  Avery  attacks  the  appellant's  submissions  on  another  ground
    entirely.  He argues as follows.  (1)  If the  second  application  was
    effective at all it was as a variation of the application for leave  to
    remain as a student.  (2)  The decision on that application was adverse
    to the appellant and he appealed  against  it.   (3)   Because  of  the
    provisions of s3C(4), there could be no other  application  with  which
    the Adjudicator was concerned in December 2004.  (4)  The appellant did
    not advance any grounds for leave to remain  as  an  unmarried  partner
    before the Adjudicator, and he did  not  seek  to  appeal  against  the
    Adjudicator's determination on the  ground  that  the  Adjudicator  had
    failed to take such matters into account.  (5)  All proceedings arising
    out of the only application that the appellant could lawfully have made
    were therefore terminated in December 2004, and the  alleged  variation
    of the application is subsumed in the  Adjudicator's  determination  of
    the appeal against the immigration decision.

26. The appellant's only answer to that argument was to refer, in  somewhat
    vague terms, to conversations with IND officials who, it was said,  had
    had, at about the time the Adjudicator dealt with the matter,  accepted
    that the appellant had an application outstanding.

27. We are confident that Mr Avery's  argument  is  right.   The  appellant
    could not have an application outstanding at that time: he  could  make
    only one application and, as he knew, it had been decided  and  he  was
    appealing against the decision.  Section 3C(4)  has  the  clear  result
    that an Adjudicator or (now) this Tribunal can be concerned  with  only
    one application - whatever its terms, varied  or  not,  may  be  -  and
    therefore with one decision on an application.  However many  times  an
    applicant may vary or attempt to vary his application, he  is  entitled
    to only one decision.  It follows that, so far as any particular period
    of s3C leave is concerned, there  can  be  only  one  appeal.   In  the
    present case the appeal was determined by the Adjudicator  in  December
    2004, and the appellant's s3C leave expired with the time  allowed  for
    applying for permission to appeal to the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.
    The second application, and everything  belonging  to  it,  was  either
    prohibited by s3C(4) or, if a variation, has to be  regarded  as  dealt
    with by the Adjudicator, and the appellant's s3C leave  expired  within
    the time allowed for seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal.  At the  time  the  third  application  was  made  the
    appellant had no current leave.

28. For that reason also, therefore, the Immigration Judge's error  of  law
    was not material.

29. The second matter dealt with by the Immigration Judge was the  question
    of  finance,  and  whether  the  appellant  could   comply   with   the
    requirements of paragraph 295D(ix).  As we have already  indicated,  he
    appears to have erred in his approach  to  the  evidence.   This  issue
    would only arise, however, if the appellant had had  current  leave  at
    the time of the third application.  As  he  did  not,  the  Immigration
    Judge's error of law is again immaterial.

30. There remains the issue of human rights.  We may say only that  we  see
    no reason to differ in substance from what the Immigration Judge  said.
    The appellant and his partner have always known  that  the  appellant's
    position was precarious and they must be assumed  to  have  engaged  in
    their relationship on the basis that the appellant might have to return
    to Ghana.  The only material before the Immigration Judge  relating  to
    the question was the appellant's assertion that his partner  would  not
    want to live, with their child, in Ghana, and the clear  impression  he
    gave that he preferred to remain in the United Kingdom.  There  was  no
    further evidence before us.  There is no provision in  the  Immigration
    Rules allowing the appellant to stay in the United Kingdom.   There  is
    nothing to suggest that it would not be reasonable to  expect  him  and
    his family to  live  in  Ghana.   Even  if  that  were  not  reasonably
    practicable, there is nothing at all to suggest  that  the  appellant's
    human rights or those of anybody else would be  breached  by  requiring
    him to return to Ghana and to make an application from  abroad  in  the
    normal manner.  For these reasons we agree with the  Immigration  Judge
    that the appellant's removal would not breach any Convention  right  of
    his.

31. For the  foregoing  reasons  we  order  that  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination, dismissing this appeal, shall stand.


                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
