
JS (Victims of gang violence - Sufficiency of protection) Jamaica CG [2006]
UKAIT 00057

                       Asylum and Immigration Tribunal




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th February, 2006 and 8 th May 2006        |21st July 2006             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste,
                     Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley,
                          Sir Jeffrey James KBE CMG

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


There is clear evidence that in general the Government  of  Jamaica  is  not
only  willing,  but  also  able  to  provide  through  its  legal  system  a
reasonable level of protection from ill-treatment to its citizens  who  fear
criminal acts in Jamaica and to those who fear  retribution  for  testifying
against criminals.






1.   This is a "second-stage"  reconsideration  of  a  determination  by  an
      Adjudicator, as he then was, Mr I T Sanderson, promulgated on 20  July
      2004, following a hearing at Bennett House, Stoke, on 20 May  2004  in
      which he dismissed an  appeal  brought  on  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds against the earlier decision of the respondent,  taken  on  26
      February 2004 to refuse to vary leave to enter or remain.

2.   Mr H  Allison,  a  representative  with  Immigration  Advisory  Service

             appeared on behalf of the appellant and Mr S  Ouseley,  a  Home
      Office Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the respondent.

3.   At a "first-stage" reconsideration  hearing  on  3  October  2005,  the
      panel comprising Mr P S Aujla, Immigration Judge, Mr D R  Bremmer,  JP
      and Mrs M L Roe, found the following:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  18  December
              1958.   She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  15  September
              2002, as a visitor and claimed asylum on  5  December,  2002.
              She claimed that she  feared  persecution  and  ill-treatment
              from a group of men who wanted to rape her daughter  and  who
              were not happy with her relationship with her boyfriend.    A
              gun man came into her house on 2 November 1999, and after not
              finding her daughter in the house, he shot her son and killed
              him and the appellant  was  shot  in  the  eye.   She  became
              unconscious and was in  a  coma  until  January  2000.    The
              appellant also claimed that her other son was shot by  police
              and killed on 20 December 2001.


         2.   The respondent refused  her  claim  and  she  appealed  to  an
              Immigration Judge [Mr I T Sanderson] who heard the appeal  on
              20  May,  2004.   He  dismissed  it  in   his   determination
              promulgated on 20 July 2004.   He  found  that  there  was  a
              sufficiency of protection available to the appellant from the
              authorities.  He also  found  that  the  option  of  internal
              relocation was open to the appellant.


         3.   Mr Allison made submissions on behalf of  the  appellant.   He
              submitted that there was a material error of law on the  part
              of the Immigration Judge.  He referred to paragraph 23 of the
              determination where the Immigration Judge had stated that the
              appellant's fear was not subjectively well-founded  and  that
              there was a sufficiency of protection.    He  submitted  that
              relevant objective evidence was placed before the Immigration
              Judge which clearly indicated that there was  no  sufficiency
              of protection.   He referred  to  various  documents  in  the
              appellant's bundle that was  placed  before  the  Immigration
              Judge [sic], in particular the Amnesty International  report,
              on page 94 of the bundle, where it was stated that there  was
              no general sufficiency of protection for victims of  criminal
              violence in Jamaica.  He also referred to  paragraph  7.6  of
              the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case of  McPherson
              (page 82 of the  appellant's  bundle)  where  the  report  of
              Professor Le Frank was referred to  by  their  Lordships  and
              which stated that the police were  quite  unable  to  provide
              adequate protection for any one.   Mr Allison submitted  that
              the Immigration Judge had made a material  error  of  law  in
              overlooking to consider the objective that was placed  before
              him.


         4.   Mr Allison submitted that the Immigration Judge had also  made
              an error in his consideration of the internal flight options.
                He did not apply his mind to the  general  inefficiency  of
              protection  in  his  consideration  of  the  internal  flight
              option.


          5.  Mr Johnson made submissions on behalf of  the  respondent  and
              invited us to find that the  determination  was  sustainable.
              The grounds of appeal were a  simple  disagreement  with  the
              findings made by  the  Immigration  Judge.   The  Immigration
              Judge considered the existence of the  Jamaican  Constabulary
              Force and made his findings.   He took all the evidence  into
              account in finding that the police were  able  to  provide  a
              sufficiency of protection.  He also  submitted  the  internal
              flight option was  probably  considered  by  the  Immigration
              Judge.   The findings made by the Immigration Judge were open
              to him and he invited us to find that there was no  error  of
              law.


          6.  We considered the submissions made by both representatives and
              examined the  determination.   We  found  that  there  was  a
              material error of law on the part of the  Immigration  Judge.
              Objective  material  was  placed  before  him  which  clearly
              indicated that there was no sufficiency of  protection.    It
              is clear from the findings of the Immigration Judge  that  he
              did not engage with the objective materials.    He  found  in
              paragraph 23 that there was a sufficiency of  protection  but
              did not comment on the objective material  presented  to  him
              which clearly indicated otherwise.   We find that that was  a
              material error of law.


          7.   Connected  with  the  error  relating  to   sufficiency   of
              protection, the Immigration  Judge  also  made  an  error  as
              regards the internal flight option.    His  consideration  of
              the internal flight option was  inadequate  and  therefore  a
              further error of law.  We  are  satisfied  that  there  is  a
              material error of law on the part of the Immigration Judge.


         8.  We could not complete the consideration today since the appeal
              would have to be heard afresh when the appellant  would  want
              to give oral evidence and factual findings would have  to  be
              made.


        9.   The matter is adjourned and kept at Field House Hearing Centre
              where further reconsideration  will  resume  in  due  course.
              There will be a complete rehearing of the  appeal  when  both
              parties will be able to argue all aspects of their respective
              cases.


        10.  The matter is placed before  the  country  guidance  group  to
              consider whether this case, which we have linked with another
              file where an error of law was found today, should be  listed
              for country guidance.


        11.  We gave a direction at the hearing that both parties serve  on
              each other and on the Tribunal at least 14  days  before  the
              resumed hearing any documentary evidence to be  relied  upon,
              including any witness statements and skeleton arguments.


        12.  We reminded both parties that further directions may follow.


        13.   The  list  office  should   liaise   with   the   appellant's
              representatives to enquire whether oral expert evidence is to
              be called since it was not made clear at the  hearing  before
              us.


        14.  An interpreter will not be required.


        15.  The list office should refer to the country group to find  out
              how much time should be allocated to these  two  cases  which
              may be heard together."


4.   The other case which was linked did not come for hearing before us.

5.   We agree with the representatives  that  they  and  we  have  the  same
      documents.

6.   Both representatives confirmed that there had been no challenge to  the
      finding in the determination that there was  no  1951  United  Nations
      Convention on the Status of Refugees Convention reason.   They  agreed
      that the Tribunal was concerned only with the appellant's human rights
      claim under Article 3 of the European Convention for the Protection of
      Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

7.   Both representatives agreed  with  the  Tribunal  that  sufficiency  of
      protection is applicable to Article 3 in the same terms as for asylum,
      per auld Bagdanavicus and Bagdanaviciene v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  1605.



8.   We referred the representatives to the position of the adjourned  panel
      which is set out  in paragraph 3 above.   Neither  representative  had
      received a copy of it and we therefore gave them a copy and gave  them
      an opportunity of reading it.  We  indicated  to  them  that  we  read
      paragraph 6 of that judgment to mean that the material error of law on
      the part of the Adjudicator was his failure to engage with that strand
      of the objective evidence that stated that there was no sufficiency of
      protection.  Both representatives agreed.

9.   We pointed  out  to  the  representatives  that  paragraph  7  of  that
      decision concluded that the further material error of law on the  part
      of the Adjudicator was the inadequacy  of  his  consideration  of  the
      issue of internal  flight.   We  pointed  out  that  the  question  of
      internal flight in relation  to  an  asylum  claim  was  not  strictly
      relevant to an Article 3 appeal, following WD, (WD (Iraq) [2005] UKIAT
      00034) and AE and FE (AE and FE v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ.  1032).   The  Adjudicator  should  have
      assessed whether the appellant would face a breach  of  Article  3  on
      arrival and in any part of Jamaica.

10.  Mr Allison confirmed that Ms Yvonne Sobers, the author of the  "expert"
      opinion, is related to  the  expert  who  wrote  the  report  for  the
      Tribunal in the case of DW (Homosexual Men;  persecution;  sufficiency
      of protection) Jamaica CG [2005] UKIAT 00168 and who was described  by
      the Court of Appeal in Michael Atkinson v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 846  as
      a  distinguished  member  of  the  bar  and  expert  on  gang  related
      activities.  Ms Sobers confirmed that she is the mother of that expert
      and herself also provided a report to the Court of Appeal  in  Michael
      Atkinson.

11.  The Tribunal pointed out  to  Mr  Allison  that  the  Court  of  Appeal
      referred to a "Dr Yvonne Sobers" but that the author  of  the  expert
      opinion does not describe herself as a doctor although  she  does  say
      she has a first degree.   He pointed out to us that the case of A also
      refers to her as "Ms Sobers" and he cannot clarify her  qualifications
      beyond what she says in her report.

12.  We enquired of Mr Allison about the gang which attacked the  appellant.
       We pointed out to him that the gang apparently comprised five people,
      of whom three were brought up with the appellant and were  treated  as
      brothers.  Three of the attackers had been killed.   We asked  him  to
      identify which three had been killed and whether any of the  attackers
      are known to the appellant.  We told him that we would  like  to  know
      whether the police were aware of their identities  and  whether  there
      were  sufficient  findings  of  fact  on  this  matter.    Mr  Allison
      responded that there were no findings and  that  these  were  relevant
      matters.  He explained that he would need  to  take  instructions  and
      prepare a witness  statement.    We  adjourned  and  on  resuming  the
      hearing were supplied with a copy of the appellant's more up  to  date
      witness statement.

Appellant's evidence

13.  Both representatives agreed that we should take  oral  evidence.    The
      appellant advised us that she was  fasting  today  but  that  she  was
      feeling well enough to give oral evidence.   She  confirmed  her  full
      name and address and confirmed that she had  made  a  statement  today
      which she had signed.  She identified her signature and confirmed that
      it was a true and accurate statement.  She adopted it.

14.  For completeness, we set out the statement below:

         "I,[...] , make this statement as follows:

         The names of the three "brothers"  were  "Scubo"  (now  deceased),
          "Little" and "Biggie".  "Little  and  Biggie"  are  twins.    The
          others are "Tarzan"  and  another  whose  name  I  do  not  know.
          "Tarzan" is dead.  One of "Little" and "Biggie" is dead, but I do
          not know which one.


         There is sixth person.  Is the one who told my daughter what  they
          were planning to do.  This group did not have a  particular  name
          as a gang but were part of the PNP.

         I have also heard from my son since I have been in the UK that  my
          7 bedroom house has been completely burnt down.  I fear  so  much
          for my family still in Jamaica.  This statement is the  truth  to
          the best of my knowledge  and  to  the  best  of  my  belief  and
          knowledge."

Cross examination

15.  Cross examined by Mr Ouseley, the appellant explained that she did  not
      know the surnames of the twins called  Little  and  Biggie.   She  had
      known them since the appellant was about 10  years  of  age,  some  20
      years.   They were next door neighbours and  they  and  the  appellant
      grew up together.   Their mother had 18 children and Little and Biggie
      were always fighting.   Their mother's name was  Icy.   The  appellant
      did not know her surname.   Little and Biggie always lived  next  door
      to the appellant but now she does not know where they live.   They  do
      not live in the same yard any more but the appellant maintained  that,
      "they still hang around on the street  corner."    The  appellant  was
      unable to say which of the gang members had died.  Her daughter-in-law
      had advised her of their death but apart from saying it was one of the
      twins she did not explain who had died.  Scubo is also dead and  there
      are only two of the five still alive.  One of the survivors is one  of
      the twins and  the  other  one,  the  appellant  did  not  know.   The
      appellant was unable to name the sixth member of the gang.

16.  In Jamaica the appellant has a son, Kevin Robinson who himself has  two
      children.  He lives at in Kingston, Central District.  He lives  close
      to where the appellant used to live.  Her sister lives in Bull Bay  in
      the country.

17.  Mr Ouseley asked the appellant why the appellant could not go and  live
      with her sister in Bull Bay, to which  the  appellant  replied,  "they
      would not trouble her",  by  which  we  understood  the  appellant  to
      indicate that her sister would not be in any difficulties as a  result
      of what had happened to the appellant.  But the appellant added,  "PNP
      have friends all over", by which we understood her to  mean  that  she
      could not go and live with her sister, because she would be found  and
      would then be at risk.  The appellant was asked if she would go to the
      police and she replied that she would if she thought it would  make  a
      difference.   She agreed that she had on a previous occasion gone to a
      traffic post.  In her statement this was described as being a  traffic
      police station but it was for traffic wardens.  She pointed  out  that
      she had not said police station to  her  solicitor.   She  went  there
      because it was the nearest place for her to run for her life when  two
      men were chasing her.  The appellant was shaking at the time  she  ran
      to the Warden's Office.   She said that she  had  wet  herself.    She
      told the Traffic Warden what had  happened  and  one  of  them  looked
      outside and said that there was no  one  there.    He  asked  for  the
      appellant's address and when she told him they took  her  to  the  bus
      stop.  She had not explained to the Traffic Warden that  the  men  who
      followed her were the men who had been involved with her shooting.

18.  The appellant had never disclosed the identity of the gang  members  to
      the police.   She said that she would have done so if she had  thought
      that the police would help, but she had never  done  so.   Her  sister
      had, however, told the police.   She agreed that her sister was not  a
      witness, but said that the police took a  statement  from  her  sister
      after the shooting.  The appellant had been told  by  a  neighbour  of
      hers, the names of the five men.   The police knew who these five  men
      were.  The neighbour was an eye witness.  The neighbour had  not  said
      anything to  the  police,  because  she  feared  for  her  life.   The
      appellant never had contact with the police  following  the  shooting.
      She did not know the name of the officer in charge of her case.

19.  At this stage the appellant  became  rather  distressed  and  indicated
      that she would like a break for a few  moments  to  recover.   On  her
      regaining her composure we recommenced the hearing.

20.  The appellant was asked whether anything had happened to  her  son  who
      lives in Jamaica.   She replied that there were places he could not go
      to and that he felt like a prisoner.  He had never been to the  police
      but he feared for his life.

21.  In order to clarify the appellant's evidence, the  Tribunal  asked  her
      several questions.  She confirmed that the attack  on  her  had  taken
      place on 2 November 1999 and that she had remained  in  a  coma  until
      January 2000 when she left hospital.   She then went to Camden to live
      with her son.  That is in part of Kingston but not where she had  used
      to live in Bridge View.  She had been chased by two  men  in  February
      2002, and went back to her son's  house  in  Camden  afterwards.   She
      remained there until she left for  the  United  Kingdom  in  September
      2002.   During this time the appellant maintained that she remained in-
      doors except when she was accompanied by Church members to hospital.

22.  The appellant said that she had lived in her grandmother's house.   Her
      house that had been burnt down was one that her son lived in.  He  was
      living there at the time when it was gassed.   She said that the  same
      men who had shot her also set fire to the house.  When asked  how  she
      knew this, she said that people had seen them.  The appellant believed
      that her son would have told the police about this.  He now lives with
      a friend in another community in Jamaica.  The gang members  were  not
      members of any particular gang  but  they  were  members  of  the  PNP
      political party.   There was no re-examination.

Submissions

23.  Mr Allison addressed us at length.   He asked for positive  credibility
      findings to be made in  respect  of  the  appellant's  evidence.    He
      maintained that her evidence was consistent and  not  fabricated.   We
      asked Mr Allison what we should make of the fact  that  the  appellant
      did not know the surnames of the five men even though  she  had  known
      them for some 20 years.  He said that in giving evidence that she  had
      given the names by which these men were known.  These men  would  only
      use their surnames for official purposes.   He  believed  that  police
      records would include their  aliases.    He  relied  on  his  skeleton
      argument, particularly sections 2 and 3 and on the list  of  essential
      reading.   The risk posed by the men in terms of their reach  was,  Mr
      Allison, submitted, due to their political connections,  although  the
      crime itself did not appear to have any political connotation.

24.  Mr Allison took  us  to  the  objective  evidence.    He  asked  us  to
      consider paragraph 1.3 of the letter from Amnesty International of  21
      September 2005 which deals with the background  to  the  existence  of
      armed  gangs.   Many  of  those  gangs  are  said  to  have  political
      affiliations and their activities include drug trafficking,  extortion
      and serious violent crime.   It was necessary, he  suggested,  to  see
      how these five men  fitted  in  with  this  background.    These  five
      attackers were all "foot soldiers" and were known within the  district
      as being affiliated to the PNP.   He referred us to 2.1.3 of the  same
      letter from Amnesty International which showed that politicians relied
      on "local dons" to ensure support at  election  time  and  to  provide
      protection.   In return, local dons, supported  by  area  leaders  and
      "foot  soldiers"  drawn  from  the  local  community,  would   receive
      political protection.

25.  Mr Allison suggested that an effective police force  would  investigate
      a murder and shooting whether one of the victims  had  approached  the
      police or not.  The lack of contact by the police with  the  appellant
      was, he suggested, a manifestation of  their  lack  of  effectiveness.
      Foot soldiers might not be part of any formal gang provided  they  can
      run errands on behalf of the gang.  Two of  this  gang  are  still  at
      large.  One of the twins and the other we do not know the name of.

26.  Mr Allison pointed out that gangs migrate.  It was clear, he  submitted
      that dons  had  developed  networks  throughout  Jamaica.    Even  for
      someone to be seen going into a police station would put them at  risk
      as being seen as a potential informer.  While the police  may  not  be
      able to act without clear evidence there is  a  problem  in  that  the
      local community will not trust the police and  give  evidence.    This
      shows a perception amongst the  community  of  an  ineffective  police
      force.  The community knows that they are going to put  themselves  at
      risk if they are seen as being an informer and  given  information  to
      the police.

27.  We adjourned for lunch and following the lunch adjournment  Mr  Allison
      continued with his submissions.

28.  The appellant's aunt supported the JLP.  The appellant's  statement  at
      paragraph 7 refers to the fact that her former partner was a supporter
      of the PNP who moved from  a  JLP  area.   The  appellant's  risk  was
      because she had a daughter who herself was having a relationship  with
      someone from another area.  The gang saw this  as  disrespect  on  the
      part  of  the  appellant's  daughter  and  saw  their  own  action  as
      protecting their community.   The group propagates crime  in  that  it
      protects  itself  by  intimidating  people  and  thus  preventing  the
      reporting of their  criminal  actions.   The  appellant's  failure  to
      report crime herself reflects this context.   First she believed  that
      the police would not do anything and there was no point, therefore, in
      going to them because of their  inefficiency  and  secondly  there  is
      complicity between the gangs and the police.  She would be in  further
      fear of her life were she to go to a police station  since  she  would
      then be perceived as being an informer.  The objective evidence  shows
      that gangs are complicit with the  police.   At  paragraph  38  of  Ms
      Sobers report, she refers to  a  police  officer  as  having  publicly
      criticised his colleagues for ignoring criminal  activities  which  he
      described as taking place under their noses.  He said that  peace  and
      tranquillity exists in certain divisions because of a non interference
      with the police  with  criminal  activity  of  druggists,  gunmen  and
      prostitutes and that sometimes police know that  guns  and  drugs  are
      being sold sometimes right under their noses and they do nothing about
      it just to maintain what they  call  peace  and  tranquillity.   This,
      suggested Mr Allison,  shows  corruption.    There  was  reference  to
      paragraph 41 of Ms Sobers report to the police having planted  weapons
      evidently to subvert justice.   One police officer, the  head  of  the
      police forensic laboratory, was quoted as saying  that  he  would  not
      rule out that a dishonest policeman would  plant  a  gun  on  someone,
      because there is corruption in every stratum of society and the police
      force is no exception.  The Jamaican police  were,  said  Mr  Allison,
      ineffective and this is  borne  about  by  the  Amnesty  International
      report in paragraph 3.2 and  3.3  which  talks  about  corruption  and
      inadequate investigation of human rights abuses.

29.  There is the further risk attaching to the  appellant  as  a  perceived
      informer and this is a crucial  aspect  of  this  case.    People  who
      informed take on a higher degree of risk.   There was a difference, he
      suggested, between  the  appellant  as  a  victim  of  crime  and  the
      appellant as an informer.   As an  informer  this  was  an  additional
      aggravating feature.   It would add to the determination of  the  gang
      to seek out this appellant.  4.1 of the Amnesty  International  report
      and paragraph 4.2 point out the risks to informers and the failure  to
      protect witnesses.

30.  It was therefore, suggested Mr Allison, clear  why  the  appellant  had
      not gone to the police to give them the information which he had.

31.  Mr Allison suggested that it would not be dons  who  would  necessarily
      take action on the grounds it was much more likely that  the  soldiers
      would do the "dirty work".  The dons would not themselves  necessarily
      want to be identified.   The degree of  incompetence,  corruption  and
      complicity evident in the objective material  means  simply  that  the
      Jamaican police force would not be able  to  offer  any  effective  or
      adequate protection to the appellant.

32.  He confirmed again that he relied on his skeleton  argument  and  asked
      that the appeal be allowed.

33.  Replying, Mr Ouseley asked us first to consider Ms Sobers' report.   Ms
      Sobers is referred to by the Court  of  Appeal  but  only  in  neutral
      terms.   It is said that she is an expert but it  is  not  clear  what
      aspect of her evidence had been considered previously by the Court  of
      Appeal.   Her activities focus mainly on what might  be  described  as
      "anti-government" activity.  Her objectivity is not accepted on behalf
      of the Secretary of State.   She chairs an organisation known as FAST.
        This is an organisation known as "Family Against  State  Terrorism".
      Whilst it is accepted that Jamaican police have used  excessive  force
      in the past, Ms Sobers proceeds on the assumption that the state is  a
      terrorist  organisation.   Paragraph  7  describes  families   against
      terrorism.   In paragraph 7(a) she says:

         "Families against state terrorism (FAST).   I presently lead  this
          organisation and need to be  regularly  in  contact  with  social
          services  agencies  that   can   provide   victim   support   and
          counselling, as well as care  and  protection  for  children  and
          young persons.  Membership  is  drawn  mainly  from  those  whose
          children police have killed or  those  (including  minors)  whose
          rights  have  been  infringed  by  agents  of  the  state.   This
          organisation provides support for bereaved families  and  lobbies
          for systems to hold police to account or for breaches of  peoples
          human rights.    FAST  maintains  close  links  with  low  income
          communities where the police killings  and  abuses  usually  take
          place.   The organisation has built  a  reputation  for  pursuing
          justice on behalf of people outside circles of power,  affluence,
          and influence.   FAST has campaigned most notably  on  behalf  of
          the families of the Braeton 7 - seven young men killed by  police
          in 2001."


  34. This, with respect, shows some bias on her part.   Mr Ouseley produced
      a copy of inter-press service agency  news  report  entitled  Jamaica:
      police acquittals  revives  spectre  of  impunity  written  by  Dionne
      Jackson Miller which refers to Ms Sobers  being  on  the  local  human
      rights groups and being against state terrorism and said that she  had
      mixed feelings about the outcome of  a  trial.    It  quoted  here  as
      saying


         "I had wanted enquiry at the highest level, and to that  extent  we
         go it. We got it at the Supreme  Court  [with]  the  Chief  Justice
         [presiding], the DPP  [Director  of  Public  Prosecutions]  himself
         doing the prosecutions, the best of defence lawyers, Scotland  Yard
         doing investigations,  forensic  evidence  which  was  really  very
         sophisticated" she said.  "We got it past the no  submissions,  and
         it went to a jury that did  not  come  back  in  45  minutes.   The
         evidence was circumstantial, and from that point of view, if  there
         was doubt, then according to our  process,  the  doubt  has  to  be
         resolved in the favour of the accused person, so that is why  I  am
         saying the system worked".

     Her concerns stem from what she said was a systematic refusal  to  hold
      police accountable for their actions.

         "I am absolutely for anybody defending himself or herself but I  am
         not convinced that this  was  what  was  occurring  in  this  case,
         although, acknowledge the jury's right and the decision  that  they
         came to... but I am very  concerned  by  the  message  that  it  is
         sending."

      said Makal Sobers, who was present in Court throughout the trial."

35.  Mr Ouseley said that this shows that the witness  was  campaigning  for
      police to go on trial, but after an investigation, which was  followed
      by a  trial,  the  officers  were  acquitted.    However,  Ms  Sobers'
      comments are very mixed in that, on the one hand  she  says  that  the
      system worked, but on the other hand that she did not get  the  result
      that she wanted.  This, he suggested,  hardly  displays  an  objective
      attitude.   Mr Ouseley said that this show that Ms Sobers is partisan.
        She plainly has no love for the police and is biased in her outlook.
       He submitted that there had been a major sea change in Jamaica  which
      Ms Sobers was not prepared to recognise.  One of  the  most  notorious
      criminals has recently been convicted and sentenced to some  90  years
      but she only describes it as "the limited success".   That  is  simply
      not fair and unbiased.  In her report, Ms Sobers goes on to  say  that
      there is a lack of public confidence, but  her  view  is  based  on  a
      newspaper survey in which people openly gave their names and  all  but
      one said that they would not go into a witness  protection  programme.
      The witness protection programme is described at paragraphs  5.102  to
      5.110 of the CIPU report and the Jamaican Gleaner was quoted as having
      reported on 30 January, 2005, that  the  Jamaican  government  was  in
      discussions with the British government to find ways to strengthen the
      witness protection programme.  Concerns were  expressed  about  public
      confidence in  the  facility,  especially  since  one  recent  witness
      expressed fear and on account of this the case against the accused was
      dismissed.

36.  The Tribunal enquired whether the appellant would be eligible  for  the
      programme.  Mr Ouseley was unable to assist us  but  said  that  there
      were some 300 people  being  protected  under  the  programme  and  he
      suggested that that showed it was a  wide  ranging  initiative.    The
      budget was said to be some 80 million Jamaican dollars and that  as  a
      consequence of this programme one major criminal has been convicted.

37.  Mr Ouseley emphasised that the past situation is  poor  but  there  has
      been a major sea change.   The violence in the past has given  way  to
      politicians and police disowning and cracking down on criminal  gangs.
      Included amoungst the documents submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
      is a letter, dated 21st September, 2005, from  Amnesty  International,
      commenting on the appellant and  her  claim.   Commenting  on  it,  Mr
      Ouseley said that Amnesty has always tried to put a political spin  on
      this case, because the aunt was a member of the JLP.    However,  this
      appears nowhere in the appellant's evidence. There does not appear  to
      be any political link whatsoever in this appeal.   The  appellant  was
      targeted because of the relationship which her daughter  had  with  an
      outsider.  Even if the gang members were  only  foot  soldiers  it  is
      clear that they were acting as individuals and  not  as  part  of  any
      orchestrated action  on  part  of  a  much  bigger  gang  against  the
      appellant and her family.  Money appears to have been demanded.    The
      appellant knew the identity of several of the gang members but was not
      able to give the name of the gang the men belonged to.  She lived with
      a number of the PNP gang members for some years and regarded three  of
      her attackers as being like brothers.   There  is,  he  submitted,  no
      clear or established link between these five men and any one else  and
      certainly no evidence that they were acting in  except  of  their  own
      volition.

38.  He asked us to take into account the report in the Jamaica Observer  on
      Operation Kingfish.   This shows that in one year of intense  activity
      Operation Kingfish has wiped out  one  of  12  major  criminal  gangs,
      severely disrupted or impacted 7 others, arrested 235 people, some for
      alleged murder, and seized a number  of  significant  go  fast  boats,
      firearms, Cocaine and Ganja.   Gangs can no longer rely  on  political
      parties for support, the circumstances in Jamaica have changed and the
      state is now acting against gangs.  There has  been  past  corruption:
      again the government recognises this and is taking action against  it.
       He asked us to note in particular paragraphs 6.47 to 6.49 of the CIPU
      report.   Were the appellant now to return to Jamaica and go into  the
      Witness Protection programme, she would not be justified in having any
      fear.   She may well have been justified in the past, but not now with
      the change in attitudes in Jamaica.  Even if she were not to be  taken
      into the witness protection plan it, was not  accepted  that  the  two
      surviving members of the gang would be able necessarily to locate her.



39.  The Tribunal enquired whether there was any evidence as to who  may  or
      may not  qualify  under  the  Witness  Protection  plan.   Mr  Ouseley
      suggested that there were some 300 people on it, none of whom had been
      killed. That, of itself, appears to suggest that it is effective.   Mr
      Ouseley asked for a brief adjournment in order that  he  might  obtain
      some information about the criteria for those who wished to go  on  to
      the Witness  Protection  programme.   After  a  brief  adjournment  Mr
      Ouseley suggested that he might be able  to  obtain  more  information
      were he to be given further time.   Mr Allison indicated that  he  had
      spoken to Ms Sobers, who said that the witness must be a witness to  a
      crime where the witness's life is  threatened,  the  accused  must  be
      either a noted government employee or policeman and the protection  is
      linked simply to the appellant's appearance in Court.  He was not able
      to confirm that protection stops following the giving of evidence.  We
      deal with the Jamaican Witness Protection programme in  paragraphs  68
      and 69 below, but could find no confirmation of  those  qualifications
      for entry into the programme as indicated by Ms Sobers to Mr Allison.

40.  Mr Ouseley emphasised that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
      general and in particular to those on the  Witness  Protection  scheme
      for a witness to murder.  There is clear evidence that  strong  action
      is being taken  by  the  government  against  gangs  as  evidenced  by
      Operation Kingfish.  There would be nothing to prevent  the  appellant
      moving to the area of rural Jamaica where her sister lives  and  where
      she has social contacts.   The question of migration of  gang  members
      is hardly relevant in this case since there are only two members  left
      and there is no real evidence that there would be any risk  that  they
      would migrate to the rural area.

41.  By way of reply,  Mr  Allison  suggested  that  so  far  as  Ms  Sobers
      objectivity was concerned, paragraph 80 of her  report  clearly  shows
      that the police have had a measure  of  success  in  policing.     The
      Country Information and Policy Unit report at paragraph 5.104  clearly
      shows there was some concern in some quarters at the  success  of  the
      witness protection programme.  In her report, Ms Sobers accepted  that
      371 people have been protected in the  witness  protection  programme,
      but there is still a lack of public confidence.  Ms Sobers report does
      not show bias.  Her comments on the child and the police officer  were
      fair.  There were only four convictions obtained from some 2,109 cases
      referred by the internal oversight branch of the police.   There is  a
      30 year history of gun violence in Jamaica  and  the  history  of  the
      country is part of the context in which  this  case  should  be  seen.
      Recent action should not be seen in  isolation.    Far  from  being  a
      crackdown on the  gangs,  the  objective  evidence  shows  that  gangs
      continue to operate in the  areas  that  have  been  attacked  by  the
      police.  Kingfish is only one of the many  previous  initiatives  over
      the past 30 years and it does not of  itself  undo  all  of  what  has
      happened in the past and changed the perception in the  minds  of  the
      local people.  The Witness Protection programme is funded to the  tune
      $80,000,000  Jamaican.     That  is  very  approximately  �700,000  to
      �1,000,000 sterling.  The CIPU report, at paragraph 5.109,  identified
      deficiencies in the Witness  Protection  programme  in  terms  of  its
      number and staff and under funding.   The Secretary of State  believes
      that the appellant could go and live near her sister,  but  she  could
      not.    If she does not live with her sister then she will be seen  as
      a stranger in the area since she has  no  social  contacts.    If  the
      police were to visit the home of someone then they would be seen as an
      informer.   In our case the police did not go to the appellant's home.

42.  We gave directions that each representative should  be  at  liberty  to
      provide further  written  evidence  and  written  submissions  to  the
      Tribunal on or  before  26  February,  2006,  concerning  the  Witness
      Protection programme.   Copies could also be sent direct to the  other
      representatives.  Each representative would then have until 12 noon on
      6 March, 2006, to make any  written  additional  submissions  if  they
      wished to do so.   By way of guidance, we pointed out that  we  wanted
      to know who might qualify under the Witness  Protection  scheme,  when
      protection starts and when it finishes.  Also we thought it  might  be
      helpful to know whether a lapse of more than 5 years from the date  of
      the commission  of  the  crime  might  disqualify  an  applicant.   We
      indicated that  we  would  like  a  copy  of  the  relevant  statutory
      frameworks setting up the Witness Protection  programme  and  reminded
      the parties that the appellant's name must be kept  confidential  from
      the Jamaican authorities.  We  directed  that  submissions  should  be
      addressed personally to Mr Chalkley and evidence not submitted  before
      12 noon on 6 March, 2006, would  be  ignored.    Both  representatives
      indicated that they understood those directions.

43.  We subsequently received further evidence and a skeleton argument  from
      the appellant's representatives.  The further evidence consisted of  a
      copy e-mail message from a Research and Information Officer of the IAS
      detailing his  attempts  to  obtain  information  from  Mr  Robertson,
      Director of the Witness Protection programme in Jamaica.  The skeleton
      argument referred to the Witness Protection scheme  and  commented  on
      correspondence from the British High Commission,  Kingston,  submitted
      by the respondent.  The respondent's  further  evidence  consisted  of
      copy correspondence between the British High Commission  in  Kingston,
      Jamaica, and the Home Office and copy of an  e-mail  together  with  a
      copy of the Jamaican Justice Protection Act and  extracts  taken  from
      the  Internet  from  a  webpage  entitled:  "Black  Information  Link"
      detailing Ms Shurland's appeal hearing and describing her claim.   The
      skeleton argument referred to the fact that the  following  day  after
      the adjourned hearing, Mr Ouseley was  advised  of  an  Internet  link
      giving details of Ms Shurland's asylum claim.  It disclosed  all  the
      facts of her case  and  indicated  that  she  was  available  to  give
      interviews.  The submission made by Mr Ouseley was that it  undermined
      the  appellant's  claimed  fear  of  being  identified   in   Jamaica.
      Following receipt of both skeleton  arguments  we  concluded  that  we
      would need to reconvene the hearing.

44.  The hearing was reconvened on 8 May when, in answer  to  questions  put
      to him by the Tribunal, Mr Allison indicated that  there  had  been  a
      representative of the press at the last hearing and confirmed that the
      appellant had not herself taken any  steps  to  have  the  information
      about her claim published on the Internet, the article which  appeared
      on the Internet had not been written by the appellant but instead by a
      reporter.  He referred to the copy e-mail submitted with  his  further
      evidence and skeleton argument and advised that there was  no  further
      information available in relation to the Witness Protection programme.
        None of the enquiries made by the Immigration Advisory  Service  met
      with any response.

45.  We reserved our determination.

The law

46.  It is for the appellant to show that there will be a violation  of  her
      human rights if she is returned to Jamaica now.   The  appellant  must
      demonstrate that there is a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  or  a
      serious possibility or a real risk that the  matters  upon  which  she
      relies are true.  This is a lower standard of  proof  than  the  civil
      standard and applies both to the history of events as well as  to  the
      assessment of future risk.

47.  The principles for assessing sufficiency of  protection  as  originally
     described in Horvath v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department
     [2001] 1 AC 459, have been refined in various cases since. The present
     position, so far as is  relevant  to  this  appeal,  was  assessed  in
     Bagdanavicius and Bagdanaviciene v The Secretary of State for the Home
     Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605, which was  upheld  in  the  House  of
     Lords at [2005] UKHL 38. In the judgment of Auld LJ in  the  Court  of
     Appeal at paragraph 55, he summarised the position as follows:


        "Asylum claims ...
        4)   Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state agents  or
        non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on  the  part  of
        the  receiving  state  to  provide  through  its  legal  system   a
        reasonable level of protection  from  ill-treatment  of  which  the
        claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear; Osman, Horvath, Dhima.


        5) The effectiveness  of  the  system  provided  is  to  be  judged
        normally by its systemic ability to deter  and/or  to  prevent  the
        form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
        of it after the event; Horvath, Banomova, McPherson and Kinuthia.
        6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
        receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded  fear  of
        persecution if he can show that the authorities know  or  ought  to
        know circumstances particular to his case giving rise to  his fear,
        but  are  unlikely  to  provide  the  additional   protection   his
        particular circumstances reasonably require;  Osman.


        Article 3 claims ...
        10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3  depends  on
        the circumstances of each case,  including  the  magnitude  of  the
        risk, the nature and severity  of  the  ill-treatment  risked,  and
        whether the risk emanates from a state agency or  non-state  actor;
        Horvath.
        11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases of ill-treatment which,
        but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a  risk  of  such
        ill-treatment will be more  readily  established  in  state  agency
        cases than in non-state actor  cases  -  there  is  a  spectrum  of
        circumstances  giving  rise  to  such  risks   spanning   the   two
        categories, ranging from breach  of  a  duty  by  the  state  of  a
        negative duty not to inflict Article 3 ill-treatment to a breach of
        a duty to  take  positive  protective  action  against  such   ill-
        treatment by non-state actors;  Svazas.
        12) An assessment of  the  threshold  of  risk  applicable  in  the
        circumstances  to  engage  Article  3   necessarily   involves   an
        assessment of the sufficiency  of  state  protection  to  meet  the
        threat of which there is such a risk -  one  cannot  be  considered
        without the other whether  or  not  the  exercise  is  regarded  as
        'holistic' or to  be  conducted  in  two  stages:   Dhima,  Krepel,
        Svazas.
        13) Sufficiency of state protection is not necessarily a  guarantee
        of protection from Article 3 ill-treatment any more than  it  is  a
        guarantee of protection from  an  otherwise  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the extent that  there
        is any difference, is it eradication or removal of risk of exposure
        to Article 3 ill-treatment; Dhima, McPherson, Krepel.
        14) Where the risk falls to be judged by the sufficiency  of  state
        protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according to whether it
        would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm,  but  according
        to whether it is  a  reasonable  provision  in  the  circumstances;
        Osman.
        15) Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
        in the receiving state, a claimant may still be able  to  establish
        an Article 3 claim if he can show that the authorities  there  know
        or ought to know particular circumstances likely to expose  him  to
        risk of Article 3 ill-treatment;  Osman.
        16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country is or is
        not a party to the ECHR, but in determining  whether  it  would  be
        contrary to Article 3 to remove  a  person  to  that  country,  our
        courts should decide the factual  issue  as  to  risk  as  if  ECHR
        standards apply there - and the same applies to  the  certification
        process under Section 115(1) and/or (2) of the 2002 Act."



Objective Background Information

48.  We confirm that we have carefully considered the  objective  background
      information placed before us.  We were given an IAS Research  Analysis
      prepared by IAS in relation to  Jamaican  sufficiency  of  protection,
      which referred to the Home Office  CIPU  Report  pointing  to  various
      initiatives and reforms within the police in Jamaica,  including,  the
      new crime plan which formularised the role  of  the  Jamaican  Defence
      Force and the Jamaican Constabulary  Force  who  co-operate  in  crime
      reduction, Operation Kingfisher which was launched as a crime fighting
      initiative and an announcement  by  the  Prime  Minister  to  increase
      efforts in fighting crime. The research analysis suggested that a  new
      report in the Jamaican Gleaner noted that, "Police have  made  arrests
      in only twenty six  per  cent  of  the  murders  committed  this  year
      [2005]".  That report went on to state that it had been reported  that
      the explosion of murders outside the corporate area was  as  a  result
      of, "migrating criminal gangs punching holes in the government's crime
      initiatives".    The Jamaican Observer also reported  on  the  Witness
      Protection programme and suggested that during a visit by  a  team  of
      British experts it  was  recognised  that  the  programme,  "needs  to
      increase its staff by fifty  per  cent".    There  were  also  several
      reported cases of killings of witnesses and it was suggested there was
      little trust in the Witness Protection  scheme.   Few  Jamaicans  were
      said to be willing to put their trust in the scheme and  many  instead
      opted not to testify.  It confirmed that none had, so  far  under  the
      programme, been killed.

49.  The report also spoke of  concern  regarding  the  incidence  of  fatal
      killings by members of the police force and  lack  of  prosecution  of
      those responsible.  Jamaica was said to have one of  the  highest  per
      capita rates of legal police shootings in the world and on average one
      hundred and forty people per year have been shot  and  killed  by  the
      police in the last decade.  It was not clear to us, however,  to  what
      extent this simply reflected the amount of gun crime in Jamaica.   The
      Superintendent of the Professional Standards Branch  of  the  Jamaican
      Constabulary Force was reported as saying that corruption has not gone
      down and that it was actually increasing.  Again, there did not appear
      to be any information to indicate whether detection rates  might  have
      improved.

50.  We read the UK Home Office  Science  and  Research  Group,  Country  of
      Origin Information Service COI Report of October, 2005.   The  Jamaica
      Constabulary Force was said to have been formed in 1865.   It  remains
      semi-military in character and comprises a system of gazetted and non-
      gazetted ranks.   Gazetted  Rank  officers  are  drawn  from  Jamaican
      Officers, who are promoted through  the  ranks  from  constable.   The
      force is  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order  and
      prevention  and  detection  of  crime,  the  protection  of  life  and
      property, the investigation of alleged crime and  the  enforcement  of
      all  criminal  laws  in  Jamaica.   The  Commissioner  of  Police   is
      responsible to the Ministry of National Security for the  command  and
      superintendence of the force.

51.  The US State Department Report for 2004 noted that:-

         "[The Jamaica Constabulary Force] maintains divisions  focusing  on
         community policing, special response, intelligence  gathering,  and
         internal affairs.  Faced with a rapidly increasing rate of killings
         the JCF generally was not effective.  The country  experienced  the
         highest level of violent crime in its history and the perception of
         corruption and impunity within the force were serious problems that
         contributed to the lack of public confidence  in  the  institution.
         Human  rights  groups  identified  systematic  poor   investigative
         procedures and  weak  oversight  mechanisms.   Failure  to  protect
         witnesses led to the dismissal of criminal trials."


      The Commissioner is said to  have  described  the  force  as  being  a
      "reactive, fire brigade, style of policing".


52.  A Financial Times article, reported by BBC monitoring of  14  February,
    2003, referred to:-

         "Plans are being formulated for major restructuring of the  Jamaica
         Constabulary Force (JCF) including new guidelines to deal with  the
         problems of corruption within the service".


      The Police Commissioner said,


         "In addition  JCF  is  drafting  a  new  training  manual  and  the
         establishment of training units across the island and retraining of
         trainers."


      He said that,


         "Members of the force will have  to  undergo  annual  training  and
         certification for the use of firearms as it moves to modernise  its
         operations".


      The Jamaican Gleaner, dated 8 October 2004, reported that:-


         "The ability of Jamaica's security forces to  tackle  the  island's
         flourishing drug trade and spiralling crime rate is to be  enhanced
         through a training initiative to  be  administered  by  the  United
         Kingdom  armed  forces.    Adam   Ingram,   State   Minister   with
         responsibility of the  United  Kingdom's  armed  forces,  disclosed
         during a tour of the HMS Richmond yesterday [7 October  2004]  that
         he had met with the National Security Minister, Dr Peter Phillips,
         to discuss possibilities for, "training the Jamaica  Defence  Force
         and the law Enforcement Agencies to be able to bring  those  people
         and their society to justice and to  squeeze  their  organisational
         capabilities".


      While not divulging details of the training initiative, the  UK  State
      Minister said that the training exercise will be  "even  more  intense
      from the ones we have had before".


53.  In the Jamaica Gleaner of 3 February, 2005,  it  was  reported  that  a
    senior British law enforcement agent  was  joining  the  ranks  of  the
    Jamaica Constabulary Force.   The Jamaica Gleaner of 11 February, 2004,
    reported that a senior Scotland Yard detective had been seconded to the
    JCF with effect from 4 March, 2005.

54.  On 14 February, 2005, the Jamaica Gleaner quoted the Prime Minister  as
    announcing that the government will be stepping up  the  fight  against
    crime, "with new vehicles, new police stations, new technology,  a  new
    coastguard base and new foreign expertise".  He  announced  that  crime
    and violence continue to be a most troubling aspect  of  national  life
    pointing to the wanton killing  of  children  and  the  elderly.    One
    hundred new motorcycles were said to be on the  streets  in  a  further
    week, in addition to one hundred and fifty new "all  terrain  vehicles"
    which would arrive  the  following  month.   The  government  was  also
    proceeding with legislative action, as well as the acquisition  of  new
    technology, to facilitate  greater  reliance  on  forensic  science  in
    solving crime.  Five new police stations have recently been opened  and
    another one was due to be opened  in  March  2005.    Several  existing
    police stations have been repaired and  refurbished,  he  said.   On  1
    March, 2005, JCF launched its new corporate strategy for 2005 to  2008,
    with a commitment to curb organised crime and general  criminality  and
    to improve the performance standards of the police.  In July 2005,  the
    Jamaican Gleaner noted that the Senate had passed the Firearms Bill  to
    establish a centralised and  independent  Gun  Licensing  Authority  to
    grant and revoke gun licences, permits and certificates.   The  Jamaica
    Gleaner  in  August,  2005,  reported  that  at  least  five  policeman
    implicated in a controversial shooting at Flankers, St James', would be
    charged with multiple offences by the Bureau of Special Investigations.
     In January, 2005, the Jamaica Observer reported that members of  a  UK
    company were now in the island training local policeman assigned to the
    newly formed anti-kidnapping unit, which had been  established  by  the
    government in response to a spate of abductions.

55.  The report referred to the Witness Protection  programme  and  referred
    to the Justice Protection Act of 2001.  It was  clear  from  paragraphs
    5102 to 5110, that the government was in discussion  with  the  British
    Government to find ways to strengthen the country's Witness  Protection
    programme.  The National Security Minister was reported as saying  that
    no witness has ever been lost from the programme and that a great  deal
    of effort  in  preparing  the  protection  programme  had  been  spent.
    Operation Kingfisher was launched following a spate of  killings  which
    saw the island's murder rate go to a record high of  well  over  twelve
    hundred.   The aim of Operation Kingfisher is to break up organised and
    dangerous criminal gangs and the Security Minister was quoted as saying
    that known organised criminal gangs and their activities were  specific
    targets.  Operation Kingfisher was set up in October, 2004 and up to 22
    November, 2004,  it  recovered  seven  stolen  motor  vehicles,  seized
    thirteen firearms, seized over five hundred pounds of compressed ganja,
    destroyed two sophisticated ganja fields; arrested several persons  for
    various offences including murder and illegal possession of  arms;  and
    seized in Caribbean waters, several go-fast boats and almost eight tons
    of cocaine destined for Jamaica. One well known  gangster  is  said  to
    have been arrested and another to have appeared in court  facing  trial
    for illegal possession of firearms and robbery.  An Interpress  Service
    News Agency report of 22 December, 2005, reported  that  two  policemen
    have been acquitted of murder charges in the fatal  shootings  of  four
    people.   Yvonne Sobers of Families Against State Terrorism was said to
    have mixed feelings about the outcome of the trial.  She  was  reported
    as saying:-

         "I had wanted enquiry at the highest level, and to that  extent  we
             got it".


    She was also quoted as saying:-


         "We  got  it  at  the  Supreme  Court  [with]  the  Chief   Justice
         [presiding], the DPP  {Director  of  Public  Prosecutions}  himself
         doing the prosecutions, the best of defence lawyers, Scotland  Yard
         doing investigations, forensic science which  they  said  was  very
         sophisticated.   We got it past the no  case  submissions,  and  it
         went to a jury that did not come back in forty  five  minutes.  The
         evidence was circumstantial, and from that point of view, if  there
         was doubt, then according to our  process,  the  doubt  has  to  be
         evolved in favour of the accused person, so that is why I am saying
         the system worked".


      She went on to say:


         "I am absolutely for anybody defending himself or herself, but I am
         not convinced that  this  is  what  was  occurring  in  this  case,
         although I acknowledge the jury's right, and the decision they came
         to... but I am very concerned by the message that it is sending."


56.  The Jamaican Gleaner reported that police corruption was on  the  rise.
     This reported a Superintendent from the Professional Standards  Branch
    who suggested that corruption had not gone down and based on the number
    of reports that he had  been  getting,  it  was  increasing.    It  was
    unclear  whether  this  was  because  improved  police  resources   and
    intelligence had enabled  the  police  to  detect  more  corruption  or
    whether in fact more officers are corrupt.  The murder rate was said to
    have gone down in January 2006 by nearly twenty three  per  cent.   The
    Police Commissioner made it clear that he was not complacent.


57.  We very carefully read the expert  opinion  and  addendum  prepared  by
    Yvonne McCalla Sobers.   Ms Sobers describes  herself  as  being,  "an
    educator, management consultant, community activist  and  human  rights
    activist."  She said that the major focus of her work, "is lobbying and
    advocating for changes in Jamaica's justice and security systems".

58.  As an educator, Ms Sobers taught for nearly thirty  years  in  primary,
    secondary and tertiary education and as a management  consultant  since
    1992, she had provided services to Jamaican Government  Ministries  and
    assisted in programmes intended to build students'  self  esteem  as  a
    means of preventing substance abuse.  She had also  conducted  research
    in  Jamaican  schools  island-wide  to  evaluate  child  guidance   and
    counselling programmes and written guidance  and  counselling  teaching
    units for use in schools.   She has  been  commissioned  by  Jamaica's,
    National Council on Education to  assess  levels  of  achievement/under
    achievement in schools and provided consultancy support for  children's
    rights organisations as well  as  grass  roots  organisation  targeting
    young people at risk in inner city communities.

59.  As a Community Development Practitioner,  she  has  provided  training,
    planning and research to support NGOs and community based organisations
    involved in mother and child issues in the broader context  of  overall
    community development.   She has also been a human rights  activist  in
    organisations such as "Families Against  State  Terrorism"  (FAST)  and
    "Brother's  Keeper".   She  currently  leads  Families  Against   State
    Terrorism and needs to  be  in  regular  contact  with  Social  Service
    agencies that can provide the support and counselling, as well as  care
    and protection  for  children  and  young  persons.   The  organisation
    provides support for bereaved families and lobbies for systems to  hold
    police accountable for breaches of human rights.  She chairs  Brother's
    Keeper, which lobbies for the rehabilitation of prison inmates and  the
    integration of former inmates into society.   She acts as a host  on  a
    talk show on an inner city community radio  station  called  Roots  FM.
    The focus of the programme is the extent  to  which  human  rights  and
    justice are observed in the  inner  city  environment  and  inner  city
    residents call in and share their experiences.    Ms  Sobers  describes
    being educated at the University of the West Indies and holds  a  first
    degree in Arts together  with  diplomas  in  Education  and  Management
    Studies.  She has  taught  in  Ghana,  England,  and  Jamaica  and  has
    prepared previous reports in the past for British  tribunals  including
    the Court of Appeal.  She describes herself as being familiar with  the
    Jamaican Social Service systems, of  being  in  a  position  to  gather
    information because of her previous working relationships  with  Social
    Services agencies, in particular  with  those  links  to  her  work  in
    Jamaica as an educator, consultant, community development practitioner,
    human rights activist and talk show host.

60.  There has been no indication that Ms Sobers holds a  Doctorate  and  we
    assume therefore that the reference to "Dr. Sobers" was a typing error.



61.  We found, having carefully read Ms Sobers' report,  that,  reluctantly,
    we must agree with the comments of Mr Ouseley; Ms Sobers'  report  does
    lack balance and objectivity.  We have said in several  previous  cases
    that, just because someone is a human rights activist,  does  not  mean
    that they cannot be an impartial expert, but Ms  Sobers'  evidence  did
    not appear to us to be fair or objective.   Whilst  objective  evidence
    clearly shows that in the past the Jamaican Police have used  excessive
    force, Ms Sobers appears to proceed on the much more sweepingassumption
    that the Jamaican State is some form of terrorist organisation.    That
    assumption is not  reflected  in  any  of  the  established  background
    country materials.  Furthermore, in our opinion, her two  reports  also
    betray a biased approach to certain matters of evidence.  In the  press
    report of 22 December,  2005,  (which  we  have  set  out  in  full  at
    paragraph 41 above) the witness describes having called for an  enquiry
    of the highest level and says that that  is  precisely  what  happened.
    However, when the accused police officers were  subsequently  acquitted
    by a jury after what we can only believe must have been a  fair  trial,
    she appears to be upset with  the  verdict  and  describes  herself  as
    being, "very concerned by the message that it is  sending."   That  did
    not appear to us to be the view of somebody who could possibly be  said
    to be unbiased.   Ms Sobers appeared to  us  to  be  partisan  and  not
    consistently objective.

62.  We noted that in paragraphs 4 to 10 of Section  A  of  her  report,  Ms
    Sobers refers to the island's escalating  murder  rate.   However,  she
    appears not to have been aware that the murder  rate  actually  dropped
    during January 2006.  In Section B, in describing the Jamaican  Police,
    Ms Sobers refers to the failure of various crime  initiatives  in  the
    past, but makes little reference to recent successes.  The  address  by
    the Minister of National Security which he gave on  5  November,  2005,
    referred to the success of the police in tracking down  Jamaica's  most
    wanted criminals.  He spoke of the arrests that had been made  and  the
    individuals facing extradition to the United States to  answer  charges
    of drug  trafficking;  the  dismantling  or  severely  disrupted  major
    criminal networks including  Gideon's  Warriors,  the  One  Order,  the
    Clansman as well as other gangs; the hundreds of firearms and thousands
    of rounds of ammunition that had been seized; the success of  Operation
    Kingfisher which has resulted in the arrest of two  hundred  and  fifty
    five people by November 2005 in relation to  murders,  firearms,  drugs
    and ammunition; and the seizure of over twelve metric tons of  cocaine.
     He reported on the increase in gang and drug related murders and spoke
    of the government intensifying their intelligence driven focus on  what
    they call hot spots of crime.  A further three hundred and  fifty  more
    officers were being released for active duty and the  establishment  of
    the police force was to increase to  over  ten  thousand  in  the  next
    eighteen  months.   This  would  put  an  additional  fifteen   hundred
    policeman on the street.

63.  We also noted the  Jamaica  Observer  Report  of  21  September,  2005,
    describing one well known  gang  member  being  imprisoned  for  ninety
    years.   The  report  of  the  Jamaican  Observer  of  November,  2005,
    suggested that Operation Kingfisher had wiped out  one  of  the  twelve
    major criminal gangs  and  severely  disrupted  or  impacted  on  seven
    others.   In a report in the Jamaican Gleaner  of  December  19,  2005,
    thirty five people were arrested  by  Operation  Kingfisher.   None  of
    these successes were reported in Ms Sobers' report.  She did  refer  to
    the March, 2004, Jamaica Observer Report that the police were grappling
    with a  severe  shortage  of  motor  vehicles,  but  failed  to  report
    additional resources made available  by  the  government  to  which  we
    referred earlier.  In discussing police corruption, Ms  Sobers  thought
    it was noteworthy that Jamaican constabulary "has had  to  solicit  the
    assistance of Scotland Yard and the Royal Canadian  Mounted  Police  to
    investigate shootings of four persons by the CMU (Crawle case)  in  May
    2003".   However, the fact that the Jamaican Government did call on the
    resources of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and Scotland  Yard  was,
    we thought, a clear indication of the government's  willingness  to  do
    what was necessary to investigate corruption.

64.  We read what Ms Sobers said  about  the  fate  of  informers  and  the
    Witness Protection programme.  It was said that  the  Jamaican  Witness
    Protection programme had still not served to install public  confidence
    so that the safety of witnesses can be assured. However,  according  to
    the information before us, the Witness Protection  programme  has  been
    highly successful.  No one entering the  Witness  Protection  programme
    has been lost.

65.  We noted from the information supplied by the British  High  Commission
    in Kingston, Jamaica, in its facsimile of 22nd February, 2006, that the
    Jamaican Government is currently expanding the programme and  that  the
    United Kingdom has been asked to provide assistance to help train newly
    recruited social workers.  The Metropolitan Police Service have in  the
    past provided expert advice and training.    In  the  addendum  to  her
    report under the heading  "Jamaica's  Witness  Protection  System"  Ms.
    Sobers has written a sub-heading entitled "Limited  Success"  and  then
    quoted Mr Gilbert Scott  of  the  Ministry  of  National  Security  who
    announced that not a single witness  had  been  lost  to  any  kind  of
    violence.   Quite  why  she  would  describe  that  as  being  "limited
    success", we simply did not understand.  The Witness Protection  system
    has, on any view, been highly successful.  Ms Sobers then referred to a
    local  newspaper  receiving  responses   to   questions   asked   about
    participation in the Witness Protection scheme and sets out  the  names
    of individuals who say that they  would  not  go  on  the  scheme.   We
    thought it hardly surprising that people would say that they  were  not
    prepared to go into such a scheme and give evidence  when  their  names
    were being published in a newspaper.

66.  We  concluded  that  Ms  Sobers'  report  and  addendum  could  not  be
    described as being consistently objective and unbiased.   We  concluded
    that we could place little reliance upon the opinions expressed by her.



67.  We have, as we believe has been demonstrated  by  the  length  of  this
    determination, given very careful consideration to  all  the  objective
    evidence and not simply to that which we have referred and  from  which
    we have quoted.  It should not be assumed  that  because  we  have  not
    referred to a particular document or piece of evidence,  that  we  have
    not considered it.

The Jamaican Witness Protection programme.

68.  According to the copy facsimile of 22nd February, 2006, from the  Press
    and Political  Affairs  Officer  at  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Kingston, any witness to a crime who testifies in court and  fears  for
    his life is eligible to enter the Jamaican Witness  Protection  Scheme.
    The witness is evaluated to ensure that protection is needed  and  that
    the witness is able to follow the rules of the programme.    A  witness
    is required to remain in the programme until after the  case  is  tried
    and it is deemed safe for that person to leave the programme.   Several
    people who have participated in the  programme  in  the  past  are  now
    living normal lives in Jamaica or overseas.   It confirmed that  almost
    four hundred people  have  participated  in  the  programme  since  its
    inception in 1997 including over one hundred primary witnesses and  two
    hundred and seventy dependants.  None has  been  harmed.    The  United
    Kingdom has been asked to consider providing assistance to  help  train
    newly recruited social workers and in the past the Metropolitan  Police
    Service have provided expert  advice  and  training  to  establish  the
    scheme.

69.  The Justice Protection Act of 2001 established the  Justice  Protection
    Programme for the purpose of providing to  participants  protection  or
    assistance or both and established an administrative centre to develop,
    manage  and  maintain  the  Justice  Protection  Programme  and  to  be
    responsible for deciding whether the prospective participant is  to  be
    afforded protection or assistance or both  under  the  programme.   The
    administrative centre may offer protection or assistance or both  under
    the Justice Protection  Programme  in  respect  of  civil  matters  and
    offences  set  out  in  the  Act.    Those  offences  include   murder,
    manslaughter, treason, treason felony, sedition, piracy  or  hijacking,
    possession or use of firearms and ammunitions with  intent  to  injure,
    possession or use of firearms in furtherance of any  criminal  offence,
    aggravated assault, shooting or wounding with intent  to  do  grievance
    bodily harm, robbery,  robbery  with  aggravation,  arson,  any  sexual
    offence, any offence involving drug trafficking or dealing, kidnapping,
    domestic violence, money laundering and any  offence  involving  fraud,
    dishonesty or corruption.

Findings of Fact

70.  It was against the background which we considered at paragraphs  48  to
    69 above, that we considered the evidence before us  and  on  which  we
    made our findings of fact, bearing in mind that the burden of proof  in
    on the appellant and the standard of proof is of a  "reasonable  degree
    of likelihood"or of a "real risk".   We first reminded  ourselves  that
    the Adjudicator (as he then was) found the appellant to be  a  credible
    witness who had given  a  consistent  account  of  her  experiences  in
    Jamaica.  Having considered all the evidence  before  us  we  make  the
    following findings of fact:-

         (a)  We find of the six attackers involved in the appalling  attack
             on the appellant and her family, one was called "Scubo" who is
             now deceased; there are (two) twins, one called Little and one
             called Biggy, one of whom  is  now  dead;  and  there  was  an
             assailant called Carson who is  also  dead.    The  other  two
             assailants' names are not known to the appellant.


         (b)  We find that the appellant has known Little  and  Biggy  since
             she was approximately ten years of age, that  they  were  next
             door neighbours and  that  they  and  the  appellant  grew  up
             together.


         (c)  We do not believe that the appellant is  being  truthful  when
             she says she  does  not  know  the  surnames  of  any  of  the
             attackers.  We do not believe it to be  credible  that  having
             known the twins, Little and Biggy, since she was approximately
             ten years of age and having grown up with them together,  that
             the appellant did not know their family name.    She  told  us
             that they had always lived next door to her and  although,  at
             the time of the assault, they no longer lived next  door,  she
             maintained that they "still hang around on the street corner".
              If the appellant had lived in close proximity to  Little  and
             Biggy and their sixteen siblings for any length  of  time,  as
             this appellant claimed, we thought it simply not credible that
             she would  not  have  known  their  surnames.   There  was  no
             background evidence indicating that surnames are not  commonly
             known to a person's friends or neighbours.


         (d)  We do not  accept  that  the  attack  by  these  five  or  six
             individuals was in any way politically motivated or  condoned,
             sanctioned or approved of by any political party  in  Jamaica.
             There is no  credible  evidence  before  us  to  support  that
             possibility.   We find that the attack was carried out by five
             or possibly six individual thugs acting on their own volition,
             simply because they did  not  like  the  appellant's  daughter
             associating  with  someone  regarded  by  them  as  being   an
             outsider.   The  robbery  associated  with  the   attack   was
             opportunistic. We believe that the secondary  motive  for  the
             attack was robbery.  Those members for the gang who were known
             to the appellant appear to have been  living  locally  to  the
             appellant.  Had they been known locally to have been part of a
             larger criminal gang, then we believe that the appellant would
             have known this and would have known  the  name  of  it.   For
             those reasons, we do not accept that the  attack  was  carried
             out at the direction of, or  with  the  knowledge  or  at  the
             instruction of any gang leader or political leader, or that it
             was carried out on behalf of any gang or political party.


         (e)  The appellant told us that her house had been burnt  down  and
             that at the time her son had lived in it.  She  told  us  that
             the house was "gassed".  She said that the same  men  who  had
             taken part in the shooting had set fire to her house  and  she
             knew this because "people had seen  them".   While  we  accept
             that the adjudicator who heard the  appellant's  appeal  found
             the appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness,  this  was  fresh
             evidence which had not been given to Mr  I  T  Sanderson  and,
             consequently, evidence upon which we have to make findings. We
             do not believe that this is true.  This evidence was given  to
             us almost as an afterthought by the appellant.  It may or  may
             not be that her house was burnt down, but we  do  not  believe
             that if it was, that it was the subject of an  attack  by  the
             same thugs who attacked the appellant and killed her daughter.
             If "people has seen them" as the appellant alleges, then  they
             would have needed to describe the attackers to the  appellant,
             but the appellant failed to  tell  us  how  these  people  had
             described the  attackers  sufficiently  well  enough  for  the
             appellant to know that it was the same people.


         (f)  We do not accept that  the  appellant's  assailants  were  all
             members of the PNP Party.  The appellant could not  even  name
             these assailants and she gave us no plausible explanation  for
             how she had known that  they  were  all  members  of  the  PNP
             political party, yet at the same not even know their names.


         (g)  We do not accept that if she were to return to her  home  area
             in Jamaica, there would be a real risk that now, more than six
             years after that attack on her, the appellant would  face  any
             persecutory harm, or  of  treatment  which  would  breach  her
             Article 3 rights.  Only one of the twins is  still  alive  and
             the appellant does not know the identity of the other one,  or
             possibly two, members.  We do not accept that there is a  real
             risk that they would have any continuing interest in her.  The
             appellant gave the excuse that the PNP have friends  all  over
             Jamaica and that she would not be safe.  We do not accept that
             the assailants who took part in the attack were members of the
             PNP, or that the attack was in any way politically  motivated.
             Neither do we accept that there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood that if the appellant were to go and live with  her
             sister in Bull Bay, she would be  troubled  by  the  surviving
             members of the gang responsible for the attack.


         (h)  The appellant said that she had been out one day when she  had
             seen two men chasing her.  She sought sanctuary at  a  traffic
             warden's  office.   Despite  having  told  us  that  she   was
             distressed at being chased and "wet"  herself,  the  appellant
             told us that she had not explained to the traffic  warden  why
             the men who were following her were doing so.  We accept  that
             the appellant may have thought that she saw  two  men  chasing
             her, but we do not believe that, at the  time,  the  appellant
             thought that these two men had anything at all to do with  the
             attack on her home.  We believe that if she thought this,  she
             would have  been  fearful  for  her  life  and  having  sought
             sanctuary in the traffic wardens' office, would have told them
             precisely why she needed  their  protection.   This  lady  has
             suffered the most  appalling  injuries  and  suffered  a  most
             dreadful personal loss and it is  because  of  that,  that  we
             believe that had she thought these two men  were  involved  in
             the attack, she would have told the traffic wardens and  asked
             for protection.


         (i)  The appellant claimed, in giving  evidence  to  us,  that  she
             never made any complaint or statement to the police  following
             the shooting.  She claims that they  were  not  interested  in
             investigating the attack.  We do not believe this  to  be  the
             case.    We  believe,  having  very  carefully  examined   the
             objective evidence, that even in 1999, the police  in  Jamaica
             would have been interested in investigating the murder of  her
             daughter and the assault  on  the  appellant  and  would  have
             wanted to question her.  We also believe she would have  known
             that.  The appellant told us that her sister (who  was  not  a
             witness to the attack) had told the police the identity of the
             gang members, but if that was the case the police would hardly
             have acted on the say so  of  someone  who  had  not  actually
             witnessed the events.


         (j)  The appellant maintained that the police knew the identity  of
             the five assailants.  She maintained that they were simply not
             interested in helping her.  Our consideration of the objective
             evidence leads us to believe that they  most  certainly  would
             have been interested in investigating the matter and  that  if
             the appellant had chosen to co-operate with the police,  there
             is every possibility that criminal charges may have been made.
               As it is, this  appellant  chose  not  to  make  a  complain
             herself and chose not to seek  protection  from  the  Jamaican
             authorities, but instead, to  seek  international  protection.
             We do not  find  that  the  objective  evidence  supports her
             assertion that the police would not be interested in her case.


         (k)  We did  not  believe  there  to  be  a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood that the appellant's son who lives in  Jamaica  was
             in fear for his life.  There was no credible  reason,  on  the
             evidence before us, for him to be.  He had not been  attacked.




         Credibility


         (l)  We accept the  appellant's  core  account  of  the  attack  on
             herself and her daughter. We also accept that some  her  views
             may be honestly held. However, her evidence on key aspects, as
             we have indicated above, lacked credibility.  Her  views  were
             also at odds with the objective evidence on  such  issues  as
             police willingness to help her.


Assessment of Risk on Return

71.  Our consideration of the objective evidence leads us  to  believe  that
    were the appellant to return to Jamaica she would not  be  at  risk  of
    retribution  from  the  surviving  members  of  the  group   who   were
    responsible for the attack on her and her daughter's murder.  There are
    now only two, or at most possibly three, surviving members of the  gang
    left.  We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that the
    motive for the attack was political, or that it was  directed  by  some
    organised gang leader, as the appellant would have us believe.  Rather,
    we believe that the appellant was the victim  of  an  attack  by  local
    thugs acting on their own initiative  and  motivated  by  a  desire  to
    impose their will on  her  daughter..   We  do  not  believe  that  the
    surviving members of this group of opportunist thugs would  retain  any
    motive  or  reason  to  focus  on  the  appellant  six   years   later.
    Accordingly, we do not believe there is any reason to think that,  were
    the appellant to return to her home area of Jamaica, she  would  be  at
    any risk of persecutory harm or Article 3 ill-treatment. We  can  quite
    understand why, having lost a child in the  most  awful  circumstances,
    that she might not wish to go there, but we are satisfied that were she
    to do so there would be no real risk to her.  It follows that were  the
    appellant to return to Jamaica and go and live  with  her  sister,  she
    would not be at any risk of persecutory harm or Article 3 ill-treatment
    there either.

72.  In any event, even if we had believed that there was  a  risk  to  this
    appellant of serious harm or Article  3  ill-treatment,  it  was  quite
    clear to us, from our very detailed  and  careful  examination  of  the
    objective material, that there is not only a willingness, but  also  an
    ability on the part of the Jamaican state, to provide through its legal
    system a reasonable level  of  protection  from  ill-treatment  to  its
    citizens.  The initiatives announced over the  past  few  years,  while
    perhaps not initially being as effective as had been  hoped  for,  have
    been added to by initiatives such as "Operation Kingfisher", which have
    been successful.  The  Government  of  Jamaica  has  demonstrated  very
    clearly that it is determined to reduce  the  level  of  crime  and  to
    prosecute its perpetrators and it is achieving a significant  level  of
    success.  The further initiatives set  out  at  paragraph  54  of  this
    determination  demonstrate  that  the  Government  of  Jamacia  is  not
    complacent and is genuine in its aims.  In short, the  evidence  before
    us in our view clearly demonstrates  that  the  Jamaican  authority  is
    committed  to  reducing  levels  of  crime  and  violence  and  to  the
    investigation and prosecution of criminal activity.

73.  We believe that there is, as Mr Ouseley describes,  a  sea  change  in
    attitudes in Jamaica, such that the government are determined to put an
    end to rising crime and to the incidents of violence and do now  appear
    to be achieving considerable successes.

74.  We believe that, had we found this appellant to be at risk in her  home
    area, she would have been able to look to the Jamaican authorities  for
    protection which would have been provided.  That is not to say that  in
    every case requiring protection, the Jamaican  authorities  are  either
    willing, or able to provide it and each case will need to be  carefully
    considered on its own facts, but we believe that in general,  those  in
    fear of retribution from criminal gangs and thugs in Jamaica  would  be
    offered effective protection by the authorities.   We  do  not  believe
    that our decision in any way conflicts with that of the decision of the
    panel in DW (Homosexual Men; persecution;  sufficiency  of  protection)
    Jamaica CG [2005] UKIAT 00168, where, at paragraph 8 the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department made a concession that:

         ".....as a general rule, he would not argue  that  the  authorities
         would  provide  a  Jamaican  homosexual  with  a   sufficiency   of
         protection."

75.  Had we found this appellant to be  at  risk  of  serious  harm  on  her
    return to Jamaica, we believe that she would, in any event,  have  been
    eligible for protection in the Jamaican Government's Witness Protection
    scheme, should she decide to give evidence  against  those  responsible
    for her daughter's murder.  The Witness Protection  scheme  appears  to
    have been effective in protecting some one hundred and  twenty  primary
    witnesses and members of their  families.    The  Jamaican  authorities
    have clearly been anxious to ensure that the scheme  is  effective  and
    areable to offer protection to witnesses and appear to be committed  to
    developing the scheme's effectiveness by  seeking  means  of  providing
    training assistance for newly recruited social workers.

Conclusion

76.  We have concluded that whilst the Adjudicator  did  materially  err  in
    law, the decision we must substitute  is  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    asylum claim and her Article 3 claim.  We do not believe  that  on  her
    return to Jamaica, this appellant will be at any  risk  of  persecutory
    harm or a breach of her Article 3 rights.   As an alternative, even  if
    we had found that the appellant would have been  at  risk,  we  believe
    that the objective evidence before us clearly demonstrates  that  there
    is in Jamaica both a willingness and an ability  on  the  part  of  the
    state to provide  through  its  legal  system  a  reasonable  level  of
    protection from ill-treatment.

77.  For all these reasons we find that the original Adjudicator did make  a
    material  error  of  law.   The  following  decision   is   accordingly
    substituted:  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the
    appellant's human rights appeal is also dismissed.




Decision:

    For all these reasons we find that the original Adjudicator did make  a
    material  error  of  law.   The  following  decision   is   accordingly
    substituted:  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the
    appellant's human rights appeal is also dismissed.



Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley
                                  APPENDIX

     List of Objective Evidence Considered by the Panel of the Tribunal



1.       October  2005  Jamaica  Country   Report   published   by   Country
    Information and Policy Unit.

2.      21 September 2005 letter  from  Amnesty  International  relating  to
    this appellant.

3.      28 February 2006 memorandum from Immigration  Advisory  Service  re:
    "Witness Protection Programme Information".

4.       Undated  copy  Interpress  Service  News  Agency  report   entitled
    "Jamaica: Police Acquittals Revive  Spectre  of  Impunity"  written  by
    Dionne Jackson Miller.

5.      11 January 2006 Operational Guidance Note Jamaica published  by  the
    Home Office.

6.      5 November 2005 Jamaica Information Service  Broadcast  by  National
    Security Minister, Dr the Hon. Peter Phillips.

7.      21 September 2005 report from Jamaica Observer entitled "Richie  Poo
    gets Ninety Years".

8.      13 November 2005 report from Jamaica  Observer  entitled  "One  Gang
    Down, Eleven to go, says Kingfisher Commander".

9.      25 September 2005 report from Jamaica Gleaner  entitled  "Gangs  and
    Books - Kingfisher Disrupting and Dismantling Gangs".

10.    19 December 2005 extract from Jamaica  Gleaner  entitled  "Kingfisher
    Raid Nabs Fifty Five Detainees".

11.    22 February 2006 copy letter from British High Commissioner  Kingston
    to  Country  of  Origin  Information  Service,  Home  Office,  entitled
    "Jamaica: Witness Protection Scheme".

12.    2001 Justice Protection Act.

13.    8 February 2006 IAS Research Analysis entitled "Jamaica:  Sufficiency
    of Protection".

14.    1 November 2004 UK Home Office Science and Research Group Country  of
    Origin Information Service Jamaica COI Report October 2005.

15.    5 January 2006 HJT Research "Murders in 2005 Reach Record Levels".

16.    25 September 2005 HJT  Research  "Maxfield  Avenue,  Central  Village
    Killings  Continue:  Jamaica  Gleaner  Calls  Jamaica  'an   incredibly
    dangerous country to live in'."

17.    22 December 2005 Interpress  Service  News  Agency  Report  "Jamaica:
    Police Acquittals Revive Spectre of Immunity".

18.    25 May 2005 Amnesty International Report 2005: Jamaica.

19.    18 March 2005 Jamaican  Gleaner  "Security  Minister  calls  out  the
    National Reserves in All out Assault against Criminal Gangs".

20.    18 March 2006 HJT Research, "National Security Minister Declares  'we
    are at war'."

21.    18 April 2005 HJT Research, "New Information in  killing  of  witness
    suggests no link to 100 Lane Massacre".

22.    6 February 2006 HJT Research, "Police Corruption on the Rise".

23.    2 February 2006 HJT Research, "Murder Rate down  in  First  Month  of
    2006.

24.    24 August  2005  HJT  Research,  "Primary  School  Principal  Killed,
    Police Suspect Connection with Role as Murder Witness."

25.     14  March  2005  HJT  Research  "British  Experts   Review   Witness
    Protection Scheme".

26.    5 February 2006 Jamaica Observer "We Could  Cut  Murders  by  50  per
    cent!" by Andrew Hollness.

27.    5 February 2006 Jamaica Observer "From Victims to 'Shottas'  -  Women
    Emerging as Dangerous Criminals" by Luke Douglas.

28.    1 January 2006 Jamaica Gleaner "the mother of all Verdicts" by  Sybil
    Hibbert.

29.    30 January 2005 Jamaica  Gleaner.com  "Reinforced  Refuge  -  Jamaica
    Seeks to Strengthen Witness Protection  Programme"  Report  by  Glenroy
    Sinclair.

30.    25 September 2005  Jamaica  Gleaner  "Xmas  Present?"  by  Orville  W
    Taylor.

31.    29 December 2001 Jamaica Gleaner "Police Killing  Questioned"  Report
    by Petulia Clarke.

32.    30 September 2005 "Expert Opinion" Yvonne McCalla Sobers.

33.    15 September 2006 Expert Opinion Addendum to earlier  Expert  Report,
    Yvonne McCalla Sobers.
