
SW and Others (Paragraph 60 (v): meaning of  "including") Jamaica [2006]
UKAIT 00054

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing:  20 June 2006


                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
 Miss E Arfon Jones, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the first Appellant:     Mr Goldborough, O'Keefe Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

In order to meet the requirements of  paragraph  60(v),  an  applicant  must
have  taken  and  passed  any  relevant  examinations.   Other  evidence  of
satisfactory progress may add  to  but  cannot  substitute  for  success  in
examinations.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Jamaica.   The  second  and  third
     appellants are  the  children  of  the  first  appellant.   The  first
     appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent on 8 November
     2005 refusing to vary her leave in order to allow her to remain  as  a
     student.  The second and third appellants appeal decisions refusing to
     vary their leave in  order  to  allow  them  to  remain  as  dependant
     children of a student.

  2. The reasons for the decision in the first  appellant's  case  were  as
     follows:

           "You have applied for leave to remain  as  a  student  but  your
           application has been refused.
           This is because since you began studying in the  United  Kingdom
           in April 2002 you have not achieved any qualifications from your
           courses and the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you can
           show evidence of satisfactory progress in your courses of study.
           Furthermore you have been working for more than the 20 hours per
           week which is permissible as a student and  you  have  therefore
           failed to comply with conditions attached to your grant of leave
           to remain.
           In  view  of  this  employment  and  the  other   evidence   and
           information about funds which you have submitted  the  Secretary
           of State is not satisfied that you are able to meet the costs of
           your course and accommodation and to the maintenance of yourself
           and your  dependants  without  taking  employment,  engaging  in
           business or having recourse to public funds.
           Moreover in  view  of  the  fact  that  you  have  not  achieved
           qualifications  and  have  been  working  for  more   than   the
           permissible number of hours, and you have  relatives  living  in
           the United Kingdom, the Secretary of Sate is not satisfied  that
           you intend to leave the  United  Kingdom  at  the  end  of  your
           studies."



  3. The appellants' appeals were heard by an  immigration  judge  Mr  G  J
     Hart, on 23 December 2005.  He allowed the appeals.   His  conclusions
     as to the first appellant's  employment  have  not  been  subsequently
     challenged.  His conclusions as to her progress in her studies to date
     were as follows:

           "It is abundantly clear that the appellant  achieved  little  or
           nothing during her claim to studies with the Borough College and
           South Lambeth College in London.  Indeed  the  evidence  largely
           points to the fact  that  the  appellant  was  still  living  in
           Gloucester  and  working  there  regularly.   She  had  made  no
           successful attempt to find a relevant  care  home  placement  to
           support her studies at Borough, although clearly she  ultimately
           found a comparable position in February 2004 at  Uplands  Homes.
           This meant  that  the  appellant  was  travelling  to  and  from
           Gloucester, if she were regularly attending her course.  However
           what  influences  me  is  that  the  respondent  had   to   give
           consideration to applications by the  appellant  to  extend  her
           stay in February and July 2003 and September  2004.   These  all
           provided the respondent with the opportunity to consider closely
           the appellants past academic achievements and attendance.   They
           were clearly lacking in success at  that  time.   The  inference
           therefore  is  that  the  respondent  was  satisfied  that   the
           appellant had provided evidence of satisfactory progress in  the
           course of study, the passing of any  relevant  examinations  and
           thus her intention and ability to undertake the several courses,
           including that for which she now seeks leave to extend her stay.
            It strikes  me  that  after  a  dismal  and  doubtful  past  he
           appellant has now shown some dedication to her  studies.   Those
           studies have not been particularly successful but at  least  she
           attained two out of three modules which she took in  June  2005.
           She is now in the process of re-sitting the  third  module.   It
           will be an uphill task for her to achieve the completion of  the
           remaining modules in the next six months.   It  is  not  without
           some anxious  thought  that  I  find  that  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities the appellant has demonstrated  that  she  has  at
           last made some  progress  in  her  studies.   This  arises  even
           because earlier she had made no progress.   She  has  taken  and
           passed some but not all relevant examinations.  I find that  she
           just meets that requirement. "

  4. It is that conclusion which is the subject of the Secretary of State's
     application  for  reconsideration.   The  first  ground  is  that  the
     immigration  judge  applied  the  wrong  test:  he  decided  that  the
     appellant had made  "some" progress in her studies whereas  he  should
     have been concerned with whether the appellant had made "satisfactory"
     progress in her studies.  The second ground is  that  the  immigration
     rules  require  success  in  examinations  and  that  accordingly  the
     immigration judge was not entitled  to  allow  the  appeal  given  his
     finding that the appellant had not passed all her examinations.

  5. The relevant immigration rules are those in paragraph 60 of HC 395:

           "60.  The requirements for extension of stay as  a  student  are
           that the applicant:
           ...
           (v)  can show evidence of satisfactory progress in his course of
           study  including  the  taking  and  passing  of   any   relevant
           examinations; ...."

  6. Mr. Goldborough's  submission  on  the  appellant's  behalf  was  that
     "including"  and "any" showed that the taking and passing any relevant
     examinations was simply an example of the way  in  which  satisfactory
     progress could be demonstrated.  Ms Tanner's submission was  that  the
     use of those words showed  that  whatever   other  evidence  might  be
     available, the applicant was required to show that she had  taken  and
     passed any relevant examinations.

  7. The phraseology of the rule is slightly peculiar.  Whatever may be its
     precise effect in the course of an appeal, on its  face  it  does  not
     require the appellant to establish  that  she  has  made  satisfactory
     progress by producing evidence: it requires her to produce evidence of
     certain matters.  The evidence is  required  to  be  of  "satisfactory
     progress  ...  including  the  taking  and  passing  of  any  relevant
     examinations".  It does not appear to us that it is possible  to  read
     that  phrase  as  meaning  that  evidence  of  passing  any   relevant
     examinations is an optional extra.  The clear meaning of the words  is
     that whatever other  evidence  is  also  provided,  the  applicant  is
     required to show that she has both  taken  and  passed  any  "relevant
     examinations".

  8. Of course it is right, as Mr Goldborough pointed out that if there are
     no "relevant examinations", an applicant will not be able to show that
     she has taken and passed them: that, in our view, is the value of  the
     word "any".  The rule is constructed in such a way  that  satisfactory
     progress may be shown without  examinations  if  there  have  been  no
     examinations; but,  if  there  have  been  examinations,  satisfactory
     progress has to be shown  by  evidence  including  evidence  that  the
     examinations have been taken and passed.

  9. It is also true that on its face this rule makes no  allowance  for  a
     person who may, within the regulations of his or her course,  have  an
     opportunity to re-sit an examination  or  paper  which  has  not  been
     passed at the first attempt.  That consideration,  however,  does  not
     cause us to modify our interpretation of this paragraph of the  rules,
     because paragraphs 69A - 69 F make specific  provision  for  leave  to
     enter or remain in order to re-sit an examination.

 10. We remind ourselves also that leave to enter or remain as student  has
     always depended on the course being one which the Secretary  of  State
     was satisfied was of a proper standard and  at  an  institution  which
     maintained proper records of attendance and progress, and  such  leave
     is now conditional on the course being at an institution appearing  on
     the Secretary of State's  list  of  approved  institutions.   We  have
     little doubt that the institution's attitude to examinations is one of
     the factors which would be taken into account in deciding  whether  an
     institution was to be approved or not.  In this context it is  not  at
     all surprising that paragraph 60  should  require  that  any  relevant
     examinations have been taken and passed.

 11. For the foregoing reasons  we  consider  that  the  immigration  judge
     materially erred in law.

 12. As the first appellant has  not  passed  "relevant  examinations"  she
     could not comply with paragraph 60(v).  We substitute a  determination
     dismissing the first appellant's appeal on the grounds  that  she  did
     not and does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  60(v).   We
     substitute determinations dismissing the appeals  of  the  second  and
     third appellants on the ground that the first appellant will  have  no
     leave as a student.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


