
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 October 2015                            |                              |
|Oral judgment delivered on 27 October 2015    |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLGATE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     vV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
                  Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Kent
                  Immigration and Visa Advice

   1) An application for permission to appeal on the grounds  of  inadequacy
      of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must generally
      demonstrate by reference to the material and arguments  placed  before
      that Tribunal that (a) the matter involved a substantial issue between
      the parties at first instance and (b) that the Tribunal either  failed
      to deal with that matter at all, or gave reasons on that  point  which
      are so unclear that they may well conceal an error of law.

   2) Given that parties are under a duty to  help  further  the  overriding
      objective and to co-operate with the Upper  Tribunal,  those  drafting
      grounds of appeal (a) should proceed on the basis  that  decisions  of
      the First-tier Tribunal are to be read  fairly  and  as  a  whole  and
      without excessive legalism; (b)  should  not  seek  to  argue  that  a
      particular consideration was not taken into account  by  the  Tribunal
      when it can be seen from the decision read fairly and as a whole  that
      it was (and the real disagreement is with the Tribunal's assessment of
      the evidence or the merits); and (c) should not challenge the adequacy
      of the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal without  demonstrating
      how the principles in (1) above have been breached,  by  reference  to
      the materials  placed  before  that  Tribunal  and  the  important  or
      substantial issues which it was asked to determine in that  particular
      case.

   3) Where permission to appeal is  granted,  an  Appellant  should  review
      whether the grounds of appeal are genuinely arguable in the  light  of
      any response from the Respondent to the appeal.  Whether  or  not  the
      original grounds are pursued, it is generally inappropriate to seek to
      raise new grounds of appeal close to the date of the hearing  if,  for
      example, that would cause unfairness to a Respondent or result in  the
      hearing being adjourned.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 22
    December 2014 in respect of an appeal made by VV against a decision  to
    make a deportation order under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").   For  convenience  we  will
    continue to refer to the respective parties as Appellant and Respondent
    as in the Tribunal below.  We are satisfied that an anonymity direction
    should be made as in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant was born  on  11  August  1972.   He  is  a  national  of
    Lithuania.  He claimed to have first entered the UK on 5 March 2005  in
    order to work.  He provided evidence that he had exercised  his  Treaty
    rights as an EEA national.  On 8 August 2013  he  was  convicted  of  a
    sexual assault on a female and on 15 September 2013 he was sentenced in
    the Crown Court to fifteen months' imprisonment. In the  usual  way  he
    was required to be registered on the Sex Offenders'  Register  for  ten
    years and a restriction order was imposed for a period of  five  years.
    There was no appeal against conviction or sentence.

 3. On 28 October 2013  the  Appellant  was  served  with  a  liability  to
    deportation notice and  the  Secretary  of  State's  deportation  order
    followed in due course.  In this case the Respondent accepts  that  the
    Appellant has acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence  pursuant  to
    regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations.  As a  consequence  the  parties
    and the judge in the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the basis that it
    was necessary for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the  "relevant
    decision", that is to say the decision to make the  deportation  order,
    was justified on "serious grounds of public policy or public security".



The determination of the First Tier Tribunal

 4. In paragraph 6 of his determination the judge quoted  extensively  from
    the sentencing remarks of the judge in the Crown Court which  need  not
    be repeated here.  He referred to the circumstances of the  offence  at
    some length between paragraphs 7 and 10 of the decision.

 5. Having summarised the evidence and submissions  before  him  the  judge
    then set out his findings between paragraphs 34 and 47.  They fell into
    two parts.

 6. Paragraphs 34 to 45 set out the judge's findings  in  relation  to  the
    2006 Regulations. In paragraph 45 he  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    behaviour did not satisfy the "serious  grounds  of  public  policy  or
    security" test and hence his  appeal  should  be  allowed  under  those
    Regulations. The judge plainly demonstrated his understanding  that  in
    this case the threshold under regulation 21 to justify the decision  to
    deport was more demanding than for  someone  who  had  not  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.

 7. Having reached that conclusion, the judge took the  view  that  it  was
    unnecessary for him to make formal findings in relation to  Article  8,
    but he nonetheless set out his views in summary form (see paragraphs 46
    to 47).  At paragraph 47 the judge said that he would have  found  that
    the removal of the Appellant would not have been proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public aim sought to be achieved by the  Respondent,  paying
    particular regard to the best interests of the two children,  one  aged
    14 at the time of the decision and the other aged 8.

 8. Although not raised in the grounds of appeal, it was pointed out at the
    outset  of  this  hearing  by  both  legal  representatives  that   the
    proportionality findings made by the judge  at  paragraphs  46  and  47
    should not have been expressed under Article 8 but should instead  have
    been  dealt  with  under  the  terms  of  regulation  21  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  However, after some discussion it  became  common  ground
    that  the  merits  of  this  appeal  do  not  turn  upon  this   point.
    Essentially the same issues would have been considered if the judge had
    expressed his conclusions  under  the  2006  Regulations.   It  is  not
    suggested, for example, that in following the course he did  the  judge
    failed to take into account any consideration  which  would  have  been
    material had he dealt with proportionality under the 2006  Regulations.
    At one stage reference was made to  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but it was agreed during argument  that
    that provision would not  have  been  in  play  for  a  proportionality
    assessment made under the 2006 Regulations.  Nonetheless, the Secretary
    of State maintains her legal challenge criticising  the  way  in  which
    proportionality was addressed by the judge.

 9. In paragraph 36 the  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    convicted of any other offence.

10. In paragraph 37 the judge set out  at  some  length  the  circumstances
    relating  to  the  offence,  referring  once  again  to  parts  of  the
    sentencing remarks. Although it is unnecessary for us to set out  those
    matters, we do note this sentence:

         "Whilst I accept that the offence was  out  of  character  and  the
         Appellant was remorseful the starting point is not the  Appellant's
         subsequent contrition but the fear not to say terror  he  inflicted
         upon  the  victim  by  his  persistent  efforts  to  obtain  sexual
         gratification over a prolonged period of time from a quite innocent
         neighbour with whom he had  no  relationship  apart  from  that  of
         neighbour.  I find that the Appellant's offence was serious."

11. He then continued between paragraphs 38 to 42 by setting  out  in  some
    detail the cross-examination of the Appellant  at  the  appeal  hearing
    about his attitude to the offence,  which  was  significant  not  least
    because this sexual offence had caused the victim to suffer significant
    harm.  The judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  sought  to  deflect
    responsibility for the offence and had even gone so far as  to  suggest
    that he had simply fallen on to the victim. It was at that  point  that
    the sentencing remarks of the judge in the Crown Court were read out to
    the Appellant and he was asked whether he accepted  that  the  touching
    had been sexual, to which he replied "I would not say it  was  sexual".
    The judge then contrasted that answer with the quite different  account
    given by the Appellant in his re-examination when he said, "very  sorry
    I have no words to say .... I am remorseful  about  that".   The  judge
    then gave a  very  careful  assessment  of  his  appreciation  of  this
    evidence and the Appellant's view of his offending.  He referred to the
    significant inconsistency in the answers, which led him  to  doubt  the
    genuineness of the remorse.  He said that his conclusion was reinforced
    by the account of the offence set out in the NOMS Report and once again
    the Appellant's reaction recorded there. Responding to the  submissions
    he had heard, the judge said at paragraph 43 that:

         "I am not persuaded in the light of the above  that  the  Appellant
         has shown remorse for the offence of which he  was  convicted.   He
         may be remorseful that he finds himself in his present difficulties
         but I find that he is not remorseful  for  the  behaviour  that  he
         inflicted upon the victim."

12. The paragraphs which are criticised  in  this  appeal  then  follow  at
    paragraphs 44 and 45.  In paragraph 44 the  judge  expressed  the  view
    that the NOMS Report gave conflicting messages.  He then went on to set
    out correctly his understanding that the NOMS Report had concluded that
    the likelihood of reconviction is in the  low  category  but  that  was
    offset or counterbalanced by the conclusion that the  risk  of  serious
    harm, if further offending were to occur, was in the  medium  category.
    The judge  expressed  the  view  that  that  was  consistent  with  the
    circumstances of the offence and at that point he brought back into his
    analysis his earlier conclusions  about  the  nature  of  this  offence
    starting at paragraph 37 of his decision. He then said  this,  "I  find
    that there is little comfort in knowing that  while  the  risk  of  re-
    offending is low, the harm attached to any re-offending is serious".

13. Paragraph 45 states:

         "Taking  these  matters  together  the  scales  tip  slightly   but
         decisively in the Appellant's favour.  Were it the  case  that  the
         risk of re-offending  was  in  the  medium  category  it  would  be
         possible to conclude that the requirement  of  serious  grounds  of
         public policy had been established but  because  the  risk  of  re-
         offending is low it cannot be the case that even with a medium risk
         of serious harm that the grounds of public  policy  have  not  been
         established.  I find that the Appellant's behaviour does  not  come
         within the serious grounds of public policy and his  appeal  should
         be allowed under the 2006 Regulations."

Grounds of appeal

14. It was suggested in the written grounds of appeal that  the  judge  had
    committed the error of regarding himself as bound  by  the  conclusions
    expressed in the NOMS Report as opposed to  making  an  assessment  for
    himself of the circumstances.  Quite properly  that  argument  was  not
    pursued at the oral hearing. It was untenable.

15. At the hearing  before  us  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  for  the  Respondent
    advanced a completely new point.  She suggested that the words  at  the
    beginning of paragraph 45 "taking these matters together"  showed  that
    the judge's conclusions in that paragraph were based upon nothing  else
    other than the NOMS Report as summarised  in  paragraph  44.   On  that
    reading of paragraph 45, it was then submitted that  it  followed  that
    the judge had applied the test set by regulation 21(3) where  the  risk
    of "serious harm"  resulting  from  re-offending  lies  in  the  medium
    category, simply by drawing a distinction according to whether the risk
    of re-offending occurring is medium or low. It was then submitted  that
    on that reading of the determination the judge erred in law because, in
    particular,  he  failed   to   take   into   account   other   material
    considerations, namely the circumstances and seriousness of the offence
    and any implications they have for the assessment of "serious grounds".



16. The merits of this challenge therefore depend critically upon  the  way
    in which the decision letter is to be read. It  is  a  well-established
    legal principle that a decision is to be read fairly and as a whole.

17. We have reached the firm conclusion that the correct way to  understand
    paragraph 45,  and  in  particular  the  words  "taking  these  matters
    together", is that the judge was taking into account  everything  which
    preceded paragraph 45 going back to paragraph 36  and  not  simply  his
    summary of the NOMS Report in paragraph 44.  We  have  no  doubt  about
    this, partly because paragraph 44 itself refers to the circumstances of
    the offence and therefore was referring back to what had been  set  out
    in paragraph 37. It is impossible to read paragraphs 44 and  45  as  if
    they constitute a hermetically sealed piece of reasoning which left out
    of account the earlier parts of this carefully expressed decision.

18. Despite the fact that the judge had made a  series  of  findings  which
    were plainly adverse to the Appellant (see paragraphs 37 to 43) he took
    the view that the  scales  were  tipped  slightly  in  the  Appellant's
    favour. It is  therefore  clear  how  his  thinking  proceeded.  Taking
    paragraphs 36 to 44 together, he plainly reached the  view  that  there
    were a number of adverse findings against the Appellant  which  brought
    this case relatively close to the "serious grounds"  threshold  set  by
    regulation 21(3). It is perfectly clear that according to  the  judge's
    evaluation he concluded that the circumstances of this case taken as  a
    whole did not reach that threshold. But he went on to explain how  with
    one change in circumstance the case would have crossed  it,  namely  if
    the risk of re-offending had been thought to be medium rather than low.
     Thus, it is clear that in paragraph 45 of his determination the  judge
    did take into account all the matters set out between paragraphs 36 and
    44 and not just simply the NOMS Report as summarised in  paragraph  44.
    It therefore follows that the  judge  did  have  in  mind  his  careful
    assessment of the nature of the  offence  and  indeed  the  Appellant's
    unsatisfactory evidence on the issue of  remorse  as  set  out  between
    paragraphs 38 and 43.  We are left in no doubt that it would be  wholly
    unrealistic to think that this judge, having taken the trouble  to  set
    these matters out in such detail, simply put them to one side  when  he
    came to reach his critical conclusion in  paragraph  45.  It  is  quite
    possible that another judge faced with the  same  evidence  might  have
    reached a different conclusion under  regulation  21(3),  but  that  is
    nothing to the point in an appeal which is confined to errors  of  law.
    This judge's reasoning was logical and clearly expressed. It  discloses
    no error of law.

19. The Respondent's  misconstruction  of  the  determination  comes  about
    because of an elementary error, namely by reading paragraphs 44 and  45
    in isolation and not by reading the decision fairly  and  as  a  whole.
    Experience in this and other appeals by  the  Respondent  leads  us  to
    express concern as to whether, before formulating  grounds  of  appeal,
    sufficient care is being taken within the Home Office  to  apply  well-
    established principles for identifying an error of law and to  appraise
    fairly and realistically the manner in which judges of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal have expressed their conclusions.

20. The same concern applies to the second ground of appeal relating to the
    Tribunal's determination under Article 8. Although this ground did  not
    find any favour with the judge granting permission to appeal,  we  have
    listened to the argument and will address it briefly.  It is plain from
    what we have said already that the appeal must fail because the judge's
    reasoning on the application of Article 8  was  not  essential  to  his
    decision to allow VV's appeal.

21. It is important to recall that the judge began paragraphs 46 and 47  by
    expressly stating that in view of his conclusion under regulation 21(3)
    it was unnecessary to make findings in relation to Article 8.  In other
    words the judge was making it plain that he was expressing  himself  in
    abbreviated  terms,  something  which  ought  readily  to   have   been
    appreciated, bearing in mind also the very considerable case load  with
    which the First-Tier Tribunal has to deal. Nonetheless,  the  Secretary
    of State has advanced what is no more than  a  "reasons  challenge"  to
    paragraphs 46 and 47.

22. Again we feel bound to question whether those responsible for launching
    grounds of appeal of this nature are correctly applying  in  each  case
    the law on what must be demonstrated in  order  to  vitiate  an  appeal
    decision for legal inadequacy of  reasoning.   The  case  law  on  this
    subject is well-established and clear (see eg. Save Britain's  Heritage
    v Secretary of State for the Environment [1991] 1 WLR 153; South  Bucks
    DC v Port (No 2) [2004] 1  WLR  1953)  and  we  merely  summarise  some
    fundamental principles.

23. An allegation that reasons are inadequate cannot normally get  off  the
    ground unless the appellant can show firstly that the matter  to  which
    the complaint relates was raised in the proceedings  before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal as a substantial issue between the parties for the  judge
    to determine.  If  the  matter  was  not  a  substantial  issue,  or  a
    "principal important controversial issue",  then  generally  it  cannot
    fall within the ambit of the duty to give reasons in that case.   There
    is no obligation on a Tribunal to deal with each and every point  which
    has been raised in an appeal process.

24. But secondly, even if the matter relates  to  a  substantial  issue  or
    principal controversial issue, it is essential for an appellant to show
    either that the judge has simply failed to  resolve  that  dispute,  in
    other words there  is  a  gap  in  the  reasoning  on  that  point,  or
    alternatively, that even though the issue  has  been  dealt  with,  the
    reasoning is so unclear that the Tribunal is satisfied that it may well
    conceal a public  law  ground  of  challenge  (see  eg  Save  Britain's
    Heritage at [1991] 1 WLR at page 168). Likewise in the South  Bucks  DC
    case Lord Brown reiterated (at [2004] 1  WLR  at  page  1964)  that  an
    Appellant must show "a substantial doubt as to  whether  the  decision-
    maker erred in law ...". But he then  added  "such  adverse  inferences
    will not readily be drawn".

25. In South Bucks DC the House of Lords approved  (at  paragraph  33)  the
    well-known statement by Sir Thomas Bingham  MR  that  an  issue  as  to
    whether the reasons for a decision were inadequate "is to  be  resolved
    ... on a straightforward reading [of the  decision]  without  excessive
    legalism or exegetical sophistication."  The  degree  of  particularity
    required for reasoning will depend entirely on the nature of the issues
    which have been raised by  the  parties  for  the  judge  to  determine
    (paragraphs 28 and 36).

26. We also note that at paragraph 35 Lord Brown said that the  restatement
    of the relevant legal principles in South Bucks  DC  should  "serve  to
    focus the reader's attention on the main considerations to have in mind
    when contemplating a reasons a challenge" and tend to  discourage  such
    challenges.

27. It follows from the authorities, and also from the duty of  parties  to
    help further the overriding objective and  co-operate  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal, that those drafting grounds of appeal (a) should not seek  to
    argue that a particular consideration was not taken into account by the
    Tribunal when it can be seen from the decision read  fairly  and  as  a
    whole that it was (and the real disagreement  is  with  the  Tribunal's
    assessment of the evidence or the merits) and (b) should  not  treat  a
    reasons challenge as a "softer  option".  When  seeking  permission  to
    appeal an Appellant is obliged to  demonstrate  how  the  threshold  of
    arguability is reached.

28. Similarly, judges in the First Tier Tribunal dealing with  applications
    for permission to appeal should  also  have  the  principles  governing
    reasons challenges well in mind when considering whether  a  ground  of
    appeal alleging inadequacy of reasons is  genuinely  arguable.  If  the
    party raising a reasons challenge does not give proper  particulars  as
    to how those principles have been breached, by  reference  to  relevant
    materials placed before the judge  who  dealt  with  the  appeal,  then
    ordinarily permission to appeal on that ground should be refused.

29.  Unless  practitioners  considering  grounds  of   appeal   adhere   to
    established legal requirements for demonstrating inadequate  reasoning,
    and more generally on what may qualify as an error of law, there  is  a
    real likelihood of appeals to the Upper Tribunal being pursued  without
    any genuine legal merit. That would represent an improper  use  of  the
    Tribunal's limited resources and generally extend the  time  for  which
    litigants would have to wait before their cases can be determined.

30. We should also refer to another matter. In this case, and in others, we
    have observed the Secretary of State obtaining permission to appeal  on
    grounds which are not pursued at the hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    because it is eventually acknowledged that they are unarguable. Plainly
    an Appellant should review the arguability of grounds  of  appeal,  for
    example in the light of any response from the Respondent to the appeal.
    An Appellant should  not  continue  to  pursue  points  which  are  not
    properly arguable. But where points are abandoned, there is a  tendency
    then to seek to rely upon a skeleton argument, served only just  before
    or even on the day of the hearing, so as to advance  one  or  more  new
    arguments not previously notified either to the other party or  to  the
    Tribunal.  Raising  new  points  in  this  manner  plainly  can   cause
    unfairness to the opposing party and, if so,  the  Upper  Tribunal  may
    well refuse to allow the new point to be  argued.  That  is  even  more
    likely to be the case where a new point could not fairly be dealt  with
    without adjourning the hearing so that the opposing party has a  proper
    opportunity to deal with it. The resources of this Tribunal are  finite
    and have to be allocated fairly  and  proportionately  as  between  all
    cases before it and not  wasted.  These  are  important  considerations
    which those who draft, or advise upon, grounds of appeal must keep well
    in mind.

31. In this case it appears to us that  those  launching  or  pursuing  the
    appeal cannot have applied basic principles on what an Appellant  needs
    to demonstrate in order to establish an error of law.   That  point  is
    further illustrated by two additional criticisms now being advanced  by
    the Respondent.  The judge said in  paragraph  47,  "the  children  are
    integrated into the UK school system and the Respondent accepts that it
    is in the best interests of the two children that they both  remain  in
    the UK with the mother".  The Respondent complains that the judge's use
    of the word "is" does not accord with  paragraphs  64  and  65  of  her
    decision letter in which it was  said  that  it  may  be  in  the  best
    interests for the children to remain in the UK.  But  the  Respondent's
    attempt to argue a reasons challenge on this difference of language  is
    flawed, because no attempt was made to put  before  this  Tribunal  any
    evidence as to how the Respondent's case on this aspect  was  presented
    in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is quite  conceivable
    that during the  hearing  before  the  judge  the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that there was no longer any issue that it "is"  in  the  best
    interests of the children to remain in the UK.

32. The other criticism which was made of the judge's  reasons  related  to
    his finding that it was not in the best interests of the children to be
    separated from their father.  We say very little about  this  criticism
    for two reasons.  First, as we have said the judge expressed himself in
    summary terms having already decided the case in the Appellant's favour
    under  regulation  21(3).  Second,  the  Respondent  has  not  provided
    information as to how this point was dealt with before the Tribunal, so
    as to justify an argument that any further reasoning on this  point  in
    this particular case was required.





Conclusion

33. For the reasons set out above we conclude  that  the  decision  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal did not involve any error of law, its decision must
    stand and the Respondent's appeal must be dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


The Hon. Mr Justice Holgate


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date


The Hon. Mr Justice Holgate




