
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

OO (Burma -TS remains appropriate CG) Burma [2018] UKUT 00052 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                       |                                    |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2017                     |           On 9 January 2018        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     OO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Markus, Counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



TS (Political opponents-risk) Burma  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00281  (IAC)  remains
appropriate country guidance on the risk to political opponents in Burma.


                                  DECISION


   1. This appeal concerns a national of Burma who was born  in  1965.   The
      government of Burma changed the name of  the  country  to  Myanmar  in
      1989, following the suppression  of  a  popular  democratic  uprising.
      Internationally both names are recognised.  In this decision, I  refer
      to the country as Burma.

Procedural history

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK')  on  7  April  2010
      using his own passport, containing a valid student visa,  and  claimed
      asylum on 10 May 2010.  This was refused in June 2010 and he  appealed
      to the First-tier Tribunal ('the  first  FFT'),  which  dismissed  his
      appeal in a decision dated 13 August 2010.   The  first  FTT  entirely
      rejected the appellant's account of being politically active in Burma,
      observing that if he had a long record of political activism and  been
      detained, he would not have been issued with a passport  in  2009  and
      permitted to  leave  Burma.   The  appellant  became  'appeals  rights
      exhausted' on 15 December 2010.  Removal directions were set  in  2011
      and the appellant issued judicial  review  proceedings  challenging  a
      decision not to treat his submissions as a fresh claim.  In a  consent
      order dated 1 September 2014 the respondent  ('the  SSHD')  agreed  to
      reconsider the appellant's  submissions  in  light  of  TS  (Political
      opponents-risk) Burma CG [2013] UKUT 00281 (IAC).

   3. In a decision dated 19 March 2015, the SSHD refused the  asylum  claim
      and the appellant appealed to  the  FTT  ('the  second  FTT').   In  a
      decision dated 25 January 2016 the second FTT allowed  his  appeal  on
      Refugee Convention grounds.  The  second  FTT  acknowledged  that  the
      first FTT's factual findings should  be  used  as  a  starting  point,
      considered TS and found, inter alia, that the appellant had  taken  an
      active part in numerous demonstrations in  the  UK  before  concluding
      that he would be at risk of  persecution  in  Burma.   The  SSHD  then
      appealed to the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

   4. In a decision dated 26 June 2016 UT Judge O'Connor concluded that  the
      second FTT's assessment of risk upon return was unlawful  because  two
      important factors, as identified in TS, were left out of account:  (i)
      whether his political views were genuine or opportunistic and (ii) the
      nature and extent of any political activities he is reasonably  likely
      to engage in upon return  to  Burma.   At  the  hearing  before  Judge
      O'Connor it was agreed that the second FTT's findings of  fact  should
      be maintained.  It was also agreed that the decision would  be  remade
      by the UT at an adjourned hearing with a Burmese interpreter.

   5. The rehearing unfortunately had to be adjourned  three  times.   At  a
      hearing on 21 February 2017, the appellant raised a new issue  shortly
      before the hearing relating to the  asserted  likely  refusal  by  the
      Burmese embassy to issue  him  with  a  new  passport,  and  the  SSHD
      required additional time to consider: (i) whether it is accepted  that
      the appellant would not be issued with a  passport;  (ii)  whether  he
      would be  returned  to  Burma,  absent  a  passport;  (iii)  what  the
      consequences of (ii) would be if he were to be  returned.   Directions
      were given for  both  parties  to  file  and  serve  further  evidence
      relevant to  these  three  issues.   The  SSHD  did  not  receive  the
      appellant's further evidence in time to seek evidence in response  and
      a hearing before me on  3  May  2017  was  adjourned.   The  SSHD  was
      directed to file and serve a full position statement responding to the
      appellant's updated skeleton argument and addressing the three  issues
      set out above.

   6. A further hearing before me on 19 June 2017 was adjourned as the  SSHD
      had not received evidence  requested  from  the  Burmese  embassy,  in
      circumstances wherein it was expected the evidence would be  available
      imminently.

Hearing

   7. At the beginning of the  hearing  the  representatives  clarified  the
      documents they placed reliance upon.   The  Respondent  relied  mainly
      upon the Country Policy and Information Note, Burma:  Critics  of  the
      Government, Version 2.0, March 2017 ('the 2017 CPIN').  This  document
      does not merely record the SSHD's  own  assessment  but  sets  out  in
      comprehensive detail, with quotations, the assessments made  by  wide-
      ranging sources.  Indeed, Mr Markus placed considerable reliance  upon
      the contents of the  2017  CPIN.   The  appellant's  evidence  was  in
      disarray and  scattered  amongst  numerous  bundles.   After  a  short
      adjournment, Mr Markus provided me  with  a  helpfully  tabbed  bundle
      containing all the evidence relied upon by both parties, including the
      country background evidence and country guidance decisions  on  Burma.
      The country background documents  available  to  me  are  set  out  in
      Appendix A.

   8. Mr Markus  clarified  that  reliance  was  no  longer  placed  on  the
      application prepared by the  appellant's  solicitors  dated  3  August
      2017, in which the  SSHD  was  invited  to  withdraw  her  appeal.   I
      therefore need say no more about this.

Issues in dispute

   9. Both representatives agreed  that  the  appeal  raises  three  issues.
      First, whether, as submitted by the SSHD, there has been a  change  of
      conditions in Burma to justify a departure from the  country  guidance
      in TS.

  10.  Second,  whether  this  appellant  is  reasonably  likely  to  be  at
      prospective risk in Burma, given his particular political profile  and
      likely political activities in Burma, in light of  TS  and  /  or  the
      updated country conditions.

  11. Third, and in the alternative, whether the appellant would  be  unable
      to renew his passport or obtain a certificate of identity ('CoI') from
      the Burmese Embassy, with the result that  he  would  be  detained  on
      return to Burma.  In relation to this issue, Mr McVeety submitted that
      HM (Risk factors for Burmese citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012  no
      longer applied, and placed reliance upon updated  evidence,  which  he
      submitted called into question its conclusions.

Oral evidence

  12. Both representatives also agreed that the  second  FTT's  findings  of
      fact are preserved but it was nonetheless important for the  appellant
      to provide updated evidence  as  to  his  political  activities  since
      January 2016, and his intentions, if returned to Burma.  The appellant
      confirmed all three of his witness statements, two from 2015  and  the
      most up to date one dated 12 April 2017.

  13. Mr Markus took the appellant to photographs in the bundle of  evidence
      and he clarified who he was demonstrating with.  Mr Markus also played
      a very short video, secretly recorded when the appellant attended  the
      Burmese Embassy.  McVeety asked the appellant to clarify his political
      role in the UK and I heard detailed evidence regarding this.

Submissions

  14. I then heard submissions from the parties.   Mr McVeety invited me  to
      depart from TS given the changes in the country conditions  identified
      in the 2017 CPIN.  In the alternative, he asked me to find  that  when
      the TS risk factors are carefully considered, the appellant  would  be
      of no real interest to the Burmese authorities.

  15. Mr Markus submitted that any changes to the country conditions are  at
      an early stage and there is sufficient evidence that  the  government,
      and the military (who form part of the executive)  remains  intent  on
      targeting their critics.  He  invited  me  to  find  that  TS  remains
      appropriate  country  guidance  and  when  the  TS  risk  factors  are
      considered, this appellant is at real risk of persecution if  returned
      to Burma for reasons relating to his political opinion.

  16. I only heard brief submissions regarding the HM / third  issue.   Both
      representatives agreed that it would  only  be  necessary  for  me  to
      address the third issue if I determined  both  the  first  and  second
      issues against the appellant.

  17. At the end of the submissions I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
      provide with reasons.
Legal framework
  18. The legislative framework to these appeals includes international  and
      European Union law comprising  the  Refugee  Convention,  through  the
      prism of the Qualification Directive,  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC.
      This framework is well-known and does not need to be elaborated.  When
      making findings of fact and assessing risk  on  return,  I  do  so  by
      applying the lower standard of proof.

TS

  19. It is convenient to set out the headnote of TS at this stage.

        "1.      In order to decide whether a person would be  at  risk  of
        persecution  in  Burma  because  of  opposition  to   the   current
        government, it is necessary to  assess  whether  such  activity  is
        reasonably likely to lead to a risk  of  detention.   Detention  in
        Burma, even for a short period, carries with  it  a  real  risk  of
        serious ill-treatment, contrary  to  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  and
        amounting to persecution/serious harm within  the  meaning  of  the
        Qualification Directive.

        2. A person is at real risk of being detained in  Burma  where  the
        authorities regard him or her to be a threat to  the  stability  of
        the regime or of the Burmese Union.

        3. The spectrum of those potentially at risk ranges from those  who
        are (or are perceived to be)  actively  seeking  to  overthrow  the
        government to those who are in outspoken and vexing  opposition  to
        it.  Whether a person is in need of  protection  will  depend  upon
        past and future political behaviour. This assessment has to be made
        against the background of  a  recently  reforming  government  that
        carries a legacy of repression and  continues  to  closely  monitor
        those in opposition. The evidence points to  a  continuing  anxiety
        over the break up of the state and the loss of its power.

        4. The question of risk of ill-treatment will in general turn  upon
        whether a returnee is detained by  the  authorities  at  any  stage
        after return.

        5. A person  who  has  a  profile  of  voicing  opposition  to  the
        government  in  the  United  Kingdom   through   participation   in
        demonstrations or attendance at political  meetings  will  not  for
        this  reason  alone  be  of  sufficient  concern  to  the   Burmese
        authorities to result in detention immediately upon arrival.   This
        is irrespective of whether the  UK  activity  has  been  driven  by
        opportunistic or genuinely held views  and  is  regardless  of  the
        prominence of the profile in this country.

        6. A person who has a profile of voicing opposition to the  Burmese
        government in the United Kingdom can expect to  be  monitored  upon
        return  by  the  Burmese  authorities.   The  intensity   of   that
        monitoring will in general depend upon  the  extent  of  opposition
        activity abroad.

        7. Whether there is a  real  risk  that  monitoring  will  lead  to
        detention following return will in each case depend on the  Burmese
        authorities' view of the information it already  possesses  coupled
        with what it receives as the result of any post-arrival monitoring.
         Their view will be shaped by (i) how active the person had been in
        the United  Kingdom,  for  example  by  leading  demonstrations  or
        becoming a prominent voice in political meetings, (ii) what  he/she
        did before leaving Burma, (iii) what that person  does  on  return,
        (iv)the profile of the people he or she mixes with and (v)  whether
        a person is of an ethnicity that is seen by the government to be de-
        stabilising the union, or if the person's activity  is  of  a  kind
        that has an ethnic, geo-political or economic  regional  component,
        which is regarded by the Burmese government as a sensitive issue.

        8. It is someone's profile in the eyes of the state that is the key
        to determining risk.  The more the person  concerned  maintains  an
        active political profile in Burma,  post-return,  the  greater  the
        risk of significant monitoring, carrying with it  a  real  risk  of
        detention.

        9. In general, none of the risks  identified  above  is  reasonably
        likely to arise if an individual's international prominence is very
        high.  The evidence shows that the  government  is  keen  to  avoid
        adverse publicity resulting from the detention  of  internationally
        well-known activists.

        10.      In the light of these conclusions, TL  and  Others  (Burma
        CG) [2009] UKAIT 00017 can no  longer  be  relied  on  for  Country
        Guidance.   The  issue  of  illegal  exit  and   its   consequences
        considered in HM (risk  factors  for  Burmese  Citizens)  Burma  CG
        [2006] UKAIT 00012 were  not  addressed  by  the  parties  and  the
        guidance in that decision remains in force for the time being.

        11.      There is evidence of positive changes in  Burma  which  as
        they become embedded may result in the need for the present country
        guidance to be revisited by the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  short  to
        medium term."

  20. There have undoubtedly been  widely  publicised  positive  changes  in
      Burma since the guidance issued in TS, after a hearing in March  2013.
      This was  foreshadowed  at  [11]  of  the  TS  headnote.   Mr  McVeety
      submitted that the change was now so embedded, that the guidance in TS
      no longer applied.  To make good that proposition  Mr  McVeety  relied
      entirely upon the 2017 CPIN.  Mr Markus invited me to find that  there
      was an absence of cogent evidence to justify not applying the guidance
      in TS.

Country guidance legal framework

  21. DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT
      148 (IAC) makes it clear that a judge may depart from existing country
      guidance in the circumstances described in (i) Practice Direction 12.2
      and 12.4 and (ii) the UT (IAC) Guidance Note  2011,  no.  2,  entitled
      'Reporting Decisions of the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber' paragraphs 11 and 12, which I set out below.

  22. Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 states as follows:


           "12.2       A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT or
           IAT  bearing  the  letters  'CG'  shall   be   treated   as   an
           authoritative finding on the country guidance  issue  identified
           in the determination, based upon the evidence before the members
           of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that determine  the  appeal.
           As a result, unless it has been expressly superseded or replaced
           by any later 'CG' determination, or is inconsistent  with  other
           authority that is  binding  on  the  Tribunal,  such  a  country
           guidance case is authority in any subsequent appeal  so  far  as
           that appeal:-


              a. relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
              b. depends upon the same or similar evidence.

           12.4  Because of the principle that like cases should be treated
           in like manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
           applicable country guidance case or to  show  why  it  does  not
           apply to the case in  question  is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
           grounds for appeal on a point of law."


  23. In the UT Guidance Note 2011 No 2, at paragraph 11, it is stated:


           "If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue  that
           has not been considered in the country guidance case  or,  if  a
           subsequent case includes  further  issues  that  have  not  been
           considered in the CG case, the judge will reach the  appropriate
           conclusion on the evidence, taking into account  the  conclusion
           in the CG case so far as it remains relevant."


  24. And at paragraph 12:


           "Where  country  guidance  has  become  outdated  by  reason  of
           developments in the country in question, it is anticipated  that
           a judge of the First-tier Tribunal will have such credible fresh
           evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above."

  25. The UT made the following observation in DSG at [26]:


           "A  country  guidance  case  retains  its  status  until  either
           overturned by a higher court or replaced by  subsequent  country
           guidance.  However, as this case shows, country  guidance  cases
           are not set in stone (see also HS (Burma) [2013] EWCA Civ 67),
           and a judge may depart from existing  country  guidance  in  the
           circumstances  described  in  the  Practice  Direction  and  the
           Chamber Guidance Note.  That does not amount  to  carte  blanche
           for judges to depart from country guidance as it  is  necessary,
           in the wording of the Practice Direction to show why it does not
           apply to the case in question.  In SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA  Civ
           940, the Court of Appeal made it clear, at  paragraph  47,  that
           decision makers and tribunal judges are required to take country
           guidance determinations into account, and to follow them  unless
           very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence,  are  adduced,
           justifying their not doing so.  To do otherwise will  amount  to
           an error of law."


  26. In KS (Burma) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 67, in the course of  considering
      and approving of the country  guidance  system  employed  by  the  UT,
      Maurice Kay LJ said this at [20]:

           "The important point is that when there is a challenge on  legal
           grounds to  country  guidance,  either  directly  or,  as  here,
           indirectly, the guidance is subjected to rigorous scrutiny.  The
           Court will need to satisfy itself that the  particular  part  of
           the guidance that is being called into question was the  subject
           of evidence that was properly evaluated, after full argument, by
           the UT, whether or not it applied strictly to the  appellant  or
           appellants before it."

  27. Where, as here, one party seeks to challenge the continued validity of
      country guidance, it is  similarly  important  that  the  evidence  is
      properly evaluated and subjected to rigorous  scrutiny,  and  this  is
      what I have sought to do.


Evidence relied upon by the SSHD

  28. The 2017 CPIN presents a  mixed  picture  for  those  involved  in  or
      perceived to be involved  in  political  activities  critical  of  the
      government.  The position is summarised at 2.2.1-2.2.3 as follows:

        "2.2.1   Since the change from military rule to a civilian
        government in March 2016, there is a growing tolerance of diversity
        of political opinion, freedom of association, and improvements in
        freedom of the press and internet based expression. There are some
        concerns about the ongoing restrictions on the exercise of the
        rights to freedoms of expression, association and assembly; and the
        continuing intimidation, harassment and arrest of real or perceived
        critics of the government. Broad reforms have resulted in the
        release of thousands of political prisoners (see Political reform,
        Political affiliation including Political prisoners, Freedom of
        association and assembly, and Freedom of speech and media).


        2.2.2 Furthermore, authorisation to exit Burma, in the form of a "D-
        form", is no longer required. Therefore, a person  who  left  Burma
        "illegally" is no longer at real risk of imprisonment on return  to
        Burma  unless  that  person  is  returned  without  a  passport  or
        Certificate of Identity issued by the relevant Burma  Embassy  (see
        Entering and exiting Burma).


        2.2.3 The Home Office's view is that these significant and  durable
        changes to Burma's governance and exit/entry procedures amounts  to
        strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence  to  depart  from  the
        findings in TS (Political opponents -risk) Burma/Myanmar CG  [2013]
        UKUT 281 (IAC) (25 June 2013), and HM  (Risk  factors  for  Burmese
        citizens) Burma CG [2006] UKAIT 00012 (23 January 2006), which were
        based explicitly on conditions under the previous  military  junta.
        Therefore, the Country Guidance in TS and HM should  no  longer  be
        followed by decision makers."


  29. The 2017 CPIN goes on to set out the SSHD's views as to why  a  person
      is unlikely to be at risk for voicing their political views and  /  or
      attending demonstrations at 2.2.4-7, before  outlining  the  political
      developments and changes in Burma at sections  5  and  6.   Under  the
      heading 'political reform' reference is made at 5.1.3 to what  the  UN
      Secretary General described as  "a  major  transformation"  in  Burma,
      which has seen  "significant  progress  made  in  the  reform  of  its
      political and economic institutions, as well as in its opening  up  to
      the outside world".

Evidence relied upon by the appellant
  30. Mr Markus wholly acknowledged the positive political  developments  in
      Burma but submitted that much of the evidence referred to  within  the
      2017 CPIN supports the appellant's case that that there has  not  been
      sufficiently fundamental or durable changes to the way  in  which  the
      Burmese authorities treat those who are regarded  as  critics  of  the
      government.

  31. It is an uncontested fact  that  the  National  League  for  Democracy
      ('NLD'), led by Aung San Suu Kyi, won a landslide victory in elections
      on 8 November  2015.   However,  the  military  continues  to  play  a
      significant role in  the  government.   Under  the  constitution,  the
      military  holds  25%  of  seats,  maintaining  control  over  security
      ministries and Suu Kyi is precluded from taking the  presidency.   The
      2017  CPIN  acknowledges  that  the  military  continues  to   operate
      autonomously of Burma's elected establishment (see 5.2.1-2) and quotes
      from extensive sources to the following effect:  significant  progress
      has been made on human  rights  but  there  continue  to  be  concerns
      relating to civil and political rights  -  see  5.1.1,  5.1.3,  5.2.4,
      5.2.5.   At  6.1.4-5,  the  2017  CPIN  quotes  from  the   Australian
      Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Country Information Report for
      Burma dated 10 January 2017 ('the 2017 DFAT report') as follows:
           "Nonetheless, some laws restricting political  activism  remain,
           and protesters have continued to be  arrested,  including  since
           the NLD came  to  power...[I]n  the  course  of  normal  events,
           Myanmar citizens  face  a  low  risk  of  official  or  societal
           harassment, discrimination,  violence  or  imprisonment  on  the
           basis of their actual or imputed political opinion.  People  who
           actively participate in public protests against  the  government
           or the military face a  moderate  risk  of  being  arrested  and
           detained. Given the NLD government only assumed power  in  March
           2016, it is unclear at this  stage  whether  those  detained  in
           these circumstances will typically be released more quickly than
           under the previous government.
  32. The 2017 CPIN also quotes from the Human Rights Watch  Report  'Burma:
      Don't Prosecute  Peaceful  Speech  -  Government  Failing  to  Protect
      Critics from Arrest, Jail' dated 24 January 2017 at 6.1.7 in which  it
      is said that during the government's first  year  there  has  been  an
      escalation in prosecutions of peaceful  political  speech.   Following
      her visit in January 2017 the UN Special Rapporteur on  the  situation
      of human rights in Burma issued a report dated 1 March  2017,  wherein
      she  noted  the  pervasive  and  extensive  fears  of  reprisals   for
      criticising the government - see 6.1.9 of the 2017  CPIN.   Monitoring
      and surveillance of critics of the government and those  perceived  to
      be critics remain - see 6.2.1-6.3.4.  Ex-political prisoners have been
      subject to close monitoring upon release.  In her report dated 8 March
      2016 the UN Special Rapporteur expressed concern at continued  reports
      of civil society actors being monitored by military  intelligence  and
      the Special Branch Police, including being followed  and  photographed
      at  meetings  whilst  their  families,  friends  and  colleagues  were
      questioned on their whereabouts.  Concern was also expressed about the
      "...continuing  application  of  problematic  legal  provisions  (both
      historic and recently-enacted) to arrest, prosecute, and convict civil
      society   actors,   journalists,   and   human   rights    defenders,"
      particularly,  regarding  freedom  of  association  and  assembly  and
      continued monitoring and surveillance of civil society  actors  -  see
      6.2.1-2.  Political prisoners  have  been  released  but  many  remain
      imprisoned or detained pending trial - see 6.33-4.
Expert evidence

  33. Mr Markus also relied upon a country  expert  report  prepared  by  Dr
      Zarni dated 10 August 2017.  Dr Zarni's qualifications and  experience
      are set out in TS at [21].  The UT considered  him  well-qualified  to
      speak about matters in Burma  at  [63]  but  questioned  the  academic
      rigour with which he has approached the task before him  at  [66]  and
      [75].  The UT nonetheless accepted his evidence that the sophisticated
      state intelligence network had not been dismantled in Burma and  those
      who demonstrate against the government and are involved  in  political
      opposition in the UK is fed back  to  senior  officers  in  Burma  for
      assessment - [81-2].


  34. In his 2017 report Dr Zarni sets out  the  political  developments  in
      Burma after the elections but also describes the use  of  broad  anti-
      defamation laws to target those critical of  the  government  together
      with a continuation of the "old  pattern"  of  curtailing  freedom  of
      speech.  Dr Zarni acknowledges that there was a period of time  up  to
      March 2016 when the government made efforts to reach  out  to  Burmese
      living abroad but that this "new found tolerance and cooperation"  has
      been "closed off".    Dr Zarni's 2017 report suffers  from  a  similar
      absence of academic rigour to that observed in  TS.   Aspects  of  his
      analysis  are  generalised  and  unsupported  by  clear  examples   or
      evidence.   Dr  Zarni's  conclusion  that  there  remain   significant
      concerns  together  with  the   continued   extensive   human   rights
      violations, notwithstanding the changes in the political landscape, is
      however  entirely  consistent  with  the  majority  of   the   country
      background  evidence.   Importantly,  Dr  Zarni  emphasises   that   a
      significant aspect of his evidence accepted in TS, continues to  apply
      to the current regime: the sophisticated  state  intelligence  network
      operating outside and inside Burma has not been dismantled -  see  [23
      to 26] of the 2017 report.
UN Special Rapporteur
  35. The UT in TS attached significant weight to the evidence  provided  in
      the 2013 report from the UN Special Rapporteur at [74-76].  The report
      from the UN Special Rapporteur  dated  1  March  2017  summarises  the
      progress that has been made but describes the human rights  challenges
      as "formidable".  The UN Special Rapporteur acknowledges  the  strides
      taken in opening up the democratic space but considers the country  to
      still be without a truly civilian government.  Whilst  much  attention
      is placed on the serious human rights violations against  the  Rohinga
      (at [72-76]), the UN Special Rapporteur  remains  concerned  regarding
      wider human rights abuses including, the  application  of  problematic
      legal provisions, particularly  in  politically  sensitive  cases  and
      noted that 170 prisoners remain imprisoned for  peacefully  exercising
      their rights to freedom  of  opinion  and  assembly.  The  conclusions
      reached paint a stark picture, that  is  probably  gloomier  than  the
      previous report:
           "82.  It has been almost one year since the new Government  came
           to power. The  Special  Rapporteur  has  already  noted  in  her
           previous report the formidable human rights challenges it  faces
           while simultaneously having to navigate and direct a bureaucracy
           carried over from the previous Government,  as  well  as  govern
           within the constraints of a Constitutional framework which gives
           precedence to military prominence over civilian  authority.  She
           recalls that the consolidation of democracy and the creation  of
           a culture of respect for human rights is a  complex  undertaking
           that requires political will and  sustained  investment  in  not
           just  enhancing  the  functioning   and   integrity   of   State
           institutions but also their accountability.
           83. While improvements have been seen in some areas and some are
           making clear efforts, as the Special Rapporteur reflected  after
           her  recent  visit,  many  ordinary  people  in   Myanmar   have
           unfortunately begun to lose hope that the  new  Government  will
           address their needs and concerns. That is undoubtedly  at  least
           partially due to the continued impunity enjoyed by the  military
           and other security forces and their  dominant  position  in  the
           Government. Trust that was placed in the new civilian leadership
           has started to wane  with  repeated  incidents  that  carry  the
           hallmarks  of  the  previous  Government.   Where   abuses   and
           violations are suspected, the Government appears quick to resort
           to its standard position of "defend, deny and dismiss".
           84. Addressing the apparent climate of impunity  will  be  vital
           for the new Government moving forward. Impunity  arises  from  a
           failure by States to  meet  related  obligations,  including  to
           investigate violations; take appropriate measures in respect  of
           the perpetrators by ensuring that those  suspected  of  criminal
           responsibility are prosecuted, tried and duly punished;  provide
           victims with effective remedies; and take other necessary  steps
           to prevent reprisals by those implicated in alleged  abuses  and
           violations.
           85. Currently, existing policies, laws and avenues  for  redress
           appear to favour those in positions of power rather than  ensure
           that  everyone  is  equal  before  the  law  and  has  an  equal
           opportunity  to  have  legitimate  grievances  addressed.   Laws
           continue to be misused to  stifle  freedom  of  association  and
           assembly, and to subvert  freedom  of  opinion  and  expression.
           Individuals who have lived on land for generations  continue  to
           face eviction without proper safeguards for projects that  bring
           them little or no benefits. Conflict, which continues to have  a
           devastating effect on civilians, sometimes appears to be focused
           around resource-rich areas or near lucrative projects.
           86.  The  Special  Rapporteur  reminds  the  Government  of  the
           distinction between rule of law and rule  by  law,  as  far  too
           often issues of concern are explained away as having been  dealt
           with "according to the law". Too often also cases of abuses  and
           serious, even grave, human rights  violations  that  potentially
           involve the State  as  the  perpetrators,  are  closed  with  no
           explanation or dealt  with  in  secrecy  under  the  pretext  of
           national security. Alternatively, a plethora  of  committees  or
           commissions are set up to tackle the same issue with duplicative
           mandates,   insufficient   guarantees   of   independence    and
           impartiality, and confusing, inconclusive and delayed  outcomes.
           Where the State is unable  to  discharge  its  primary  duty  of
           investigating violations, taking  appropriate  measures  against
           perpetrators and providing victims with effective  remedies,  it
           must seek assistance to do so. When it is unwilling  to  do  so,
           the international community must step in and step up."
Assessment of the background evidence post-TS
  36. The UT in TS was in no doubt at [77]  that  significant  progress  had
      been made to address human rights abuses.  The UT also acknowledged at
      [78] that the positive changes might become sufficiently  embedded  to
      warrant a re-examination of the country guidance on  Burma.   Positive
      changes have undoubtedly continued after TS,  most  notably  the  2015
      elections themselves, but as the UN Special Rapporteur put it  in  her
      August 2016 report:
           "92. The Special Rapporteur welcomes the Government's commitment
           to furthering democratic  transition,  national  reconciliation,
           sustainable development  and  peace,  and  the  important  steps
           already taken in this regard. However, Myanmar's young democracy
           can only progress if human rights are fully integrated into  its
           institutional, legal and policy framework. Building a culture of
           respect for human rights must be  a  priority  now  and  in  the
           future.
           93. After the euphoria following the elections, the  reality  of
           the wide-ranging challenges facing the new  Government  has  not
           significantly dampened the sense of hope  for  change.  It  will
           therefore be the key test for this Government to  capitalize  on
           its overwhelming public support and  current  momentum  to  make
           progress in human rights priorities and further reforms."
  37. The UN Special Rapporteur's 2017  report  makes  it  clear  that  many
      challenges remain and respect for human rights has not been integrated
      into Burma's institutional, legal and policy framework. The UN Special
      Rapporteur also explains that the military retains dominant  influence
      within  the  government  and  human  rights  abuses  continue  to   be
      perpetrated with impunity.  The UN Special Rapporteur is  not  a  lone
      voice - her assessment is consistent with the conclusions  reached  by
      Dr Zarni, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch.
   38.      I now turn to the terms of the Practice Direction  and  Guidance
      Note on country guidance decisions.    TS is authority in this  appeal
      in so far as it (a) relates to the country guidance issue in  question
      and (b) depends on the same or similar evidence.  This case raises the
      issue of how the appellant,  a  government  critic  is  likely  to  be
      treated upon return to Burma.  That is the same broad issue of concern
      in TS.  The evidence in this case is obviously not  the  same  as  the
      evidence before TS.  Not only is the evidence  updated  by  over  four
      years, but there have been significant and  wide-ranging  developments
      in Burma as a consequence of its  move  toward  democracy.    However,
      having carefully scrutinised the evidence before me, in particular the
      reports of the UN Special Rapporteur and the 2017  CPIN  (which  as  I
      have  said  cross-references  to  extensive  and  wide-ranging  source
      materials), as to how government critics are treated in  Burma,  I  am
      satisfied that the evidence is to similar effect to that available  to
      TS.


   39.      First, a wide variety of sources, as set out above, support  the
      broad proposition that those who engage in activity  critical  of  the
      Burmese government continue to  face  a  real  risk  of  surveillance,
      monitoring and detention, such that the guidance in TS  has  not  been
      shown to have been overtaken by events in Burma.  As Dr Zarni noted in
      his 2017 report, a number of credible publications  outside  of  Burma
      have documented a soaring in prosecutions for allegedly  defaming  the
      government.  The 2017 DFAT report quantifies the risk  of  people  who
      actively participate in public  protests  against  the  government  or
      military to face a moderate risk of arrest and detention.
  40. Second, there continue to  be  links  between  a  sophisticated  human
      intelligence network and the military.  There is no evidence that  the
      sophisticated  state  intelligence  network   has   been   dismantled,
      particularly  given   the   military's   significant   influence   and
      involvement in the executive and parliament.  Indeed, the  UN  Special
      Rapporteur continued to express concern at continued reports of  civil
      society actors being  monitored  by  military  intelligence  including
      being followed and photographed at  meetings  whilst  their  families,
      friends and colleagues were questioned about their whereabouts.

  41. Third, the UT in TS was particularly concerned about the  practice  of
      torture in  detention  in  Burma.   This  has  not  been  specifically
      addressed by the UN  Special  Rapporteur  in  relation  to  government
      critics outside of armed conflict.  Dr Zarni's evidence  continues  to
      point to the risk of ill-treatment  in  detention,  in  incidents  not
      related to armed conflict and a  continued  culture  of  impunity  for
      perpetrators, as does the US Department of State's 2016 Country Report
      on Human Rights Practice in Burma dated 3 March 2017.  The guidance in
      TS that there remains a risk of torture and / or serious ill-treatment
      during short detentions remains appropriate.

  42. Having  considered  all  the  relevant  updated  evidence,  I  am  not
      satisfied that the changes to the political landscape in the aftermath
      of the elections have led to any fundamental change  in  the  approach
      toward critics of the government  by  the  Burmese  authorities.   The
      situation remains similar to the assessment in TS at [78]  that:  "the
      reforms and improvements to the human rights have not yet reached root
      and branch level such that those who voice opposition  to  the  regime
      are  free  to  do  so  confidently  without  risk  of   discriminatory
      interference by the state with  potentially  severe  consequences  for
      some at present".

  43. It follows that I do not accept the SSHD's submission  to  the  effect
      that there are sufficiently significant and durable changes to Burma's
      governance and approach to government critics, that the guidance in TS
      should be departed from.   In  short,  there  is  insufficient  cogent
      evidence available to justify not following the  country  guidance  in
      TS, and the updated country background evidence continues  to  support
      that guidance.
Findings of fact and application of TS
   43.      The findings of fact made by the second FTT have been  expressly
      preserved.  When reaching my own findings of fact on the evidence post-
      dating that decision, I have taken these findings into account as well
      as the adverse factual findings made by the first FTT.  I have had the
      benefit of assessing considerably more evidence stretching  over  many
      years, than the first FTT.  I have taken into account the  appellant's
      evidence before me together with the photographic and other supporting
      documentary evidence.  Having  considered  all  the  evidence  in  the
      round, I make the findings set out below.

  44. As set out in TS, whether there is a real risk  that  monitoring  will
      lead to detention following return, will in each case  depend  on  the
      Burmese authorities' view of the  information  it  already  possesses,
      coupled with what it  receives  as  the  result  of  any  post-arrival
      monitoring.  Their view will be shaped by a number of factors, which I
      address in turn, before considering on  a  cumulative  basis.  I  have
      considered the guidance in TS on the basis that the appellant will  be
      returned to Burma, and for these purposes any failure on the  part  of
      the Burmese Embassy to provide him with a passport  or  CoI  does  not
      arise - see the SSHD's letter  dated  3  August  2017  that  emergency
      travel documents have been in use since March 2017 and the appellant's
      acceptance of this in  Mr  Markus's  skeleton  argument  at  paragraph
      17(a).

   How active the person  had  been  in  the  UK,  for  example  by  leading
   demonstrations or becoming a prominent voice in political meetings

  45. Despite not being politically active in Burma prior to his arrival  in
      the  UK,  the  appellant  has  taken  an  active  role   in   numerous
      demonstrations outside the Burmese Embassy and elsewhere from 2010  to
      2017, including making and holding  placards/banners/flags  and  using
      the megaphone to shout slogans.  This claim is supported  by  numerous
      photographs.  These demonstrations were small  and  the  appellant  is
      easily identifiable.

  46. The appellant has shown  commitment  to  demonstrating  and  political
      activism in the UK over an extended period of time.  I accept that his
      motivation is genuine.  The appellant  finds  it  difficult  attending
      demonstrations in London due to the costs involved in travelling  from
      his home in Manchester but nevertheless  manages  to  attend  as  many
      demonstrations as he is  able  to.   In  2016  and  2017  he  attended
      approximately  six  demonstrations.   I  note  that  when  considering
      matters in 2010, the first FTT did not consider the appellant to  have
      attended demonstrations out of any genuine commitment but in order  to
      bolster a weak asylum claim.  My findings are different but are  based
      upon an additional  six  years  of  activities  on  the  part  of  the
      appellant.  Of course, it  is  not  necessary  for  the  appellant  to
      establish that his  attendance  at  demonstrations  was  motivated  by
      genuine commitment, if he is at real risk upon return by reason of his
      participation alone.  However, the genuineness of  his  commitment  to
      demonstrating in the UK is relevant to my  assessment  of  how  he  is
      likely to behave if returned to Burma.

  47. During the course of cross-examination, the appellant claimed that  he
      played a role in organising the demonstrations.   I  accept  that  the
      appellant is genuinely committed to the political causes that  he  has
      been and continues to be involved in.  I also accept that he played  a
      role in motivating others to attend demonstrations but that  his  role
      was limited to this.  The appellant was  unable  to  cogently  explain
      what he did to organise the demonstrations beyond  encouraging  others
      to attend.

  48. I accept that the appellant became a member of the Burmese  Democratic
      Movement Association ('BDMA') in 2011 but this ceased to  exist  after
      its main organiser was detained upon arrival  in  Burma  in  2014.   I
      accept that whilst the BDMA's activities were reducing, the  appellant
      became  involved  in  '88  New  Generation  Students'.   This  is   an
      organisation  committed  to  full  civilian  rule.   The   appellant's
      membership of  these  organisations  is  corroborated  by  letters  of
      support from the organisations themselves.

  49. The appellant has therefore been active  in  attending  demonstrations
      outside the Burmese Embassy over an extended period of time.   He  has
      not played any obvious leading role at the demonstrations and does not
      have a high profile but has on a few occasions played a prominent role
      at the demonstrations, and this is reasonably likely to  be  known  to
      the authorities.  The appellant has not  been  a  prominent  voice  at
      political meetings but has  attended  many  meetings  affiliated  with
      activities in opposition to the Burmese military and continues to be a
      member of an organisation critical  of  the  current  regime.      The
      appellant has demonstrated real  commitment  to  political  causes  he
      genuinely believes in, and the stamina  to  commit  to  this  over  an
      extended period of time.

  50. As Dr Zarni is recorded to  have  noted  in  TS,  whilst  protests  by
      overseas communities in front of diplomatic posts do  not  immediately
      threaten to destabilise or  disrupt  the  military  controlled  social
      order inside Burma, these protest demonstrations are usually  headline
      news, the impact amongst the Burmese public  is  significant  and  for
      that reason the government disproportionately views  transmitted  news
      of protests in front of its embassies  abroad  and  other  direct  and
      practical instigations as having a contagious impact.

Activities before leaving Burma

  51. I have  assessed  risk  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  was  not
      politically active until after his arrival in the  UK,  in  accordance
      with the findings of the first FTT.

Activities on return to Burma

  52. The appellant's motivation and commitment is unlikely to change if  he
      is returned to Burma.  He will have been in  the  UK  for  over  seven
      years having grown accustomed to openly expressing his views, over  an
      extended period of time.  I accept that he  is  committed  to  lasting
      change in Burma based upon a fully civilian government.  The appellant
      has carefully explained why he  believes  that  deeper  constitutional
      change is necessary so as to ensure less military  power  and  greater
      rights for minorities.   His activities critical of the government are
      reasonably likely to continue in Burma.

The profile of the people he mixes with

  53. The appellant has been seen publicly in the company  of  a  well-known
      activists, known to and regarded adversely by the Burmese authorities:
      Ko Aung and Dr Sein Win.  I accept that on occasion the appellant  has
      been seen with and as supporting higher profile critics of the Burmese
      government.

Whether a person is of an ethnicity that is seen by the government to be de-
stabilising the union, or if the person's activity is of a kind that has  an
ethnic, geo-political or economic regional component, which is  regarded  by
the Burmese government as a sensitive issue.

  54. The appellant is of mixed Shan and Mon ethnicity.  His  activities  in
      the UK have had an ethnic component and he is staunchly anti-military.
      He is committed to resolving  the  problems  caused  by  the  military
      targeting  the  Shan  and  other  minorities.   These  activities  are
      reasonably likely to continue in Burma.  This continues to be regarded
      as a sensitive issue by the Burmese government.  According to the 2016
      USDOS report,  "tension  between  the  military  and  ethnic  minority
      populations,  whilst  somewhat  diminished  in  areas  with  ceasefire
      agreements, remained high".

Cumulative assessment of prospective risk

  55. The  appellant  has  been  able  to  credibly  demonstrate  a  genuine
      political profile critical of the Burmese government both  before  and
      after the elections, whilst in the UK, and an intention to protest and
      demonstrate on return on matters regarded by the  Burmese  authorities
      to be politically sensitive and  controversial.  The  authorities  are
      reasonably likely to know about him; it is not reasonably likely  that
      he will be detained  on  arrival  at  the  airport,  but  he  will  be
      monitored and, as he progresses politically in Burma, it is reasonably
      likely that he will be seen as vexing the authorities by espousing the
      causes he particularly believes in - minority rights and full civilian
      rule.  When all the risk factors are considered  cumulatively,  it  is
      reasonably likely that after a period of monitoring the appellant will
      be detained for questioning and will be in need of protection.

HM country guidance

  56. The headnote in HM sets out the following:

           "The following comprise general guidelines in assessing risk  on
      return to Burma of a Burmese citizen:

                    1. A Burmese citizen who has left Burma illegally is  in
                       general  at  real  risk  on  return   to   Burma   of
                       imprisonment  in  conditions  which  are   reasonably
                       likely to violate his rights under Article 3  of  the
                       ECHR.  Exit will be illegal where it is done  without
                       authorisation from the Burmese  authorities,  however
                       obtained, and will include travel  to  a  country  to
                       which the person concerned was not permitted to go by
                       the terms of an authorised exit. We  consider  it  is
                       proper to infer this conclusion from  the  effect  in
                       the Van Tha case of the employment of Article 5(j) of
                       the Burma Emergency Act 1950, either on the basis  of
                       the application of that Article in that case or  also
                       as a consequence of a breach of the exit requirements
                       we have set out in paragraph 83.


                    2. A Burmese citizen is in general at real risk of  such
                       imprisonment if he is  returned  to  Burma  from  the
                       United Kingdom without being in possession of a valid
                       Burmese passport.


                    3. It is not reasonably likely that a Burmese citizen in
                       the United Kingdom will be issued with a passport  by
                       the Burmese authorities in London, unless he is  able
                       to present to the Embassy an expired passport in  his
                       name.


                    4.  If  it  comes  to  the  attention  of  the   Burmese
                       authorities that a person falling within (1)  or  (2)
                       is a failed asylum seeker, that is reasonably  likely
                       to have a significant effect upon the length  of  the
                       prison sentence imposed for his illegal  exit  and/or
                       entry. To  return  such  a  person  from  the  United
                       Kingdom would accordingly be a breach of  Article  33
                       of the Refugee Convention.  Whether that  fact  would
                       come to the attention of the authorities will need to
                       be determined on the facts of  the  particular  case,
                       bearing in mind that the person is highly  likely  to
                       be interrogated on return.


                    5. It has not been shown that a person who does not fall
                       within  (1)  or  (2)  above  faces  a  real  risk  of
                       persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on  return  to
                       Burma by reason  of  having  claimed  asylum  in  the
                       United Kingdom, even if the Burmese authorities  have
                       reason to believe that he  has  made  such  a  claim,
                       unless the authorities have reason to regard him as a
                       political opponent."

  57. Given the findings I have reached in relation to  the  application  of
      TS, it is not necessary for me to assess whether the appellant  is  at
      risk by reason of the Burmese Embassy refusing to grant him a  CoI  or
      passport.  Both representatives focused their attention  on  TS.   The
      letter from the Embassy dated 30 June 2017, submitted by the SSHD, and
      supported by a witness statement from Ms Vigor from the SSHD's  Return
      Logistics unit, does not take the matter much further.  This states:

                 "We issue  the  passport  or  certificate  of  identity  to
                 someone who can firmly  prove  that  he/she  is  a  Myanmar
                 national with proper documents but only on the approval  of
                 the concerned Ministry of  Home  Affairs  and  Ministry  of
                 Labour, Immigration and Population of Myanmar".

      This offers  no  indication  of  the  requirements  necessary  for  an
      application to be successfully "approved" by the Ministry.

  58. In her written submissions the SSHD asserted that "all Burma nationals
      are issued with a Certificate of Identity  in  lieu  of  a  passport".
      This proposition is unsupported by cogent evidence  and  difficult  to
      reconcile with the 30 July 2017 letter, which  implies  that  even  if
      Burmese identity / nationality is confirmed, a CoI will only be issued
      on the approval  of  the  relevant  Ministry.   Under  Burma's  quasi-
      parliamentary system of government one quarter of parliamentary  seats
      go to active duty military appointees.  As noted at 5.2.1 of the  2017
      CPIN, the military continues to head the ministries of  defence,  home
      affairs and border affairs.

  59. Matters seem to have moved on since HM.  First, there is now provision
      for a CoI to be issued in lieu of a passport, albeit  both  appear  to
      require the relevant Ministry's approval.  Second, and in  any  event,
      HM is predicated  upon  the  acceptance  that  those  who  left  Burma
      illegally are in general prosecuted and  detained  but  the  provision
      rendering illegal departure a criminal offence has not  been  enforced
      in recent years, according to 10.4.5 of the 2017  CPIN,  quoting  from
      the 2017 DFAT report.

  60. I did not hear full argument on these matters, and as the appeal  must
      be allowed on a separate point it is not appropriate or necessary  for
      me to address the guidance in HM in any further detail, save to  state
      the following:

        a. Whilst I accept that the appellant attended the Burmese  Embassy
           on 5 April 2017 with a view to trying  to  evidence  his  belief
           that the authorities would not provide him with a new  passport,
           I do not accept that reliance can be placed  upon  the  evidence
           that an employee at the Embassy told him that as  a  person  who
           claimed asylum, his passport will not be renewed.  The  evidence
           as to who said this and the surrounding circumstances is  vague.
           The appellant does not know the name of the  individual  or  his
           job title.  The appellant has not been able to  explain  how  he
           was able to see someone so quickly, when the Embassy was closed,
           and when he did not  have  an  appointment.   A  friend  who  is
           recognised as a refugee from Burma, accompanied the appellant to
           the Embassy but has not explained how he knew the  name  of  the
           individual at the Embassy they spoke to, but not  his  rank.   I
           note that there are witness statements  from  others,  who  have
           explained what happened when they attended  the  Embassy.   They
           did not attend the Tribunal in order to  provide  oral  evidence
           and do not give any detailed information about  the  person  who
           refused to renew their respective passports.

        b. In any event, matters appear to have moved  on:  the  2017  DFDL
           report makes it clear that  a  person  may  now  lawfully  enter
           Burma, with a passport or a CoI - see the 2017 CPIN at 10.4.3-4.



        c. The evidence  before  me  indicates  that  the  guidance  in  HM
           probably requires updating.

Decision

  61. I remake the decision by allowing the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention
      grounds.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the original first Appellant in this  determination  identified  as
OO.



Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Plimmer

Dated: 4 January 2018 but amended on 26 January 2018 pursuant to rule 42 of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to include an anonymity
order



                                 Appendix A
1.  Human  Rights  Watch:  "They  can  arrest  you   at   any   time",   The
criminalisation of peaceful expression in Burma, June 2016
2. Human Rights Watch Annual Reports for 2016 and 2017
3. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the  situation  of  human  rights  in
Myanmar, 29 August 2016
4. BBC news -  Amnesty  accuses  Myanmar  of  crimes  against  humanity,  19
December 2016
5. The Guardian - Free Speech curtailed in Aung San  Suu  Kyi's  Myanmar  as
prosecutions soar, 10 January 2017
6. NY Times - Brazen killing of Myanmar lawyer came after  he  sparred  with
the military, 2 February 2017
7. US Country Report on human rights practices 2016 - Burma, 3 March 2017
8. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the  situation  of  human  rights  in
Myanmar, 14 March 2017
9. The Guardian - Myanmar's great hope fails to live up to expectations,  31
March 2017
10. Country Policy and Information Note, Burma: Critics of  the  Government,
Version 2.0, March 2017


