
MO (Date of decision: applicable rules) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00057

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 17 October 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Freeman
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr D Krushner, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

The Immigration Rules applicable to an  immigration  decision  are,  in  the
absence of transitional provisions or any contrary  legitimate  expectation,
the rules in force at the date of the decision.  Nathwani [1979-80]  Imm  AR
9 remains good law.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She came to the United  Kingdom
    in September 2005 for a two months clinical attachment.  She  undertook
    a further clinical attachment and in January 2006 received confirmation
    that the basic surgical training she had received was, in the  view  of
    the  UK's  Postgraduate   Medical   Education   and   Training   Board,
    "acceptable".  She then applied for leave to remain as  a  postgraduate
    doctor.  That application was made on 17 January 2006, at  which  time,
    pursuant to the provisions of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules HC 299, which came into effect on 19 July 2005, a person who  had
    only an overseas medical degree  was,  subject  to  other  requirements
    including registration with the General Medical  Council,  eligible  to
    apply for an extension of leave as a postgraduate  doctor  or  dentist.
    On 3 April 2006 there  was  a  further  radical  restructuring  of  the
    Immigration Rules in this area, by Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules HC 1016, which came into force on that date.  One of the  changes
    was that in future a person could not have leave to enter or remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a postgraduate doctor or dentist unless he

      "has successfully completed and obtained a recognised  UK  degree  in
        medicine or dentistry from either:


          a)  a  UK  publicly  funded  institution  or  further  or   higher
             education, or
          b) a UK bona fide private education  institution  which  maintains
             satisfactory records of enrolment and attendance."

 2. Under the Rules as amended the appellant has no claim to  an  extension
    of leave, because she has no UK degree.  The Secretary  of  State  made
    his decision on the appellant's  application  on  26  April  2006.   He
    refused it.  The refusal is in short form, but it is clear that it  was
    motivated by the Rules are they were on the date he made his  decision.



 3. The appellant appealed against the refusal to an Immigration Judge, who
    held, following HS [2005] UKAIT 00169, a  decision  of  this  Tribunal,
    that the Secretary of State was right to apply the Rules as  they  were
    at the time of his decision and that the appellant had no right to have
    her application decided according to the Rules as they were at the date
    the application was made.  The appellant sought and obtained  an  Order
    for Reconsideration.  Thus the matter comes before us.

 4. There were human rights issues raised  in  the  appellant's  Notice  of
    Appeal.  They were dealt with by the Immigration Judge on the basis  of
    JM * [2006] UKAIT 00009 and have not been argued or reserved before us.
     We mentioned them for two reasons only.  One is that it  appears  that
    their having been raised means that the appellant undoubtedly does have
    an in-country right of appeal against the decision of  26  April  2006.
    The other is that we ought to  point  out  that  there  might  be  some
    difficulty in arguing them now, bearing in mind that the appellant  did
    not seek leave to enter for any permanent  purpose,  although  she  now
    claims that it will be contrary to her human rights not  to  allow  her
    remain indefinitely.

 5. The issue with which we are concerned  is  stated  as  follows  in  the
    grounds for reconsideration:

        "The sole ground on which reconsideration is  sought  is  that  the
        Judge was wrong to place reliance on HS [2005] UKAIT 00169, because
        that case was wrongly decided."

    The grounds go on to point out that HS is not starred (indeed,  bearing
    in mind the constitution of the Tribunal that decided it, it could  not
    be starred) and argues that it should not be treated as  binding.   The
    grounds quote Macdonald's Immigration Law and  Practice  (6th  edition,
    2005) at paragraph 1.50:

        "Where changes are made to the Immigration Rules, it  is  sometimes
        difficult to establish whether the old or  new  Rules  apply.   The
        transitional provisions in the current Rules, HC 395, provide  that
        applications extant prior  to  their  coming  into  force  will  be
        decided under the previous Rules.  We suggest that the  same  logic
        should apply with regard to amendments, so that  applications  made
        before the amendments take effect should be dealt  with  under  the
        unamended Rules.  Any other Rule penalises the applicant  for  Home
        Office delays."

      HS had taken paragraph 4 of HC 395 (which  contains  the  transitional
    provisions) as an illustration of the fact that Immigration Rules  were
    capable of including  transitional  provisions  where  it  was  thought
    appropriate.  The grounds challenge the conclusion reached in  HS  that
    where there are no transitional provisions, the Rules in force  at  the
    date of  decision  are  to  apply.   They  cite  Bennion  on  Statutory
    Interpretation (4th Edition 2002) as follows:

      "Where an act contains substantive, amending or repealing enactments,
        it commonly also includes transitional  provisions  which  regulate
        the coming into operation of  those  enactments  and  modify  their
        effect during the period of transition.  Where  the  act  fails  to
        include such provisions expressly, the court is  required  to  draw
        such inferences as to the intended transitional  arrangements,  as,
        in the light of the interpreted criteria, it  considers  Parliament
        to have intended."

    The grounds go on to argue that given "that the  time  of  decision  is
    wholly within the power of the respondent, who has,  at  least  in  the
    past, been notorious for delay in decision-making, sometimes of years",
    it cannot have been intended that the applicant should be penalised  by
    a change in the Rules between his application and  the  decision.   The
    grounds go on to cite s16(1)(c) of the Interpretation Act  1978,  which
    provides that, subject to any contrary  intention,  the  repeal  of  an
    enactment does not affect any "right ... acquired, accrued or incurred"
    under that enactment.  That provision was  examined  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Chief Adjudication Officer v Maguire [1999] 1 WLR 1778  where
    the majority, Clarke and Waller LJJ, found that an "accrued" right  was
    one in respect of which the individual had taken steps to  realise  it,
    so that in the context of that case it would accrue when  a  claim  was
    made.  By analogy with legislation and with the Immigration Rules,  the
    grounds argue that when an application is made there is a right accrued
    that the application be decided in accordance with the rules  in  force
    at that time.

 6. The grounds also state "HS aside, there is  no  authority  directly  on
    point".  That, regrettably, is not the case.  As we pointed out at  the
    hearing, there is a decision of what we would regard with respect as  a
    strong Divisional Court, Lord Widgery CJ, Eveleigh LJ and Stephen Brown
    J, in R v IAT ex parte Nathwani [1979-80] Imm AR 9.

 7. The applicant in that case was a citizen of India.  On 10 December 1976
    he was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom for one month.   On  1
    January 1977 he married a British citizen who had apparently previously
    been a total stranger to him.  He then applied for leave to  remain  as
    her husband.  When a  Home  Office  investigator  visited  the  alleged
    matrimonial home he found that they were not living together there.  At
    the  time  of  the  application,  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule  was
    paragraph 25 of Cmnd 5716:

        "A man admitted in a temporary capacity who marries a woman settled
        here should  on  application  have  the  time  limit  on  his  stay
        removed".

    On 22 March 1977, new Immigration Rules contained in HC 239  came  into
    effect.  They inserted paragraphs 26 and 26A as follows:


        "Subject to paragraph 26A, a man admitted in a  temporary  capacity
        who marries a woman settled here should have the time limit on  his
        stay removed unless the  marriage  took  place  within  the  twelve
        months immediately preceding his application, in  which  event  his
        stay should be extended for a further period not  exceeding  twelve
        months.  Where an extension  is  granted  any  restriction  on  the
        taking of employment should be removed and,  subject  to  paragraph
        26A, the time limit may be removed at the end of that period.


        26A.     An extension of stay  or  leave  to  remain  will  not  be
        granted, and any time limit will not be removed, under paragraph 25
        or 26 if the Secretary of State has  reason  to  believe  that  the
        marriage is one of convenience entered  into  primarily  to  obtain
        settlement here with no intention  that  the  parties  should  live
        together permanently as man and wife."

 8. It was evidently a matter of great importance for Mr Nathwani that  his
    application should be decided under the Immigration Rules as they  were
    at the time of the application on 3 January, rather than as  they  were
    at the date of the decision, which in his case was 27 May 1977.  Before
    the Divisional Court it was argued that both the Secretary of State and
    the Immigration Adjudicator should have applied the  Immigration  Rules
    before their amendment by HC 239.  Stephen Brown J, who gave the  first
    judgment, said this:

        "In my judgment, it is necessary to consider what the position  was
        at the time when the Secretary of State made his decision on 27 May
        1977.  It is quite apparent that at that time - at the time of  his
        decision - the effective Rules were paras 26  and  26A  of  HC  239
        which had come into effect as from 22 March 1977.   It  would  seem
        abundantly clear to me  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  quite
        correct in considering this application in the light of  the  Rules
        which were in force at the time when he considered the application,
        and that accordingly he was quite correct in considering the matter
        under paras 26 and 26A  of  HC  239;  and,  furthermore,  that  the
        Adjudicator was quite correct in proceeding  upon  that  particular
        basis.


        ...  It seems to me that, bearing in mind that the  Rules  are  not
        statutes or statutory instruments which give rights to any  person,
        there  can  be  no  question  here  of  restrospectivity   applying
        certainly to the time of the application as distinct from the  time
        of the Secretary of State's consideration of  the  application  and
        his decision.  This is a  matter,  in  my  judgment,  which  is  so
        abundantly clear that no arguable point of law can arise upon it."

 9. Eveleigh LJ said:

        "I agree.  I think it is important to bear in  mind  the  words  of
        Lord Denning MR in R v SSHD ex parte Hosenball [1977] 1 WLR 766  at
        780 where he said:


           'They are not rules of law.  They are  rules  of  practice  laid
           down for the guidance of immigration officers and tribunals  who
           are entrusted with the administration of the Act.  They can  be,
           and often are, prayed in aid by applicants before the courts  in
           immigration cases.'

        When one bears that in mind, there is no right in the applicant  to
        dictate to the Secretary of State which  set  of  Rules  should  be
        applied at the time of the decision  of  a  case.   The  Rules  are
        essentially rules which have to  be  regarded  at  the  time  of  a
        decision.


        The  argument  of  Mr  Nathan  that  in  effect  this   is   giving
        retrospective effect to the Rules,  and  then  by  analogy  to  the
        interpretation  of  statutes   contending   that   that   was   not
        permissible, is, in my view, a mistaken approach.   The  Rules  and
        their  statutory  interpretation  depend  very  largely  on  vested
        rights.  There were no such rights in the present case."

10. Lord Widgery CJ agreed with both judgments.   Before  looking  at  some
    more general issues arising from that decision, we should  remark  that
    we think that there might be a misprint in  what  is  reported  as  the
    judgment of Eveleigh LJ.  We think it is very unlikely that he can have
    said "the Rules and their statutory interpretation depend very  largely
    on vested rights."  Nobody  could  think  that  the  Immigration  Rules
    "depend very largely on vested rights".  We think that what Eveleigh LJ
    must have said, bearing in mind that both  the  general  principles  of
    statutory interpretation and the provisions of the  Interpretation  Act
    1978, is "the rules of statutory interpretation depend very largely  on
    vested rights".

11. It is possible to dispute whether decisions of the Divisional Court are
    strictly binding on the Tribunal.  We think that they are; but even  if
    this decision were not  binding  on  the  Tribunal  we  would  hesitate
    greatly before departing from the view of such a  distinguished  court.
    The facts of Nathwani's case  offer  no  possibility  for  the  present
    appellant to distinguish it.  It would nevertheless be right for us  to
    consider the matter afresh if it could be shown that the  decision  was
    so out of date that it ought not to be regarded any longer as a binding
    precedent.  Twenty seven years is a long time in immigration  law;  and
    although antiquity itself is no reason for  disregarding  a  precedent,
    developments in the general law may destabilise the  sub-stratum  of  a
    particular decision.  When Lord Denning made his remarks in  Hosenball,
    and when Nathwani's  case  was  decided,  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    expressed in terms very different from those of HC 395.  It  is  almost
    inconceivable that a statute of 1977 could have  contained  the  phrase
    "the law (including Immigration Rules)", which appears in s86(3)(a)  of
    the 2002 Act.  In 1977 Adjudicators were appointed and paid by the Home
    Office and had no real claim to independence, although the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal was always an independent  judicial  or  quasi-judicial
    body.  There have been very considerable developments in administrative
    law since 1977; and the Human Rights Act 1998 has affected many of  the
    cases  in  which  claims  are  made  by  individuals   against   public
    authorities including the government.  Whether Nathwani's  case  should
    be regarded as  authoritative  is,  therefore,  a  question  which  can
    properly be asked.  It demands an answer because it is  our  experience
    that the question raised in this reconsideration is being  raised  very
    frequently before this Tribunal at present.  The reason may be the view
    expressed by Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, as cited in  the
    grounds.  It may be simply because changes in the Immigration Rules are
    now so frequent.  There were 31 Statements of Changes  between  31  May
    2003 and 11 December 2006, including three in March 2006, part  of  the
    purpose of the third being to clarify the second,  which  had  not  yet
    taken effect; and two in November 2005, the purpose of the second being
    to restore the list of countries from which working holidaymakers might
    come, which had been "accidentally" deleted by the first.

12. It may well be that, as the grounds imply, changes in Immigration Rules
    tend to work against applicants.  We do not know  whether  that  is  in
    general true, but it  is  not  necessarily  the  case,  and  we  remind
    ourselves that Cmd 3669, which  abolished  the  primary  purpose  rule,
    operated in favour of applicants.  We doubt that if  those  acting  for
    the appellant in  the  present  case  would  wish  to  say  that  their
    arguments had equal force in cases where there had been a change in the
    Immigration Rules beneficial to applicants.

13. The fundamental question is whether there has been  such  a  change  in
    attitude to the Immigration Rules that what  was  said  about  them  in
    Nathwani's case should no longer  be  regarded  as  current.   Although
    there have been many developments and changes which we have  mentioned,
    and although there have  been  statutes  dealing  solely  with  matters
    relating to immigration in 1999, 2002, 2004 and 2006, there has been no
    formal change in the status of the Immigration Rules.   It  is  perhaps
    worth setting out s3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971,  which  has  never
    been amended:

      "3(2) The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as  soon  as
             may be) lay before Parliament statements of the  rules,  or  of
             any changes in the rules, laid down by him as to  the  practice
             to be followed in the administration of this Act for regulating
             the entry and stay in the United Kingdom of persons required by
             this Act to have leave to enter, including any rules as to  the
             period for which leave  is  given  and  the  conditions  to  be
             attached in different circumstances;  and  section  1(4)  above
             shall not be taken to require uniform provision to be  made  by
             the rules as regards admission of persons for a purpose or in a
             capacity specified in section 1(4) (and in particular, for this
             as well as other purposes of this Act, account may be taken  of
             citizenship or nationality).
                  If a statement laid  before  either  House  of  Parliament
             under this subsection is disapproved by a  resolution  of  that
             House passed within the period of forty days beginning with the
             date of laying  (and  exclusive  of  any  period  during  which
             Parliament is dissolved  or  prorogued  or  during  which  both
             Houses are  adjourned  for  more  than  four  days),  then  the
             Secretary of State shall as soon as may be make such changes or
             further changes in the rules as appear to him to be required in
             the circumstances, so that the statement of  those  changes  be
             laid before Parliament at latest by the end of  the  period  of
             forty days beginning with  the  date  of  the  resolution  (but
             exclusive as aforesaid)."

14. The Immigration Rules are not a  statute  or  a  statutory  instrument.
    Although they are to be laid before Parliament, and although  they  are
    subject to a negative resolution  by  either  House,  they  remain  the
    Secretary of State's "Rules laid down by him as to the practice  to  be
    followed".  Although  they  can  have  no  effect  if  the  legislature
    disapproves of them, the Immigration Rules are  essentially  executive,
    not legislative.  Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act sets down the  procedure
    for making what are essentially  statements  of  policy;  it  does  not
    change those statements from policy  into  legislation.   As  executive
    rules or policy they are in our view not amenable to interpretation  as
    though they were statutes or statutory instruments.  The  Secretary  of
    State is entitled and bound to make and operate  the  United  Kingdom's
    immigration  policy  and  he  is  entitled  to  make  decisions   about
    particular cases by reference to the policy in operation  at  the  time
    the decision is made.

15. That is not to say that there  cannot  be  transitional  provisions  in
    Immigration Rules.  As we have seen, when the  Immigration  Rules  were
    completely restructured by HC 395  in  1994,  there  were  transitional
    provisions; a more recent and subtle example is HC 974 of  March  2006,
    which, in substituting a new paragraph 60(i), preserves the position of
    a individuals in a number of different  categories  who  had  different
    sorts of leave granted before 22 July 2004, 30  September  2004,  or  1
    July 2006 (the latter date being after the coming into force of the new
    rule).  Where  there  are  transitional  provisions,  the  transitional
    provisions form part of the United Kingdom's immigration policy as  set
    out  in  the  Rules.   Where  there  are  no  transitional  provisions,
    individuals are not entitled to  say  that  old,  rather  than  current
    policy, should be applied to them.

16. The appellant can gain nothing by putting his claim in the language  of
    legitimate expectation.  His only legitimate expectation is to have his
    application decided in accordance  with  the  Rules  at  the  time  the
    decision is made.  Any other view would entail the conclusion that  the
    Secretary of State's power to make policy by changing  the  Rules  from
    time to time is hampered or fettered (see In re Findlay [1985] AC 318).
     (It might be thought that R v SSHD ex parte Hargreaves  [1997]  1  WLR
    906 assists the appellant with its similar view expressed in  terms  of
    the policy in force at the date  of  the  application.   It  is  clear,
    however, that in Hargreaves no point was taken about  any  interval  of
    time between application and decision.  The court's view was  that  the
    applicant was not entitled to require that  the  decision  be  made  by
    reference to any pre-existing  policy.   Lord  Woolf  MR's  summary  of
    Hargreaves in R v North  and  East  Devon  Health  Authority  ex  parte
    Coughlan  [2001]  QB  213  at  [75]  refers  only  to  the  right  that
    applications be "considered  individually  in  the  light  of  whatever
    policy was in force at the time".  Hargreaves is not authority for  the
    view that the relevant policy is that in  force  at  the  time  of  any
    application as  distinct  from  that  in  force  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.)

17. So far as legitimate expectation  as  to  procedure  is  concerned,  we
    should add that it is not (and could not properly  be)  suggested  that
    the Secretary of State's position, whether before or after  any  change
    of Rule, is that he will not entertain applications outside the  Rules.
    On the contrary: it is clear that applicants may make  applications  on
    an exceptional basis outside the Rules and that such  applications  are
    sometimes successful.

18. It is rare indeed for a legitimate expectation in public  law  to  give
    rise to a substantive benefit, as would enure here if the appellant had
    a right to the leave he would have been granted if  the  Rule  had  not
    been altered.  In Coughlan Lord Woolf MR said at [59]:

        "[M]ost cases  of  an  enforceable  expectation  of  a  substantive
        benefit ... are likely in the nature of things to  be  cases  where
        the expectation is confined to one person or a few  people,  giving
        the promise or representation the character of a contract."

    We note the word "most".  But we can see no useful or proper purpose in
    extending this category to cases such as the present, where  the  group
    of  potential  claimants  would  be  large  and  (for  various  reasons
    including successive changes in the  Rules)  constantly  changing,  and
    would furthermore consist of persons to none of whom had  any  relevant
    promise or representation actually been made.   We  note  also  that  a
    similar view motivated the decision of the Court of Appeal in Nadarajah
    v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1363.

19. For completeness we should add that in our view  the  decision  in  the
    European Court of Justice in Marks  &  Spencer  v  Customs  and  Excise
    Commissioners [2003] QB 866 does not assist the appellant either.   The
    Court was  there  concerned  with  the  reduction,  by  United  Kingdom
    legislation, of the limitation period within  which  a  United  Kingdom
    company could reclaim VAT overpaid in error.  But  here  there  was  no
    doubt  that  before  the  legislative  change  the  claimant   had   an
    enforceable right not itself subject to any change in  policy,  as  the
    Court   had    previously    recognised    in    Grundst�ckgemeinschaft
    Schlossstrasse GbR v Finanzamat Paderborn [2000] ECR I - 4279.

20. Reference is made in the grounds for reconsideration in  this  case  to
    the fact that the Secretary of State took three months  to  decide  the
    appellant's application.  That does not appear to us to  be  an  unduly
    long period.  It is less than the period in Nathwani itself.   It  will
    be apparent from what we have already said that, in order to be able to
    rely on any such delay, a claimant will have to  do  more  than  merely
    show that different, more beneficial rules were in force at the time he
    made his application.  It seems to  us  that  in  general  it  will  be
    necessary to show one of two things.  The individual might be  able  to
    prove the existence of an undertaking or policy that his case would  be
    decided at a time which was before the Rule was changed.  Such  appears
    to have been the position in the case of AH in R (A, H and AH)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWHC 526 (Admin).  Merely  to  show  a  target  for  deciding  a
    certain proportion of cases within a given time would not,  of  course,
    be sufficient for these purposes.  Alternatively, it might be  possible
    in an exceptional case to prove that the changing of the  Rules  was  a
    deliberate decision by the Secretary of State amounting to an abuse  of
    power, as was identified by Sullivan J in  R  (S  and  others)  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWHC 1111 (Admin).   Both  these  decisions  were  decisions  on
    policies outside the ambit of the Immigration Rules, but in our view it
    is in the law relating to published executive policies rather  than  in
    the law relating to the interpretation of statutes that any remedy lies
    in cases such as the present.

21. Save in such circumstances, an individual applicant  has  no  right  to
    require the United Kingdom's immigration policy to be  the  subject  of
    abridgement or dispensation for his benefit.  As Eveleigh LJ  said,  he
    has no right to dictate to the Secretary of State which  set  of  rules
    should be applied at the time of the decision in  his  case.   Nathwani
    remains good law.  In the absence  of  a  transitional  provision,  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the date of the decision are those to  be
    applied to that decision.

22. The Immigration Judge  made  no  error  in  law.   We  order  that  his
    determination shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
