

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT
                                 00056 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court Birmingham           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 December 2011                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT, MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                       DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sc
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Bake and Co Solicitors


A decision to remove a claimant is in accordance with the  law  even  if  at
the time of the decision there is  a  policy  or  practice  not  to  enforce
removals.

A decision to remove someone  to  Zimbabwe  is  not  inconsistent  with  the
statement of policy announced in October 2009.

A decision that was contrary to an established policy  may  be  contrary  to
the law and thus incapable of justification under Article 8 ECHR.

In the absence of strong countervailing factors residence of 8 years in  the
United Kingdom with a child is likely to make removal at  the  end  of  that
period not proportionate to the legitimate aims in this case.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal from a decision of  Judge  C
      Bennett dated 30 June 2010 allowing the  claimant's  appeal  on  human
      rights grounds while dismissing it on asylum grounds. We  will  direct
      that the claimant be referred to as C in these proceedings.


   2.   C is a national of Zimbabwe who came to the United Kingdom  in  July
      2003 with her child HC (then aged 5). They were both  given  leave  to
      enter as  visitors  and  subsequently  had  their  leave  extended  to
      February 2006 as dependents of her husband Mr C  who  was  here  as  a
      student. A further child  SHC  was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
      September 2005 and a third child was born here in February  2009.   In
      February 2008 C applied for asylum identifying  her  two  children  as
      dependants. The application was refused in June 2008 and an appeal was
      dismissed in August 2008.

   3.    In May 2009 C made further representations in support of an  asylum
      claim for  herself  and  her  family  based  on  the  decision  in  RN
      (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083 promulgated in  the  autumn
      of 2008 after C's appeal had  been  dismissed.  This  application  was
      refused and a decision was made to remove C and her  family  in  April
      2010. They appealed and the appeal came before the First-tier judge in
      June 2010.

The judge's decision

   4.    He concluded in summary  as follows:-
           i) He did not accept C's claims that the first judge  had  erred
              in rejecting important aspects of  her  case  and  there  was
              insufficient new material  to  persuade  him  to  accept  C's
              contentions of being at particular risk in Zimbabwe.
          ii) Nevertheless if he applied the guidance in RN  (Zimbabwe)  he
              would have allowed the appeal on asylum grounds as C and  her
              family would be unable to demonstrate loyalty to  ZANU-PF  on
              return to Zimbabwe as she was a low level MDC supporter  from
              Bulawayo.
         iii) However, he did not apply the guidance in RN (Zimbabwe) as he
              was satisfied that circumstances had changed there since that
              decision, largely because of the power sharing agreement that
              had come into force. The risk of violence if  C  were  to  be
              returned to Zimbabwe was not such as to found  an  asylum  or
              related protection claim.
          iv) He concluded that there was private life established  in  the
              United Kingdom by reason of  the seven years residence  of  C
              and her eldest child and Mr C in the United Kingdom  and  the
              residence of the other two children since their birth.
           v)  He  further  concluded  that  removal  to  Zimbabwe  was  an
              interference with that private life established here. However
              he decided that any interference was not in  accordance  with
              the law because at the date that  he  heard  the  appeal  the
              Secretary of State had a policy not to remove  failed  asylum
              seekers to  Zimbabwe and so the intended removal  was not  in
              accordance with policy and accordingly not in accordance with
              the law.
          vi) He disagreed with and did not apply an unreported decision of
              the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  in  CG  v  Secretary  of
              State for the Home Department given on 12 February 2010 where
              Senior Immigration Judge Latter had reversed Judge Bennett on
              the same point. He concluded that the AIT had not referred to
              a decision of the Court of Appeal  in  CL  (Vietnam)  v  SSHD
              [2009] 1 WLR 1873 that directed the judge's attention to  the
              hypothetical  removal and its consequences  on  the  claimant
              even if there  were  no  proposals  to  actually  remove  the
              claimant or do so in the near future.
         vii) He allowed C's appeal on human rights grounds  and  indicated
              that the same would apply to her  husband  and  children.  He
              made no directions to give effect to his decision.


   5.    On 23 July 2010 the Secretary of State was  granted  permission  to
      appeal against the judge's Article 8 decision.


   6.    It is not clear to us why it has taken such an inordinate length of
      time for this appeal to be listed for hearing. A period of delay of 17
      months is not acceptable.  On 8 December  2011  solicitors  instructed
      for the claimant gave a rule 24 notice seeking to resurrect the asylum
      claim. That notice was given 16 months after the  month  provided  for
      service of such notice in  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 rule 24 (2)(a).


   7.   In the meantime, there have  been  other  developments  relating  to
      Zimbabwe and the application of Article 8 with respect to children who
      have lived in the United Kingdom for  substantial  periods.  In  March
      2011 the Upper Tribunal delivered its Country Guidance case of EM  and
      others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC). The UT  concluded
      that there had been a material change  of  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe
      since RN (Zimbabwe) that was no  longer  to  be  followed  as  Country
      Guidance.

   8.    The UT also gave some general  guidance  regarding  long  residence
      Article 8 claims involving the children of  Zimbabwean  nationals   at
      [308] and concluded that where children of asylum seekers had been  in
      the UK for approximately eight  years either with leave, pursuant to a
      moratorium on compulsory  removals  or  pending  the  promulgation  of
      relevant and up to date country guidance determination  on  the  vexed
      issue of Zimbabwe, in the absence of a compelling public interest such
      as criminality or fraud by one of the family members, removal  of  the
      family containing such children was  likely  to  be  disproportionate.
      The guidance took into account the fact that  the  best  interests  of
      the  children  as  a  primary  but  not  paramount  or   determinative
      consideration was emphasised in LD (Article 8 - best interests of  the
      child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 304 (IAC) and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4,
      [2011] Imm AR 395.


   Error of Law


   9.   We agree with the contention that Judge Bennett made an error of law
      in concluding that the decision  that  the  claimant  and  her  family
      should be removed in principle was not in accordance with the law.


  10. We recognise that there are  cases  where  a  decision  to  refuse  an
      extension of stay  or  remove  a  person  may  be  so  contrary  to  a
      requirement contained in an established policy or practice  as  to  be
      not in accordance with the law. In such a case the analysis  does  not
      move on to justification for Article 8 purposes and the decision  must
      be re-made in accordance with the law,  either  by  the  Secretary  of
      State or the judge. However, in our judgment this was not such a case.




  11.  As we understand it, the Secretary of State's policy or practice that
      removal directions should not be served  on  Zimbabwean  nationals  to
      effect a compulsory return of those with no claim to remain was  not a
      policy that such persons should not be refused  leave  to  remain,  or
      that removal in principle was  inconsistent  with  their  rights.  The
      matter is discussed at EM (Zimbabwe) at paragraphs 41, 130 and 131. In
      summary:-

           i) Forced  removals  were  suspended  in  2005  pending  country
              guidance.
          ii) The suspension was re-imposed in July 2006 pending litigation
              in the Court of Appeal and the AIT.
         iii) On the  29  October  2009   the  Minister  of  State  made  a
              statement in the House (Hansard  col 25WS) to the effect:


                  "Alongside these changes to our voluntary returns  package
                  we have also considered carefully our position on enforced
                  returns to Zimbabwe. We have kept this issue under  review
                  since the Home Office first deferred enforced  returns  to
                  Zimbabwe in September 2006 and the courts have found  that
                  not  all  Zimbabweans  are  in   need   of   international
                  protection.  The  UK  Border  Agency  will  therefore   be
                  starting work over  the  autumn  on  a  process  aimed  at
                  normalising our returns policy to Zimbabwe, moving towards
                  resuming enforced returns progressively as  and  when  the
                  political situation develops."


          iv) On the 14 October 2010 the Minister of State announced in the
              House that forced returns would be resumed once the  case  of
              EM (Zimbabwe) had been determined.
           v) On the 18  October  a  letter  from  the  FCO  Zimbabwe  Unit
              suggested that a relevant reason for the previous policy  had
              been concerns about political stability rather than safety.

  12.  Accordingly,  having  regard  to  the  2009   Ministerial   statement
      applicable  at  the  time  of  the  judge's  decision,  there  was  no
      inconsistency between such a practice and  a  decision  to  remove  in
      principle that would engage the judge's jurisdiction to  examine  what
      the consequences of that (hypothetical) removal to be.


  13.  There are many reasons political  or  practical  why  a  decision  to
      remove in principle may not be implemented in practice, but that  does
      not prevent the decision being made and the appeal being determined on
      the basis of the facts as they appear at the material date.  In  fact,
      four  months  after  Judge  Bennett's  decision  the   moratorium   on
      compulsory removal was lifted subject to the outcome  of  the  Country
      Guidance case thus enabling those whose appeal rights  were  exhausted
      to be made the subject of removal directions.

  14. There was nothing in the learning provided by the Court of  Appeal  in
      CL (Vietnam) v SSHD [2009] 1 WLR 1873 that is relevant to the issue in
      the present case, or suggests that  Judge  Latter  was  wrong  in  his
      determination in CG v Secretary of  State.  It  was  unfortunate  that
      Judge Bennett persisted  in  this  case  with  an  approach  that  had
      correctly been held to be wrong previously. It  is  not  necessary  to
      explore further when a failure to apply a  policy  or  practice  to  a
      claimant would make the decision not in accordance with  the  law  for
      the purpose of Article 8.

  15. We therefore  set  aside  the  Article  8  decision  and  re-make  it.
      However, the passage of time and  the  legal  developments  since  the
      judge decided this case have considerably strengthened it.


  16. Eight and a half years have now passed since  C  and  her  child  came
      here. HC has spent the formative years of his life (5 to  13  1/2)  in
      education here and his siblings are now  6  and  2  respectively  have
      spent  all  their  lives  here.  There  has  been  no  criminality  or
      fraudulent wrong doing by the parents or children and both C  and  her
      husband and child were  given  leave  to  enter  and  remain.  If  the
      guidance in EM (Zimbabwe) had been available to the  first  judge  who
      decided the asylum claim in 2008 the claimant and her dependants would
      have been granted refugee status in the circumstances then  pertaining
      in that unhappy country, despite the  fact  that  the  judge  did  not
      accept that she had worked as a teacher. For most  of  the  period  of
      their stay there was a moratorium by the  UK  government  on  enforced
      removals to Zimbabwe. The public interest in removing the claimant and
      her dependants in the interests of the economic order of  society  was
      consequently not a strong one. The children's claim to  continuity  of
      education and up-bringing in the United Kingdom was a weighty factor.

  17. We raised these matters at the outset  with  the  representatives  for
      both parties. Mr Smart realistically conceded that he could not  mount
      an opposition to the Article 8 claim or justify removal on the merits.
      We agree. Removal of this family  would  be  disproportionate  to  the
      legitimate aim and accordingly not "necessary" within the  meaning  of
      Article 8.

  18. As to the asylum claim, that was not pursued. In the light of the fact
      that the judges below were entitled to draw  the  distinction  between
      being trained as a teacher and having practised professionally as one,
      and  the guidance in RN (Zimbabwe) is no longer applicable,  we would,
      in any event have refused permission to argue this claim out of time.

      Decision

  19. The judge made a material error of law in his decision in this appeal.
      We set it aside and re-make it.


  20. We dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal on the merits of the  human
      rights claim for the reasons given above. Although there is  only  one
      appeal  reference  number  and  one  respondent  identified   in   the
      proceedings  before  us,  it  is  clear  from  the  history  of  these
      proceedings that this family is  treated  as  a  unit  and  the  judge
      intended to allow the appeals of the husband and children as well.

  21.  We will direct that the Secretary of State should grant the  claimant
      and her family leave to remain on human rights grounds. The period  of
      such a leave is a matter for her, but in  the  light  of  the  unhappy
      history of this case and the considerations we have  briefly  set  out
      above, she may well conclude that this  is  a  case  where  indefinite
      leave to remain is appropriate.

  22.  We treat the asylum cross-appeal as abandoned and withdrawn.




                               Signed


                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Date: 17 January 2012


