
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


              NM ("leading an independent life") Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00051

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Field House                             Date of Hearing:  13
March 2007


                                   Before


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                     NM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Naik instructed by Dexter Montague and
                       Partners, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Tranter, Home Office Presenting Officer

Where a child (who may be over 18) is seeking limited  leave  to  remain  as
the child of a parent with limited leave, in order to establish that  he  is
not "leading an independent life" he must not have formed through  choice  a
separate (and therefore independent) social unit from  his  parents'  family
unit whether alone or with others.  A child who,  for  example,  chooses  to
live away from home may  be  "leading  an  independent  life"  despite  some
continuing financial and/or emotional dependence upon his parents.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  was  born  on  4  February
     1984.   On 12 April 2006, the respondent refused to vary her leave  to
     enter as the child of a person with limited leave to enter  or  remain
     in the UK.    Her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by
     Immigration Judge Scobbie in a determination promulgated  on  13  June
     2006.  On 28 June 2006 Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley made an order
     for reconsideration of her appeal.  Thus, the matter comes before us.

The facts

  2. The relevant facts of  this  appeal  can  be  stated  shortly.   Until
     January 1999, the appellant lived in Zimbabwe with  her  parents,  her
     older brother and her  younger  sister.   In  that  year,  the  family
     emigrated to the USA because  of  the  difficulties  created  for  the
     family by the situation in Zimbabwe.  In January 2002, the appellant's
     father obtained a visa on the basis of his UK  ancestry  and  together
     with the other members of the family,  the  appellant  obtained  entry
     clearance to come to the UK with her parents.  At that time,  she  was
     17 years old.  The appellant came to the UK on 31 January 2002,  ahead
     of her parents who remained behind whilst her younger sister completed
     her academic year in the USA, and  she  was  granted  leave  until  14
     January 2006.  In March 2002, the appellant's brother came to  the  UK
     and on 26 June 2002 the appellant's parents and sister came to the UK.
       Her father was initially given leave until 14 January 2005 and  that
     was subsequently extended until 26 June 2006.  We were told  that  the
     appellant's father still has limited leave to remain on the  basis  of
     his UK ancestry and will, in due course, apply for indefinite leave to
     remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules.    The   appellant's   current
     application is for an extension in line with the leave of her father.

  3. On her arrival in the UK in January 2002, the appellant went  to  live
     with her aunt where she remained (subsequently with her  brother  from
     March 2002) until her parents came to the UK in June 2006.   She  then
     moved in with them in a two-bedroomed flat.  Her parents occupied  one
     bedroom and the appellant and her sister the other.  Her brother  also
     lived in the flat with the family and he  slept  in  the  lounge.   In
     September 2005, the appellant's brother purchased his own property and
     he moved out of the family home.  The  appellant  moved  in  with  him
     because of the lack of space in the family flat and to help  him  with
     the mortgage - which she did by  defraying  some  household  expenses.
     This, she says was only  on  a  temporary  basis,  until  her  parents
     acquired a larger home.  On 5 April 2006, they did just that  and  the
     appellant moved in with  them  again  into  their  newly  rented  four
     bedroom house where she occupied her own bedroom.

  4. Since March 2002, the appellant has had a number  of  jobs,  including
     part-time work in her father's business and from May 2004  she  worked
     full-time for him.  He is an independent financial advisor and she  is
     training to be a mortgage advisor.   The  business  is  run  from  the
     family home.  In a statement dated 16 April 2007, the  appellant  sets
     out her present situation.  She has given up her work for  the  moment
     in order to concentrate on  her  full-time  studies  on  a  course  to
     qualify as a mortgage advisor.



The immigration judge's decision

  5. At her appeal, the immigration judge accepted all the  primary  facts.
     It was accepted by the parties that the respondent had wrongly applied
     paragraph 317 of HC 395 to the appellant.   She  was  not  seeking  an
     extension of leave as a dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
     settled in the UK.  Rather, she was seeking matching limited leave  to
     that of her father under paragraph 197.  It was also accepted that the
     only issue was whether the appellant satisfied the  requirement  under
     para 197(iii), namely that:

           "[she] is unmarried and is not a civil partner, has  not  formed
           an independent family unit and is  not  leading  an  independent
           life;..."

  6. Clearly the appellant was unmarried and had not formed an  independent
     family unit of her own.  However,  in  paragraphs  22  to  24  of  his
     determination, the immigration judge concluded that she  was  "leading
     an independent life".    As a result, the immigration judge  dismissed
     the appeal under the immigration rules.  He reached his conclusion  in
     the following way:

           "22. There is no question that the Appellant is part of a  close
           family.  However, this is different from the question of whether
           she is  living  an  independent  life.   I  concluded  that  the
           Appellant was living an independent  life.   I  regarded  it  as
           perfectly possible to do so while still staying with her family.
            I will return to this particular point  later.   The  Appellant
           has worked in the United Kingdom for a  number  of  years.   She
           presently works for her father but it is clear from her  witness
           statement that she has worked for other people from as long  ago
           as 2002.  She has worked with Lloyds TSB, Barclays Bank,  Comet,
           London Scottish and R and R Lettings.  It may suit the Appellant
           to be working for her father but she  has  demonstrated  in  the
           past that she is not dependent on  her  father  for  employment.
           The Appellant  is  an  adult.    She  comes  over  as  extremely
           intelligent and in my view totally able to look after herself.

           23. With regard to the question of where the Appellant lives she
           did live with her brother outwith the family home for  a  period
           from September 2005 to April 2006.  This was a decision she made
           herself.  She made the decision firstly to  help  the  financial
           affairs of her brother and secondly to give  herself  some  more
           space.  She has now returned to the family home.  There  has  to
           be a question as to whether or not  this  was  inevitable.   The
           family now have a larger house where she has a  bedroom  of  her
           own.  However, I had to be concerned as to whether  or  not  the
           Appellant would have moved back into the family house if she had
           not discovered that her application for further leave to  remain
           was in difficulty because of the fact that she was  living  with
           her brother.  She says that the plan was that she would not live
           with her brother indefinitely.  However, be that as it may,  she
           made a decision to move out the family house of her own volition
           and while she may be living with the family now she  is  capable
           of living out with the family house and has done so.

           24. In all these circumstances, notwithstanding  the  fact  that
           the Appellant lives with her parents and works for her father at
           the present time, there is no doubt that as an intelligent adult
           her actions have shown her totally capable  of  living  her  own
           life independently.  I did not regard the circumstances of  this
           case as amounting to the Appellant  leading  a  life  which  was
           dependent on her family.  Given her past actions, she was living
           an independent life notwithstanding her current place of abode."




  7. Before us, Ms Naik, who represented the appellant, submitted that  the
     reasoning in these paragraphs is  legally  flawed.   In  essence,  she
     submitted that he had approached the issue of whether the appellant is
     "leading  an  independent  life"  in  the  wrong  way  and  reached  a
     conclusion on the facts that could not be sustained.

  8. First, the immigration judge  was  wrong  to  emphasis  the  issue  of
     whether the appellant was capable of leading an independent life:  the
     issue was whether at the date of hearing she actually was  leading  an
     independent life.  Secondly, he was wrong to place emphasis  upon  the
     fact that the  appellant  worked  and,  at  least  financially,  could
     support herself.  Employment, Ms Naik reminded us,  is  permitted  for
     someone  with  leave  under  para  197.   It  was  not   inconsistent,
     therefore, with compliance with the rule.   Thirdly,  the  immigration
     judge wrongly placed undue reliance upon his view that  the  appellant
     was not dependent upon her parents.  This, Ms Naik, submitted was  not
     the crucial issue.  A child's emotional and financial dependency  upon
     her parents was relevant but, even if she were not (which was not  the
     case on the facts), its absence did  not  necessarily  mean  that  the
     appellant  was  leading  an   "independent   life".    Fourthly,   the
     immigration judge placed too  much  weight  upon  the  fact  that  the
     appellant lived with her brother  between  September  2005  and  April
     2006.  He was wrong to infer that the appellant moved  back  into  the
     family home in April 2006 because she  knew  her  application  was  in
     difficulty because she was living with her brother.  She moved back to
     live with her parents,  Ms  Naik,  pointed  out,  before  the  adverse
     decision was made by the respondent.

  9. On the facts, Ms Naik submitted, the appellant was, and  is,  part  of
     her parents' family unit.  She was part of  a  family  which  migrated
     together from Zimbabwe, first to the USA and then to the UK.  She only
     lived with her brother temporarily and always intended to return  once
     her parents acquired a larger property.  She is  dependent  upon  them
     for accommodation and for her work and was (until she began  full-time
     study) paid by her father.  On these facts,  Ms  Naik  submitted,  the
     only proper view was that she was "not leading an independent life".

 10. We have concluded that in paragraphs 22-24 of his  determination,  the
     immigration judge did not approach the issue of whether the  appellant
     was "leading an independent life" in  the  correct  way  and  that  he
     reached a conclusion on the facts that was not open  to  him.    As  a
     result, he materially erred in law.    He should have  concluded  that
     she was not leading an independent life and allowed her  appeal  under
     paragraph 197.  We now substitute a decision to  that  effect.   These
     are our reasons.

Leading an independent life

 11. What  is  the  correct  legal  approach  to  the  phrase  "leading  an
     independent  life"  in  paragraph  197(iii)?   We  were  surprised  to
     discover at the hearing that neither the  research  endeavours  of  Ms
     Naik nor those of Mr Tranter had been able to  turn  up  any  relevant
     authorities on its meaning.   That, indeed,  does  appear  to  be  the
     position.  The Tribunal is also not aware of any relevant  authorities
     in the field of immigration law although we  suspect  the  phrase  may
     also  feature  in  social  security  or  community  care  legislation.
     However, we were no referred to such provisions and thus we  undertake
     our interpretative task unaided. It seems to us  that  there  are  two
     helpful indications within  the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  which
     provide insight into the meaning of the phrase "leading an independent
     life".

 12. First, there is the underlying purpose of para 197 (and other  similar
     rules such as paras 243, 274 and 298) which is to maintain the  family
     unit between parents and their children when the former come to the UK
     with limited leave to enter or remain.   It allows children to  remain
     part of the family unit in which they lived abroad with their  parents
     (or sole surviving parent or one with sole responsibility).  At  least
     at the point of application (and most likely decision) the child  must
     by virtue of para 197(ii) be under the age of 18.  As such,  the  rule
     clearly contemplates the situation where, usually  at  any  rate,  the
     applicant (on entry) is a child who is naturally part  of  the  family
     unit headed by its parent or parents.  Thus, paragraph 197 is properly
     seen as a rule providing for the continuation of "family unity".   The
     difficulty arises when applying the provision post-entry  to  a  child
     who is now an adult  but  to  whom  the  rule  can  still  be  applied
     providing he is unmarried, has not formed an independent  family  unit
     and is not leading  an  independent  life.   However,  the  underlying
     purpose of the rule is the same - the continuation and maintenance  of
     the "family unit" with the parents.

 13. Second, there is the context of the phrase itself  as  it  appears  in
     para 197(iii).   The child must be "unmarried",  have  not  formed  an
     independent family unit" or, as are concerned  with  in  this  appeal,
     "not [be] leading an independent  life".   Clearly,  these  are  three
     distinct possibilities but, in our view, they have a  common  feature.
     A child who has married or  formed  his  own  independent  family  has
     separated from the family unit of his parents.  He has formed his  own
     social unit with others.  It seems to us that  the  third  possibility
     also requires the same element of "separation";  the  formation  of  a
     separate (and therefore independent) social  unit  from  his  parents'
     whether alone or with others, for example a girlfriend  or  boyfriend.
     The rule does not require  that  the  child  must  be  independent  of
     everyone; just that he must be independent of his  parents.   At  that
     point, the underlying purpose of para 197 of  maintaining  the  family
     unit with the parents is no longer engaged.  Further leave  to  remain
     should now be a matter of the child satisfying the  Immigration  Rules
     on his own right rather than as a component  of  the  social  unit  of
     which he is no longer part.

 14. Mr Tranter submitted that it was a matter of assessing the  nature  of
     the choices made by the child.  To an extent  we  agree.   It  is  not
     enough that the child does make choices about his life, for example to
     take up employment.  This, like other choices made by the  child,  may
     be factors to be taken into account but the crucial issue is always to
     ask whether the child has, through choice, separated from his parents'
     family to form his own social unit, whether alone, by marrying  or  as
     part of his own independent social unit.   Consequently, a  child  who
     leaves his parents' home and sets up home alone can properly  be  said
     to be "leading an independent life".   This is not the same as  saying
     he must no longer be dependent upon his parents or is no  longer  part
     of their family.  He clearly is the latter even if  living  alone  and
     "independently" of them.  The family ties remain even  if  the  family
     unit headed by the parents has now split up.  Likewise, even if living
     his own independent life he may be financially dependent (at least  in
     part) on his parents, for  example  they  may  help  him  set  up  his
     separate home and, perhaps, even help him with his  rent  or  mortgage
     for a period until he has found his feet  financially.   But,  in  our
     view such a person may still be seen as "leading an independent life".
      Financial or emotional  dependence  is  not,  in  this  context,  the
     antithesis of "independence".   Again, these are relevant  factors  to
     be taken into account but no more.

 15. In order to satisfy the requirement in para 197(iii), it will  usually
     be the case that the child makes his home with the parents.   That  is
     likely to be the starting point and expectation for  a  child  who  is
     said to be part of the parents' family unit.   It  is,  of  course,  a
     separate  requirement  under  paragraph  197(iv)  that  the  child  is
     accommodated in property owned or occupied exclusively by his parents.
      Nevertheless, where the child lives is no more than a factor  (albeit
     a potentially significant one) to be taken into account  in  assessing
     whether a child is "leading an  independent  life".   We  can  readily
     foresee situations where the child may live away from that home whilst
     still remaining part of the parents' social unit, for  example  whilst
     temporarily away studying at college.  On the other hand, although  no
     doubt not frequently, a child may be living independently yet still be
     resident in its parents' home but, in effect, be no more than a lodger
     paying to live there.

Application to the appeal

 16. There is no doubt that the immigration judge was attempting  to  apply
     the relevant phrase in paragraph 197(ii)  as  best  he  could  in  the
     absence of any further guidance on its meaning.  It is  clear  to  us,
     however, that he did not reach a sustainable view on the facts.   When
     applying the correct approach to the issue under para 197(iii), it  is
     plain to us that the immigration judge erred in three principal  ways.



 17. First, the immigration  judge  placed  considerable  weight  upon  the
     appellant's employment record and her  financial  lack  of  dependence
     upon her father  in  reaching  his  view  that  she  was  leading  "an
     independent life" (para 22 of his  determination).    Whilst  both  of
     these may be relevant factors, for the reasons we  have  given  above,
     they are not the central issue in determining whether an individual is
     leading "an independent life" which is whether or  not  the  appellant
     remains  part  of  her  parents'  family  unit.   In  our  view,   the
     immigration judge misdirected himself by  placing  unwarranted  weight
     upon these factors.

 18. Secondly, the immigration judge placed considerable  weight  upon  the
     appellant's capacity to be  independent  which  he  considered  to  be
     demonstrated by her employment record and the fact that she  had  been
     living with her brother between September 2005 and April  2006  (paras
     22, 23 and 24 of his determination).  That  was  the  wrong  approach.
     The relevant  issue  is  not  an  individual's  capacity  to  lead  an
     independent life but rather whether she is leading such a life.  If it
     were otherwise, few adults could meet the requirement in para 197(iii)
     since, in ordinary circumstances, every adult will have that capacity.
      It is only if a person actually separates from  his  parents'  family
     unit that he will not satisfy the requirement in para 197(iii).

 19. Thirdly, the immigration judge drew an  improper  inference  from  the
     fact that the appellant had moved  out  of  the  family  home  between
     September 2005 and April 2006 (para 23  of  his  determination).   Her
     evidence was that it was temporary and due to overcrowding and with  a
     view to helping her brother to pay his mortgage.  She intended to move
     back as soon as her parents obtained a larger property which they  did
     in April 2006 and she then moved back.  If this account were believed,
     her temporary absence from her parents' home would not, in  our  view,
     establish  that  she  had  been  leading  an  independent  life.   The
     immigration judge did not accept her account.  He  inferred  that  she
     only moved back because of the damage it was  doing  her  application.
     Ms Naik readily  accepted  at  the  hearing  that  the  way  this  was
     challenged in the grounds for review, based  upon  the  appellant  not
     having at the relevant time received the  refusal  letter,  could  not
     stand.  At the time the appellant moved back into her  parents'  home,
     the appellant had not received the refusal letter from the respondent.
      However, she had received a letter from  the  Home  Office  dated  10
     March 2006 enquiring whom she lived with at the address which is  that
     of her brother (at C3 of  the  Home  Office  bundle).   The  appellant
     replied on 16 March 2006 that she  lived  with  her  brother  at  that
     address and had done so since 15 September 2005 (D2 of the Home Office
     bundle).   In her application form the  appellant  gives  her  current
     address as her brother's home.  But, she gives her parents' home as  a
     return address for any documents to be sent by the Home  Office.    In
     our view, the appellant clearly saw her parents' home as her base.  We
     do not consider it to be a sustainable inference  that  the  appellant
     returned to her parents' home in order to avoid any damage her absence
     was doing to her application.   She had always  been  open  about  the
     fact that she was living with her brother both in her application form
     and in her response in the letter of 16 March 2006.   The  immigration
     judge did not refer to the fact that she identified her parents'  home
     in her application as the place  to  which  correspondence  should  be
     sent.  Had the immigration judge had regard to this, he could not have
     reached the conclusion that her  evidence  (which  was  not  otherwise
     challenged) was not to be believed on the specific issue  of  why  she
     moved out.

 20. For these reasons, the immigration judge materially erred in law.

 21. On the facts, we  accept  Ms  Naik's  submission  that  the  appellant
     succeeds.  On the basis of the evidence before the  immigration  judge
     (and us today) the correct  finding  is  that  the  appellant  is  not
     leading an independent life.  The appellant always has  been  part  of
     her  father's  family  unit  since  the  family  left  Zimbabwe.   The
     immigration judge acknowledged that the appellant is part of  a  close
     family.  They emigrated to the USA and then to the UK  together.   She
     is integrated into the family unit having only left  the  family  home
     for seven months in 2005-2006.  We accept her evidence that  this  was
     only  on  a  temporary  basis  until  her  parents  obtained  suitable
     accommodation  for  all  the  family.    Even  then,  the  appellant's
     evidence is that she spent most of her time at the family home.   Once
     her parents acquired a larger property in April 2006, she  moved  back
     to live with them  and  her  sister.   The  fact  that  she  has  been
     employed, either by third parties or her father, and thus may be  said
     to be financially self-sufficient does not lead us  to  conclude  that
     she is leading an independent  life.   She  is  now,  of  course,  not
     employed but is a full-time student.  In our view, as one might expect
     of an adult, she is pursuing her own life but it is  as  part  of  her
     parents' family unit.  She has not yet formed a separate social  unit,
     anymore than she has married or has formed her own independent  family
     unit.

 22. Thus, we  are  satisfied  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
     appellant  meets  the  requirement  in  para   197(iii).    No   other
     requirement of the rule being  in  issue,  we  substitute  a  decision
     allowing the appeal under para 197 of HC 395.  We  need  say  no  more
     about the Art 8 ground  of  challenge  which  was  overlooked  by  the
     immigration judge because Ms Naik did not press it before us unless we
     were against her under para 197.

Decision

 23. In the result, we conclude that the Immigration Judge materially erred
     in law  and  we  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under
     paragraph 197 of HC 395.












                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE

                                        Date:


