
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          Kamran (UK NARIC - incorporation in rules) [2012] UKUT 00058(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|on 8 November 2011                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SPENCER


                                   Between

                             Malik Sohail kamran
                                 Samina Gul
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr N Mohammad, Counsel, instructed by Legis Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

It cannot be said that UK NARIC has no role in judging the equivalence of  a
Tier 1 (General) Migrant applicant's qualification if it is  not  a  foreign
qualification since paragraph 5  of  Appendix  A  to  HC  395,  as  amended,
expressly gives it that role.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These appeals come before us as a result of permission to appeal having
    been granted in the Upper Tribunal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on
    17th May 2011.  The  terms  of  the  grant  of  permission  provide  an
    adequate introduction to the details of  the  appeals.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted for the following reasons:

         "1.      The first appellant appeals against the  decision  of  the
             First-tier Tribunal (Immigration Judge Peart)  dismissing  his
             appeal against the refusal of the  respondent  to  extend  his
             leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under para  245C
             of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  The  appeal  of
             the second appellant, who is the first appellant's wife,  fell
             to be dismissed in line under para 319C of the Rules.

         2. The first  appellant  relied  upon  a  postgraduate  diploma  in
             management studies  issued  by  the  Birmingham  International
             College in order to obtain the  required  "Attributes"  points
             under Appendix A and  to  meet  the  language  requirement  in
             Appendix B.  The judge found that the first appellant was  not
             entitled to the points as the qualification was not "deemed by
             UK NARIC to meet  the  recognised  standard  of  a  bachelor's
             degree in the  UK".   As  the  grounds  point  out,  UK  NARIC
             functions  to  assess  overseas   qualifications   and   their
             equivalence to UK qualifications (see UK Border Agency, Tier 1
             (General) of the Points-Based System - Policy Guidance at para
             64).  It is arguable, therefore, that in requiring UK NARIC to
             approval for the first appellant's  qualification,  the  judge
             imposed an impossible requirement and thereby erred in law  in
             assessing whether the appellant met the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules.

         3. The proper mechanism for the assessment of the equivalence of UK
             qualifications was raised in the grounds and  may  be  argued.
             Even if an error of law is identified, it will remain for  the
             first appellant to establish  that  his  postgraduate  diploma
             from a UK institution is the equivalent  of  a  UK  bachelor's
             degree for the  purposes  of  the  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
             category within the Immigration Rules.

         4. Permission to appeal is granted."

 2. We received skeleton arguments from both from Mr Mohammad and Mr Deller
    and we have also taken into account their oral submissions.  The thrust
    of the argument advanced on behalf of the appellants was that UK  NARIC
    had no function other than to assess overseas qualifications and  their
    equivalence to United Kingdom qualifications.  Reliance was placed upon
    the UK NARIC website which said that UK NARIC was the  national  agency
    responsible  for   providing   information   and   advice   about   how
    qualifications from schools from overseas compared to the UK's national
    qualification  frameworks.   Mr  Mohammad  suggested  that  the  Credit
    Accumulation Scheme (CATS) operated by the Quality Assurance Agency for
    Higher Education (QAA) was the body which oversaw quality assurance for
    indigenous awards and there was  no  general  requirement  for  British
    citizens to reference (sic) their British awards.   It  was  said  that
    with the QAA in place the respondent was not correct to insist that  UK
    NARIC was the body of reference for indigenous qualifications.   Having
    said that, he conceded that the QAA did not cover private  institutions
    such as the Birmingham International College (BIC).

 3. Mr Mohammad further argued, by reference to a document taken  from  the
    Directgov website, that since  the  National  Qualifications  Framework
    (NQF) set out the level at which a qualification could be recognised in
    England, Northern Ireland and Wales across the NQF  and  Qualifications
    and  Credit  Framework  (QCF),  the  Secretary  of  State  was   acting
    unreasonably in requiring UK NARIC to assess  the  equivalence  of  the
    first-named appellant's English qualification, particularly since  such
    was not part of UK NARIC's role.  It was also  argued  that  since  the
    first-named appellant's qualification had  been  deemed  sufficient  to
    entitle him to  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    International Graduates  Scheme  (IGS),  it  should  be  deemed  to  be
    sufficient for the purposes of his application for leave as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant.

 4. We observe that only the latter point was raised before the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge at the hearing of  the  appeal.   Then  the  appellants'
    representative conceded that at the date of  the  application  and  the
    decision the first-named appellant was not able to  show  that  he  had
    obtained an academic qualification deemed  by  UK  NARIC  to  meet  the
    recognised standard of a bachelor's degree.  It is clear from paragraph
    9 of the determination that what was argued on the  appellants'  behalf
    was  that  as  the  first-named  appellant  had  qualified  under   the
    International Graduate Scheme because transitional arrangements enabled
    such persons to apply for further leave as Tier 1 (General) Migrants to
    obtain a total of up to two years' leave under a combination  of  their
    previous scheme and Tier 1, the  first-named  appellant's  Postgraduate
    Diploma in  Management  Studies  should  be  regarded  as  an  adequate
    qualification.  The First-tier Tribunal judge accepted that whilst that
    might be true the appellants still needed to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The reality of the position was that the first-named appellant had been
    granted further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  participant
    of the International Graduate Scheme on 17th July 2008 until 17th  July
    2009 and then on 27th July 2009 he was granted further leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until  17th
    July 2010.

 6. We also observe that the only matter advanced in the grounds of  appeal
    to the Upper  Tribunal  was  that  UK  NARIC  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    adjudicate on the standards of British awards.

 7. Paragraph 245C of HC 395, as amended, in force at the date of  decision
    required, so far as relevant, as follows:
       "Requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain
       To qualify for entry clearance or  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
       (General) Migrant, an applicant must meet  the  requirements  listed
       below. If the applicant meets these requirements, entry clearance or
       leave to remain will be granted. If  the  applicant  does  not  meet
       these requirements, the application will be refused.
       ...
       Requirements:
       (aa) The grant allocation relating to the Tier 1  (General)  Migrant
       route would not be exceeded by granting the  application  for  entry
       clearance or leave to enter in the relevant grant allocation period.
       ...
       (c) The applicant must have the specified minimum number  of  points
       under paragraphs 1 to 31 of Appendix A as set out below:


       (i) if the applicant is applying for leave to  remain  and  has,  or
       last had, leave as a Tier 1 (General) migrant, as a  Highly  Skilled
       Migrant, as a Writer, Composer  or  Artist  or  as  a  Self-employed
       Lawyer, the specified minimum number of points is 75 points.


       (ii) if the applicant does not fall within the scope of  245C(c)(i),
       the specified minimum number of points is 80 points.


       (d) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs  1  to 2  of
       Appendix B.
       (e) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs  1  to  3  of
       Appendix C.
       (f) An applicant who is applying for leave to remain must have,  or
       have last been granted, entry clearance, leave to enter or remain:
       ...
       (xvi) as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant,
       ..."

 8. Appendix A provided, so far as is relevant, as follows:

       "Appendix A - Attributes

       Attributes for Tier 1 (General) Migrants
       1. An applicant applying for entry clearance or leave to remain as a
       Tier 1 (General) Migrant must score the specified minimum number  of
       points for attributes as set out below:


       (i) if the applicant is applying for leave to  remain  and  has,  or
       last had, leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, as a  Highly  Skilled
       Migrant, as a Writer, Composer or  Artist,  or  as  a  Self-employed
       Lawyer, the specified minimum number of points is 75 points.


       (ii) if the applicant does not fall within the scope of Appendix  A,
       1(i), the specified minimum number of points is 80 points.
       1A. Subject to paragraph 1B,  an  applicant  who  has  a  Master  of
       Business  Administration  Degree  from  an  institution  listed   in
       paragraph 58A of this  Appendix,  and  who  provides  the  specified
       documents, will be awarded 80 points, provided he:
       (a) commenced the course of study that led  to  that  degree  on  or
       before 29 June 2008.
       (b) applied for entry clearance or leave to remain within 12  Months
       of the date on which he  was  first  notified  in  writing,  by  the
       awarding institution, that the qualification had been awarded, and
       (c) provides the specified documents as evidence of the facts in (a)
       and (b).
       1B. Paragraph 1A does not apply to an applicant who is applying  for
       leave to remain and who has, or last had, leave  as  Highly  Skilled
       Migrant, Tier 1 (General) Migrant, a Writer, Composer or Artist or a
       Self-Employed lawyer.
       2. With respect of any applicant  to  whom  paragraph  1A  does  not
       apply, available points are shown in tables 1 to 4 below.  Only  one
       set of points will be awarded per table. For  example,  points  will
       only be awarded for one qualification.
       3. Notes to accompany the tables appear below each of the tables.
       Table 1
       ...
       ...
       Applications for entry clearance  and  all  other  applications  for
       leave to remain
|Qualification                         |Points                      |
|Bachelor's degree                     |30                          |
|Master's degree                       |35                          |
|PhD                                   |45                          |



       Qualifications: notes
       4.  Specified  documents  must  be  provided  as  evidence  of   the
       qualification, unless the applicant has, or was last granted,  leave
       as a Highly Skilled Migrant  or  a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  and
       previously scored points for the same qualification  in  respect  of
       which points are being claimed in this application.
       5. Points will only be awarded for an academic qualification  if  an
       applicant's qualification is  deemed  by  the  National  Recognition
       Information Centre for the United Kingdom  (UK  NARIC)  to  meet  or
       exceed the recognised standard of a Bachelor's or Master's degree or
       a PhD in the UK.
       6. Points will also  be  awarded  for  vocational  and  professional
       qualifications that are deemed by UK NARIC  or  the  appropriate  UK
       professional body to be  equivalent  to  a  Bachelor's  or  Master's
       degree or a PhD in the UK.
       7. If the applicant has, or was last granted,  leave  as  a  Tier  1
       (General) Migrant or a Highly Skilled Migrant and the  qualification
       for which points are  now  claimed  was,  in  the  applicant's  last
       successful application for leave or for  a  Highly  Skilled  Migrant
       Programme Approval Letter, assessed to be of a higher level than now
       indicated by UK NARIC, the higher score of points will be awarded in
       this application too.
       ..."

 9.  Therefore  according  to  the  immigration  rules  in  order  for  the
    appellants to have succeeded in the appeals the  first-named  appellant
    would have to have been  entitled  to  30  points  in  respect  of  the
    Postgraduate Diploma in Management Studies issued to  him  in  2007  by
    Birmingham International College.  According to paragraph 5 of Appendix
    1 points would only be awarded if this qualification was deemed  by  UK
    NARIC to meet or exceed the recognised standard of a bachelor's  degree
    in the United Kingdom.

10. The point made on the appellants' behalf before the First-tier Tribunal
    judge,  that  the  first-named  appellant's  qualification,  which  was
    sufficient to entitle him to leave under  the  International  Graduates
    Scheme,  should  be  regarded  as  adequate  for  the  purpose  of  his
    application for leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, was and is in  our
    view wholly unarguable in the light of the decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Odelola v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    UKHL 25.  In that appeal the House of Lords held that in the absence of
    transitional provisions and an indication to the contrary, even if  the
    rules changed between the date of an application and the  date  of  the
    decision, an appellant still needed  to  comply  with  the  immigration
    rules as they were at the date of the decision.

11. Had we had to decide the main argument now advanced on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, namely that UK NARIC had no role in judging the  equivalence
    of  the  appellant's  qualification  because  it  was  not  a   foreign
    qualification, unaided by authority we would have had no hesitation  in
    rejecting it.  If it were the case that UK NARIC had no such role  then
    all that  would  have  followed  would  have  been  that  on  a  proper
    construction of the immigration rules no mechanism would have  been  in
    place for judging the equivalence of the appellant's qualification.  In
    that situation as he did not have a UK bachelor's degree he  could  not
    have satisfied the requirements of the immigration rules.

12. As it is, the point has already been decided in the Court of Appeal  by
    Richards LJ in a renewed application for permission  to  appeal  in  AH
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ
    1564.   The  same  point  was  unsuccessfully  argued   before   Senior
    Immigration Judge Southern in the reconsideration of an  appeal  before
    the  AIT,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  8th  February   2010,
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of
    his  application  for  a  variation  of  his  leave  to  remain.    The
    unsuccessful appellant applied to the Court of Appeal for permission to
    appeal but his application was refused.  Richards LJ recited  that  the
    appellant's contention before the senior immigration judge was that the
    role of UK NARIC was limited to  vetting  overseas  qualifications  and
    that UK NARIC's approval was not needed for  a  UK  qualification.   In
    paragraph 8 of his judgment he said that  Mr  Malik,  who  appeared  on
    behalf of the applicant, submitted  that  paragraph  5  of  Appendix  A
    related only to qualifications from abroad.  He said Mr  Malik  pointed
    to the statement on UK NARIC's own website that UK  NARIC  "provided  a
    service whereby qualifications from outside the UK are compared to  the
    UK's qualification framework" and to an email from UK NARIC  which  was
    before the senior immigration judge.  Mr Malik submitted  that  e-mails
    from the UK Border Agency to the contrary  effect  could  not  displace
    what was said by UK NARIC itself.

13. Richards LJ noted that it was  further  submitted  that  qualifications
    from within the United Kingdom were deemed to be of recognised standard
    if obtained from an institution on a list approved  by  the  Department
    for Business, Innovation and Skills in accordance  with  the  Education
    (Listed Bodies) England Order 2007 and that Saxon College was  on  that
    list when the applicant obtained his qualification and its removal from
    the  list  at  a  later  date  could   not   affect   the   applicant's
    qualification.  He did not accept the submissions.   He  said  this  in
    paragraph 9 of his judgment:

         "It seems to me that the scheme of Appendix A  is  clear.   Certain
         Master's qualifications from institutions listed in paragraph  58A,
         institutions which include UK institutions but are not  limited  to
         them, count for a specified number  of  points.   Otherwise  points
         have to be determined by reference to the tables, subject so far as
         material to the proviso in paragraph 5  that  points  for  academic
         qualification will only be awarded if the qualification  is  deemed
         by UK NARIC to meet the recognised standard.  There is  nothing  to
         suggest that paragraph 5 relates only to overseas qualifications."

14. He went on to say that there was no provisional machinery setting up  a
    separate regime for UK qualifications, save  to  the  extent  expressly
    provided for under paragraph 1A.  He said Appendix A  provided  on  its
    face a complete code.  He could see  no  basis  for  qualifying  it  by
    reference to a separate regime for UK qualifications as  contended  for
    by Mr Malik.  He said in particular he thought it wrong to have  regard
    to  extraneous  material,  be  it  e-mails  or  policy   guidance,   in
    considering the Appendix.  To his  mind,  Mr  Malik's  submission  that
    there was a lacuna in the Appendix insofar  as  the  generality  of  UK
    qualifications was concerned was unsustainable.

15. Mr Mohammad made a bold submission that the decision of Richards LJ was
    wrong.  He said the court probably did not  have  the  advantage  of  a
    fully argued case at a permission stage.  It is apparent, however, that
    the applicant in AH was represented by very experienced counsel, namely
    Mr Z Malik, and we just do not accept the proposition that the case  on
    behalf of the applicant was not fully argued.   The  submission  of  Mr
    Mohammad that even if the reference to  UK  NARIC  included  it  having
    power  to  judge  the  equivalence  of  the   first-named   appellant's
    qualification such was not in accordance with the law and  should  have
    been disregarded, in our view is wholly without merit.  The  fact  that
    the Secretary of State might have chosen different means of testing the
    equivalence English qualification is neither here nor there.

16. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Pankina [2010] EWCA Civ
    719 Sedley LJ with whom the other members of the Court agreed and  said
    that he accepted that the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  v
    Secretary of State for Social Services, ex-parte Camden  LBC  [1987]  1
    WLR 819 established  that  a  measure  which  had  to  be  laid  before
    Parliament was not vitiated if, rather than  being  self-contained,  it
    derived part of its content  from  an  extant  and  accessible  outside
    source.  He accepted that that had a direct bearing on the Statement of
    Immigration Rules which under section 3(2) of the  1971  Act,  likewise
    had to be laid before Parliament.  It meant  that  the  answer  to  the
    question whether  the  immigration  rules  could  lawfully  incorporate
    provisions set out in another document which had not itself  been  laid
    before Parliament was that the bare fact that  a  measure  laid  before
    Parliament was not self-contained did not render  it  ineffective.   In
    paragraph 27 of his judgment he mentioned that counsel for  Ms  Pankina
    had drawn attention to places where plainly  legitimate  reference  was
    made in the rules to outside sources: for example, by rule 6 a  private
    education institution must offer courses recognised by  an  appropriate
    accreditation body. He said one could  add  Appendix  C  itself,  which
    perfectly reasonably relied on bank statements and  the  like,  so  the
    objection was not to rules which relied on outside sources for evidence
    of compliance. Such considerations equally apply to  the  circumstances
    of this case.

17. In our view the interpretation of Appendix A to HC 395, as amended,  is
    perfectly clear.  The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make  an  error
    of law in his determination in finding that the  first-named  appellant
    did not comply with the requirements of paragraph 345C of  HC  395,  as
    amended.  Therefore his decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.



Signed

P A Spencer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

