
AO (unreported determinations are not precedents) Japan [2008] UKAIT 00056

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
      Date of Hearing: 29 April 2008

                                   Before:


                         Mr Justice Hodge, President
                      Senior Immigration Judge Waumsley

                                   Between

                                     AO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr P Costello, of UK Visa Services
For the Respondent:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


No judge must treat as a precedent an unreported decision  of  the  Tribunal
without paying proper regard to para 17 of the AIT Practice Directions.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Japan, born on 13 September 1969.   On  1
    November 2006 she applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a  spouse  of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  UK
    (paragraph 287 Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended).

 2. The application was refused on  24  September  2007.   The  appellant's
    appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Majid.  He allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds in a  determination  promulgated  on  12  November
    2007.  The respondent's application for reconsideration was granted  by
    a senior immigration judge on 2 December 2007.

The Immigration History

3.    The appellant came to the United Kingdom on  6  September  2000  as  a
    student.  Her leave was extended on various occasions until 31  October
    2004.  On 1 June 2004 the appellant married WH a British citizen.   She
    thereafter applied for and on 3 November 2004 was granted an  extension
    of her leave to remain as a spouse.  This was further extended until  2
    November 2006.  Her application for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse was made in time on 1 November 2006.

4.    On 20 August 2007 the appellant was asked to  resubmit  her  husband's
    current passport which had  been  withdrawn  from  the  Public  Enquiry
    Office in 2006 and to provide a letter from her husband confirming that
    he supports the application.  Neither the passport nor the letter  were
    provided.  On 24 September 2007 a Notice of  Immigration  Decision  was
    issued as a refusal to  vary  leave.   In  the  section  "Decision  and
    Reasons" it was stated:

        "You applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
        as the spouse of W...H.., but your application has been refused.


        In view of the fact that you failed to respond to our letter  dated
        5 August requesting your husband's passport and a letter  from  him
        confirming that he still supports your application,  the  Secretary
        of State is not satisfied that  you  have  not  failed  to  produce
        within a reasonable time documents or other  evidence  required  by
        the Secretary of State to establish your claim to remain under  the
        Immigration Rules."


 5. In her appeal the appellant said:

        "At the time of my application  in  October  2006  I  submitted  my
        husband's passport, completed application form, our  child's  birth
        certificate, marriage certificate, evidence of our cohabitation  in
        the past two years, my payslips, P60 and bank statements.


        It is submitted that I have provided enough evidence for  Secretary
        of  State  to  approve  my  application  as  I  satisfied  all  the
        requirements of Immigration Rules concerning spouses  applying  for
        indefinite stay.

6.    The appellant  went  on  to  state  that  after  the  application  was
    submitted her husband had committed adultery and had abandoned her  and
    her child for another woman.  She said "We are still married but do not
    keep in contact.  My child is British national  and  I  established  my
    life in the UK with him."

Immigration Rules

7.    The requirements for indefinite leave to remain for a spouse or  civil
    partner of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom  are  set
    out in paragraph 287 Immigration Rules.  That provides, so  far  as  is
    relevant as follows:

        "287(i)(a)     The applicant was admitted to the United Kingdom  or
                  given an extension of stay for a period of two  years  in
                  accordance with paragraphs 281 - 286 of these  Rules  and
                  has completed a period of two  years  as  the  spouse  or
                  civil partner of a person  present  and  settled  in  the
                  United Kingdom ....
        (ii)     The applicant is still the spouse or civil partner of  the
                  person he or she was admitted or granted an extension  to
                  stay to join and the marriage  or  civil  partnership  is
                  subsisting, and
        (iii)    Each of the parties intends to live permanently  with  the
                  other as his or her spouse or civil partner."


8.    Here the appellant having married on 1 June 2004  was  granted  a  two
    year extension of her leave to remain as a spouse for a period  from  3
    November 2004.  At the time of the application she  had  completed  two
    years as the spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  UK  and
    satisfied paragraph 287(i)(a).

9.     Paragraph  322  of  the  Immigration  Rules  provides   so   far   as
    appropriate:

        "322.    Grounds of which an application to vary leave to enter  or
              remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused.


        (9)      Failure by an applicant to  produce  within  a  reasonable
              time information, documents or other evidence required by the
              Secretary of State to establish his  claim  to  remain  under
              these Rules."


10.   The appellant had been written to on 20 August 2007 by  the  Border  &
    Immigration Agency requiring the appellant under paragraph 222  of  the
    Rules to "re-submit (her) husband's current passport - he withdrew this
    from the Public Enquiry Office last year" and "We also require a letter
    from your husband confirming that he still supports your  application".
    The passport was never returned to the relevant authorities.  No letter
    was then  or  has  been  subsequently  submitted  confirming  that  the
    appellant's husband still supports her application.

11.   The grounds for refusal have been set out in paragraph 4 above.   They
    are badly worded.  The application to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  the
    appellant's husband was clearly refused.  The reasons  given  were  the
    failure to supply  information.   The  information  required  was  that
    needed to satisfy paragraph 287(a)(ii) and (iii)  confirming  that  the
    marriage is "is subsisting" and that "each of the  parties  intends  to
    live permanently with the other as his or her  spouse".   The  marriage
    has clearly broken down.  It was and remains the case that the  parties
    to the marriage do not intend to live permanently with each other.  The
    requirements of paragraph 287 Immigration Rules are  not  satisfied  in
    this case and the appeal on that ground necessarily fails.

Error of Law

12.   This was an appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  immigration
    judge entirely failed to address the issue.  It is  however  clear  and
    remains unchallenged by the appellant that she could  not  satisfy  the
    relevant Immigration Rule.  She had failed to  supply  the  information
    required under Rule 322.  She was not and  is  not  living  permanently
    with her spouse and  the  marriage  cannot  properly  be  described  as
    "subsisting".

13.   The immigration judge however allowed the appeal  but  addressed  only
    issues under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

14.   In the respondent's challenge to this decision in the application  for
    reconsideration she said of the basis of the findings under Article 8:

        "his (the  immigration  judge's)  ...  findings  are  fundamentally
        flawed.  At paragraph 21 of the  determination  he  makes  a  clear
        finding that the Appellant's husband has abandoned  the  child  and
        mother since Jan 2007.  He then finds the child cannot  be  removed
        and that the child will be left in  Social  Service'  care  if  the
        mother is removed from the UK.  There is no  analysis  of  why  the
        child cannot return to Japan with his natural mother.  There is  no
        reason why the child will need to be separated from his  mother  in
        this case.  As to the reference to Social  Services  there  was  no
        evidence the Child was subject to a care order or Court proceedings
        which regulated contact with the father who had been found to  have
        severed his family life with both the Appellant and his son.


        The IJ  has  failed  to  follow  the  case  of  Konstatinov  v  the
        Netherlands ECHR (26/04/07)  which  reiterated  the  principles  of
        "whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the
        family  living  in  the  country  of  origin  of  one  or  more  of
        them".(para 48)


        It is noted the child was born in 2004 and could  easily  adapt  to
        life in Japan where the appellant has family.


        If the IJ had properly applied the law he would  have  found  there
        was no breach of Article (8) following Huang".


15. A further ground for reconsideration was  that  the  immigration  judge
    relied on an unreported case of this Tribunal AS/18287/2004 promulgated
    in 2007 describing it as a precedent and so ignoring  the  requirements
    of the AIT Practice Directions.  These provide at  paragraph  17(6)  as
    follows:


         "17.    Reporting and citation of determinations


        17.6     A  determination  of  the  Tribunal  which  has  not  been
              reported may not be cited in proceedings before the  Tribunal
              unless:-


                 a) the appellant in the present proceedings, or a member of
                    the appellant's family, was a party of  the  proceedings
                    in which the previous determination was issued; or


                 b) the Tribunal gives permission.

        17.7     An application for  permission  to  cite  a  determination
              which has not been reported must:


                 a) include a full transcript of the determination;


                 b) identify the proposition for which the determination  is
                    to be cited;

                 c) certify  that  the  proposition  is  not  found  in  any
                    reported determination of the Tribunal or of the IAT and
                    has not been  superseded  by  a  decision  of  a  higher
                    authority; and


                 d) be accompanied  by  a  summary  analysis  of  all  other
                    decisions of the Tribunal and all available decisions of
                    higher  authority,   relating   to   the   same   issue,
                    promulgated in the period beginning  six  months  before
                    the date of the decision proposed to be cited and ending
                    two  weeks  before  the  date  of  the  hearing.   (This
                    analysis is intended  to  show  the  trend  of  Tribunal
                    decisions on the issue)."

16.   The respondent relies in part on the claim that the immigration  judge
    erred in law in his  approach  to  Article  8  ECHR  by  relying  as  a
    precedent on the unreported determination AS/18287/2004.  In effect the
    implication is that it is wrong in law for an immigration judge to rely
    on an  unreported  determination  without  going  through  the  process
    required by paragraph 17.7 of the Practice Directions.

17.    We  deprecate  use  by  any  immigration  judge  of   an   unreported
    determination  of  the  Tribunal  without  paying  proper   regard   to
    requirements  of  paragraph  17  of  the  Practice   Directions.    The
    unreported case cited by this immigration judge says in the clearest of
    terms at paragraph 28:  "The case turns very much on  its  own  facts".
    An advocate attempting to  rely  on  AS/18287/2004  could  not  in  our
    judgement satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  17  of  the  Practice
    Directions in relation to the determination  published  as  it  was  in
    March 2007.  The judge in this case should not have purported  to  rely
    on the decision nor should he have described it as a  "precedent".   He
    was in error in so doing.  However the material error of  law  in  this
    case occurs in the manner in which the immigration judge  analysed  and
    decided upon the Article 8 claim.  We deal with that below.

The Article 8 Claim

18.   The factual background  to  this  Article  8  claim  is  in  brief  as
    follows.  The appellant and her spouse had a son who was born on 8  May
    2004.  She married her spouse on 1  June  2004,  her  husband's  fourth
    marriage and their son is his fourth child.  The  husband  is  said  to
    have a serious alcohol problem.  The couple went to  Japan  on  holiday
    for two weeks in March 2006 paid for by  the  appellant's  parents  who
    live in Japan.  She said of her husband:

        "He hardly came back  home  after  the  holiday  ...  He  confessed
        several adulteries  ... He said he would help my  visa  application
        when I asked him in October 2006, but I gathered all the  documents
        by myself because he was not helpful.  They  were  sent  off  on  1
        November 2006.  (The spouse) went to the Home Office on 3  November
        and said that "our marriage was unsustainable" to get his  passport
        back, but he did not.  He was due to travel to South Africa to  see
        someone who was in a relationship.  He reported it  as  stolen  and
        applied for a new one.  He left home in January 2007 to  live  with
        her.  I do not know where he is now."


19.   The basis on which the immigration judge appears to have acted is  set
    out in paragraph 20 of his determination where he said:

        The essence of this Determination (with a full  advertence  to  the
        particular facts of  the  case)  [a  reference  to  the  unreported
        determination AS/18287/2007]  may  be  stated  that  if  a  British
        national child is likely to  encounter  undue  hardship  if  he  is
        returned  with  a  non-British   parent   then   the   parent   may
        exceptionally be allowed to remain in this country,  in  line  with
        the spirit of Article 8 of the ECHR 1950".


20.   The judge went on to say:

        "The rights of a British child are of course  very  significant  in
        light of the precedent mentioned ...  In this case  the  father  is
        not interested in the welfare of the child to the  extent  that  he
        has made himself disappear from the scene and has not been  in  any
        physical contact with the child or the mother since  January  2007.
        Hence, since being a British child he cannot  be  removed,  if  the
        mother is forced to leave the UK I  can  understand  Mr  Costello's
        submission that the British infant would be taken into care by  the
        local authorities and be deprived of the  mother's  care.   Say,  I
        must that the mother came over as a caring person and she would not
        leave the infant behind but to depend on her love for the child  in
        this way would not be fair on her.  Thus I am willing to allow this
        appeal to let this willing mother look after the child  and  having
        the satisfaction that the father may have contact with the child."

21.   This approach to the appellant's Article  8  rights  is  fundamentally
    misconceived.  The proper approach is to apply the analysis set out  by
    the House of Lords in R (Razgar) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27.  Lord Bingham in that case was dealing  with
    the issues that arise where removal of  an  appellant  is  resisted  in
    reliance upon Article 8.  The questions he poses are  however  entirely
    appropriate for a case, such as this,  where  an  Article  8  claim  is
    relied on in resisting a decision to refuse  to  vary  the  applicant's
    leave to remain the consequence of which will be that the applicant has
    no right to remain in the United Kingdom and is  therefore  subject  to
    removal if he or she does not depart voluntarily.  The questions are as
    follows:

        "17.
        (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
             authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect
             for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
        (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Art 8?
        (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
        (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security, public safety or
             the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of other?
        (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"


22.   Mr Costello's core submission was that because the  appellant's  child
    aged 4 is a British citizen it is wrong on the facts of  this  case  to
    take a decision that means the mother has no leave to remain in the UK.
     He relied on the decision of Jack J in R  (AC)  v  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal [2003] INLR 507.  The decision in this case is best summarised
    in Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    828 at paragraph 12 where Latham LJ said:

        "The right of appeal on human rights grounds requires consideration
        of the alleged breach of the  appellant's  human  rights.   In  the
        present case this required the adjudicator to  concentrate  on  the
        effects of removal on the appellant.  True it is, as Jack J said in
        R (AC) .... the effect  on  others  might  have  an  effect  on  an
        appellant, nonetheless it is the consequence to the appellant which
        is the relevant consequence.  In the context of  a  merits  appeal,
        which this was, the tribunal was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
        adjudicator had allowed his judgement to be affected unduly by  the
        effect of removal on the remainder of the family in particular  his
        mother."


23.   The appellant is a Japanese citizen.  Japan is a  safe  country.   She
    has parents who live in Japan who she visited in 2006.  It  is  nowhere
    suggested in the evidence that Japan is in any  sense  unsafe  for  the
    appellant or her child.  The appellant can safely  return  there.   The
    effect on her 4 year old son is minimal as he will, on the evidence, go
    there with her.  The immigration judge ought to have applied the Razgar
    step-by-step approach which we now do.  He erred in law by  failing  to
    do so.

24.   The appellant clearly has a private life in the United  Kingdom.   She
    has been here since 2001.  There is no family life with her spouse.  He
    has left her.  There is clearly family life with her child.  There  was
    no evidence before the immigration judge or before  us  that  were  the
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom she would do anything other  than
    take the child  with  her.   Indeed  the  immigration  judge  found  at
    paragraph 21 that she would not leave the infant behind.  There was  no
    evidence before the immigration judge that the child would therefore be
    left behind or that the child would be taken into care or that a  local
    authority was in  any  sense  involved  in  oversight  of  the  child's
    welfare.  We cannot see that there would be any interference  with  the
    appellant's family life with her child were she  to  leave  the  UK  in
    consequence of an adverse decision.  She will on the evidence take  the
    child with her.  We accept there would be some  interference  with  her
    private life given the length of time she has stayed  in  the  UK.   We
    turn then to the second of the Razgar questions.  On our  analysis  the
    appellant has to show that such interference with her private  life  as
    will result in her no longer having any right to remain in the  country
    will "have consequences of such gravity as potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8".  For this Japanese citizen to return with  her
    child to her home country where her parents live cannot on the evidence
    have grave consequences.

25.   We conclude that the appellant's Article 8  rights  are  not  engaged.
    Her only family life is with her child.  He will leave the UK with  her
    if she does so.  It is clear that her family life with  her  child  can
    reasonably be expected to be enjoyed in Japan.   There  is  nothing  to
    suggest to the contrary.  Equally the appellant's private life  can  be
    conducted in Japan.  There  will  be  minimal  adverse  effect  on  the
    appellant's child as he will be with his mother and go  to  Japan  with
    her.  Such breach as might arise of the appellant's  Article  8  rights
    cannot using the words of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 be of  "a  manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right
    protected by Article 8".  The consequences  to  the  appellant  of  her
    having no right to remain in the UK does not prejudice her family  life
    with her child to such an extent as  to  engage  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under the European Convention.

26.   It has not been necessary for us to  address  the  third,  fourth  and
    fifth Razgar questions.  But for the avoidance of doubt we  acknowledge
    that were we to be  wrong  in  our  conclusion  on  the  2nd  question,
    questions 3 and 4 would be answered in the  affirmative.   Any  removal
    would be entirely proportionate.  There are no serious difficulties (or
    insurmountable obstacles) preventing the appellant mother and her young
    child returning to Japan.

Decision

26.   For the reasons given above we conclude the  immigration  judge  erred
    in law in his approach to the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.  The immigration appeal should itself have been  decided  against
    the appellant which the immigration judge failed to do.  Accordingly,

        a) The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.
        b) The appeal under Article 8 ECHR is dismissed.


                                                            MR JUSTICE HODGE
                                                                   PRESIDENT


                                                           Date: 13 May 2008



