
JL (Domestic violence: evidence and procedure) India [2006] UKAIT 00058

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

    Heard at: Newport                                  Dates of Hearing:
                                12 April 2006
                                                                 31 May 2006
                                                 Promulgated on 12 July 2006

                                   Before:


      Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration
                                  Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                         Immigration Judge A D Baker

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms S Changkee of Albany Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr G Russell, Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. (a) Applications for ILR arising from domestic violence must  be  made
      by using the appropriate form.  An application made otherwise than  by
      form is not valid and cannot found a successful appeal.  (b) The  form
      may be a valid application even if it is submitted out of  time.   (c)
      If it is out of time, it will not give rise to a right of appeal under
      s82(2)(d) but will clearly  be  relevant  if  some  other  immigration
      decision  (e.g.  to  remove  as  an  overstayer)  is  made.   (d)  The
      Regulations (SI 2003/1712) contain provisions  relating  to  documents
      accompanying the form.  It is for the Secretary of State to  take  any
      point about missing documents within the prescribed time; if  he  does
      so the form is invalid and an appeal based on it cannot  succeed,  but
      if he does not, the application by form is to be treated as valid.  2.
       Evidence of domestic violence.  If (but only if)  there  has  been  a
      valid application, the Immigration Judge is not confined on an  appeal
      to the evidence "required" by the Secretary of State, nor is an appeal
      bound to fail if the "required" evidence has not been  produced.   The
      question of whether domestic violence has occurred is to be determined
      on the basis  of  all  the  evidence  before  the  Immigration  Judge.
      Paragraph 289A(iv) is to be read down to reflect this.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India who claims to be entitled to remain
    in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  victim  of  domestic  violence.   The
    respondent refused her application made on that basis and on 27 October
    2004 decided to issue removal directions against her as an  overstayer.
    She appealed to an Immigration Judge who allowed her appeal on what  he
    described as "immigration grounds" and separately under Article 8.  The
    respondent sought and was granted an order for  reconsideration.   Thus
    the matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant was born and brought up in India.   On  6  May  2001,  in
    India, she married her husband.  He was a British citizen who had  come
    to India for the marriage and to live with her.   The  couple  remained
    together in India until late  in  2001.   By  then  the  appellant  was
    pregnant.  On application she was on  8  November  2001  granted  entry
    clearance with a view to settlement as her husband's spouse.  The entry
    clearance was valid from 13 November 2001 for one year.   She  came  to
    the United Kingdom on 16 November 2001: the effect of her visa was that
    she thereupon had leave to enter until 13 November  2002.   A  son  was
    born to the appellant and her husband on 10 March 2002.  In April  2002
    the appellant's passport expired and she obtained a  new  one  in  this
    country, which was issued on 24 May 2002.  In the summer  of  2002  her
    parents sent her a ticket so that she could return to India.   She  did
    so, and, taking her son with her, went to  live  with  her  parents  in
    India.  Her husband remained in the United Kingdom.

 3. In December  2002  the  appellant's  husband  travelled  to  India  and
    persuaded her to return to  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  son.   She
    applied for and was granted entry  clearance,  again  with  a  view  to
    settlement as a spouse.  Her visa was issued on 31 January 2003 and was
    valid for a year.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 February 2003
    and thereupon had leave to enter until 31 January 2004.

 4. In July  2003  the  appellant's  aunt  visited  her  at  her  home  and
    eventually the appellant and her son left the matrimonial home to  live
    with the aunt.  The appellant has not since lived with her husband.

 5. The appellant says that the reason for her leaving her husband to go to
    India in the summer of 2002 and leaving her husband again in the summer
    of 2003 was that she was subject to domestic violence.  On 17  November
    2003 solicitors acting on her behalf wrote to the respondent's domestic
    violence unit applying for the  appellant  to  have  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a victim of  domestic  violence.   They
    supported the application by a copy of a statement which the  appellant
    had made two months earlier in connection with proceedings  brought  by
    her husband against the appellant under the Children Act 1989.  It  set
    out the factual basis for her application and it remains the basis  for
    her claim now.

 6. The respondent appears to  have  taken  no  immediate  action  on  that
    letter.  The position is not entirely  clear,  because  the  solicitors
    then acting for the appellant have closed their immigration  department
    and Ms Changkee who appeared before us told us that  it  had  been  not
    always easy to  interpret  the  way  in  which  their  files  were  put
    together.  What we do have is a  letter  from  the  respondent  to  the
    appellant's solicitor, dated 18 May 2004, in the following terms:

      "Thank you for the requested information however as  I  mentioned  in
        our telephone conversation today I still need details of  how  your
        client entered the UK.  Please could you complete  and  return  the
        attached questionnaire and also submit a full birth certificate  or
        passport for [the son].


      Please do not hesitate to telephone the  above  number  if  you  need
        assistance.


      If you do not produce the information requested within fourteen days,
        the application will be considered on the basis  of  the  documents
        and information you have already provided.  This  could  result  in
        the application being refused, as provided for in paragraph 322  of
        HC 395 of the Immigration Rules."

 7. The "questionnaire" was the form SET(O), to which we will make  further
    reference in due course.  The form was completed and  returned  to  the
    respondent apparently on 3 June 2004, apparently with  no  accompanying
    documents.  Again there was no immediate reaction from the  respondent.
    The application was, however, formally refused on 11 October 2004.   It
    is clear that the respondent had by then a copy  of  a  police  report,
    made in connection  with  the  proceedings  in  Swansea  County  Court,
    indicating that the appellant's  husband  had  been  reported  for  the
    offence of common assault and, upon caution, had made no reply.   There
    is also a Criminal Justice Act witness statement by  the  appellant  in
    connection with the same investigation.

 8. The letter accompanying the refusal includes the following passage:

      "5.   Your client has not submitted  any  of  the  relevant  documents
           that are required to consider a claim for  indefinite  leave  to
           remain on the grounds of domestic violence.
        6. Your client has failed to submit any objective evidence from the
           authorities which would support her claim.  The report  from  PC
           Andrew Gunn dated 30 September 2003 states  that  your  client's
           spouse has denied all allegations of  mistreatment  towards  his
           wife.  [He] has not received a police caution  for  his  alleged
           behaviour and your client has not sought any form of  injunction
           or protection order against her spouse.   Your  client's  spouse
           was given a caution for the offence of common assault which  has
           a six  month  time  limit  and  the  offence  according  to  the
           statement produced by your client was over a year old.
        7. Your  client  has  also  failed  to  produce  a  medical  report
           confirming that she has injuries that are consistent with  being
           a victim of domestic violence.
        8. Your client has stated that she had been 'treated like a  slave'
           and that her spouse had attempted to hurt her physically  during
           the marriage.  However, she does not explain when  these  events
           occurred and  whether  they  happened  during  the  probationary
           period of her marriage to  [her  husband].   In  addition,  your
           client only reported the alleged violence by her spouse  to  the
           police in September 2003, almost two years after she had arrived
           in the United Kingdom and faced any alleged abuse.  As such,  it
           is not possible to  say  whether  the  abuse  which  took  place
           happened during the probationary period of the marriage."

 9. The appellant appealed  against  the  decision  to  remove  her  as  an
    overstayer.  The respondent's appeal bundle summarises her  immigration
    history in the following way:


          "The subject entered the United Kingdom on 16  November  2001  and
          was granted leave to enter as the spouse of a person  present  and
          settled in the United Kingdom,  following  her  marriage  to  [her
          husband] on 6 May 2001.  On 13 November 2002 the  subject's  leave
          to enter expired and at this point she became an  overstayer.   On
          27 September 2004 she was served  with  an  IS151A.   The  subject
          applied for indefinite leave to  remain  on  4  June  2004.   This
          application was refused on 11 October 2004."

10. The appellant's appeal was heard by an Immigration Judge, Mr G  J  Hart
    TD, on 21 November 2005.  The appellant gave oral evidence  before  him
    and he had a considerable number of documents.  After setting  out  the
    immigration history and making  some  observations  about  the  law  of
    divorce, he noted that since the hearing he had received a  copy  of  a
    decree absolute made on 17 October 2005, following a decree  nisi  made
    on 14 July.   He  summarised  the  evidence  of  domestic  violence  as
    follows.  On 5 August 2003 the appellant made her Criminal Justice  Act
    statement.  That appeared  to  have  been  made  as  a  result  of  her
    husband's refusal to allow her to collect her valuables and belongings.
     The statement resulted in a police officer visiting her husband at his
    home, the report for possible prosecution for common assault and, as we
    have already recorded, the husband's lack of any comment,  following  a
    police and Criminal Evidence Act caution.  The next  event  appears  to
    have been that the husband instigated proceedings  under  the  Children
    Act 1989 claiming a residence order that the son should live with  him.
    That application was resisted by the appellant  in  the  terms  of  the
    statements to which we have already made  reference.   On  21  December
    2004 an order was made in Swansea County  Court  granting  a  residence
    order to the appellant with initially supervised contact or so  awarded
    to her husband.  In the  Immigration  Judge's  view  these  proceedings
    showed that there had been no reconciliation between the appellant  and
    her husband.

11. So far as domestic violence itself is concerned, the Immigration  Judge
    set out the evidence as follows:

        "The substance of the allegations of domestic violence is that  her
        ill-treatment began even before she left India  for  this  country.
        However [her husband] did not hit her but grabbed hold of her  face
        and applied pressure to her wrist.  When  she  came  here  she  was
        prevented from leaving the house by  her  husband's  relatives  who
        also lived there.  This prevented her from seeking outside help and
        approaching doctors and other agencies.  She was a young girl fresh
        from India with little experience of the world, let alone  life  in
        the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 9 she said  that  she  remembered
        once that he kicked her on her right side causing her leg to hit  a
        cupboard, at a time when she was heavily pregnant.  He shouted  and
        kicked her.  Following the birth of  her  son,  she  described  the
        uncaring behaviour of her husband  and  that  (para  11)  he  often
        slapped her on the face, held her tightly on the face  and  twisted
        her arm badly.  It was then that she left for her parents in India.
         However she was persuaded by  her  husband  to  return  and  again
        refers at para 40 to similar treatment placing his arm on her  neck
        and applying pressure but not leaving any  mark.   Accordingly  she
        had been back about six months before her aunt visited and she  was
        able to leave.  At para 70 she concludes by saying that her husband
        hit her many times but she was never allowed to go out and have her
        injuries looked at."

12. In the section of his determination headed "Findings", the  Immigration
    Judge  discussed  the  evidence  and  noted  that  although  the  Crown
    Prosecution Service were seeking  much  clearer  evidence,  it  was  is
    likely  that  the  District  Judge  would  have  made   an   injunction
    restraining the husband from further violence if it had not  been  that
    the appellant was able to go and live with her  aunt.   He  also  noted
    that  the  appellant  had  made  statements  which  were  substantially
    identical, and that one of them was under the usual conditions  imposed
    by the Criminal Justice Act 1967, that she was aware that if she stated
    something which she knew was false or did not believe to be  true,  she
    would be liable to prosecution.  The Immigration  Judge  continued  his
    determination as follows:

      "44.  The problem, unfortunately, is that the respondent's  attention
             has been directed to meeting the  documentary  requirements  of
             the  Immigration  Directorate  instructions  rather  than   the
             substance of the  allegations,  considered  in  their  cultural
             context. ...
         45. The requirement of the Rules  is  that  the  domestic  violence
             causing the permanent breakdown occurred before  the  probation
             period.  The difficulty here, of course, is that there were two
             separate periods of one year.  The fact  that  the  ECO  Mumbai
             granted a second period  of  one  year  suggests  that  he  was
             satisfied that the marriage was then subsisting and the parties
             intended to live together. ...
         46. As there has been no challenge to the extent and nature of  the
             domestic violence alleged, I find that  domestic  violence  has
             taken place.   It  is  at  the  lower  level  of  violence  but
             undoubtedly sufficiently distressing to cause the appellant  to
             leave.  It was long and  persistent.   I  therefore  find  that
             domestic violence was suffered  by  the  appellant  during  the
             relevant probation period thus meeting most of the requirements
             of the Rules.
         47. It does not appear to me to be reasonable that  the  respondent
             should set out outside  the  Rules  those  documents  which  he
             considers  might  be  produced  as  evidence  of  the  domestic
             violence but without considering what further evidence of  such
             violence might in fact be available.  I accept the  appellant's
             account that apart from the report  to  the  police  after  her
             departure, primarily to obtain  her  personal  belongings,  the
             appellant was unable because of her circumstances to report the
             matter to a doctor, general practitioner, or indeed the police.
              As she put it, she was treated as a slave by her husband.   In
             practical terms he and his family dominated  her  in  a  manner
             more appropriate to the Indian sub-continent than Leicester.  I
             do note that the Swansea County  Court  must  have  thought  it
             appropriate to protect the appellant and her son  by  making  a
             resident's order in her favour on the basis that such an  order
             was necessary.  I therefore find that the appellant has met the
             requirements of paragraph 289A of the Immigration  Rules  which
             was clearly introduced with the purpose of providing assistance
             to someone in the position of  this  appellant.   There  is  no
             indication that the appellant has fabricated  her  account  for
             the main purpose of perpetuating her  presence  here  following
             the end of a marriage of convenience."

13. The Immigration Judge went on to indicate  that  although  (as  he  was
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules) it  was  not  strictly
    necessary for him to consider Article 8, he would  in  fact  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 as well.

14. The grounds for reconsideration are as follows:

        "Rule 289A(iv) of HC 395 requires the production of evidence as may
        be required by the Secretary of State to  establish  that  domestic
        violence has taken place.  The evidence required is  thus  as  laid
        down  in  the  Secretary   of   State   Immigration   Directorate's
        Instructions (IDIs) chapter 8, paragraph 5.  It is  submitted  that
        the requirements of the IDI is to provide a low standard  of  proof
        that is appropriate when dealing with the sensitive  and  difficult
        circumstances that domestic violence  cases  can  present.   It  is
        further submitted that the evidence  presented  by  this  appellant
        fails to meet this low standard of  proof  and  a  finding  to  the
        contrary amounts to an error in law.  Indeed at paragraph 34 of her
        [sic] determination, the IJ details  an  extract  from  the  police
        constable's pocket book:


             '... it appears that the only note is that he had attended upon
             [the husband] administered a PACE caution and he therefore made
             no reply ... the inference is that [the husband]  was  reported
             for common assault but no further steps were taken'.


        The IJ refers to this document again at paragraph 44  and  contends
        that this document satisfies the requirements of the IDIs.


        Paragraph 5(iii) of the IDIs in particular requires  'full  details
        of a relevant police caution issued against the  sponsor'.   It  is
        submitted that the inference which the IJ refers to is  not  enough
        to satisfy this requirement.  This is particularly pertinent  given
        that the IJ is unable to point to any  evidence  that  specifically
        indicates any domestic violence had  occurred  or  that  any  other
        authority has taken seriously such allegations."

      The grounds also challenge  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  under
    Article 8.

15. It became apparent during the course of the hearing that,  as  well  as
    the issue raised by  the  grounds,  we  needed  to  be  concerned  with
    whether, and if so when, a valid application was made by the appellant.
     We heard further submissions on this issue at the  adjourned  hearing.
    The questions which we now need to decide are the following:

     1) Did the appellant make a valid application for indefinite leave  to
        remain by her letter dated 17 November 2003?
     2) If not, did she make a valid application for  indefinite  leave  to
        remain in her form SET(O) on 4 June 2004?
     3) Was the Immigration Judge restricted to evidence specified  by  the
        respondent in determining whether the appellant had been  a  victim
        of domestic violence?

Rules and Legislation

16. The relevant Immigration Rules are paragraphs 289A and 289B of HC  395.



        "Requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
        as the victim of domestic violence
        289A.          The requirements to be met by a person  who  is  the
              victim of domestic violence and  who  is  seeking  indefinite
              leave to remain in the United Kingdom are that the applicant:
        (i)      was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension
              of stay for a period of  2  years  as  the  spouse  or  civil
              partner of a person present and settled here; or
        (ii)     was admitted to the United Kingdom or given  an  extension
              of stay for a period of 2 years as the unmarried or  same-sex
              partner of a person present and settled here; and
        (iii)    the relationship with their spouse  or  civil  partner  or
              unmarried partner or same-sex partner,  as  appropriate,  was
              subsisting at the beginning of the relevant period  of  leave
              or extension of stay referred to in (I) or (ii) above; and
        (iv)     is able to produce such evidence as may be required by the
              Secretary of State to establish  that  the  relationship  was
              caused to permanently break  down  before  the  end  of  that
              period as a result of domestic violence.


        Indefinite leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence
        289B.    Indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  victim  of  domestic
              violence may be granted provided the Secretary  of  State  is
              satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 289A  is
              met."

    So far as the procedure on an application is concerned,  the  principal
    statutory requirement is in s31A of the Immigration Act 1971.






            "31A. Procedural requirements as to applications
            (1)    If  a  form  is  prescribed  for  a  particular  kind  of
              application under this Act, any application of that kind must
              be made in a prescribed form.
            (2)   If procedural or other steps are prescribed in relation to
              a particular kind of application under  this Act, those steps
              must be taken in respect of any application of that kind.
            (3)   'Prescribed' means prescribed in regulations made  by  the
              Secretary of State.
            (3A)  regulations under this section may provide that a  failure
              to comply with a specified requirement of the regulations -
              a) invalidates any application
              b) does not invalidate an application, or
              c)  invalidates  an  application  in  specified  circumstances
                 (which may be described wholly or partly  by  reference  to
                 action  by  the  applicant,  the  Secretary  of  State,  an
                 immigration officer or another person.
      (4)   The power to make regulations under this section is  exercisable
              by statutory instrument.
      (5)   Any such statutory instrument shall be subject to  annulment  in
              pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament."


17. The Regulations are the Immigration (Leave to Remain) (Prescribed Forms
    and Procedures) Regulations 2003 (SI 2003/1712, which came  into  force
    on 1 August 2003).  Regulation 9 provides:

      "(1)  The form set out in schedule 7  is  hereby  prescribed  for  an
             application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom:
            ...
            (l)  as a victim of domestic violence, for the purposes of  the
             Immigration Rules."


    Under the heading "Prescribed Procedures" in the same  Regulations  are
    the following:


      "11.  The following procedures are hereby prescribed in  relation  to
             an application for  which  a  form  is  prescribed  in  any  of
             regulations 3 to 9 above:
              a) the form shall be signed and dated by the  applicant,  save
                 that where the applicant is under the age of eighteen,  the
                 form may be  signed  and  dated  by  the  parent  or  legal
                 guardian of the applicant on behalf of the applicant;
              b) the application shall be accompanied by such documents  and
                 photographs as specified in the form; and
              c) the application shall be:
                  i)  sent  by  prepaid  post  to   the   Immigration   and
                     Nationality Directorate of the Home Office, or
                 ii) submitted in person at a Public Enquiry Office of  the
                     Immigration and Nationality Directorate  of  the  Home
                     Office.
           save that an application for  which  a  form  is  prescribed  in
           regulation 3A above shall be sent by prepaid post or by  courier
           to  Work  Permits  (UK)  at  the  Immigration  and   Nationality
           Directorate of the Home Office  and  may  not  be  submitted  in
           person at the Public Enquiry Office.
      12. - (1)  A failure  to  comply  with  any  of  the  requirements  of
             regulation  11(a)  or  (b)  above  to  any  extent  will   only
             invalidate an application if:
             (a)   the  applicant  does  not  provide,   when   making   the
                 application, an  explanation  for  the  failure  which  the
                 Secretary of State considers to be satisfactory,
            (b)  the Secretary of  State  notifies  the  applicant,  or  the
                 person who appears to the Secretary of State  to  represent
                 the applicant, or the failure within 21 days of the date on
                 which the application is made, and
            (c)  the applicant does not comply with the requirements  within
                 a reasonable time, and in any  event  within  28  days,  of
                 being notified by the Secretary of State of the failure.
      (2)   For the purposes of this  regulation,  the  date  on  which  the
                 application is made is:
            (a)  in the case of an application sent by  post,  the  date  of
                 posting. ..."

18. The prescribed form is  the  SET(O)  to  which  we  have  already  made
    reference, and which was used by the appellant in this  case.   Because
    of  the  reference  in  Regulation  9,  its  terms  are  part  of   the
    Regulations.  In part 7I of the form, we find this:

            "7I
            (    If you are applying as  a  victim  of  domestic  violence,
             document(s)  showing  that  you  are  the  victim  of  domestic
             violence:


              1. An injunction, non-molestation order  or  other  protection
                 order against your partner (see Note 4) or
              2. A relevant court conviction against your partner or
              3. Full details of relevant police caution issued against your
                 partner.  The information needed here is the full  name  of
                 your partner,  their  date  of  birth,  nationality,  their
                 address at the time of the incidents(s) and (if  different)
                 now and also the date, time and place  where  the  incident
                 for which the caution was issued, or  for  which  they  are
                 being prosecuted, took place.


             |                                                             |
|Note 4: An ex-parte or interim order is not sufficient for   |
|the purpose of this application.                             |


                 If you are not able to provide any of the of the  documents
                 or information listed at 1 to 3 above, you must provide  at
                 least two of the following types of document:


              a) A medical report from a hospital doctor or  a  letter  from
                 the family practitioner confirming that your  injuries  are
                 consistent with being a victim of domestic violence.
              b) An undertaking given to a court that your partner will  not
                 approach you
              c) A police report confirming your attendance at  your  (then)
                 address as a result of a domestic violence incident
              d) A letter from a social services department  confirming  its
                 involvement in connection with  domestic  violence  towards
                 you
              e) A letter of support or report from a women's refuge.


                 Whether your have provided document(s) at 1 to 3 or  a)  to
                 e) above, you must also provide  a  letter  signed  by  you
                 stating you are still living with your partner and, if  the
                 marriage or relationship has broken down, whether  domestic
                 violence was the reason for this."

19. The following more general provisions are also of relevance.  Section 3
    of the Immigration Act 1971 is, in part, as follows:


            "3.   General provision for regulation and control
            (1)   Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a
             person is not a British citizen -
                  (a)  he shall not enter the United  Kingdom  unless  given
                 leave to do so in accordance with  the  provisions  of,  or
                 made under, this Act;
                  (b)  he may be given leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
                 (or, when already there, leave  to  remain  in  the  United
                 Kingdom) either for a limited or for an indefinite period);
                  (c)  if he is given leave to enter or remain in the United
                 Kingdom, it may be given subject  to  all  or  any  of  the
                 following conditions, namely -
                       (i)   if a condition restricting  his  employment  or
                       occupation in the United Kingdom;
                       (ii)  a  condition  requiring  him  to  maintain  and
                       accommodate  himself,  and  any  dependants  of  his,
                       without recourse to public funds; and
                  iii) a  condition  requiring  him  to  register  with  the
                       police.
      (2)   The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as  soon  as
             may be) lay before Parliament statements of the  rules,  or  of
             any changes in the rules, laid down by him as to  the  practice
             to be followed in the administration of this Act for regulating
             the entry into and  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  persons
             required by this Act to have  leave  to  enter,  including  any
             rules as to the period for which leave is to be given  and  the
             conditions  to  be  attached  indifferent  circumstances;   and
             section 1(4) above  shall  not  be  taken  to  require  uniform
             provision to be made by  the  rules  as  regards  admission  of
             persons for a purpose or in a  capacity  specified  in  section
             1(4) (and in particular, for this as well as other purposes  of
             this Act, account may be taken of citizenship or  nationality).
             ...
          3) In the case of a limited leave to enter or remain in the United
             Kingdom, -
             (a)  a person's leave may be varied,  whether  by  restricting,
                 enlarging or removing the limit  on  its  duration,  or  by
                 adding, varying or revoking conditions, but if the limit on
                 its duration is removed, any  conditions  attached  to  the
                 leave shall cease to apply; ...".

20. Paragraph 32 of HC 395 is as follows:


           "32.  After admission to the United Kingdom any application  for
           an extension of the time limit on  or  variation  of  conditions
           attached to a person's stay in the United Kingdom must  be  made
           to the Home Office before the applicant's current leave to enter
           or remain expires.
           With the exception of  applications  made  under  paragraph  31A
           (applications at the port  of  entry)  and  paragraph  33  (work
           permits), 33A (applications made outside  the  United  Kingdom),
           paragraphs 255 to 257 (EEA nationals) and Part 11 (asylum),  all
           applications for variation of leave to enter or remain  must  be
           made using the form prescribed for the purpose of the  Secretary
           of State, which must be completed in the manner required by  the
           form and to be accompanied  by  the  documents  and  photographs
           specified in the form.  An application for such a variation made
           in any other way is not valid."

Did the appellant apply for indefinite leave to remain by letter?

21. It will be apparent from the facts as we have set them out  earlier  in
    this determination that the respondent's  summary  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history in the appeal bundle is somewhat wide of the  mark.
    The respondent appears to have been unaware that the appellant had left
    the country before the expiry of her first period  of  leave,  and  had
    been readmitted with a new grant of leave  to  enter.   (We  understand
    that the respondent makes no practice of keeping a record of aliens who
    are in this country, whether lawfully or unlawfully.)  The  appellant's
    leave did, however, expire on 31 January  2004,  which  was  after  the
    letter was written, but before the application form was  sent  in.   If
    she made an application during the  currency  of  her  existing  leave,
    therefore, it must have been by the letter.

22. The problem with that suggestion is the wording of s31A(1) of the  1971
    Act.  So  far  as  any  application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    concerned, an application for leave to remain as a victim  of  domestic
    violence must be an application for indefinite leave to remain, because
    the Rules make no provision for temporary leave in those circumstances.
     Regulation 9 of the Regulations prescribes the use of a form  for  the
    application.  Section 31A thus has  the  effect  that  the  application
    "must be made" in the prescribed form.

23.  We do not think there can be any proper argument about the  effect  of
    those provisions.  In the present case they mean not  merely  that  the
    letter (however it was treated by the respondent) was  not  capable  of
    being the appellant's application: they also mean  that  the  appellant
    made no application while she had extant leave.

24. That last consideration is  potentially  serious  for  at  least  three
    reasons.  First, it is only  if  an  application  is  made  during  the
    currency of existing leave that the applicant obtains the  benefits  of
    s3C of the 1971 Act, extending the leave until the determination of the
    application or any subsequent appeal.   Secondly,  it  is  only  if  an
    application is made during  the  currency  of  existing  leave  that  a
    refusal to vary leave will be appealable under  s82(2)(d),  because  if
    the leave has already run out before the decision is made, the decision
    does not itself have the effect of causing the  applicant  to  have  no
    leave.  Thirdly, paragraph 32 of the Immigration  Rules  provides  that
    certain applications must be made during the currency of existing leave
    and it therefore follows that in the case of an  application  to  which
    that paragraph applies, if the application was made other  than  during
    the currency of existing leave its refusal could not be  challenged  as
    not being in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

25. For these reasons, as we say, the failure to make an application within
    the currency of existing leave is  potentially  serious.   For  reasons
    which will appear, however, we do not regard any of  those  factors  as
    damaging to the appellant's position in this appeal.

Was the Form SET(O) a valid application?

26. The problems that the appellant might have to face in establishing that
    the form was a valid application for indefinite leave to remain as  the
    victim of domestic violence are, first, that the form was submitted  at
    a time when her leave had  expired  and,  secondly,  that  it  was  not
    accompanied by the documents by  which  the  form  is  required  to  be
    accompanied.

27. Looking first at the question of  time,  it  is  clear  that  (for  the
    reasons we  have  just  indicated)  if  paragraph  32  applies  to  her
    application, she is in difficulties.  In our view,  however,  paragraph
    32 does not apply to an application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Paragraph 32 applies to "any application for an extension of  the  time
    limit on or variation of conditions attached to a person's stay in  the
    United Kingdom".  Section 3(1) of the 1971 Act makes it clear that  the
    length of time for which leave is granted is not a condition.   Section
    3(3) of the 1971 Act makes it clear that when a time limit  is  removed
    any conditions attached to the leave cease to have effect.   For  these
    reasons it is clear that seeking indefinite leave to remain  cannot  be
    regarded as seeking a variation of the conditions of leave.

28. The question then is whether seeking  indefinite  leave  to  remain  is
    seeking "an extension of the time limit" of the leave.   Again  looking
    at s3(3) of the 1971 Act  (to  which  the  Immigration  Rules  must  be
    regarded as subject) there is  a  distinction  between  restricting  or
    enlarging the time limit and removing it.  It is only the last that has
    the effect of also removing any conditions.  This does not seem  to  be
    language which regards the removing of a time limit as in any  sense  a
    sort of extension of the time limit: it is a different type of decision
    altogether.  If a person succeeds  in  obtaining  indefinite  leave  to
    remain there is no limit  on  the  leave:  that  is,  after  all,  what
    "indefinite"  means.   For  that  reason  we  take  the  view  that  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain cannot  be  regarded  as  an
    "extension of a time limit" within the meaning  of  paragraph  32.   It
    follows  that  paragraph  32  does  not  require  an  application   for
    indefinite leave to remain to be made during the currency  of  existing
    leave.

29. We were directed to no other provision  requiring  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain to be made during the currency  of  existing
    leave.  We note in particular that paragraph 289A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules - that is to say, the paragraph with which we  are  substantively
    chiefly concerned - contains no requirement  that  the  applicant  have
    existing leave.  The lack of such a requirement is, so far  as  we  can
    see, a regular feature of provisions of the Immigration Rules regarding
    indefinite leave to remain, but is by no means a universal  feature  of
    the Rules: see for example paragraph  284,  which  requires  that  "the
    applicant has limited leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom"
    as one of the conditions imposed by the rule.   It is perhaps worthy of
    note that the  rule  giving  the  general  grounds  for  refusal  of  a
    variation of leave to remain in the United Kingdom, paragraph 322, has,
    as one of the "grounds on which an application to vary leave  to  enter
    or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused" a  "failure
    to comply with any conditions attached to the grant of leave  to  enter
    or remain", but, as  we  have  indicated,  time  is  not  a  condition.
    Paragraph 322 contains no provision penalising overstaying.

30. For the foregoing reasons we have concluded that the mere fact that the
    form was submitted at a time when the appellant  had  no  extant  leave
    does not prevent it being a valid application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a victim of domestic violence under the Immigration Rules.

31. There is one point that we should perhaps add.  Although  we  have  had
    cause here to interpret phrases relating to the variation of conditions
    and the extension of time, nothing that we have said should be taken to
    affect the usual meaning of the phrase "variation of leave".  A  person
    who has existing leave and who, during  the  currency  of  that  leave,
    seeks indefinite leave to remain, is  not  (for  the  reasons  we  have
    given) seeking a variation of conditions or the  variation  of  a  time
    limit.  Such a person is, however, seeking a variation of leave, and  a
    refusal in such circumstances would be a refusal to vary the leave.

32. The second question about the form is the effect of the failure to send
    to the Secretary of State all the documents required by the form.   The
    second part of paragraph 32 might  at  first  sight  appear  to  apply,
    because it requires that


        "all applications for variation of leave to enter or remain must be
        made using the form prescribed for the purpose by the Secretary  of
        State, which must be completed in the manner required by  the  form
        and be accompanied by the documents and  photographs  specified  in
        the form.  An application for such a variation made  in  any  other
        way is not valid."

      That is, however, not  the  end  of  the  matter,  for  at  least  two
    reasons.  The first is that, given that the appellant had, at the  time
    that she submitted the form, no existing leave, she  was  not  applying
    for any "variation" of leave.  She was applying for  a   new  grant  of
    leave.  (There is a contrast with the first part  of  paragraph  32  in
    cases to which that paragraph does apply: but  for  the  rule  in  that
    paragraph, a person might seek, for example, a retrospective  extension
    of a time limit.)  The second reason is that  the  rule  must  be  read
    subject to the statute and the statutory  instrument.   Section  31A(2)
    and (3A) allow the Regulations to prescribe  procedural  steps  and  to
    prescribe the effects of failure to comply with the  procedural  steps.
    The relevant Regulations are Regulations 11 and 12  of  the  Prescribed
    Forms and Procedures Regulations.  Regulation 11 requires the specified
    documents to  accompany  the  form,  but  Regulation  12  provides  two
    processes by which the failure  to  send  the  documents  will  not  be
    regarded as invalidating the application.  Under Regulation 12(1)(a) an
    applicant may  provide  an  explanation  for  the  failure,  which  the
    Secretary of State considers to be satisfactory.  Otherwise, it is  for
    the Secretary of State to raise the issue within 21 days of the date on
    which the application is made and it is only if the applicant does  not
    comply with the requirements within a reasonable time (28 days  at  the
    most) thereafter, that the application is to be regarded as invalid.

33. In the present  case,  although  there  had  been  some  correspondence
    between the Secretary of  State  and  the  appellant's  representatives
    before the form was submitted, the Secretary of State has pointed to no
    correspondence after the submission of the  form  that  could  possibly
    amount to notification under Regulation 12(1)(b).  The  effect  of  the
    failure to give any notification to the applicant is that  the  absence
    of the documents does not invalidate the form.

34. It follows from the above that the appellant made a valid out  of  time
    application for indefinite leave to remain as the  victim  of  domestic
    violence by her form submitted on 3 June 2004.

What evidence was the Immigration Judge entitled to  take  into  account  in
reaching his determination?

35. The appellant's application  was  refused  because,  although  she  was
    treated as having  by  some  process  made  a  valid  application,  the
    particular evidence demanded by the application form was not available.
     As we have  seen,  the  notice  of  refusal  challenges  substantively
    whether the appellant had been subject to domestic violence during  the
    probationary  period  of  her  marriage.   That  challenge  was  partly
    incoherent because the Secretary of State did not have knowledge of the
    dates of the probationary period.  The Immigration  Judge  recorded  in
    his determination that, before him,  the  occurrence  of  the  domestic
    violence was no longer contested.  We have no reason to suppose that he
    was inaccurate in so stating.   The  grounds  for  reconsideration  are
    devoted to procedural matters and, in effect, to the  admissibility  of
    evidence, rather than to the question of whether the domestic  violence
    actually occurred.

36. It is submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that,  because  of
    the terms of the Immigration Rules and  the  Immigration  Directorate's
    Instructions (IDIs) a person cannot succeed in an  appeal  against  the
    refusal of indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  domestic
    violence unless the domestic violence is proved in the manner required.
     Proof by other evidence, it is said, will not suffice if the specified
    evidence is not available.

37. We must deal first with the reference to the IDIs.  We think  they  add
    nothing to the Secretary of State's case, and  make  no  difference  to
    this appeal.  The IDIs are instructions by the Secretary  of  State  to
    his  officers.   They  are  not  part  of  any  statute,  or  statutory
    instrument, and they are  not  part  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State is not entitled by instructions to his  officers  to
    restrict the rights which would otherwise exist under  legislation  and
    the Immigration Rules.  It follows that the IDIs can be of relevance in
    an appeal only if they exactly reflect the contents of legislation  and
    the Immigration Rules or if they are more generous than the combination
    of those other sources.  The IDIs demand no further reference  in  this
    determination.

38. The suggestion that an appellant  appearing  before  the  Tribunal  and
    seeking to prove a fact of which he has the burden of proof is  limited
    to proving it by evidence and on terms prescribed by the respondent  is
    a  somewhat  alarming  one.   The  terms  of  paragraph  289A  of   the
    Immigration Rules, if interpreted in the sense for which the respondent
    contends,  and  if  directly  applicable,  as  he   submits,   to   the
    determination of an appeal, apparently mean that any evidence available
    to the appellant, however independent and however  persuasive,  can  be
    excluded  from  the  decision-making  and  appellate  process  by   the
    respondent simply not "requiring" it.  Further,  an  appellant  who  is
    unable to produce evidence that is "required" by the respondent will be
    prevented from proving his case, however persuasive the other  evidence
    that he submits.  If the  Secretary  of  State's  case  is  right,  the
    Immigration Judge could be required  to  dismiss  the  appeal,  and  to
    ignore the persuasive evidence, for the simple reason that the evidence
    "required" had not been submitted.

39. That submission is troubling.  It calls into question the  independence
    of the Tribunal as a trier of fact, because  the  respondent  seeks  in
    this way to control the Tribunal's access to evidence of the  facts  in
    question.  But, where the respondent does not challenge the accounts of
    the domestic violence, the submission moves from the troubling  to  the
    absurd.  It is in our view extremely  unlikely  that  Parliament  could
    have intended that the respondent was entitled to say (as,  in  effect,
    he does in this case): "I do not deny that you have been the victim  of
    domestic violence; you may well have been; but because you do not prove
    the domestic violence in the way that I require of  you  the  Judge  is
    required to find that it did not happen."

40. The mere fact that a conclusion is  troublesome  or  absurd  cannot  of
    itself give us jurisdiction to put matters right.  We should,  however,
    have those  considerations  in  mind  when  seeking  to  interpret  the
    statutory provisions which alone give the Tribunal jurisdiction.  There
    is no doubt that the appellant's claim to be  entitled  to  succeed  in
    this appeal (other than under Article 8) must depend on the duty of the
    Immigration Judge under s86(3) of the 2002 Act to allow the  appeal  in
    so far as he thinks that the decision "was not in accordance  with  the
    law (including Immigration Rules)".  Given the terms of the Immigration
    Rules, which require an applicant to produce "such evidence as  may  be
    required by the Secretary of  State",  it  is  clear  to  see  that  an
    appellant who seeks to succeed without producing such  evidence  has  a
    difficult task.  Is the task impossible?  If  it  is,  the  absurd  and
    troubling conclusion must stand.  We do not, however,  think  that  the
    task is impossible.  Four factors lead us to the  conclusion  that  the
    Immigration Judge is entitled to make a finding of domestic violence on
    all the evidence available to him and, if he makes such a  finding,  is
    entitled  to  allow  the  appeal  (other  things  being  equal)   under
    s86(3)(a).

41. The first factor is one to which we have already referred  in  passing.
    It is that the Tribunal is supposed to be an independent judicial body,
    and that the likelihood therefore that Parliament intended one  of  the
    parties to be in a position to control  the  other  party's  access  to
    independent fact-finding by the Tribunal is very low indeed.

42. The second consideration is that the Immigration Rules are addressed to
    those who make immigration decisions, not to  the  Tribunal  evaluating
    such decisions subsequently.  It may well  be  right  to  instruct  the
    officer making the initial decision, that he  is  to  make  a  positive
    decision in favour of the application only in certain circumstances.  A
    rule such as paragraph 289A which  is  so  obviously  directed  to  the
    process for applications is unlikely to be intended  to  regulate  also
    the substantive determination  of  an  appeal  before  the  independent
    Tribunal.

43. Those two considerations are not of themselves more  than  pointers  to
    the direction in which the other two considerations can take us.   They
    could not of themselves enable us to say  that,  in  a  case  like  the
    present, the Immigration Judge was entitled to allow the appeal in  the
    absence of the "required" evidence.

44. The third consideration relates to the question whether the  provisions
    of  paragraph  289A  are  intra  vires  the  Immigration  Act  1971  if
    interpreted in the way suggested by the Secretary of  State.   We  have
    set out the general provisions in that Act relating to  the  making  of
    Immigration  Rules  earlier  in  this   determination.    The   precise
    Parliamentary process by which the Rules are made is  not  for  present
    purposes in issue.  What is notable is that Parliament regarded  it  as
    necessary to add s31A.  That would appear to be an acknowledgement that
    the unamended provisions of the 1971 Act gave  no  power  to  prescribe
    forms or procedures as part of the Immigration Rules.  It would  appear
    to follow that the prescription of forms or procedures  does  not  come
    within the phrase in s3(2):

        "the practice to be followed in the administration of this Act  for
        regulating the entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons
        required by this Act to have leave to enter".

    Paragraph 289A does purport to  regulate  procedure  but,  as  we  have
    already shown, does so by reference to the express power given by  s31A
    and exercised by way of the 2003 Regulations.  But the power under s31A
    is not a general power to make Immigration Rules in an  area  in  which
    Immigration Rules could not previously be  made.   It  is  a  power  to
    impose procedural requirements by statutory instrument; it is  a  power
    to make such requirements in respect of applications; and it is a power
    to specify in the Regulations what would be the effect of  any  failure
    to comply with those Regulations.  There is no question  but  that  the
    Regulations themselves are intra vires, and in our  view  there  is  no
    question but that the Immigration Rules are intra vires insofar as they
    apply to applications.  The Immigration Rules perfectly  properly  can,
    and often do, summarise the law for the benefit  of  primary  decision-
    makers.  Paragraph 289A(iv) is certainly valid insofar as it summarises
    the impact of the Regulations.  But the Regulations apply only  to  the
    process  for  making  applications  and  for  determining  whether   an
    application is valid or invalid.  They have no  bearing  on  whether  a
    valid application should be granted or refused.

45. What is being said in  this  appeal  is  that  paragraph  289(iv)  also
    imposes procedural requirements on the determination of the  merits  of
    an application or appeal.  But if there was power to impose  procedural
    requirements by Immigration Rules, s31A would have been unnecessary.

46. For this reason we consider that the provisions of paragraph 289A  that
    refer to the need to provide the evidence "required" by  the  Secretary
    of State apply only within the parameters of s31A and the  Regulations.
    Once a valid application has been made the role  of  the  "requirement"
    ceases and, in accordance with the power to make them  under  s3(2)  of
    the 1971 Act, the provisions of paragraph 289A should be  read  without
    reference to the requirement.  On this view, for  the  purposes  of  an
    appeal, paragraph 289A(iv) is to be read down as:

      "(iv) is able to  establish  that  the  relationship  was  caused  to
             permanently break down before the  end  of  that  period  as  a
             result of domestic violence."


47. The fourth consideration is based on s85(4)  of  the  2002  Act.   That
    provision applies to in-country appeals,  and  it  is  clear  that  all
    appeals against the refusal of indefinite leave to remain as the victim
    of domestic violence are likely to be in-country appeals.  It  provides
    that the Tribunal


        "... may  consider  evidence  about  any  matter  which  it  thinks
        relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence which
        concerns a matter arising after the date of decision".

      The crucial phase for  present  purposes  is  "the  substance  of  the
    decision".  In the decision under paragraph 289A,  "the  substance"  is
    the domestic violence, not  the  question  whether  the  appellant  has
    produced the evidence "required".  Section 85(4) thus appears  to  give
    the Tribunal the power to consider any relevant  evidence  relating  to
    the domestic violence.  It is difficult to  see  what  the  purpose  of
    considering such evidence would be, if the Secretary of State is  right
    that it would have to be ignored unless  the  "required"  evidence  had
    also been produced.

48.  These  four  considerations  all  point  to  a  conclusion  that   the
    Immigration Judge is not bound by the requirements of the form or those
    of the paragraph 289A(iv) as expressed, but is  entitled  to  make  his
    determination on the basis of  all  the  evidence  before  him,  giving
    appropriate weight to each  item  as  he  thinks  fit.   It  follows  a
    fortiori that an Immigration Judge is entitled to find that  there  has
    been domestic violence, and to allow the appeal on  that  basis,  where
    the respondent concedes that there has been.  That  conclusion  follows
    whether or not the Immigration Judge finds that the "required" evidence
    has been produced.

49. For the foregoing reasons we find that the Immigration  Judge  made  no
    error of law  in  his  determination  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  We therefore do not need to  consider  whether  the
    appeal succeeds also under Article 8.

Postscript

50. We accept that it  may  be  that  the  appellant  in  this  appeal  was
    fortunate in that the  respondent  did  not  proceed  under  Regulation
    12(1)(b) by giving her notice of the failure to  provide  the  required
    evidence with her form.  The consequence of that, as we have found,  is
    that the application by form was a valid application in this case.   We
    emphasise that we have heard no argument, and we know of no reason,  to
    suggest that the Regulations are not entitled to provide  as  they  do.
    If the Secretary of State had followed the procedure  under  Regulation
    12(1)(b) and the appellant had still failed  to  provide  the  required
    documents, her application would certainly not have been valid.   Under
    those circumstances it appears to us that, even after  the  service  on
    her of some immigration decision, she would have been bound to fail  in
    any appeal under the Immigration Rules and the  general  law.   But  if
    there has been a valid application (either by supply of  the  documents
    or by giving an explanation for their absence that it  is  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State), then on an appeal the Immigration Judge cannot
    be restricted to the specified evidence in  determining  whether  there
    has been domestic violence.  We should also add that even if there  has
    been a valid application there will be no right  of  appeal  against  a
    refusal to vary the applicant's leave, if the application was made  out
    of time (see paragraph 24 above).   The  decision  against  which  this
    appellant appealed was a decision to  remove  her.   That  fact  itself
    carries a further hazard for prospective appellants because there is no
    general in-country right of appeal against such a  decision;  but  here
    again this appellant is fortunately placed, because  she  raised  human
    rights issues from the beginning and so  has  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal: s91(1) and (4).

51. Finally, after we had heard the substantive argument in this appeal but
    before the adjourned hearing, the Tribunal published its decision in RH
    [2006] UKAIT 00043.  Neither party made any submission on  it.   We  do
    not entirely agree with that decision.  In particular, we do not  agree
    that the Rules give a general power to make IDIs on procedural  matters
    going beyond s31A and the Regulations including the forms.  It  is  not
    entirely clear whether the application in that  case  was  invalid  for
    failure to comply with the  requirements  as  to  documents,  or  valid
    because the Secretary of  State  had  accepted  the  reason  for  their
    absence under Regulation 12(1)(a) although nevertheless deciding  that,
    without them, he was not persuaded on the  substantive  merits  of  the
    application.  To our mind, as  we  have  endeavoured  to  explain,  the
    distinction is crucial.  If the application was not valid,  the  appeal
    could not succeed.  If the application  was  valid,  the  appeal  could
    succeed despite the lack of documents.


Decision

52. We affirm the Immigration Judge's determination.  As he found,  and  we
    have agreed, that the respondent was  wrong  to  refuse  to  grant  the
    appellant indefinite leave to remain, we now direct that she be granted
    indefinite leave to remain under

    paragraph 289B of HC 395.




                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


