



|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|KA (EEA:family permit; admission) Sudan [2008] UKAIT 00052        |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|                                |                                |
|Heard at: Field House on 15     |                                |
|February   2008                 |                                |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
| SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|KA                                                                |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KHARTOUM                                 |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representation
For the appellant: Mr M Sowerby of Counsel instructed by YVA Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr M Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer

Article 5 of the Citizens Directive (Council Directive 2004/38/EC) does not
confer an unqualified right of pre-entry,  entry  or  residence  on  family
members of a Union citizen exercising Treaty  rights.  Family  members  are
required to have an entry  visa  in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EC)  No
539/2001 or, where appropriate, with national law. As explained in CO  (EEA
Regulations: family permit) Nigeria [2007]UKAIT 00070, the  United  Kingdom
has chosen to impose a visa requirement in the form of an EEA family permit
regime. If a family member arrives at a United Kingdom  border  without  an
EEA family permit and seeks admission, he must satisfy the requirements  of
regulation 11 of the 2006 Regulations. Whether a person is  entitled  to  a
right of admission under regulation 11 depends on his being able to produce
relevant documentation on that occasion (or within a reasonable  period  of
time thereafter).

                          DETERMINATION AND REASON


1. The appellant is a national of Sudan. On 3 August  2006  she  married  a
national of Sweden who has been in the United Kingdom since 2005 working as
a self-employed painter-decorator. She applied from Sudan for admission  to
the United Kingdom as the family  member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
rights of free movement under the Treaty of Rome. On 30  January  2007  the
respondent issued her with a refusal of an EEA Family Permit. It was stated
that he was not satisfied that her husband would be able  to  maintain  and
accommodate her adequately without recourse to public funds.  She  appealed
under reg 26 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
("the 2006 Regulations").


2. In a determination notified on 4  September  2007  Immigration  Judge  G
Jamieson dismissed her appeal. He considered that by virtue of reg 12(1)(b)
of the 2006 Regulations the appellant was not lawfully resident in  an  EEA
State and had thus to show that she met the requirements in the immigration
rules (other than those relating to entry clearance) for leave to enter the
United Kingdom as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.  The  relevant
immigration rule in this case was para 281.


3. Reg 2(1) of the 2006 Regulations defines "EEA  State"  to  mean  "(a)  a
member State, other than the United Kingdom;...". It is not in dispute that
the appellant has never been lawfully resident in an EEA State.  Nor is  it
in dispute that if the appellant was subject to  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules as set out in para 281,  then  she  could  not  meet  its
maintenance requirement.


4. The grounds were put entirely on the footing that the immigration  judge
was wrong to consider that the appellant was subject  to  reg  12  and  its
interlinked requirement that she be able to meet the  requirements  of  the
relevant immigration rules. He should have recognised, it  was  said,  that
the appellant derived a right of entry/residence directly from the Citizens
Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC). The latter, the grounds said, contains no
requirement that an applicant has to be lawfully resident in an  EEA  State
in order to make a  successful  application  to  join  his  or  her  spouse
exercising Treaty rights. Such an approach was said to be supported, or not
contradicted,  by  case  law,  in  particular  the  ECJ  cases  of  Jia   v
Migrationsverket (Case C-1/105) and  MRAX (Case  C-459/99  MRAX  v  Belgium
State [2002] ECR 1-6591), the Court of Appeal case of KG (Sri  Lanka)[2008]
EWCA Civ 13 and the Tribunal case of GC (Citizens Directive: UK  national's
spouse) China [2007] UKAIT 00056


The Legal Framework
The 2006 Regulations
5. Considering first  the  2006  Regulations,  regulation  12,  so  far  as
relevant, provides as follows:

              "12. - (1)    An entry clearance officer must  issue  an  EEA
             family permit to a person who applies for one if the person  is
             a family member of an EEA national and -
            (a)  the EEA national -
                       (i)  is residing in the UK in accordance with  these
             Regulations; or
                       (ii) will be travelling to the United Kingdom within
                     six months of the date of the application and will  be
                     an EEA national residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
                     accordance with these Regulations on  arrival  in  the
                     United Kingdom; and
            (b)  the family member will be accompanying the EEA national to
                 the United Kingdom or joining him there and -
                       (i)  is lawfully resident in an EEA State; or
                       (ii) would meet the requirements in the  immigration
                     rules (other than those relating to  entry  clearance)
                     for leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the  family
                     member of the EEA national or, in the case  of  direct
                     descendants  or  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
                     ascending line of his spouse or his civil partner,  as
                     the family member of his spouse or his civil  partner,
                     were the EEA national or the spouse or civil partner a
                     person present and settled in the United Kingdom.
           ...
            5) But an EEA family permit shall  not  be  issued  under  this
               regulation if the applicant or the  EEA  national  concerned
               falls to be excluded from the United Kingdom on  grounds  of
               public  policy,  public  security  or   public   health   in
               accordance with regulation 21."


6. Regulation 11 is also pertinent. Its relevant parts provide as follows:

      "11. - ...
           (2)   A person who is not an EEA national must  be  admitted  to
                 the United Kingdom if he is  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
                 national ... and produces on arrival -
                 (a)   a valid passport; and
                 (b)    an  EEA  family  permit,  a  residence  card  or  a
                     permanent residence card."


7.   Paragraph  5  of  regulation  11  makes  that  regulation  subject   to
regulation 19(1) and (2), which are as follows:


      "19. -     (1)   A person is not  entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if his  exclusion  is
             justified on ground of public policy, public security or public
             health in accordance with regulation 21.
                  (2)  A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United
                     Kingdom as the family member of an EEA national  under
                     regulation 11(2) unless, at the time of his arrival -
                       (a)   he is accompanying the EEA national or  joining
                         him in the United Kingdom; and
                       (b)   the EEA national has a right to reside  in  the
                         United Kingdom under these regulations."


The Citizens Directive
8. Article 1 of the Citizens Directive states that the Directive  lays  down
(a) The conditions governing the exercise of the right of free movement  and
residence within the territory of the Member States by  Union  citizens  and
their family members;...". Article 3, which sets  out  its  personal  scope,
states at paragraph (1):

        "This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move  to  or
        reside in a Member State other  than  that  of  which  they  are  a
        national, and to their family members as  defined  in  point  2  of
        Article 2 who accompany or join them."

9. The definition  of  "family  member"  for  these  purposes  includes  the
spouse, the civil partner in Member  States  where  civil  partnerships  are
recognised, the direct descendants under the age of  21  of  the  principal,
the spouse or the civil partner, and the direct descendents  and  ascendants
of the principal, the spouse or the civil partner who are dependants.

10. Articles 4, 5 and 6 deal  with  rights  of  exit,  entry  and  residence
respectively. The parts of Article 5 relevant here state:

      "1. Without prejudice to the provisions on travel documents applicable
      to national border controls, Member States shall grant Union  citizens
      leave to enter their territory with a valid identity card or  passport
      and shall grant family members who are not nationals of a Member State
      leave to enter their territory with a valid passport.
      No entry  visa  or  equivalent  formality  may  be  imposed  on  Union
      citizens.


      2. Family members who are not nationals of a Member State  shall  only
      be required to have an entry visa in accordance with  Regulation  (EC)
      No 539/2001 or, where appropriate, with national law. For the purposes
      of this Directive, possession of the valid residence card referred  to
      in  Article  10  shall  exempt  such  family  members  from  the  visa
      requirement.
      Member States shall grant such persons every facility  to  obtain  the
      necessary visas. Such visas shall be issued free of charge as soon  as
      possible and on the basis of an accelerated procedure.


      3. The host Member State shall not place an entry or exit stamp in the
      passport of family members who are not nationals  of  a  Member  State
      provided that they present the residence card provided for in  Article
      10.


      4. When a Union citizen, or a family member who is not a national of a
      Member State does not have  the  necessary  travel  documents  or,  if
      required, the necessary  visas,  the  Member  State  concerned  shall,
      before  turning  them  back,  give  such  persons   every   reasonable
      opportunity to obtain the necessary documents  or  have  them  brought
      within a reasonable period of time or to corroborate or prove by other
      means that they  are  covered  by  the  right  of  free  movement  and
      residence.


      ..."


11. Complementing Article 5, recital 8 states:

      "With a view to facilitating the free movement of family  members  who
      are not nationals of a Member State, those who have already obtained a
      residence card should be exempted from the requirement  to  obtain  an
      entry visa within the meaning of Council Regulation (EC)  No  539/2001
      of 15 March 2001 listing the third countries whose nationals  must  be
      in possession of visas when crossing the external  borders  and  those
      whose  nationals  are  exempt  from   that   requirement   or,   where
      appropriate, of the applicable national legislation".

12. Article 10 sets out the duty on Member States to issue  residence  cards
to family members of a Union citizen.

13. From the above it is clear that whereas  no  entry  visa  or  equivalent
formality may be imposed on Union citizens, that is  something  required  of
their family members - albeit Member States must grant such  persons  "every
facility to obtain the necessary visas...on  the  basis  of  an  accelerated
procedure".  From Article 5(4) it is also clear that where a  family  member
arrives at the border of a host Member State to seek admission,  he  or  she
must not be turned back without being given every reasonable opportunity  to
obtain the necessary documents showing they are  covered  by  the  right  of
free movement and residence.

My assessment
14. Mr Sowerby accepts that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of
the 2006 Regulations, regulation 12  in  particular.  He  submits,  however,
that the immigration judge  failed  to  give  any  reasons  as  to  why  the
Directive had no bearing on the  appellant's  case  and  that  on  a  proper
reading the appellant was entitled to succeed on the basis of the  Directive
itself.

15. So far as the former submission is concerned, it is  plainly  incorrect.
At para 15 the  immigration  judge  made  reference  to  the  provisions  of
Article 5(2) of the Directive, as  well  as  to  the  reference  therein  to
Article  10.  The  immigration  judge  correctly   considered   that   these
provisions meant that the Directive  required  family  members  to  have  an
entry visa in  accordance  with  Regulation  (EC)  No  539/2001,  or,  where
appropriate, with national law.

16. So far as the submission that the immigration judge should have  allowed
the appeal on the basis of the Directive itself, there is no  difficulty  in
accepting that provisions of a Directive can have direct effect (in  certain
circumstances), but  it is not entirely clear from Mr  Sowerby's  submission
what the right is which this Directive is said to confer.

17. If Mr Sowerby means  the  immigration  judge  should  have  allowed  the
appeal on the basis that the appellant had an  unqualified  right  conferred
by the Directive to a pre-entry EEA family  permit,  treating  that  as  the
United Kingdom equivalent of an "entry visa", that notion  clearly  founders
on the fact that Article 5, supported by  recital  8,  states  that  such  a
regime can be imposed in accordance with national law requirements. It  does
not require Member States to  ensure  that  such  a  regime  confers  on  an
applicant  an  unqualified  right  to  be   granted   such   a   visa/permit
irrespective of the requirements of national law. At most,  via  recital  6,
it requires that Member States ensure the  regime  is  consistent  with  the
principles of Community  law  and,  in  particular  the  principle  of  non-
discrimination; it must also be on the basis of an accelerated procedure.

18. If Mr Sowerby means to invoke  a  Directive-conferred  right  of  entry,
then (as the immigration judge noted), it is also clear from Article 5  that
in the case of family members such a right is one which can be made  subject
to an entry visa or equivalent formality. The Directive does  not  stipulate
that Member States must impose an entry visa regime to such persons, but  it
leaves them free to do so if they wish. Plainly the United  Kingdom  through
its implementing legislation (as  under  previous  Regulations  implementing
Community law) has chosen to impose such a regime. As noted by the  Tribunal
in CO at para 10:


      "Although Article 5 of the Directive contains restrictions on the need
      for visas in the case  of  persons  to  whom  the  Directive  applies,
      nothing in the Directive  requires  Member  States  to  use  an  entry
      clearance process by which a person's eligibility to be  admitted  can
      be determined other than at the border of the state in  question.  The
      possibility of  obtaining  an  EEA  family  permit  from  a  UK  Entry
      Clearance Officer abroad is a procedure not governed by the  Directive
      at all. A person who is able and wishes to take advantage of it is  at
      liberty to do so...Regulation 12 contains provisions purely of UK law:
      it has nothing to do with admission under EU law".

As the immigration judge noted, Regulation  (EC)  No  539/2001  lists  those
countries whose nationals require a visa for entry to  the  European  Union.
This list includes nationals of Sudan

19. If Mr Sowerby means that the immigration judge should have  allowed  the
appeal on the basis that the appellant had a Directive-conferred right to  a
residence card, then it can be seen from the Directive, Articles  5  and  10
in particular) that there is no provision for such a card to  be  issued  to
family members who have yet to arrive at the border of a  Member  State.  Of
course, a family member who has been in a host Member State already and  who
has acquired whilst there a residence card, is in a different  position.  If
such a person (after having left) seeks to  come  back,  there  is  no  visa
requirement: Article 5(2) stipulates that possession of  a  valid  residence
card exempts such a family member from the visa requirement; and as  recital
8 puts it, "those who have already  obtained  a  residence  card  should  be
exempted from the requirement to obtain an entry visa within the meaning  of
Council Regulation (EC) No 539/2001...". But Article 5 affords no  right  to
a residence card to a family member seeking entry from abroad  and,  if  the
family member already has a valid residence card,  he  does  not  require  a
family permit.

20. If Mr Sowerby means to submit  (as  his  reference  in  the  grounds  to
"residence" suggests) that the  immigration  judge  should  have  recognised
there  was  a  directly  effective  right  of  residence  pursuant  to   the
Directive, that submission overlooks that the Directive makes  no  provision
for a grant of a right of residence in advance of a  family  member  seeking
to accompany or join a Union citizen.

21. Mr Sowerby also submits that the appellant  was  entitled  to  have  her
right of entry as an EEA national recognised by virtue of Community  law  in
the form of leading judgments of the European  Court  of  Justice.  However,
none of the cases he cites relate to  the  situation  of  a  person  who  is
abroad and is seeking to obtain an entry visa  or  equivalent  formality  in
order to travel  to  a  host  Member  State.  Further,  so  far  as  Jia  is
concerned, that case does not establish that it is  unlawful  for  a  Member
State to make the grant of a residence permit to nationals of  a  non-Member
State subject to the condition that those  family  members  have  previously
been residing lawfully in another Member State; it only establishes that  it
is not unlawful if no such condition is imposed: see KH  (Sri  Lanka)  paras
53,63. As regards MRAX,  it  was  concerned  with  the  different  issue  of
whether a Member State could  send  back  at  the  border  a  third  country
national who is married to a national of a  Member  State  and  attempts  to
enter its territory without being in possession of a valid identity card  or
passport or, if necessary, a visa. The principle laid  down  in  MRAX  would
only have application to this appellant (if at  all)  if  she  attempted  to
present herself at the United Kingdom border.

22. To the extent that Mr Sowerby also sought to rely on the  Tribunal  case
of GC, that was concerned with an entirely different situation of  a  person
who had entered the United already (illegally).

The admission issue
23. Although the appellant was not entitled to succeed under regulation  12,
it is important to bear in mind that it does not follow that she  might  not
be in a position to benefit from regulation 11, were she to  arrive  at  the
United Kingdom border and seek admission  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
national exercising Treaty rights.  As noted by  the  Tribunal  in  CO  (EEA
Regulations: family permit) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00070 at para 6:

    "Regulation 12 sets out the circumstances under which a person applying
    from abroad (as is implied by  the  reference  to  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer) is entitled to an EEA  family  permit.   Sub-paragraph  (1)(a)
    sets out the conditions applying to the EEA national and  sub-paragraph
    (1)(b) sets out the conditions applicable to the family member.  As  is
    pointed out in the grounds for reconsideration in the present case,  if
    the family member is not presently lawfully resident in an  EEA  state,
    he must meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in order  to  be
    entitled to an EEA family permit. (In the  present  case  the  relevant
    rules would be those in paragraph 297 of the Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395.  As the appellant's mother is alive he would
    need to establish that his father has had sole responsibility  for  his
    upbringing or that there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
    reasons making his exclusion undesirable.  There is no suggestion  that
    he can meet the requirements of paragraph 297.)"


    "Other things being equal, therefore, a holder of an EEA family  permit
    is entitled to admission to the United Kingdom to accompany or join the
    EEA national whose family member he is.  What the  regulations  do  not
    say, however, is that a person who does not have a family permit is not
    to be admitted.  It would be surprising if there were such a  provision
    in the regulations because of the right of admission  apparently  given
    by the Directive.  As we have seen, certain family members (that is  to
    say those who are not already lawfully resident in an  EEA  state)  can
    have a  family  permit  only  if  they  meet  the  requirements  of  UK
    immigration law.  No  such  restriction  on  the  admission  of  family
    members of Union citizens is recognised in the Directive.

24. It is clear from the  immigration  judge's  determination  that  he  was
satisfied that the sponsor was  in  the  United  Kingdom  exercising  Treaty
rights at the date of  decision  and  that  the  couple  were  married.  The
respondent made no mention  of  any  reason  for  refusing  the  appellant's
application other than that he did not consider that the sponsor could  show
adequate support and accommodation would be available for  the  couple.  His
only reason for dismissing the appeal concerned the inability of the  couple
to show,  given  the  sponsor's  low  income  from  his  business,  adequate
maintenance and accommodation without recourse to public funds.  That  being
the case, it would seem that the appellant has established that she  is  the
family member of the person she claims he is, namely her husband.

25. In CO, where likewise it was found that the  appellant  could  not  meet
the requirements of the immigration  rules  (as  required  in  his  case  by
regulation 12(1)(b)(ii)), it was said that he  nevertheless  did  appear  to
qualify for a right of admission under regulation 11, at  least  insofar  as
he would be able to establish  that  he  was  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
national exercising Treaty rights. In the light of that  fact  the  Tribunal
in CO went on to state:

      "It follows that she is  entitled  to  the  admission  to  the  United
      Kingdom within the provisions of regulation 11(4). The  administrative
      arrangements (if any) needed to enable him to exercise that right  are
      not a matter for us".

26. It might be suggested that the Tribunal intended  here  to  declare  the
appellant's  right  of  admission  under  regulation  11,  which   in   turn
implements the right of entry under Article 5.  (As pointed out  in  NB  and
JN (Right of permanent  residence)  [2007]  UKAIT  00039,  the  Tribunal  is
obliged by s.84(1)(d) of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
to consider whether the decision appealed against  breaches  an  appellant's
rights under the Community Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in
the United Kingdom and in such circumstances a declaration can form part  of
a determination of the matter under s.86(2) of the same Act.  But if CO  was
read as making such a declaration, it would entail accepting that  a  person
who is not eligible for an EEA family permit (because  he  cannot  meet  the
requisite requirements of regulation 12) is nevertheless entitled  to  a  de
facto equivalent, namely a declaration that he  has  a  right  of  admission
subject only to administrative arrangements.  If  that  were  the  case,  it
would  create  legal  uncertainty  because  the  effect  would  be  that  an
applicant would be able to obtain the equivalent of an  EEA  family  permit,
even though failing to meet the requirements laid down for  such  a  permit.
It would also appear to ignore the fact that regulation 11 (like Article  5)
contemplates a test in the present, so  that  the  key  point  in  time  for
deciding eligibility is the date on which the applicant presents himself  at
the border (or within a reasonable  period  of  time  thereafter),  not  the
earlier date when he  presented  himself  to  an  entry  clearance  or  visa
officer abroad. Further, as Mr Blundell  pointed  out,  if  the  EEA  family
permit regime could be obviated in this way, it would have a  discriminatory
effect, since family members of  an  EEA  national  would  be  in  a  better
position,  at  the  entry  clearance  stage,  than  family  members  of   UK
nationals.

27. However, in my view all that CO  meant by  referring  to  the  appellant
being "entitled to the admission to the United  Kingdom"  was  that  on  the
facts of that case,  if  the  appellant  were  to  present  himself  to  the
authorities at the United Kingdom border, he would be in a position to  meet
the requirements of regulation 11, at least  so  long  as  he  was  able  to
produce the relevant documentation probative of his family relationship  and
of the fact that the EEA national he was  seeking  to  join  was  exercising
Treaty rights. The Tribunal  should  not  be  understood  as  purporting  to
declare  the  appellant's  EEA  rights  pre-admission.   Nothing   said   in
regulation 11 or Article 5 suggests otherwise.

 28. In this case, on the basis of the facts  accepted  by  the  immigration
judge, it would appear that the appellant was in a position to  qualify  for
a right of admission should she travel to the United Kingdom border  and  be
able  to  produce  the  relevant  documentation.  But  whether  she  had  an
entitlement to admission could not be established in advance of admission.

29. For the reasons I have given, I conclude that the immigration judge  did
not materially err in law  and  that  his  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
against refusal of a United Kingdom EEA family permit must stand.



                                    DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)

                                        Approved for electronic distribution
