
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

GM and AM (EU national; establishing self-sufficiency) France [2006] UKAIT
00059


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                        Date of Hearing:  16 and 23
May 2006
                                                 Promulgated on 10 July 2006
                                   Before:

 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy
                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb

                                   Between

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTAMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:          Ms N Rogers, Counsel instructed by Irving &
Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Lonsdale, Home Office Presenting Officer

An EU national child cannot establish a right of residence based upon  self-
sufficiency where the resources relied upon would come from  the  employment
of a non-EU national parent/carer who has no independent right to be  in  or
work in the UK.  Consequently, the  parent/carer  can  derive  no  right  of
residence under EU law in such circumstances either.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The first appellant was born on 27 September 1996 and is a citizen  of
     France.  The second appellant is her father.  He was born  on  3  July
     1967 and is a citizen of the Republic of Congo.

  2. The second appellant  met  the  first  appellant's  mother,  a  French
     national in the Congo in approximately 1981.  They had  two  children,
     including the first appellant.  In April 1999, the  first  appellant's
     mother moved to France because, it would seem,  of  her  health.   The
     second appellant remained  in  the  Congo  caring  for  his  daughter.
     However, in June 1999, he also left the Congo, it is claimed,  because
     of the troubles there.  The first appellant  remained  in  the  Congo.
     The second appellant  says  that  he  lived  in  the  Central  African
     Republic and he lost contact with his daughter.  In January  2001,  he
     came to  the  UK  and  claimed  asylum.   His  claim  for  asylum  was
     subsequently dismissed and he exhausted his rights of appeal.  He  has
     remained in the UK since that time.

  3. In March 2001 the second appellant arranged for the first appellant to
     come to the UK from  the  Congo.    When  here,  she  began  attending
     primary school where she has remained  and  is  looked  after  by  her
     father, the second appellant.   We were told  that  neither  appellant
     has any real contact with the first appellant's mother who,  it  would
     appear from the second appellant's statement, is  now  living  in  New
     Caledonia where she was born.   Because of his immigration status, the
     second appellant is prohibited  from  working  and  both  he  and  his
     daughter are dependent upon NASS funds which he has received since his
     arrival in the UK.

  4. In March 2004, applications were made on behalf of the appellants  for
     an EU residence permit and residence document respectively, based upon
     the first appellant's claimed right under EU law to reside in  the  UK
     as a student at school and her father's concomitant right to reside in
     the UK as her parent/carer.  On 11 March 2004, the Secretary of  State
     refused the applications.  The appellants appealed against  these  EEA
     decisions under regulation 29 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
     Area) Regulations 2000, SI 2000/2326 (as amended).

  5. In a determination promulgated on 15 September 2005, Immigration Judge
     Pitt dismissed the appeals concluding that  the  first  appellant  had
     failed to establish an EU right  to  reside  as  she  was  not  'self-
     sufficient'.  Her father was prohibited from  working  and  they  were
     both dependent upon public funds in the UK.   Consequently, her father
     also had no right to reside as her parent/carer.    In  addition,  the
     immigration judge dismissed the appeals under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
     The immigration judge saw no reason  why  the  appellants'  could  not
     return to the Republic of Congo (which she inadvertently  referred  to
     as the Democratic Republic of Congo) and maintain  their  family  life
     there.

  6. The appellants sought, and were granted, a  reconsideration  of  their
     appeals under s 103A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
     2002.   No challenge was brought to the judge's decision on Article 8.
      The sole issue was their respective EU right to reside in the UK.

The error of law

  7. Ms Nicola Rogers, who represented the appellants, argued both  in  the
     grounds of review and in her oral and written submissions to us,  that
     the Immigration Judge  erred  materially  in  law  and  therefore  her
     decision could not stand for three reasons.

  8. First, the Immigration Judge's decision was fundamentally unfair.   At
     the heart of the appellants' case was that they were 'self-sufficient'
     because the second appellant had an offer of a job which he would take
     if permitted by the Secretary of State to work.  At the hearing it was
     accepted by the Immigration Judge that there was no dispute as to  the
     primary facts of the case.  On this basis,  it  was  agreed  that  the
     second appellant need not give evidence.  Yet,  in  her  determination
     the Immigration Judge doubted the veracity of the evidence before her,
     particularly in relation to the offer of employment.   The  appellants
     were, thereby, unfairly deprived of an opportunity to  deal  with  the
     Immigration Judge's doubts.  Second, the Immigration Judge  failed  to
     give proper reasons why she had concluded  that  even  if  the  second
     appellant could work, there would be insufficient  resources  to  make
     the appellants self-sufficient.   Third,  the  Immigration  Judge  was
     wrong to conclude that the first appellant (and through her the second
     appellant) did not have an EU right to reside in the United Kingdom as
     a student or self-sufficient person.

  9. We will take the first and second issues together as they are  closely
     related.   Both  arise  from  the  Immigration  Judge's  treatment  in
     paragraphs [16] to [18] of her determination of  a  central  piece  of
     evidence from the appellants' perspective, namely a letter from Dankif
     Limited dated 15 July 2005 offering the second appellant a  job  as  a
     computer engineer once he had obtained a work  permit.   Ms  Lonsdale,
     who represented the Secretary of State, acknowledged that the  factual
     basis  of  the  appellants'  claims  was  not  disputed   before   the
     Immigration Judge or  indeed  before  us.   We  accept  that  was  the
     position before the Immigration Judge and, for that reason, the second
     appellant was not called to give evidence.   In  those  circumstances,
     the Immigration Judge was wrong in paragraph [16] of her determination
     to go behind the position accepted by the parties, and the Immigration
     Judge herself, at the hearing and to question the genuineness  of  the
     job offer.  In the circumstances, it had to be taken  at  face  value.
     Thereby, the appellants were deprived of the opportunity to deal  with
     a matter that was an important aspect of the appellants' cases.

 10. Further, the Immigration Judge  concluded  that  even  if  the  second
     appellant worked, he would not be able  to  support  himself  and  his
     daughter so as to be 'self-sufficient'.  Ms Rogers  takes  issue  with
     this and submits that in reaching such a  conclusion  the  Immigration
     Judge could not have properly taken account of all the evidence before
     her.  The nature  of  the  job  offer  and  the  evidence  before  the
     Immigration  Judge  of  the  second  appellant's  qualifications   and
     experience in the computer field made the  conclusion  untenable.   Ms
     Rogers' submission comes close to asserting a factual, rather than,  a
     legal error.  We must be cautious not to elevate mere  factual  errors
     into legal ones.  The Immigration Judge was required to take  the  job
     offer as a computer engineer at face value; she also had a  number  of
     documents relating to the second appellant's previous  experience  and
     qualifications before her (see pp 32-40 of appellant's appeal bundle);
     and finally the Immigration Judge had evidence of the remuneration for
     work of the type contemplated by  the  second  appellant  (pp  52-65).
     Taking all this evidence into account the Immigration Judge could  not
     properly conclude that the second appellant - if he worked as  claimed
     - would not be able  to  support  himself  and  his  daughter  and  to
     purchase health insurance.  Her conclusion is "demonstrably  erroneous
     or baseless, not simply debatable; and ... potentially  determinative"
     (per Sedley LJ in Krasniqi v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  391  at  paragraph
     [13]).  For these cumulative reasons, we have concluded that the judge
     erred in law.

 11. The Immigration Judge's decision can only not stand, however,  if  her
     error was "material" to  the  decision  (rule  31(2),  2005  Procedure
     Rules).  That issue depends upon the third basis upon which Ms  Rogers
     put the appellants' cases.  Does the first  appellant  (and  also  the
     second appellant by derivation) have a right to reside in  the  UK  by
     virtue of EU law? If the answer to that question  is  'no',  then  the
     Immigration Judge's error of law was not material as the appeals  were
     bound to fail.   In addressing that issue, we indicated at the hearing
     that the Tribunal would proceed on the basis of the accepted evidence,
     in particular that the second appellant has a job offer which he  will
     be able to take up if permitted to by the Secretary of State and which
     would make the appellants "self-sufficient" for the purposes of  their
     EU rights.

The right of residence under Article 18, EC Treaty and Directive 90/364

 12. Ms Rogers provided us with a detailed and  helpful  skeleton  argument
     together with a bundle of authorities in the Court  of  Justice.   The
     essence of the appellants' case is as follows.  The first appellant is
     a French national in the UK.  She is a  student  at  a  state  primary
     school.  As such, she has an EU right to reside in  the  UK  providing
     that she is self-sufficient.   Ms  Rogers  submitted  that  the  first
     appellant's right was derived from Article 18 EC Treaty and  Directive
     90/364.  The second appellant, as her parent/carer, also had a derived
     right to remain with her in order that she  may  effectively  exercise
     her own EU right.  He too has to be self-sufficient.   For the  second
     appellant's right, Ms Rogers relied upon the decisions of the Court of
     Justice in Baumbast and R v SSHD (Case C-413/99)  [2003]  INLR  1  and
     Chen and another v SSHD (Case C-200/02) [2005] INLR 1.

 13. In relation to self-sufficiency, Ms Rogers submitted that  the  second
     appellant would be able to support both himself and  his  daughter  if
     allowed to work.  His potential earnings could be taken into  account.
     Not to do so would fall foul  of  the  requirement  found  in  the  EU
     legislative provisions and the jurisprudence of the Court  of  Justice
     that any limitation on the right of residence must be proportionate in
     the sense of being necessary for the protection of the public finances
     of the Member State.

     The applicable law

 14. As we have indicated, the appellants rely - at least in respect of the
     first appellant's rights - upon Article 18  EC  Treaty  and  Directive
     90/364.  We were also referred to a  number  of  other  EU  provisions
     including Directives 93/96  (dealing  with  students  on  vocation  al
     courses) and EU Regulation 1612/68 and Directive 68/360 (dealing  with
     workers and their families).   Their transposition into UK law is, for
     the most part, effected by the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
     Regulations 2000, SI 2000/2326  (the  "EEA  Regulations  2000").   The
     relevance of some of these provisions to the rights  of  movement  and
     residence of a school student and her parent/carer is,  in  our  view,
     tangential at best.   However, the real difficulty is that  they  have
     been replaced by Directive 2004/38 with effect  from  30  April  2006.
     That directive has been transposed into  UK  law  by  the  Immigration
     (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006,  SI  2006/1003  (the  "EEA
     Regulations 2006") also with effect from 30  April  2006.   Ordinarily
     this would not present  a  problem  since  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decisions were taken before 30 April 2006 under  the  EEA  Regulations
     2000 and they would,  again  ordinarily,  remain  in  effect  for  the
     purposes of those  applications  and  any  subsequent  appeals.    The
     transitional provisions in the EEA Regulations 2006 produce,  however,
     an altogether different, and somewhat surprising, outcome.

 15. Schedule 4 to the EEA Regulations  2006  provides  in  paragraph  5(1)
     provides as follows:

           "5(1) Where an appeal against an EEA  decision  under  the  2000
           Regulations is pending immediately before 30th April  2006  that
           appeal  shall  be  treated  as  a  pending  appeal  against  the
           corresponding EEA Decision under these Regulations."

 16. That provision applies here.  There  are  no  transitional  provisions
     "saving" the EEA Regulations 2000 for  'old  cases'  which  are  quite
     simply revoked by effect of regulation 31(2) of and schedule 3 to  the
     EEA Regulations 2006.  Hence, the appellants  are  to  be  treated  as
     appealing against decisions under the  latter  Regulations  to  refuse
     them a registration certificate and  a  residence  card  respectively.
     The appeal is to be treated as brought under regulation 26 of the 2006
     Regulations.  The substance of the  appellants'  rights  (particularly
     that of the first appellant) is governed by the EEA  Regulations  2006
     and, it would seem, the new  EEC  Directive  2004/38.   There  may  be
     situations where this retrospective  application  of  the  latter  two
     provisions creates difficulties and  may  affect  the  outcome  of  an
     appeal.  This is not one of those cases.  As will  become  clear,  for
     our purposes in this appeal Directive 2004/38 and the EEA  Regulations
     2006,  reflect  the  earlier  EU  legislative  provisions  and   their
     interpretation by the Court of Justice.

      The first appellant

 17. The proper starting point in this appeal must be to consider what,  if
     any, rights of movement and residence  vest  in  the  first  appellant
     under EU law.  Any right that the second appellant may have,  must  be
     derived from the first appellant's rights as an EU citizen in the  UK.
     It has rightly not been suggested to  us  that  the  second  appellant
     could have any free-standing rights of his own.

 18. The first appellant's EU right  is  based  upon  her  being  a  school
     student and, it is claimed, a self-sufficient EU citizen  in  the  UK.
     It is not suggested that the first appellant's rights are derived from
     her receipt of services.  That would be unarguable since it  is  clear
     that such services must be provided for remuneration (Belgium v Humbel
     [1989] 1 CMLR 393).  Whilst that could apply to a student  at  a  fee-
     paying school, it has no application to a student, such as  the  first
     appellant, who is in receipt of free state education.   Likewise,  the
     first appellant cannot rely on Directive 93/96 which only  applies  to
     students following vocational training courses.   Obviously, that  has
     no application to a student undergoing primary (or  indeed  secondary)
     school education (Lair v Universit�t Hanover (Case 39/86)  [1988]  ECR
     3161).

 19. Instead, it is said that the source of the first appellant's right  as
     a student is Article 18 of EC Treaty which is in the following terms:

           "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in this  Treaty  and
           by the measures adopted to give it effect.

           2. If action by the Community should prove necessary  to  attain
           this objective and this Treaty has not  provided  the  necessary
           powers,  the  Council  may  adopt  provisions  with  a  view  to
           facilitating the exercise of the rights referred to in paragraph
           1. The Council  shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  procedure
           referred to in Article 251."

 20. This provision does not, on its face, explicitly recognise  the  right
     of free movement and residence of a student.  It is a general right of
     EU citizens subject, as Article 18(1) makes clear, to limitations  and
     conditions laid down to its exercise.  It might further be argued that
     Article 18 itself does not create a  free-standing  right  but  rather
     requires "measures [to be] adopted to  give  it  effect".    One  such
     legislative provision would be, as we  shall  see  shortly,  Directive
     90/364 in respect of the "self-sufficient" EU citizen.

 21. Ms Rogers, however, relies upon the Court  of  Justice's  decision  in
     D'Hoop v Office national de l'emploi  (Case C-224/98)  [2202]  ECR  I-
     6191 for the proposition that EU nationals  in  education  in  another
     member State are exercising their fundamental right to move and reside
     freely under Article 18.  The case concerned a  Belgium  national  who
     had completed her secondary education in France and then  returned  to
     Belgium to study at university.  After university, she sought a social
     benefit paid to young people who have completed their studies and  are
     seeking their first job.  She was refused because  she  had  completed
     her secondary education in France rather than Belgium.  The  Court  of
     Justice concluded that  this  was  unlawful.   The  Court  of  Justice
     reasoned that it resulted in an inequality  of  treatment  between  an
     individual who had exercised a "right of free movement" under  Article
     18 (as had the applicant by studying in France) and one  who  had  not
     and had  completed  their  studies  in  their  own  country  (see,  in
     particular paragraphs [30] and [33]).

 22. D'Hoop was cited with approval by the Court of Justice in  R(Bidar)  v
     London Borough of Ealing (Case C-209/03) at  paragraph  [35]  but  the
     latter case does not seem to take the matter any further forward.   Be
     that as it may, those decisions are, in our view,  founded  upon  that
     right and are, we would accept, authority  for  its  existence.   What
     D'Hoop and Bidar do not address is  the  scope  or  substance  of  the
     right.  For that, we turn to the  recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
     Appeal in Ali v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 484.

 23. The essential facts of Ali v SSHD were as follows.  The appellant  was
     a Somali national whose claim for asylum in the UK had been  rejected.
     As a result of a relationship with a Dutch national, he had a son  who
     was a Dutch national of Somali origin and lived in the  UK.    At  the
     time of the application his son was aged 5 and in school  in  the  UK.
     The appellant argued that his son, as an EU national, had a  right  of
     residence in the UK by virtue of Article 18 of the EC Treaty and  that
     he, as his primary carer, had a derived right which entitled him  also
     to reside in the UK to look after him.  The family  had  no  means  of
     support other than through the social security system.  The  appellant
     argued that Article 18 created an unlimited right of  residence.   The
     Secretary of  State  argued  that  the  existence  of  the  right  was
     predicated upon the individual having sufficient resources not  to  be
     an unreasonable financial burden upon the state.   Article 18 did  not
     create an unqualified or unlimited right. The Court of Appeal accepted
     the latter argument.  Referring to "the persistent theme"  in  the  EU
     legislation and Court of Justice's  case  law,  the  Court  of  Appeal
     concluded that Article 18 did  not  confer  an  unqualified  right  of
     residence.  It arose only when  the  EU  national  would  not  be  "an
     unreasonable burden on the  public  finances"  of  the  host  country.
     Consequently, the appellant's son had no right  of  residence  derived
     from Article 18, and hence the appellant had no derived right  as  his
     carer.  We are grateful to Ms Lonsdale for referring us to this recent
     and important case.  The Court of Appeal's decision is instructive for
     a number of reasons.

 24. First, and perhaps most obviously, with the exception  of  one  matter
     its facts  strongly  resemble  the  instant  case.   Like  the  second
     appellant in this appeal, the appellant in Ali did not  work  and,  it
     would seem, could not work presumably because  he  too  was  a  failed
     asylum seeker.  He and his son, as are the appellants  in  this  case,
     were dependent  on  public  funds  to  survive.   The  one  matter  of
     difference is, of course, that in Ali the appellant  did  not  produce
     any evidence of a job  offer.     The  appellant  in  Ali  could  not,
     therefore, mount the argument which Ms  Rogers  does  in  this  appeal
     that,  as  a  result,  the  appellant   was   self-sufficient.    That
     distinction on the facts cannot be gainsaid.  Thus, the situation with
     which we are faced in this appeal did not arise for decision, nor  was
     it discussed, by the Court of Appeal.

 25. Second, there is no doubt that the Court of Appeal accepted that an EU
     national does have a right of movement and  residence  within  the  EU
     qualified by the need for self-sufficiency.  The probable  source  for
     that right was Article 18 itself.  We say probable because  the  Court
     did not interpret D'Hoop, as we have done, as  recognising  any  right
     under Article 18 (see para [20] per Keene LJ).   The Court  of  Appeal
     was certainly influenced by, and may have located the  source  of  the
     right in, Directive 90/364 which confers a right of residence  for  EU
     nationals (and certain family members) in other Member States provided
     they  are  "self-sufficient",  namely  that  they  have  comprehensive
     sickness insurances and the resources to avoid being a burden  on  the
     social assistance system of that other country.   Article 1 of  90/364
     provides as follows:
           "1.  Member  States  shall  grant  the  right  of  residence  to
           nationals of Member States who do not  enjoy  this  right  under
           other provisions of  Community  law  and  to  members  of  their
           families  as  defined  in  paragraph  2,  provided   that   they
           themselves and the members of  their  families  are  covered  by
           sickness insurance in respect of all risks in  the  host  Member
           State and have sufficient resources to avoid becoming  a  burden
           on the social assistance system of the host Member State  during
           their period of residence.
           The resources referred to in the  first  subparagraph  shall  be
           deemed sufficient where  they  are  higher  than  the  level  of
           resources below which the host Member  State  may  grant  social
           assistance to its nationals, taking into  account  the  personal
           circumstances of  the  applicant  and,  where  appropriate,  the
           personal circumstances of persons admitted pursuant to paragraph
           2.
           Where the second subparagraph cannot  be  applied  in  a  Member
           State, the resources of the applicant shall be deemed sufficient
           if they are higher than the level of the minimum social security
           pension paid by the host Member State.
           2. The following shall, irrespective of their nationality,  have
           the right to install themselves in another Member State with the
           holder of the right of residence:
           (a) his or her spouse and their descendants who are dependants;
           (b) dependent relatives in the ascending line of the  holder  of
           the right of residence and his or her spouse."
 26. In Ali v SSHD, the Court of Appeal may have intended no more  than  to
     rely upon the self-sufficiency element of Directive 90/364 in order to
     fashion a mirror requirement where reliance is  placed  directly  upon
     the right in Article 18 (see the court's reference to  R  v  SSHD,  ex
     parte Vitale [1996] All ER (EC) 461 at paras [23] and  [24]  of  Keene
     LJ's judgment).  Thus, whether derived exclusively from Article 18  or
     when read together with Directive 90/364, the content of the right  is
     clear from the Court of Appeal's decision which is binding upon us and
     applicable in this case (and see now the  Court  of  Justice's  recent
     decision, Commission v Belgium  (Case C-408/03) at paras [34] - [36]).

 27. For completeness, we should add that Directive 90/364 was given effect
     in the UK by the EEA Regulations  2000,  in  particular  regulation  5
     (defining "qualified person" as including a  "self-sufficient  person"
     and  regulation  3(1)(e),  (2)  and  (5)   defining   "self-sufficient
     person").  We note that the EEA Regulations 2000  did  not  include  a
     school student within the definition  of  a  "student"  (reg  3(1)(g))
     which is restricted to a  student  following  a  "vocational  training
     course" (reg 3(1)(g)(ii)).

 28. Directive 90/364 has now been replaced by Directive  2004/38  and,  in
     turn,  the  EEA  Regulations  2000  have  been  replaced  by  the  EEA
     Regulations  2006.   Both  contain  provisions  conferring  rights  of
     residence on EU nationals (and certain family members) who  are  self-
     sufficient (Art 7 and regs 6 and 4(1)(c), (2) and  (4)).    Regulation
     4(1)(c) of the EEA Regulations 2006 states that:

           "(c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-


                 (i) sufficient resources not to  become  a  burden  on  the
                 social assistance system of the United Kingdom  during  his
                 period of residence; and


                 (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in  the  United
                 Kingdom; ... ."

 29. Regulation 4(2) requires that the EU national's "family  members"  are
     also  covered  by  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  and  the  total
     resources of that individual and his family will avoid them becoming a
     burden on the social assistance system.  It provides as follows:

           "(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family  members
           of the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom  and  their
           right to reside is dependent upon their being family members  of
           that person-


           (a) the requirement for that person to have sufficient resources
           not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of  the
           United Kingdom during his period  of  residence  shall  only  be
           satisfied if his resources and those of the family  members  are
           sufficient to avoid him and the family members becoming  such  a
           burden;

           (b) the  requirement  for  that  person  to  have  comprehensive
           sickness insurance cover in the United  Kingdom  shall  only  be
           satisfied if he and his family members have such cover."

 30.  The  level  of  resources  required  is  that  sufficient  to   avoid
     eligibility to  social  assistance  in  the  UK.   This  is  found  in
     Regulation 4(4):

           "(4)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (1)(c)  and  (d)   and
           paragraphs (2) and (3), the resources of  the  person  concerned
           and, where applicable, any family members, are to be regarded as
           sufficient if they exceed the maximum level of resources which a
           United Kingdom national and his family members may possess if he
           is to become eligible for social  assistance  under  the  United
           Kingdom benefit system."

 31. In addition, for the first time both Directive  2004/38  and  the  EEA
     Regulations 2006 contain specific  provisions  including,  within  the
     definition of a "qualified person" who is a "student",  persons  other
     than those following a vocational training  course  such  as  children
     attending a state school.  It  will  suffice  to  set  out  regulation
     4(1)(d) of the EEA Regulations 2006 which states:

           "(d) "student" means a person who-
                 (i) is enrolled  at  a  private  or  public  establishment,
                 included on the Department for
                 Education and Skills' Register of  Education  and  Training
                 Providers or financed from public funds, for the  principal
                 purpose  of  following  a  course   of   study,   including
                 vocational training;


                 (ii) has comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  in  the
                 United Kingdom; and


                 (iii) assures  the  Secretary  of  State,  by  means  of  a
                 declaration, or by such equivalent means as the person  may
                 choose, that he has sufficient resources not  to  become  a
                 burden on  the  social  assistance  system  of  the  United
                 Kingdom during his period of residence."


 32. Thus, as with  the  'self-sufficient'  EU  national,  an  EU  national
     student must also be 'self-sufficient'.  The requirements  effectively
     mirror one another.  Regulation 4(3) stipulates that the  EU  national
     must "assure" the Secretary of State that he and  his  family  members
     have the resources not be a burden on  the  social  assistance  system
     during their period of residence.  We do not  see  any  difference  in
     substance between the student's requirement to "assure" the  Secretary
     of State that  he  has  those  resources  (reg  4(3))  and  the  self-
     sufficient person's obligation to "have" those  resources  (reg  4(2).
     As we have already seen, Regulation 4(4)  specifies  that  a  person's
     resources are "sufficient" if they exceed the  resources  below  which
     the individual will be eligible for social assistance.

 33. In Ali v SSHD, the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  that  its  decision
     reflected the requirements of Directive 2004/38  (see  para  [27]  per
     Keene LJ).  That is plainly correct even where the EU national and his
     family rely upon the right of residence for  a  period  of  less  than
     three months (see, Art 6 read with Art 14(1) Directive 2004/38 and reg
     13(3)(b), EEA Regulations 2006 -  must  not  become  "an  unreasonable
     burden on the social assistance system").

 34. The upshot is that an EU citizen, whether school student or not, has a
     right of free movement  to  and  residence  in  another  Member  State
     providing that she (and her family members) are self-sufficient in the
     sense of being covered by comprehensive  sickness  insurance  and  not
     being an (unreasonable) burden upon the social  assistance  system  of
     the receiving state.  That right is derived from Article 18 of the  EC
     Treaty and Directive 90/364 and is repeated in substance in  Directive
     2004/38 and the EEA Regulations 2006.  Subject to the element of self-
     sufficiency, that right applies to the first appellant in this appeal.

      The second appellant

 35. What right of residence, if any, does the  second  appellant  possess?
     It was not disputed before us that he does not  have  a  free-standing
     right to reside in the UK under EU law or indeed any law.  His  right,
     if any, is derived from that of  his  daughter  as  her  parent/carer.
     None of the EU or domestic legislative provisions  to  which  we  have
     referred  expressly  deals  with  the  second  appellant's  situation,
     including the most recent Directive (2004/38) which was drafted before
     the relevant Court of Justice authority (Chen) was decided.   Although
     the EU legislative provisions all confer rights upon "family  members"
     of an EU citizen exercising the  relevant  Treaty  right,  the  second
     appellant does not fall within the category of "family member".   With
     some slight differences  in  wording,  so  far  as  relevant  for  our
     purposes,  "family  members"  are  restricted  to  spouses  (or  civil
     partner) of the EU national, and dependent ascendants  or  descendants
     (or those who are under 21) of the EU national or his spouse (or civil
     partner).  Whilst the second appellant, as her father, is  undoubtedly
     an "ascendant" of the first appellant, he is not dependent on her (Art
     2(2), Directive  90/364;  reg  6,  EEA  Regulations  2000;  Art  2(2),
     Directive 2004/38  and  Reg  7(1)  and  (2),  EEA  Regulations  2006).
     Rather, it is the first appellant who is  financially  dependent  upon
     her father.

 36. That the carer/parent may in  certain  circumstances  have  a  derived
     right of free movement and residence in  line  with  that  of  the  EU
     national is, however, beyond contention.  Ms Rogers referred us to the
     decisions of the Court of Justice in Baumbast and R  and  Chen.   Both
     recognise the derived right of  a  primary  carer  to  reside  with  a
     dependent EU national child.    It  is,  however,  the  Court's  later
     decision in Chen which establishes the right to reside as the carer of
     a self-sufficient EU national child.  However, we should first look at
     the Court's earlier decision in Baumbast and R upon which  formed  the
     basis for  Chen.

 37. In Baumbast and R, Mr B was a German national who worked  in  the  UK.
     He married Mrs B, a Columbian national.  There were  two  children  of
     the family, the elder was a Colombian national and the daughter of Mrs
     B and the elder was a daughter of Mr and Mrs B and had dual German and
     Colombian nationality.  They went to school in  the  UK.   Mr  B  then
     ceased to work within the UK or other EU country and  consequently  he
     ceased to be exercising EU rights as a worker and hence his  right  to
     reside in the UK on that basis also ceased.   The  children,  however,
     continued to have an independent right to remain  in  education  under
     Article 12 of Council Regulation 1612/68.  Mrs B had no primary  right
     of her own.  However she argued that, as the children's primary carer,
     she had a  right  to  reside  with  them  in  order  that  they  could
     effectively exercise their EU rights.  The Court  of  Justice  agreed.
     At paragraph [73] of  its  judgment,  the  Court  concluded  that  the
     child's right to remain in education:

           "necessarily implies  that  that  child  has  the  right  to  be
           accompanied  by  the  person  who  is  his  primary  carer  and,
           accordingly, that that person is able to reside with him in that
           Member state during his studies.  To refuse to grant  permission
           to a parent who is the primary carer of the child exercising his
           right to pursue his studies in the host Member  state  infringes
           that right."

 38. It might be thought that the Court's recognition of Mrs B's  right  is
     some indication of the existence and scope of the  second  appellant's
     right in this appeal.  It is not.  Whilst the case does illustrate the
     Court of Justice's approach  to  children  when  exercising  their  EU
     rights to reside and the need for them to have their parent/carer with
     them, Mrs B's right was  derived  from  her  daughter's  free-standing
     right under Article 12 of Council regulation No 1612/68 as  the  child
     of a former EU national worker.  Neither her right, nor  that  of  her
     daughter, depended upon Article 18 and Directive 90/364.   Hence,  the
     element of, and need to establish, 'self-sufficiency' was not present.



 39. By contrast, Mr B's right of residence was based upon Article  18  and
     Directive 90/364.  Mr B supported himself and his family  from  income
     derived from employment outside  the  EU.   He  and  his  family  were
     covered by comprehensive sickness insurance in  Germany  which,  apart
     from emergency treatment, covered them in the UK.   Even though  Mr  B
     had ceased to have a right to reside as an  EU  national  worker,  the
     Court held that he had a right to reside as a  self-sufficient  person
     by virtue of Article 18 and Directive 90/364.    As will be clear from
     this, the Court of Appeal's decision in Ali v SSHD, which we discussed
     above, reflects the decision in Baumbast and R.  However, Baumbast and
     R tells us nothing about any derived rights of the family members of a
     'self-sufficient' person.  That issue was raised before the  Court  of
     Justice but remained unanswered because the rights of Mr B's family to
     reside in the UK existed independently of his right.

 40. The rights  of  family  members  of  a  (claimed)  self-sufficient  EU
     national who are themselves non-EU nationals arose directly  in  Chen.
     The case concerned a young child who was an EU national living in  the
     UK.  She lived with her parents who  were  Chinese  nationals  and  it
     seems to have been accepted that of her mother was her primary  carer.
     Her parents were employed by a Chinese company owned by  them.   As  a
     consequence, the child's mother had sufficient  resources  to  support
     herself and the child.  They also had comprehensive health  insurance.
     The Court of Justice held that the child had a right of residence as a
     self-sufficient person by virtue of Article 18 of the  EC  treaty  and
     Directive 90/364.  It sufficed  that  there  were  adequate  resources
     available to her from her mother to make her self-sufficient.   It was
     not necessary that she should have the resources personally.  Further,
     the Court recognised the child's mother, as the primary carer of an EU
     national who was exercising her EU  right  of  residence  as  a  self-
     sufficient person, was herself entitled to reside in the UK, in  order
     to permit the child to enjoy its own EU right.  Relying,  inter  alia,
     on its earlier decision in Baumbast and R, the Court of  Justice  said
     (at para [45]):

           "... a refusal to allow the parent,  whether  a  national  of  a
           Member State or a national of a non-member country, who  is  the
           carer of a child to whom Article  18  EC  and  Directive  90/364
           grant a right of residence, to reside with  that  child  in  the
           host Member State would deprive the child's right  of  residence
           of any useful effect. It is clear  that  enjoyment  by  a  young
           child of a right of residence necessarily implies that the child
           is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is  his  or  her
           primary carer and accordingly  that  the  carer  must  be  in  a
           position to reside with the child in the host Member  State  for
           the duration of such residence ... ."

 41. Although not made explicit by the Court  of  Justice  we  consider  it
     palpably clear that the carer's right was subject to the carer herself
     being self-sufficient.  Those were indeed the facts of  the  case  and
     the Court's reliance upon Article 18  and,  in  particular,  Directive
     90/364 indicates this was the Court's view.  Article 1(1) of Directive
     90/364 requires that

           "[the EU nationals] themselves and the members of their families
           are covered by sickness insurance in respect of all risks in the
           host  Member  State  and  have  sufficient  resources  to  avoid
           becoming a burden on the social assistance system  of  the  host
           Member State during their period of residence." (emphasis added)

      (See to similar effect Reg 4(2) of the EEA Regulations 2006.)

 42. Of course, the Court of Justice was  not  strictly  concerned  with  a
     "family member" falling within the Directive but in extrapolating  the
     right of residence to those who are primary carers of the EU national,
     the Court could not have intended to omit the fundamental  requirement
     for those relying upon Directive 90/364 that they also should be self-
     sufficient.

 43. Our conclusion is reflected in paragraph 257C of the Immigration Rules
     (Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395)  which  seeks  to
     give effect to the Chen decision in the UK.  The particular  provision
     is paragraph 257C(iv).

           "257C The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
           enter or remain as the primary  carer  or  relative  of  an  EEA
           national self-sufficient child are that the applicant:


           (i) is:
                 (a) the primary carer; or
                  (b) the parent; or
                  (c) the sibling,
                 of an EEA national under the age of 18 who has a  right  of
                 residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  2006   EEA
                 Regulations as a self-sufficient person; and


           (ii) is living with the EEA national or is seeking entry to  the
           United Kingdom in order to live with the EEA national; and


           (iii) in the case of a sibling of the EEA national:
                 (a) is under the age of 18 or has current leave to enter or
                 remain in this capacity; and
                  (b) is unmarried and is not  a  civil  partner,  has  not
                 formed an independent family unit and  is  not  leading  an
                 independent life; and


           (iv) can, and  will,  be  maintained  and  accommodated  without
           taking employment or having recourse to public funds;  and


           (v) if seeking leave to enter,  holds  a  valid  United  Kingdom
           entry clearance for entry in this capacity.
           In this paragraph, "sibling", includes a half-brother  or  half-
           sister and a stepbrother or stepsister." (emphasis added)


 44.  We  turn  now  to  consider  the  central  issue  in  this  appeal  -
     establishing "self-sufficiency".

Establishing self-sufficiency

 45. One might be forgiven for thinking that the first appellant's reliance
     upon an EU right to reside as a student and/or self-sufficient person,
     and through her the right of her father to reside as her carer, is  ex
     facie untenable.  The simple fact is that she is not  self-sufficient.
     She (through her father) is dependent upon NASS funding.  He does  not
     work and does not support her.  There is no evidence that  either  has
     comprehensive sickness insurance.  How could it possibly be said  that
     they are 'self-sufficient' in the sense required?  In  essence,  those
     were Ms Lonsdale's submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
     As she put it, the appellants' case is being run on the basis  of  the
     potential for work, the possibility of money and  the  possibility  of
     medical insurance.  Potential self-sufficiency is not enough.

 46. We were not referred to any authority, domestic or  in  the  Court  of
     Justice,  which  directly  dealt  with  the  point  before  us.    The
     underlying facts of this appeal are  materially  different  from  both
     Baumbast and R, and Chen.  In the former, no member  of  the  Baumbast
     family was dependent on  social  assistance  in  the  UK.   Mr  B  had
     sufficient income to support his family from work carried out  outside
     the UK.  In the latter  case,  Mrs  Chen  supported  herself  and  her
     daughter from income derived from the family business in China.  Mr  B
     had  sickness  insurance  in  Germany  which  the  Court  of   Justice
     considered enough to satisfy the  requirement  of  'self-sufficiency'.
     Mrs Chen had private health insurance for herself and her daughter  in
     the UK.

 47. To avoid the inescapable, and potentially unfavourable, contrast  with
     the facts of Baumbast and R and Chen, Ms  Rogers  submitted  that  the
     prohibition on the second appellant's employment should be disregarded
     as being contrary to EU law - it  is  a  disproportionate  restriction
     upon the first appellant's right to reside.  The second appellant  has
     a job offer which, on the facts we must accept, will support them both
     and allow for health insurance in the UK to be purchased.

 48. Ms Rogers is driven to put her  case  in  this  way  because  it  will
     inevitably be the case that a carer/parent in the  second  appellant's
     situation  will  be  prohibited  from  taking  employment.   It  is  a
     condition of the temporary admission granted to asylum-seekers such as
     the second appellant pursuant to the Immigration Act 1971 (see,  Sched
     2, paras 21(2) and (3)).  For this reason, it was also the position of
     the appellant in Ali v SSHD although  there,  the  appellant  had  not
     availed himself of the opportunity to seek 'the invitation  to  treat'
     for an offer of a job as the second appellant has done in  this  case.
     Ms Rogers' argument, if correct, means that,  if  that  had  been  the
     case, the Court of Appeal would  have  been  constrained  to  reach  a
     diametrically opposed result in his appeal to the one that they did.

 49. Further, the carer's inability to work  is  also  the  effect  of  the
     immigration rules dealing with  carers/parents  of  a  self-sufficient
     child.  Paragraph 257D states that it will be a condition of the grant
     of leave to enter as the carer of an EU self-sufficient child that the
     carer is prohibited from employment in the  UK.   Paragraph  257C(iv),
     which we set out above, makes plain that the carer's  self-sufficiency
     must arise without the need to take employment.    It is this domestic
     regulation of the carer's ability to work which Ms Rogers  effectively
     attacks.  She relies upon the provisions found in the  EU  legislative
     provisions which, in very similar terms wherever found, require in the
     words of the fourth recital in the preamble to Directive 90/364 that

           "beneficiaries of the right to  residence  must  not  become  an
           unreasonable burden on the public finances of  the  host  member
           State".

      (See also recital (10) of the preamble to Directive 2004/38.)

 50. Ms Rogers submitted that the limitation on the right of residence must
     be exercised in accordance with Community law and with  the  principle
     of proportionality relying on Baumbast and R at paras  [90]  and  [91]
     and  Chen  at  para  [32].   It  could  hardly,  she   submitted,   be
     proportionate in order to protect the public finances  of  the  UK  to
     prevent the second appellant working and thereby  make  him  (and  his
     daughter) dependent upon the state when they would otherwise be  self-
     sufficient.  Ms Rogers referred us to a number  of  Court  of  Justice
     decisions,  in  particular  Commission  v  Belgium   (Case  C-408/03),
     decided on 23 March 2006; Commission v Italy (Case C-424/98) [2000] I-
     4001; Grzelczyk v Centre public d'aide sociale  d'Ottinies-Louvain-la-
     Neuve (Case C-184/99) [2001] ECR I-6193 and Chen, at para [30].

      Discussion

 51. Ms Rogers argued that the Court of Justice eschews any prohibition  on
     the origins of resources that can be taken into account  to  establish
     'self-sufficiency'.  We agree that the Court has done so  where  those
     sources are legitimate and no reliance is placed upon a right to  work
     which has to be derived from the self-sufficient EU national  herself.
     In both Baumbast and R and Chen,  the  family's  self-sufficiency  was
     established without reliance upon any funds derived from Mr B  or  Mrs
     Chen working in the UK or other EU Member State.   The exhortation  of
     the Court of Justice in Chen that as  regards  those  funds  Directive
     90/364 "lays down no requirement whatsoever as to their  origin"  must
     be read in that context.  Although the  point  does  not  need  to  be
     resolved in this appeal, we have no doubt  that  there  must  be  some
     limitations on acceptable  sources,  for  example  if  the  funds  are
     derived from criminal activity or where the relied upon resources  are
     derived from illegal work in breach of domestic law.

 52. In Commission v Belgium the Court of Justice decided, following  Chen,
     that an EU national was not necessarily restricted to relying upon his
     own "personal resources" and may be entitled to rely upon  the  income
     derived from a family member in the host Member State.  In particular,
     the EU national could rely upon income derived from  his  partner  who
     was resident in the host state even if there was  no  legally  binding
     obligation upon the latter to support the  EU  national.   We  do  not
     consider that the situation in Commission v Belgium is  comparable  to
     that of the appellants in this appeal.  What is important  about  this
     case for our purposes is that the ability (or right) to  work  of  the
     partner of the EU national and therefore to support  the  EU  national
     was not itself dependent upon a recognition of that EU national having
     a right to reside under Directive 90/364.   The  partner  (who  was  a
     Belgium national) had a pre-existing  right  to  reside  and  work  in
     Belgium independently of the EU  national.   On  that  basis,  it  was
     disproportionate to exclude this  legitimate  source  of  income  when
     establishing the EU national's right of residence.  That,  of  course,
     is far removed from this case where the EU national's right  can  only
     be established if the family member is allowed to work and the  latter
     has no independent right to reside or work in the UK.

 53. In Commission v Italy, the Court of Justice was concerned with Italian
     law that imposed restrictions on the documents which could be used  to
     prove self-sufficiency for those covered by Directive 90/364  and  for
     students engaged in vocational training and their families covered  by
     Directive 93/96.  Also, Italian law required such a student to  attest
     to  a  certain  level  of  resources  in  order  to  establish   self-
     sufficiency.   The  Court  made  the  general  observation  that   the
     Directives do not lay down the manner in which  the  beneficiaries  of
     that Directive must demonstrate that they fulfil  its  conditions  (at
     para [34]).  Consequently, the Court  held  that  the  limitations  in
     Italian law were impermissible.  The  matter  is  now  dealt  with  in
     Article 8(4) of Directive 2004/38.  The  decision  does  not,  in  our
     view, materially advance the appellants' arguments in this case.

 54. Finally, in Grzelczyk, the  Court  held  that  a  student's  temporary
     recourse to public funds in a host  Member  State  did  not  take  the
     student outside Directive 93/96.  It  would  not  be  an  unreasonable
     burden on that state's public  finances.   There  was  a  need  for  a
     certain degree of "financial solidarity" between nationals  of  Member
     States particularly  where  the  dependence  on  public  finances  was
     temporary (at para [44]).   It is not difficult to see why  the  Court
     concluded that a temporary loss of self-sufficiency should not deprive
     the EU national student  of  his  existing  right  to  reside.  Again,
     however, the decision casts no light upon the  issue  raised  in  this
     appeal where the appellants' seek to establish a right to reside.

 55. Ms Rogers also relied  upon  Article  5  of  Directive  68/360.   That
     provides:

           "Completion of the formalities for obtaining a residence  permit
           shall not hinder the immediate beginning of employment  under  a
           contract concluded by the applicants."

 56. Ms Rogers submitted that the second appellant could not  be  prevented
     from working prior  to  the  issue  of  a  residence  document.   That
     argument is, however, misconceived.   Directive 68/360, and Article  5
     in particular, is concerned with the rights of an EU national  worker.
     It recognises that when  the  right  to  work  exists,  he  cannot  be
     prevented from working  pending  the  formality  of  the  issue  of  a
     residence document.  The latter is, of course, merely evidence of  his
     right; it does not confer the right  which  is  derived  from  his  EU
     nationality and intention to work.   This appeal is wholly  different.
     The second appellant does not  fall  within  Article  5  of  Directive
     68/360 - he is  not  an  EU  national  worker.   Further,  the  second
     appellant seeks, in effect, to establish a right to work.  He  has  no
     pre-existing right which is being  administratively  held  up  by  the
     failure to  issue  the  relevant  documentation.   Article  5  has  no
     relevance directly or indirectly to the second appellant's  situation.
     Even if it did, the letter relied upon for his  future  employment  is
     not a  "contract  concluded"  between  the  second  appellant  and  an
     employer.  It is merely an invitation to contact them so that they can
     employ him in the future.

 57. Ms Rogers submitted that  under  the  various  Directives  the  family
     members of EU nationals exercising EU rights were  permitted  to  work
     and thus it would be exceptional to prevent the second appellant  from
     doing so.   In her premise  Ms  Rogers  is  correct  but  not  in  her
     conclusion.  Article 11 of Council Regulation 1612/68 confers a  right
     to work upon family  members  of  EU  workers.   A  similar  right  is
     conferred  upon  the  family  members  of  a  student  undertaking   a
     vocational training course by virtue  of  Article  2(2)  of  Directive
     93/96; likewise for family members of EU nationals who have ceased  to
     work or are retired by virtue of Article  2(2)  of  Directive  90/365.
     The equivalent provision is now  found  in  Article  23  of  Directive
     2004/38.

 58. It is readily understandable why  such  family  members  are  given  a
     derived right to work.  Once  it  is  accepted  that  they  should  be
     allowed to reside with the EU national, it is only natural  that  they
     should be allowed to carry on their every-day lives including, if they
     wish, working in that Member State otherwise that might  affect  their
     willingness to reside  with  their  EU  national  relative  and  hence
     discourage the exercise of his EU right.  These  situations,  however,
     have one crucial feature that distinguishes  them  from  this  appeal.
     The family member's right to work is derived from  the  EU  national's
     pre-existing right to work, study etc.  Here, the  second  appellant's
     claimed right to work is not derived from the EU national's right  but
     rather is a prerequisite to  establishing  that  right  in  the  first
     place.

 59. Directive 90/364 also contains a similar  provision  in  Article  2(2)
     which states, inter alia, that

           "[t]he spouse and the dependent children  of  a  national  of  a
           Member State entitled to  the  right  of  residence  within  the
           territory of a Member State shall be entitled  to  take  up  any
           employed or self-employed activity within the territory of  that
           Member State, even if they are not nationals of a Member State."


 60. Here again, the family member's right to work is predicated  upon  the
     EU national's existing right of residence as a self-sufficient person.
      None of these provisions, therefore, suggests  by  analogy  that  the
     second appellant has a right  to  work  in  order  to  create  the  EU
     national's primary right of residence.

     Conclusion

 61. Why is it that we feel concerns about treating  the  circumstances  of
     the appellants in this  appeal  in  the  same  way  as  those  of  the
     appellants in both Bambast and R  and  Chen?   There  are  undoubtedly
     superficial similarities with these cases, in  particular  with  Chen.
     Are there really  material  distinctions  which  dictate  a  different
     outcome?

 62. The solution may be found in an examination of the underlying  purpose
     that leads Community law to recognise the  derivative  right  of  free
     movement for family members of EU nationals exercising Treaty  rights.
     Those rights, of course, apply to family members even if they are  not
     themselves EU nationals.  The real purpose of the right  to  accompany
     (or join) and reside with the EU national is that without such a right
     the EU national could be inhibited from exercising  his  EU  right  of
     free movement and residence.   The  starting  point  is  that  the  EU
     national has a right and therefore all  principles  of  Community  law
     work to avoid difficulties in its exercise.  It follow from that  that
     in a typical case the EU national's right exists independently of  the
     presence of family members in the host country.   That  was  also  the
     situation in Chen.  Although the parent/carer had to be in the  UK  in
     order for the EU national child to exercise her  right  of  residence,
     that right existed independently of the presence of the family member.
      The child's self-sufficiency was derived  from  her  parents  but  it
     would have existed even if they had not  been  in  the  UK  -  it  was
     derived from their business in China.  The rationale of Chen  is  that
     the presence of the parent/carer enabled the  child  to  exercise  the
     right it undoubtedly - and independently - had.

 63. What is being said in this case is quite different.  Here, it is  said
     that the parent/carer is entitled to be in the  UK  and  work  because
     only then will the child be self-sufficient and hence establish her EU
     right of residence.  Thus, the family member's presence in the UK (and
     right to work) is relied upon not  in  order  to  avoid  a  'clog'  or
     'chill' on the exercise of the right of  the  EU  national  child  but
     rather in order to create that very right  itself  -  the  right  from
     which the family member then seeks to derive his own right  to  reside
     as her carer/parent.   Only if the parent/carer resides in the UK with
     the EU national child can it be said that the child has an EU right at
     all.  The argument is then exposed for what it is - entirely circular.
      Even more problematically, it is a circular argument that  begins  in
     the wrong place because it begins with a person who has  no  right  to
     begin with, unlike  in  Chen.   There  is  nothing  in  the  Court  of
     Justice's  jurisprudence,  in  particular  in  Chen,  or  anything  in
     principle which should cause us to decide that a non-EU family  member
     should be able to reside in the UK with an EU national child  (not  to
     allow it to exercise  an  existing  right  but  rather)  in  order  to
     establish the right in the first  place.   Any  right  of  the  family
     member must be derived from an existing right of the EU national which
     he or she has individually and separately.  That is  simply  not  this
     case.

 64. Further, if the appellants' arguments are accepted, there would  be  a
     number of consequences which we  consider  have  no  justification  in
     Community law.

 65. First, it would mean that an EU citizen could enter and reside  within
     another Member State on the basis of  self-sufficiency  providing  his
     accompanying non-EU family member could realistically gain  employment
     in the UK.   The family member would, thereby, acquire a right to work
     equivalent to that of an EU national who wished  to  work  in  another
     Member State.   That would elevate what has always been necessarily  a
     derivative  right  for  a  non-EU  national  into  the  primary  right
     previously only enjoyed by EU nationals.  In our view,  the  appellant
     cannot assert a right to work (which he does not otherwise possess  as
     a non-EU national) in order to establish the first  appellant's  right
     of residence  based  upon  her  'self-sufficiency'.   The  attempt  to
     supplant the Member State's right to decide upon its  own  immigration
     controls in this way has no foundation in Community law.

 66. Second, EC rights of  free  movement  and  residence  were  originally
     conceived as  rights  conferred  upon  the  economically  active,  for
     example workers and the self-employed (Roux v Belgium (Case  C-363/89)
     [1991] ECR I-273).  Neither appellant does, nor  could,  rely  upon  a
     right of this nature.  Rather, they rely upon Article  18,  EC  Treaty
     introduced by the Maastricht Treaty and its progeny in  the  shape  of
     Directives 90/364 and 2004/38 which extend EU free movement rights  in
     certain circumstances to non-economically active EU citizens and their
     family members.  The effect of Ms Rogers' argument, if correct,  would
     confer upon an  EU  national's  carer/parent  a  right  to  work  (the
     economically active right) in order that the  non-economically  active
     right of the EU national could be established.   We  do  not  consider
     that Article 18 and the relevant Directives  can  be  interpreted  and
     applied so as to create a  right  to  work  for  the  non-EU  national
     carer/parent in  these  circumstances.    It  is  not,  in  our  view,
     required by any of the Court of Justice jurisprudence or  any  of  the
     arguments presented to us.

 67. For these reasons, the first appellant has failed  to  establish  that
     she has a right to reside in the UK  as  a  student  or  as  a  'self-
     sufficient' EU national.   Consequently, the second appellant has also
     failed to establish his claimed right to reside as  her  carer/parent.
     Despite Ms Rogers' invitation to do so, this is not a matter which  we
     consider in our discretion should be referred to the Court of  Justice
     under Article  234  of  the  EC  Treaty.   We  are  confident  in  our
     conclusion on Community law: acte clair applies.

Decision

 68. For the forgoing reasons, the immigration judge was bound  to  dismiss
     the appeals.  Consequently, there was no material error of law in  her
     determination and the decision to dismiss the appeals must stand.








                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE


                                                             Date:
