
 HH (Sponsor as representative) Serbia [2006] UKAIT 00063

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House        Date of Hearing: 11 July 2006
                                        Date of promulgation: 16 August 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                        Senior Immigration Judge Warr
                     Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SKOPJE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           No representative
For the Respondent:          Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. There is no objection to a sponsor being a representative, as long as  he
is not acting "in the course of a business". 2. Whether the sponsor  is  the
representative depends on whether there has been  notification  that  he  is
the representative.  3.  When  a  sponsor  is  the  representative  it  will
normally be proper  to  allow  him  to  give  evidence  as  well  as  making
submissions (unlike the case where there is a professional  representative).
 4. Substantial compliance with the requirements of Rule 8 is sufficient  to
render an appeal valid.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant comes from Kosovo.   She  is  a  citizen  of  Serbia  and
    Montenegro and holds a United Nations travel document issued by  UNMIK.
    She applied to the respondent for entry clearance as the spouse of  the
    sponsor.  She was refused on 14 October 2005.  The  sponsor  put  in  a
    notice of appeal to the Tribunal.  Immigration Judge Wiseman determined
    the appeal without a hearing on 18 April  2006  and  allowed  it.   The
    respondent sought and obtained an  order  for  reconsideration  on  the
    following grounds:

      "Material misdirection in law


        The Immigration Judge has noted at para 49 that the  appellant  has
        not signed the appeal papers nor has a  representative.   It  would
        appear that they have been signed by the sponsor.


        The 2005 Procedure Rules state at 8.3 that  the  notice  of  appeal
        must be signed by the appellant or his representative, and dated.


        The 1999 Immigration and Asylum Act at section 84  establishes  the
        requirements for a qualified person to provide  immigration  advice
        and services.  It is submitted that there was no evidence that  the
        appellant's sponsor was so qualified.


        The Immigration Judge has misdirected himself in law by considering
        the appeal when he should have found  there  was  no  valid  appeal
        before him.


        In the alternative, if the Immigration Judge has accepted that  the
        sponsor was qualified to act as a representative he has  failed  to
        show what, if any evidence he relied on.


        The decision of the Immigration Judge is fatally flawed and  cannot
        stand."

 2. At the hearing before us Mr Saunders told us that the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer no longer relies on  the  points  raised  in  the  grounds  for
    reconsideration.  Nevertheless, these  or  similar  grounds  have  been
    raised in a number of other cases and similar considerations  regularly
    trouble Immigration  Judges.   Having  raised  these  matters  with  Mr
    Saunders at the hearing we therefore give our views on them.

 3. In cases such as the present, there are usually  three  questions  that
    may need to be answered.  They are, first, whether the sponsor (or  any
    other person, apart from the parties, involved in the  appeal)  can  be
    the appellant's representative; secondly, whether that  person  is  the
    representative; thirdly, whether the notice  of  appeal  is  adequately
    completed.

Can the Sponsor be a Representative?

 4. Rule 28(1) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005 provides that:

        "An appellant or applicant  for  bail  may  act  in  person  or  be
        represented by any person not prohibited from representing  him  by
        section 84 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999".

 5. The  present  Procedure  Rules  contain  no  other  limitation  on  the
    representation of an appellant.  The only issue, therefore, is  whether
    or not the person in question is prohibited by s84.

 6. Section 84 of the 1999 Act prohibits anybody who is  not  a  "qualified
    person" from provided "immigration  advice  or  immigration  services".
    That section, and other  provisions  of  part  V  of  the  Act  contain
    provisions defining  "qualified  person"  to  include  members  of  the
    regulated legal professions, practitioners registered with  the  Office
    of the Immigration Services Commissioner, and certain persons  who  are
    exempt.  These are the provisions which appear to have been in the mind
    of the person who drafted the grounds for review and,  it  is  fair  to
    say, the mind of the Immigration Judge.  They are the provisions  which
    need to be considered in cases where  the  representative's  connection
    with the case is purely professional or quasi-professional.

 7. Section 82(2) contains important definitions.

      "82(2)     In this Part [including s84], references to the  provision
               of immigration advice or immigration  services  are  to  the
               provision of such advice or services are to the provision of
               such advice or services by a person -
                 (a)   in the United Kingdom  (regardless  of  whether  the
                  persons to whom they  are  provided  are  in  the  United
                  Kingdom or elsewhere); and
                 (b)   in the course of a business carried on  (whether  or
                  not for profit) by him or by another person."


    This definition is a limitation on the ambit of the prohibition in s84.
     It has the effect that a person who acts outside the  United  Kingdom,
    or a person who acts other than in the course of  a  business,  is  not
    caught by the prohibition in s84.  Such a person is therefore  entitled
    to be a representative.

 8. This is not the place to investigate in any detail the meaning  of  "in
    the course of a business"; what is clear is that  the  ordinary  family
    sponsor is not providing  immigration  services  in  the  course  of  a
    business.  It is for this reason that the sponsor in this case,  as  in
    many others, can be the appellant's representative.

Is the Sponsor the Representative?

 9. The principal provisions are those in Rule 48(4) and (7):

        "(4)           Where a representative begins to act for a party, he
               must immediately notify the Tribunal and the other party  of
               that fact.


        ...


      (7)        Where a representative ceases to  act  for  a  party,  the
               representative and the party  must  immediately  notify  the
               Tribunal and the other party of that fact, and of  the  name
               and address of any new representative (if known)."

      These provisions have  certain  consequences,  also  set  out  in  the
    Rules.  Once a representative has begun to act, documents served on the
    representative are deemed to be served on the party represented  unless
    and until a change of representative is notified.


10. A representative who represents the appellant at the time the notice of
    appeal is lodged typically complies with the requirements of Rule 48(4)
    by completing section 5 of the notice of appeal, which has  spaces  for
    the representative's personal details and requires  the  representative
    to sign and date a declaration as follows:

        "I,  the  representative,  am  giving  this  notice  of  appeal  in
        accordance with the  appellant's  instructions  and  the  appellant
        believes that the facts stated in this notice of appeal are true."

      There is also a notice reminding the representative of the  provisions
    of Rule 48(7).

11. It is important to note that the mere fact that  the  appellant  has  a
    sponsor  does  not  mean  that   the   sponsor   is   the   appellant's
    representative for the purposes of the appeal.  The sponsor is normally
    capable of being a representative, as we have shown above; he  only  is
    the representative if notification has been given that he is so acting.
     But, in general, the  notification  that  a  person  is  acting  as  a
    representative does not require any particular form;  the  notification
    can be given orally at a hearing but must otherwise be in writing (Rule
    48(8)).  In the absence  of  any  notification  at  all,  however,  the
    Tribunal should  not  deal  with  the  sponsor  as  though  he  were  a
    representative: it should deal directly with the appellant.

Has the Notice of Appeal been completed validly?

12. Rule 8 is headed "Form and Contents of Notice of Appeal"  and  includes
    the following requirements:

      "8(1) The notice of appeal must be in the appropriate prescribed form
    and must -
            (a)  state the name and address of the appellant; and
             (b)    state   whether   the   appellant   has   authorised   a
                    representative to act for him in the appeal and, if  so,
                    give the representative's name and address;
            (c)  set out the grounds for the appeal;
            (d)  give reasons in support of those grounds;
            (e)  so far as reasonably practicable, list any documents  which
                    the appellant  intends  to  rely  upon  as  evidence  in
                    support of the appeal.
       (2)    The  notice  of  appeal  must  if  reasonably  practicable  be
               accompanied by the notice  of  decision  against  which  the
               appellant is appealing, or a copy of it.
      (3)   The notice of appeal must be signed  by  the  appellant  or  his
               representative and dated.
       (4)    If  a  notice  of  appeal  is  signed   by   the   appellant's
               representative,  the  representative  must  certify  in  the
               notice of appeal that he has completed it in accordance with
               the appellant's instructions."

13. "Appropriate prescribed form" is defined in Rule 2 as meaning the  form
    in the Schedule to the Rules "or that form with any variations that the
    circumstances may require".  We have already indicated that  section  5
    of the prescribed form has space for the representative to do what Rule
    8 requires him to do.   The  problem  with  the  appeal  form  in  this
    particular case (which is far from unique)  is  that  the  sponsor  has
    completed it as though he were the appellant.  He  has  given  his  own
    name and address instead of the appellant's, and he has signed  it  and
    dated it at the place where the appellant is supposed to sign and  date
    the form.  The section dealing with representation has been left blank.
     The question raised is whether, given that the sponsor is  capable  of
    being a representative, and that he appears to have intended to act  as
    representative, the failure to complete the form in accordance with the
    Rules prevents the appeal being valid.

14. It is perhaps worthy of note in this context that the  following  Rule,
    Rule 9, is headed "rejection of invalid notice of appeal".  It contains
    provisions only for the rejection of a notice of appeal where there  is
    no "relevant decision", that is to say no decision carrying a right  of
    appeal to the Tribunal.  In our view that is  a  clear  hint  that  the
    draftsman of the Rules did not envisage  failure  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of Rule 8 as causing a notice of appeal to be invalid.  In
    any event, the general law requires only that  there  be  "substantial"
    compliance with even mandatory procedural  requirements:  R  v  IAT  ex
    parte Jeyanthan [2000] 1 WLR 354; [2000] Imm AR 10, CA.  That  case  in
    fact concerned a notice of appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    which had not been properly completed by the Secretary  of  State.   Mr
    Saunders cited Jarvis v Entry Clearance Officer Manila  [1994]  Imm  AR
    102.  That decision is perhaps of less direct  relevance,  because  the
    relevant Rules at that time  contained  no  express  requirement  of  a
    declaration and signature.  The decision there was  that  a  notice  of
    appeal was good if it contained sufficient information to identify  the
    appellant.  The requirements of a notice of appeal under the 2005 Rules
    are substantially more complex.  We do not think it would be right  now
    to say that a notice was good if it merely  identified  the  appellant.
    But, given the terms of the 1984 Procedure Rules,  which  governed  the
    decision  in  Jarvis,  that  decision  is  entirely   consistent   with
    Jeyanthan.

15. Whether there has been "substantial" compliance with Rule 8 is a matter
    to be assessed on the facts of the individual case.  The law  gives  no
    encouragement to those who would  seek  to  exclude  an  appellant  for
    procedural reasons that are purely matters of  form.   In  the  present
    case, although the form itself was incorrectly completed, the notice of
    decision was included, and, as a result, there has never been any doubt
    about who the appellant was to be  or  what  was  the  subject  of  the
    appeal.  Nor has there been any doubt about the grounds of appeal,  for
    full grounds accompanied the form.  The appellant has  not  signed  the
    form, but the appellant does not have to sign the form  if  she  has  a
    representative.  The sponsor has not signed the declaration appropriate
    to a representative, but has signed the declaration appropriate  to  an
    appellant, that he believes the fact stated in the notice of appeal are
    true.  There is ample ground here  for  finding  that  there  has  been
    substantial compliance with the requirements of  Rule  8  and,  if  the
    matter were still contested by the Entry Clearance Officer,  we  should
    have so found.

16. There is a further issue.  The decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Jeyanthan shows that the validity or otherwise of a  notice  of  appeal
    cannot be determined simply by a mechanical application of  the  formal
    requirements of the Rules.  It is an issue to be determined between the
    parties.  In those circumstances it also follows that if the respondent
    has not sought to take an issue of compliance with Rule 8 at  an  early
    stage in the proceedings, he ought to be treated as having  waived  the
    issue in the appellant's favour.  Generally speaking, therefore, if the
    matter is not raised in direct response to service of  the  notice  (or
    purported notice) of appeal, it is unlikely that the  respondent  would
    be successful in excluding an appeal on this ground at a later stage.

General Points

17. There are two other matters  to  which  we  should  draw  attention  in
    relation to sponsors and other representatives.   The  first  is  that,
    except in Rule 8(1)(b), the Rules  do  not  require  the  appellant  to
    notify the Tribunal that he is represented: it is, generally  speaking,
    the representative's duty to do so.  The absence of any authority  from
    the appellant himself is therefore not material.  It is, however, clear
    that the Tribunal should be alert to any  suggestion  by  an  appellant
    that a representative is not currently acting on his instructions.

18. Secondly, the Rules contain no provisions preventing  individuals  from
    acting both as representative and as witness in the same appeal.   This
    must be a matter for the Tribunal.  The  requirements  of  justice  and
    good order must be balanced against the inherent  lesser  formality  of
    Tribunal proceedings, and the  need  to  respond  appropriately  to  an
    appellant who is  not  professionally  represented.   A  representative
    acting in the course of a business should not normally  give  evidence,
    even about previous procedure in the appeal.  If he is  required  as  a
    witness, some other person should be the representative.  On the  other
    hand, a sponsor representative must be seen as having a  dual  role  as
    witness and as supporter of the appellant's  case.   There  can  be  no
    general objection to such  a  person  giving  evidence  himself  before
    making his submissions.  The Tribunal will no doubt itself make  proper
    distinctions between what is said by way of evidence and what  is  said
    by way of submission.

Decision

19. As we said at the beginning of the determination  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer no longer takes the points made in the grounds for review.   We
    order that the Immigration Judge's determination shall stand.





                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
