
LM (risks on return) Republic of Congo (Congo-Brazzaville) CG [2008] UKAIT
00064
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 4 August 2008                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WARR
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SPENCER
                               MS J A ENDERSBY

                                   Between

                                     LM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe of Counsel instructed by TRP, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

   There have been improvements in the human rights position in the Republic
   of Congo since the determination of the Tribunal in  BB  (MCDDI  -  Known
   Political  Opponent)  Congo  Brazzaville  CG  [2004]  UKIAT   00223   was
   promulgated. The conclusion of the Tribunal in BB that  past  or  present
   membership of an opposition party including  the  MCDDI  would  not  lead
   without more to a real risk  of  persecution  on  return  to  Brazzaville
   remains valid.  There  continues  to  be  a  danger  for  some  political
   opponents of the current regime.  The test of whether  there  is  a  real
   risk continues to depend upon the  individual's  background  and  profile
   including in particular the  extent  of  his  political  involvement  and
   whether he has or is likely to come to the attention of the authorities.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of  Congo  (Congo-
      Brazzaville) born on 14 December 1978.  She arrived in this country on
      24 September 2002, applying for asylum on 2 October 2002. She  claimed
      to  support  the  Mouvement  Congolaise  pour  la  Democratie  et   la
      Developpement Integral (MCDDI).  Her  application  was  refused  on  2
      December 2002.  She appealed and her appeal came before an Adjudicator
      on 10 April 2003.  The Adjudicator dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum
      appeal but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 3.
       The Adjudicator accepted that, while conditions were improving in the
      Congo, there was a risk that the appellant would come to the attention
      of the authorities on her return  and  there  would  be  a  period  of
      detention with the risk of rape.  He had found that the appellant  had
      been raped in 1997.

   2. The matter came before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 21 May 2004.
       In its determination promulgated on 15 September 2004,  the  Tribunal
      allowed the Secretary of State's appeal, finding  that  there  was  no
      support from the objective evidence that there would be a real risk of
      rape for the appellant on return to the Congo.

   3. The appellant renewed her claim for asylum which  was  accepted  as  a
      fresh claim following judicial review  proceedings.   The  appellant's
      fresh claim was refused for reasons contained in  a  letter  dated  14
      November 2007.  It is the refusal of the appellant's fresh claim  that
      gives rise to the proceedings herein.

   4. It is accepted by the representatives that our approach is governed by
      the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702.  Our starting point is the
      findings of the original Adjudicator.  The representatives  before  us
      further agreed that the Adjudicator's findings of fact were  helpfully
      summarised in paragraph 13 of the Tribunal's  decision,  the  material
      parts of which read as follows:-

               "The [appellant] joined the  MCDDI  in  February  1997.   In
               February 1999 she became the secretary of  that  party.   At
               paragraph 10 of her statement of 28 October 2002, she stated
               that she was elected secretary  and  that  the  aim  of  the
               branch was the improvement of the  conditions  of  women  by
               creating social and economic improvements.  In  August  1997
               she had been raped in the family home by COBRA members.  Her
               family had thereafter left for Gabon.  In November 1998 they
               had returned to Congo - Brazzaville.  Between February  1999
               when she had become Secretary of the MCDDI and to 2002 there
               had been no  further  incidents  or  difficulties  with  the
               authorities or anyone else.  In February 2002 her father had
               been arrested without reason but  had  been  released  seven
               days later without charge.  On 27 April  2002,  her  parents
               had been arrested and detained.  She was informed  that  she
               and her brother were wanted by the police and  as  a  result
               they had fled to Gabon in June 2002.  They had  returned  to
               Congo and in August 2002 decided to visit their parents  who
               were in police custody.  Whilst there her brother  had  been
               badly beaten and shot by the police and she  had  also  been
               severely beaten and ill-treated.  She had left and  returned
               to  Gabon  and  from  there  had  travelled  to  the  United
               Kingdom."


   5. Although the principal focus in the arguments before  us  was  on  the
      appellant's   sur   place   activities   since    the    Adjudicator's
      determination,  we  were  invited   to   revisit   the   Adjudicator's
      conclusions in the light of fresh material.   Before  the  Adjudicator
      had been certain documents described in paragraph 22 of  his  decision
      as a mission order dated 12 July 2002, an arrest warrant dated 29 June
      2002 and a wanted notice dated  3  July  2002.   The  Adjudicator  (in
      paragraph 64 of his determination) found that the Secretary  of  State
      had been right to be suspicious of these documents, the  originals  of
      which had not been produced.   The  Adjudicator  considered  that  the
      dates did not square with the appellant's claims  and  such  documents
      were all too easily obtained.  The circumstances  in  which  they  had
      been allegedly given to the appellant's brother and then  provided  to
      the appellant  before  her  departure  for  the  United  Kingdom  were
      unpersuasive and the Adjudicator took the  view  that  they  had  been
      created to bolster her asylum claim.  Also  placed  before  us  was  a
      psychiatric report compiled by Dr David Bell dated 14 May 2008  and  a
      Medico-legal report by Dr Alison Callaway dated 5  January  2005.   Dr
      Bell found that the appellant suffered from severe depressive disorder
      and post traumatic stress disorder, with a mild to  moderate  risk  of
      suicide which  would  be  exacerbated  in  the  event  of  a  negative
      determination.  She was a solitary individual who seldom went out  and
      was sensitive to noise.  Following the rape she had conceived and  the
      pregnancy had been terminated using an African remedy.

   6. In Dr Callaway's report, the appellant  was  found  to  appear  to  be
      coping with life reasonably well with the help of medication and  with
      the support of the health team.  The appellant had multiple  scars  on
      her lower legs which were very consistent with being beaten as she had
      described, rather than having been accidentally acquired.  Her account
      was, "detailed, believable in its details and  consistent  ...".   Her
      psychological state matched the criteria  for  moderate  chronic  post
      traumatic stress disorder and  the  appellant  also  suffered  from  a
      degree  of  mild  to  moderate  depression  which  was  responding  to
      antidepressants.  Return to the Congo  would  be  likely  to  cause  a
      deterioration in her mental state.

   7. According to the evidence before us,  the  MCDDI  has  a  presence  in
      countries outside the Republic of Congo.  In particular, the President
      of MCDDI-France Maurille Louzala wrote on 16 January 2008  in  support
      of the appellant's claim.

   8. Mr Paul Melly and Ms Ticky  Monekosso  have  been  involved  with  the
      appellant's claim since 2005.  Mr Melly has given expert  evidence  to
      the Tribunal before and is a journalist who has wide knowledge of  the
      Congo. He has not interviewed the appellant. Ms Monekosso  is  also  a
      journalist  and  indeed  studied  journalism  at  the  University   of
      Brazzaville. She has extensive experience of the region. A preliminary
      report appears in the bundle at page 69, dated 15 July 2005.  To  this
      report was appended a general country conditions  report  compiled  in
      June 2005.  A full report relating to the appellant was prepared on  5
      September 2005.  In a report dated 21 May  2008,  Ms  Monekosso  found
      that the documents  adduced  in  the  appellant's  case  were  genuine
      documents and Mr Melly produced an updated report in  respect  of  the
      appellant dated 20 May 2008 as  well  as  an  updated  report  on  the
      general country conditions, also dated 20 May 2008.

   9. It  is  necessary  briefly  to  set  out  the  context  in  which  the
      appellant's case is put.   President  Sassou-Nguesso  (the  President)
      seized power in 1997.  Michel Mampouya, was persuaded to  establish  a
      breakaway version of the MCDDI which supported the President's regime.
       However many  supporters  and  members  of  the  MCDDI  rejected  the
      decision to collaborate  and  remained  steadfast  in  support  of  Mr
      Kolelas, the leader of MCDDI,  former  prime  minister  of  Congo  and
      former mayor of Brazzaville.  Mr Kolelas fled the Congo in 1997 and he
      was accompanied by a senior member of the MCDDI, whom we  shall  refer
      to as Mr PM.  This is because  he  shares  the  same  surname  as  the
      appellant and it is the appellant's case that this is a potential risk
      factor for her on return. The appellant and Mr  PM  are  not  in  fact
      related and it is coincidental that they share a surname.   After  the
      departure of Mr Kolelas  and  Mr  PM  the  MCDDI  operated  in  exile.
      However in 2005, Mr Kolelas returned to Congo after the death  of  his
      wife and he reached an accommodation with the President.  In  2007  he
      allied the MCDDI with the President's PCT party  for  the  legislative
      elections.  This arrangement was deeply resented by many MCDDI members
      and supporters.

  10. Mr PM decided to resign from the MCDDI in January 2007  and  formed  a
      new party Unis Pour Le Congo (UPC) (United for the Congo).

  11. It is the appellant's case that she is working for Mr  PM  giving  him
      secretarial and  administrative  support.   She  also  says  that  she
      resigned from the MCDDI and that she sent a letter of  resignation  to
      that effect to Mr Kolelas dated 10 April 2007.  Mr PM has been granted
      refugee status in the United Kingdom on 1  February  2002.   We  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant, Mr PM and Mr Melly.

  12. The Home Office case is set out in the refusal letter of  14  November
      2007 and objective evidence submitted under cover of a letter received
      on 11 June 2008.  Much of the objective material is relied on by  both
      parties - for example the US Department of State Report dated 11 March
      2008, an Amnesty International Report dated 23 May 2007 and a  Freedom
      House Report dated 26 June 2007.  In addition, the Secretary of  State
      lodged a Country of Origin Service  response  to  information  request
      dated 3 October 2007 and a UN integrated regional information networks
      article  dated  13  August  2007  entitled  "Opposition   Protest   as
      Government Wins Polls by Massive  Majority".   Finally,  reliance  was
      placed on a UN IRIN article dated 28 June 2007 entitled, "First  Round
      Polls Marred by Poor Organisation".

  13. The appellant  was  called  to  give  evidence  before  us,  Mr  Melly
      remaining in court by agreement of the representatives.  Counsel  said
      that the emphasis would be on recent events and it was  accepted  that
      MCDDI members were not generally at risk - it was submitted that those
      who rejected the agreement reached by the  President  and  Mr  Kolelas
      could be at risk.

  14. The appellant stood by her statements.  She said she would be arrested
      on return and detained and  persecuted.   She  was  afraid  to  return
      because of her current  involvement  with  the  UPC  as  well  as  her
      previous history.

  15. She worked in a voluntary capacity as secretary for the UPC and  wrote
      reports and also helped with administrative work.  While the UPC was a
      new party, it  was  a  growing  movement  which  was  opposed  to  the
      government in power.  The current President was aware of the party and
      was aware that the party communicated with the Congolese diaspora.

  16. In cross-examination the appellant said she had a high profile in  the
      MCDDI.  She had been the secretary  for  youth  and  had  assisted  in
      propaganda and mobilisation for the MCDDI.  While  the  appellant  had
      said in answer to question 18 in her SEF  interview  that  there  were
      quite a lot of secretaries for the youth movement, the appellant  said
      that she had been the main secretary for youth.   She  disagreed  with
      the expert who had said  she  was  low  profile.   She  had  initiated
      policies as stated in answer to questions at her  interview,  although
      senior people had had to give permission  in  order  for  them  to  be
      implemented.

  17. The appellant had no evidence that her photograph had  been  taken  by
      the authorities.  Apart from producing  leaflets,  she  had  organised
      meetings between  the  young  women.   Nothing  had  happened  to  the
      appellant between 1997 and 2002.  The appellant acknowledged that  she
      had not brought with her any copies of the leaflets that she said  she
      had produced or distributed in the Congo,  however  she  had  produced
      evidence from Mr Louzala and Mr PM and other material.

  18. The appellant was asked about the arrest  warrants  and  how  she  had
      obtained them.  The appellant said she had got them through  a  friend
      of her brother.  One of the neighbours was a police  officer  who  had
      been able to  steal  and  copy  the  material.   While  the  date  was
      different on the warrant, the country's legal  system  was  under  the
      control of the party in power.   People  were  arrested  without  just
      cause  or  kidnapped.   Subsequently,  it  was  necessary  to  produce
      documents to address the situation.  The legal system was corrupt.

  19. The appellant was asked why such an individual should help her and the
      appellant said there were always people who would help.

  20. The appellant was asked why she had not mentioned the  fact  that  she
      had conceived a child as a result of the rape  before  this  fact  was
      revealed in Dr Callaway's report.  The appellant said it had not  been
      so  easy  to  speak  about  the  matter  previously.   She  had   been
      traumatised.

  21. The appellant could  not  explain  why,  if  a  warrant  had  been  in
      existence, the police had released her after her  return  from  Gabon.
      She confirmed that she had  never  known  the  taxi  driver  whom  she
      claimed had assisted her.  She had stayed with him  for  a  few  days,
      although he was a complete stranger.  The appellant said that she  had
      been suffering and had nowhere to turn to - what could  she  do?   She
      could not go to a hospital without any money.

  22. She had been helped by the friend of her  brother  to  travel  to  the
      United Kingdom.  But she had had no passport -  the  brother's  friend
      had all the documents.

  23. She had first met Mr PM in the United Kingdom in 2003.  They  had  met
      at a conference in Birmingham.  Mr PM  had  recognised  the  appellant
      straightaway and was very happy to see her.  They had met  on  one  or
      two occasions each month and she also spoke regularly to  him  on  the
      telephone and communicated by e-mail.  She did not have access to  the
      internet at home, she went to the library.

  24. The UPC party had started approximately two months  after  Mr  PM  had
      written his resignation  letter  in  approximately  March  2007.   The
      appellant was asked why she had not mentioned the matter at all in her
      interview with the Home Office in October 2007.   The  appellant  said
      she suffered from a lack of concentration and memory loss and she  was
      in the middle of moving and she had been happy to give precise answers
      to the specific questions asked.

  25. Ms Isherwood pointed out to  the  appellant  that  she  had  described
      herself as being fit and well at the interview.   The  appellant  said
      that stress could happen at any time, it was like a  crisis.   It  was
      further pointed out to the appellant that at  the  conclusion  of  the
      interview she had been given  the  opportunity  to  add  anything  she
      liked.  The appellant repeated she had been stressed.

  26. The appellant acknowledged that she had no proof  of  her  resignation
      letter being published.  There  was  no  written  evidence  about  the
      existence of the UPC, but the President of the Congo was aware of  it.
      It was a growing movement.  The appellant said she had written reports
      for the party, but these reports had not been put in evidence  as  she
      had not been asked about them.

  27. The appellant was asked about how many members attended  the  meetings
      which occurred on one or  two  occasions  each  month.   There  was  a
      meeting room in Kings Cross and at some of  the  meetings  people  had
      been standing and the room could get quite noisy.   People  came  from
      the provinces.  She went to the library to do her e-mails almost every
      day.  It was pointed out to the appellant that in the medical  reports
      it said the appellant disliked noise.  The appellant said the meetings
      started well and people did not go to the meetings to  shout  at  each
      other.  It was also pointed out to the appellant that in  the  medical
      report she was described as socially  isolated.   The  appellant  said
      that she would go to the library to read books.  There were times when
      she would shut herself up at home and there were times when she  would
      get up and go to the library.

  28. The appellant was asked how she got evidence from the  Congo  for  her
      reports.  The appellant said that  her  reports  were  about  the  UPC
      Movement in the UK.  She got her material from members in the UK.  The
      material  could  be  circulated  to   other   countries   by   e-mail.
      Occasionally there would be photographs taken after  a  meeting.   She
      had not produced them as she had not been asked to do so.

  29. In re-examination the appellant said she had not been able to  give  a
      figure for the number of members of the new party  because  it  was  a
      growing movement.  She had not seen a passport when she had  left  the
      country.  She had left with the help of her brother's friend.  She had
      worked as secretary for youth - both young men and women - but she had
      concentrated on young women at her meetings.

  30. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, the appellant  was  referred
      to question 17 at her October 2007 interview where she had been  asked
      whether, as secretary for the youth movement, she had been responsible
      for the whole of Congo or just a region.  The appellant  had  said  in
      answer, "It was communal".  She had been stressed at the time of  that
      interview.  She had been a communal secretary but had then  progressed
      up the ladder to the national level.

  31. The appellant was asked about the measure of support the  UPC  had  in
      the United Kingdom.  The appellant  said  there  were  more  than  200
      people and she had a  lot  of  people  on  an  address  list  and  she
      maintained the e-mail list with Mr PM.

  32. Mr PM was then called to give evidence.  He had formed his  new  party
      because of the betrayal of Mr Kolelas.  He had been number two  to  Mr
      Kolelas.  He and Mr Kolelas had left in 1997.  Since  his  resignation
      from the MCDDI, he had travelled round the world and had  communicated
      with activists in Paris and elsewhere.

  33. The appellant worked with him as a collaborator and drafted his letter
      of  resignation.   The  party  had   approximately   100,000   members
      worldwide.

  34. Mr PM said he had a visa for the Democratic Republic of Congo and  had
      last travelled there a few months ago.   He  had  met  activists  from
      Gabon.  He had also met activists in Kinshasa.  There  were  activists
      throughout the United Kingdom, possibly over 1,000.  The UPC was a new
      party.  The appellant assisted him.  She was  very  intelligent,  took
      notes, made reports and also put  forward  new  ideas.   In  Paris  Mr
      Louzala followed his position and the witness said he had last been in
      Paris the previous weekend.  They were in the course  of  drafting  an
      open letter which would be submitted to the President  in  the  Congo.
      The President was well aware of their activities and they were anxious
      to take matters forward.  There were a large number  of  activists  in
      the Congo.  There had been a 90%  abstention  level  in  the  previous
      month's elections, however, as it  was  a  military  government.   The
      people who had abstained would vote for an opposition.

  35. In cross-examination Mr PM  was  asked  when  he  had  first  met  the
      appellant in Congo.  He said he had  met  her  in  1997  when  he  was
      campaigning.  She had been mobilising for youth.  She was a young girl
      and he, as a leader, was interested in young activists.   He  had  met
      the appellant before he had left following the war in June  1997.   He
      had been campaigning for the elections that were due  to  take  place.
      He had met the appellant in Makelekele, a district  in  the  south  of
      Brazzaville.

  36. He had met the appellant again  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2005  in
      Birmingham.  He was then referred to his statement where he  had  said
      he had met the appellant in 2003.  He had written  on  her  behalf  in
      2005.  He had been surprised to see her in Birmingham.

  37. He had not referred to the appellant in his  resignation  letter.   He
      said he had resigned as a leader.   His  resignation  was  a  personal
      matter and not a group matter.

  38. The party had been officially formed in April or  May  2007.   He  had
      resigned in January or February 2007.

  39. He saw the appellant on two occasions per month.  They  spoke  on  the
      telephone at any time.  When he needed her he called her.   They  also
      communicated on the internet.  He travelled on his own  -  there  were
      financial problems.  The appellant wrote reports and he had  them  but
      he had not brought them with him.  There was no website as yet.   They
      worked with friends and on the radio since the internet was  a  luxury
      in the Congo.  It was suggested to  the  witness  that  there  was  no
      evidence that his party actually existed.  The witness said he was  in
      exile and they were faced with a dictatorship.  They  had  written  to
      the President more than once.  They had to work secretly.   They  were
      working on an open letter which needed to be signed by various  people
      in Paris and elsewhere.

  40. It was suggested there was nothing to connect the appellant  with  the
      party.  Mr PM said that Congo was different from the  United  Kingdom.
      People worked secretly.  She had resigned from the party  and  he  had
      read her letter and she had  stated  her  position.   She  was  really
      connected with the party and he was the leader.   People  had  arrived
      from Paris the previous week.  Work was being done.  He had  not  been
      asked to bring any documents with him.  He had given evidence in  many
      cases and this was the  first  time  he  had  been  asked  to  produce
      material.

  41. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, Mr PM said  that  the  party
      had officers and he was the President and there was a  governing  body
      and below that there were party structures with people in  place,  for
      example in Paris.  The appellant had an official position  -  she  was
      his secretarial assistant.

  42. We then heard from Mr Melly.  Mr Melly was asked whether the appellant
      would be characterised as high profile.  Mr Melly  said  that  in  the
      Congo, grass roots activity was hugely important.  This tradition  had
      its origins in the 1970s and 1980s when there was a Marxist one  party
      state.  The whole administrative machine was controlled by  the  party
      and it was accordingly important to mobilise at the grass roots level.
       Meetings took place in small cells.  People would come  in  from  the
      countryside to the south east region of Brazzaville to the district of
      Bacongo and Makelekele and it was significant that this was  where  Mr
      PM had met the appellant.  After the new President had taken  over  in
      1997, the opposition relied totally on grass roots activity.   It  was
      not surprising that the appellant had not been arrested at  that  time
      as  an  accommodation  had  been  reached  between  Mampouya  and  the
      President.

  43. Kolelas had returned in 2005 for his wife's funeral and had  done  his
      deal with the President.  Kolelas had been  detached  from  the  grass
      roots activists.  There had been no process of consultation before  he
      had made his  switch.   Ninety  percent  of  the  activists  had  gone
      underground.

  44. The appellant had been assisted by a police officer but this  was  not
      surprising since there was a professional ethic in the police  service
      which went back to the old Marxist system.  There was a belief in  the
      office.  The security forces were more politicised.

  45. The date on the documents adduced in the  appellant's  case  could  be
      explained because the arrests had taken  place  on  an  extra-judicial
      basis.  Subsequently documents would be issued  in  justification  for
      these actions.

  46. Kolelas had been a very charismatic opponent  to  the  Marxist  party.
      The President drew his  support  from  the  northern  regions  whereas
      Kolelas' support came from the south and particularly the south  east.
      He had been the leading opponent in exile and more prominent than  the
      former President.  The grass roots had  been  expecting  him  to  lead
      civil resistance and had been taken by surprise.  He had been isolated
      on arrival and had effectively been kept in custody and protected.  He
      had not been able to re-engage with the activists.  He had  also  been
      very traumatised by his wife's death.  His confidence had been shaken.

  47. It was also resented that while he had secured a personal amnesty,  he
      had not made efforts on behalf of the members.  He had  not  made  his
      deal conditional on an amnesty being more widely granted.  People like
      Louzala felt that they were leading the true tradition  of  the  MCDDI
      and Mr PM's new party was part of that new tradition.

  48. The UPC was not a formal organisation in the way  that  other  parties
      were.  It was traditional to  have  an  overseas  wing.   It  was  not
      surprising the UPC had  not  reached  the  stages  of  other  parties.
      Exiles were afraid of  the  government.   It  had  been  claimed  that
      various individuals had been poisoned by the present regime.  Mr Melly
      gave three examples.  It might be  appropriate  to  have  a  level  of
      discretion in  the  circumstances.   Mr  Melly  had  heard  through  a
      longstanding contact that Mr PM had been forming a new party in  early
      2007.  It was not that surprising that there  was  no  secretariat  or
      internet presence.

  49. Concerning the specific risks for the  appellant  while  there  was  a
      residual risk flowing from past MCDDI activities,  she  represented  a
      hugely valuable source of information concerning  Mr  PM.   She  would
      know about the membership and about Mr PM's travel plans and how  many
      people there were at meetings etc.  The  appellant  was  the  personal
      assistant to the individual at  the  heart  of  the  opposition.   The
      government would want to know if he was a threat.  She had drafted the
      party statement and there were 200 names on the  e-mailing  list.   If
      she had the information she would be a  key  figure  of  interest  for
      interrogation and questioning.

  50. Mr PM had  referred  to  100,000  members.   This  was  based  on  the
      aspiration that  MCDDI  members  would  support  him.   This  was  not
      implausible if one included all adult members of a family rather  than
      just the head of the family.

  51. The leader was very important in a country  where  there  was  a  high
      level of illiteracy since it was the leader's photograph that would be
      emblazoned on t-shirts and appear on posters.  The image of leader was
      very important.

  52. Mr Melly was asked how the appellant would be known as a failed asylum
      seeker on return.  Mr Melly said that he  had  examined  a  number  of
      cases.  Generally people were questioned on arrival.   The  similarity
      of the appellant's name to Mr PM would be noted.  She would have  come
      from the United Kingdom and  she  would  be  automatically  questioned
      about her relationship.  She would  be  transferred  to  the  Security
      Directorate (DST).  There was a culture of keeping an  eye  on  exiled
      groups abroad.  Every arrival was noted.  It would not  be  surprising
      if the authorities were not already aware of what the  opposition  was
      doing in the United Kingdom.  This was especially so  given  that  she
      had publicly resigned and sent a letter of resignation.

  53. There had been quite clearly some improvement over the  years  in  the
      situation in the Congo.  The old broad  categories  of  risk  were  no
      longer applicable.  Individuals could be still seriously at  risk  for
      particular reasons.  For example  there  might  be  a  family  dispute
      dating back many years, or the risk might  arise  because  of  current
      political activity and it was in this latter class that the  appellant
      fell.  She had been helping to organise the new party and that was the
      core of the risk.  She might become a bargaining counter to  blackmail
      Mr PM.  She could be threatened in order to force him  to  do  a  deal
      with the government.  She, however, was not a famous  person  and  was
      not in a position to do  a  deal.   Leaders  were  able  to  offer  an
      endorsement and could be assisted to re-establish themselves.  The low-
      level activists were not of public  value.   They  had  no  bargaining
      power.

  54. In  cross-examination,  Mr  Melly  accepted  there  was  no  objective
      evidence to support the party in  its  present  level  of  operations.
      However he had been aware of Mr PM's  activities  since  the  previous
      year.  His activities had been fairly common knowledge.

  55. Mr Melly was asked what would connect the appellant  and  Mr  PM.   Mr
      Melly said that there was independent evidence of Mr  PM's  activities
      and he had been informed about that about a year and a half  ago.   He
      had not been informed about the appellant's role  until  dealing  with
      this case.  However, he would not have expected to know the details of
      individual leader's personal secretaries.  She did not have a front of
      stage political role.

  56. Ms Isherwood asked Mr Melly why the authorities in the Congo would  be
      aware of the appellant.  Mr  Melly  said  that  intelligence  services
      would have more detailed knowledge of activism.  They would  see  visa
      applications  and  would  monitor  movements  of  those  entering  the
      country.  One of the first actions of the President in 1997  had  been
      to seize the MCDDI records of members.  While he could not be sure, he
      would be very surprised if there was no suspicion of  the  appellant's
      involvement.  While  the  appellant's  surname  was  not  unique,  the
      appellant and Mr PM would be linked through the name.   They  had  the
      same surname and  came  from  the  same  country  of  exile.   If  the
      appellant's letter had been sent to Mr Kolelas, it would have come  to
      the attention of the authorities since Kolelas was  living  under  the
      observation of the authorities.

  57. Mr Melly had last visited the Congo in 1995, but  had  worked  on  the
      country extensively  since.   He  got  his  evidence  by  interviewing
      Congolese, members of the government and human rights groups  as  well
      as independent organisations.  He had the normal range of contacts  of
      a working journalist.  He was able to talk to a wide range of sources.
       He had not interviewed the appellant.  Ms  Monekosso  had  worked  on
      aspects of the case and he had concentrated  on  the  implications  of
      recent circumstances.

  58. Mr Melly was asked about the  US  State  Department  Report.   It  was
      pointed out that the security forces had established  a  joint  police
      and military unit known as COMUS under the Ministry  of  Security  and
      Public Order responsible for patrolling the  frontiers.   This  matter
      had not been mentioned in his expert's report.  Mr Melly  acknowledged
      that he had not mentioned the creation of COMUS.  It was not clear who
      would meet failed asylum seekers at the airport.  It was difficult  to
      get  detailed  information  about  this.   While  the  situation   had
      generally  improved,  there  were  still   cases   of   individualised
      repression and some cases of officially organised abuse.

  59. We then heard submissions.  Ms Isherwood relied on the refusal letter.
       The initial claim had been based on membership of the MCDDI  and  now
      reliance was placed on a newly  formed  party  and  her  health.   The
      approach of the Tribunal was governed by Devaseelan.   The  facts  had
      been found in paragraph 13 of  the  Tribunal's  earlier  decision  but
      there were still credibility issues.  In the  interview  in  September
      2007 the appellant had never mentioned the new party.  She  could  not
      claim that she had not been asked.  There was also a discrepancy about
      when the appellant and Mr PM had  met.   The  appellant  was  slightly
      evasive and had kept turning the questions round.   The  documentation
      concerning the arrest warrants was unsatisfactory and it was  accepted
      that they were post-dated.  The appellant's account  was  implausible.
      Why should a friend of a friend help the appellant  and  why  would  a
      complete stranger take her in?  There were  hospitals  in  Brazzaville
      where she could have gone for treatment.  It was implausible that  she
      had not been in possession of  a  passport  on  leaving  the  country.
      Reference was made to the 2002 Country  Information  Report,  although
      this had not been lodged.

  60. In relation to the arrest warrants,  the  experts  had  not  seen  the
      originals.  The problem about the dates  on  the  documents  had  been
      accepted by the appellant.  The  appellant's  position  was  different
      from the position of the appellant in the case of BB  (MCDDI  -  Known
      Political Opponent) Congo Brazzaville  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00223.   The
      appellant in that case had written a short play which had a  political
      purpose.  The present appellant, on the other hand was simply  one  of
      many secretaries.  Mr PM had only seen her on two occasions before his
      departure in 1997.  The 2005 experts' reports gave a  general  overall
      view.  The conditions in Pool were described as generally calm at page
      72 of the bundle.  Human rights abuses  appear  to  have  become  less
      frequent since the end of the 2002 - 2003 war, but not all individuals
      had been persecuted and a claim could no longer be  made  out  on  the
      basis of the  appellant's  ethnicity.   The  Congo  had  launched  its
      enquiry into the Beach affair.  The Congo  authorities  were  actively
      trying to improve things.  A peace accord had  been  signed  in  March
      2003 - this had been referred to in paragraph 22 of BB.  Even at  that
      time things had been improving in the Congo.

  61. Ms Isherwood referred to the appellant's sur place claim.  Apart  from
      the oral evidence there was nothing to support the claim.  The  burden
      of proof was on the appellant.  Even the expert could not confirm that
      the party existed, or that there would be any connection  between  the
      appellant and the  party.   The  appellant's  resignation  letter  was
      simply a standard typed letter on the file.  The  documents  submitted
      by the appellant had been taken at face value in the expert's  report.
      There was no evidence that the appellant would be known.  Neither  the
      e-mails nor the reports that the appellant said she  had  written  had
      been produced.  There was a lack of objective evidence to support  the
      claim.  It was said in the expert's report  that  the  government  had
      mounted a concerted drive to reach deals with  exiled  opponents  over
      the previous three years yet it was claimed the  appellant  could  not
      get home.  There was no reason why the appellant should be of interest
      given the improved situation.  The appellant's report was simply based
      on an assumption that the authorities would know of the appellant  and
      Mr PM.  The government had reached an  agreement  with  the  guerrilla
      leader,  Frederick  Bitsangou  and  he  had  been  made  the  head  of
      Humanitarian Affairs.  The government was moving  forward.   According
      to the US State Department Report published in March 2008, there  were
      no political killings and the appellant would not be at risk on return
      in the light of the improved situation and the fact that  there  would
      be no knowledge of her association with  Mr  PM.   Opposition  parties
      enjoyed wider freedom of activity nowadays as was  apparent  from  the
      expert's report at page 216 of the bundle and there was no reason  why
      there should not be evidence of the new party.

  62. The appellant's picture had  never  been  taken  by  the  authorities.
      There would be no connection between her and Mr PM.

  63. The appellant could not  base  a  claim  on  a  fear  because  of  her
      ethnicity.  This claim could not be made  out  in  the  light  of  the
      country guidance.  Mr Melly's report was diminished in  value  by  the
      fact that he had failed to mention the joint police and military  unit
      known as COMUS.

  64. In relation to the medical  issues,  it  was  to  be  noted  that  the
      appellant had only mentioned  her  pregnancy  in  one  of  the  recent
      reports.  Not all the scars had to do with the beatings and  that  had
      not been acknowledged by Dr Bell.  A high threshold was to be  applied
      in such cases - see N v UK [2008] ECHR  453.   It  was  odd  that  the
      appellant was said not to like noise but could  cope  with  the  noisy
      meetings.  She could not be  socially  isolated  and  yet  go  to  the
      library every day.  A large sum of money  had  been  invested  in  the
      healthcare system as appeared from an article entitled "State urged to
      improve disastrous healthcare system (IRIN report  dated  12  December
      2007)."

  65. Mr Pipe confirmed that the appellant's case  was  based  on  political
      opinion rather than ethnicity - ethnicity did not alone create a risk.
       However the Lari (who populate  the  Pool  region  and  south-western
      districts  of  Brazzaville)  largely  supported  the  MCDDI.   Counsel
      acknowledged that he could not argue the appellant's case  on  medical
      grounds in the light of the  authority  of  N  v  UK.   He  did  rely,
      however,  on  the  positive  findings  that  had  been  made  by   the
      Adjudicator which should be preserved applying Devaseelan.

  66. The current country guidance - BB - was to the  effect  that  not  all
      oppositionists were at risk.  Mere MCDDI members would not be at risk,
      but  specific  individuals  with  profile  would  be.   A  significant
      development since BB had been the return of  Kolelas.   His  agreement
      would protect an individual as long as that individual  acquiesced  in
      the status quo.

  67. Dealing with credibility issues, the first and  foremost  problem  was
      the appellant's failure to mention her association with Mr PM  in  her
      interview.  She had explained that she had been stressed and had other
      problems.  Her case was  supported  by  Dr  Bell  in  a  powerful  and
      compelling report.

  68. The new party was a fledgling organisation built around  Mr  PM.   The
      evidence given at the hearing  had  been  credible.   The  appellant's
      escape had been supported by Good  Samaritans  in  the  Congo.   There
      might have been confusion about the  date  of  the  meeting  with  the
      appellant in the United Kingdom.  Mr PM had met the appellant in  2003
      according  to  his  statement.   The  point  that  had  troubled   the
      Adjudicator about the dates on the documents  could  be  explained  by
      reference to the objective evidence.

  69. The expert had explained how  certain  police  officers  would  assist
      people out of a sense of duty to their office.

  70. Mr PM was an individual of  high  profile.   The  appellant  would  be
      associated with him and therefore at risk.  While senior figures  were
      returning, grass roots activists were not.

  71. The Home Office had lodged material about the 2007  elections.   There
      had been widespread chaos and malpractice  at  these  elections.   The
      situation in Pool had remained  unstable  and  corruption  remained  a
      significant problem.

  72. Mr Melly had given a very balanced report.  The position had  improved
      but problems remained for those who were not prepared to acquiesce.

  73. The appellant's claims could be reassessed in the light of the  recent
      material.  Furthermore she was connected with Mr PM who was mobilising
      the diaspora.  While the party had no profile as was accepted,  Mr  PM
      had publicly repudiated the deal and his surname was the same  as  the
      appellant's.  She would be vulnerable as a woman and because  she  was
      the source of information.  It was not suggested that all Lari or  all
      opposition members were at  risk,  but  it  was  those  who  were  not
      prepared to compromise.  The case of BB was perhaps  slightly  out  of
      date.

  74. At the conclusion of the submissions we  reserved  our  determination.
      In reaching our conclusions we  bear  in  mind  the  totality  of  the
      material before us including the skeleton argument.  The burden is  on
      the appellant to establish her asylum claim.  The standard of proof is
      that  of  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  or  real  risk:   see
      Sivakumaran v Secretary of State [1988] Imm AR 147; Karanakaran [2000]
      Imm AR 271. It is necessary to evaluate the claim in the light of  the
      objective evidence and country guidance.


            Country guidance
  75. The starting point for the consideration of the background material is
      the determination of the Tribunal in BB. The  historic  situation  was
      dealt with in paragraphs 17 to 20 of the determination.  The  Tribunal
      said that Congo Brazzaville had a history of  political  violence  and
      deep ethnic division and experienced a brutal civil war  in  1993-1994
      and  from  1997  to  1999.   In  August  1992  following   multi-party
      presidential  elections,  Pascal  Lissouba  was   elected   President,
      defeating  Denis  Sassou-Nguesso.  The  political   conflict   between
      Lissouba and his opponents including  Mr  Kolelas  spilled  over  into
      civil war.  The 1997 conflict was triggered by Lissouba's  attempt  to
      neutralise the militia of his political rival Sassou-Nguesso.  Kolelas
      was appointed Prime Minister by Lissouba.   The  civil  war  continued
      until Sassou-Nguesso's forces captured Brazzaville and  Pointe  Noire.
      In October 1997 Sassou-Nguesso was sworn in as President and  Lissouba
      and Kolelas fled the country.  The violent clashes  continued  through
      1998  between  the  Ninja  militia  who  were  loyal  to  Kolelas  and
      government forces loyal to Sassou-Nguesso.  In December 1998 there was
      a full-scale battle for Brazzaville.  In November 1999 the  government
      announced that it had reached an agreement with the militia  loyal  to
      Lissouba and Kolelas for a ceasefire and a general  amnesty  but  this
      did not include opposition leaders in exile.


  76. There was a national dialogue in March/April 2001.   According  to  Mr
      Melly, some opposition members were allowed to attend but their  views
      were ignored.  The referendum in January 2002 paved the  way  for  the
      restoration of nominally constitutional rule.  Presidential  elections
      were held on 10th March 2002.  The first round  of  elections  to  the
      National Assembly took place on 26th May 2002 and the second round  on
      14th June 2002.  By this stage there was  a  resurgence  of  violence.
      Ninja forces launched a series of attacks around  the  Pool  area  and
      fighting between them and the government army escalated  to  encompass
      large areas of the Pool Province.  There was an attack on  Brazzaville
      in June 2002.  Fighting  continued  in  the  Pool  area.   The  United
      Nations reported that 60,000 people had fled their homes in Pool as  a
      result of the conflict.  In November 2002 a plan was presented to  the
      government to end hostilities.  On 19th November  2002  the  President
      ordered the military to create a humanitarian corridor to enable Ninja
      rebels  to  leave  the  forests  in  Pool  and  pass  safely   through
      Brazzaville in order to disarm.  In January 2003 the President's party
      said it was willing to meet with Pasteur Entoumi, the  leader  of  the
      Ninjas, on  condition  that  he  lay  down  his  weapons  and  abandon
      violence.  On 17th March 2003 the government and the Ninjas  issued  a
      declaration  in  Brazzaville.   A  Ninja  spokesman  agreed   to   end
      hostilities, disarm fighters  and  to  enable  the  state  to  restore
      authority in Pool.  On 26th  March  2003  the  government  and  Ninjas
      exchanged prisoners as part of an agreement to restore  peace  in  the
      country.


  77. The Tribunal said that the CIPU report confirmed  that  the  Congolese
      government's human rights record was poor and that security forces had
      been responsible for  extra  judicial  killings  as  well  as  summary
      executions, rapes, beatings and the physical abuse  of  detainees  and
      citizens:  paragraph  6.1.   There  were  credible  reports  that  the
      government deployed undisciplined  forces  during  2002  in  the  Pool
      region.  In January 2003 the National Assembly adopted a law to create
      a National Human Rights Commission.  That was  a  requirement  of  the
      constitution that came into force  in  August  2002:   paragraph  6.8.
      Human rights NGO's had cautiously welcomed this commission but  waited
      to see how effectively it would work.  In  the  section  dealing  with
      freedom of assembly and association, it was said that  the  government
      generally respected the freedom  to  hold  demonstrations  and  public
      meetings.  The law permitted associations  and  political  parties  to
      form freely and no political parties were banned or suspended in 2002.
       The MCDDI was free to participate  in  the  political  arena  but  it
      failed to win any seats in parliament  and  only  four  in  the  local
      elections.  From exile both  Kolelas  and  Lissouba  called  on  their
      respective parties to boycott the legislative elections although  that
      call was rejected by party  leaders  in  Brazzaville  who  decided  to
      contest the election.


  78. In paragraphs 21 and 22 of their determination the Tribunal dealt with
      reports from Mr Melly. The  greatest  risk  to  returning  individuals
      suspected of  connections  to  the  opposition  lay  in  the  risk  or
      arbitrary detention and revenge attacks possibly by  groups  operating
      at arms length from official judicial and police process.  Significant
      warfare had stopped although some renegade Ninja groups had been  slow
      to abandon arms.  Mr Kolelas had recently appealed for  the  right  to
      return home  for  reconciliation  talks  but  the  response  from  the
      President was that he would have to face the judicial  authorities  if
      he returned.


  79. In paragraph 24 of their determination the Tribunal  said  looking  at
      the background evidence as a whole they were not satisfied  that  past
      or present membership of an opposition  party,  including  the  MCDDI,
      would lead without more to a real risk of  persecution  on  return  to
      Congo Brazzaville.  Those parties continued to  function  although  it
      seemed equally clear that they were effectively excluded from any real
      chance of obtaining power and  influence.   In  the  judgment  of  the
      Tribunal, however, the evidence did support Mr Melly's view that there
      continued to be a danger for some political opponents of  the  current
      regime.  They considered that the assessment of whether  there  was  a
      real risk depended  upon  the  individual's  background  and  profile,
      including in particular the extent of his  political  involvement  and
      whether he had  or  was  likely  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities.  In paragraph 26 they said that it was too early to  draw
      any firm conclusions about the peace agreement which in reality was  a
      cessation  of  hostilities.   The   political   situation   in   Congo
      Brazzaville had been exceptionally volatile since 1992 and  there  was
      no indication in the background evidence that the  current  government
      was becoming more tolerant of effective political opposition.

      The report before us of Mr Melly dealing with country conditions
  80. In his report dated 20th May 2008 Mr Melly dealt with the return of Mr
       Kolelas.  On 7th October 2005 President  Sassou-Nguesso  published  a
      degree permitting him to return to Congo on  humanitarian  grounds  to
      bury his wife, who died suddenly in Paris on 29th September 2005.   He
      arrived on 14th October and his wife was buried on 15th October.  From
      then onwards he was under effective house  arrest,  being  kept  in  a
      building in the centre of the city near the cathedral, under the guard
      of government soldiers, prevented from going to South Brazzaville  and
      effectively banned from engaging in any  political  activity,  meeting
      political colleagues or having any  access  to  the  media.   On  23rd
      December 2005 he  was  reported  as  staging  a  dramatic  U-turn  and
      publicly endorsing Mr Sassou-Nguesso's leadership and withdrawing from
      the opposition, although his family had said  that  his  remarks  were
      misinterpreted by pro-government media and in  effect  he  had  simply
      called for support for national reconciliation and  not  endorsed  the
      government.  His action, however, provoked anger and dismay among many
      of his supporters who felt that he had abandoned them.  The result was
      that during 2006 deep rifts opened  up  within  the  MCDDI  with  many
      members and senior party cadres being in total disagreement  with  his
      action;  they  regarded  themselves  as  still  part  of  the   Espace
      rpublicain pour la defense de  la  dmocratie  et  l'unit  nationale
      (ERDDUN)  opposition  alliance  with  the  Union  Panafrican   de   la
      Democracie Sociale  (UPADS)  party  of  ex-president  Lissouba  -  who
      remained in exile.


  81. On 24th April 2007 Mr  Kolelas, as  leader  of  the  MCDDI  Party  and
      Ambroise Noumazaly, Secretary General of the President's ruling  Parti
      Congolais Du Travail (PCT), signed an agreement to co-operate  in  the
      legislative elections and form joint administrations at  national  and
      local level should they win.  Many  grass  roots  members  and  senior
      activists in the MCDDI believed  that  Mr  Kolelas  had  betrayed  the
      party's heritage especially in the light of the severe repression that
      many activists endured since Mr Sassou-Nguesso captured power  in  the
      1997 civil war.  In late April 2007 the government said it had reached
      an agreement with the guerrilla leader Fredrick Bitsangou - also known
      as  Pasteur  Entoumi.   Bitsangou,  the  leader  of  a  long   running
      Ninja/Nsiloulou rebellion in the Pool region, was  appointed  Head  of
      Humanitarian Affairs.  This did not bring a complete end to  violence;
      the Pool region remained highly unstable, with civilians  at  risk  of
      attack or  harassment  by  both  rebel  fighters  and  the  government
      security forces.  In May 2008 it  was  still  unclear  how  solid  the
      reported agreement was and whether Bitsangou was  really  prepared  to
      trust the government.  He remained in his camp in rural Pool  although
      he had renamed the CNR (Conseil/Comit National pour la Rsistance) to
      make it more like a conventional party which participated in the  2007
      elections.


  82. Mr Melly stated that the first  round  of  the  legislative  elections
      which took place on 24th June  2007  were  characterised  by  numerous
      errors  and  omissions  in  the   electoral   roll   and   wide-spread
      irregularities and although the second round of voting on  5th  August
      appears to have been less  badly  organised  than  the  first  neutral
      observers noted failings in most constituencies.   The  final  results
      for the PCT (Parti Congolais du travail -the  ruling  party)  and  its
      allies awarded 124 of the 137 seats.  Of the opposition parties  UPADS
      gained only 10 while the Union for Democracy and  the  Republic  (UDR-
      Mwinda) was left with just 1 seat  -  compared  with  8  in  the  last
      parliament.  Mr  Kolelas, now allied with UPADS claimed  the  election
      had been rigged.  Certainly  many  of  the  results  were  surprising:
      UPADS did not even win seats in some of  its  traditionally  strongest
      areas while Mr Milongo lost his seat representing Boko,  in  Pool,  an
      area where he was known to enjoy huge personal local support.  Overall
      the election could not be seen as a free and fair test of  opinion  of
      the  Congolese  people,  because  of  the  widespread  flaws  and  the
      authorities'  refusal  to  allow  the  establishment  of  a  genuinely
      independent electoral commission to run the poll. Mr  Melly  expressed
      the view that opposition leaders and their parties participated in the
      political system on terms dictated by Mr Sassou-Nguesso and  the  PCT.
      Mr Sassou-Nguesso had not been prepared to engage in  any  substantive
      negotiation  or  dialogue  that  might  require  general   significant
      compromises  over  the  exercise  of  power.   Certain   elements   of
      opposition parties were now accorded a degree of freedom to operate at
      grass roots level but none was allowed to develop a serious  challenge
      because leaders were neutered by being  co-opted  into  understandings
      with  Mr  Sassou-Nguesso.   In  Congo  the  government   now   allowed
      opposition parties to operate, so long as they did not pose a  serious
      challenge to its hold on power.  A Report from one of his  main  Congo
      opposition sources indicated that the authorities continued to take  a
      repressive stance towards those members  of  the  MCDDI  who  remained
      firmly committed to opposition and had refused to follow  Mr   Kolelas
      in accepting the legitimacy of the government.


  83. In dealing with his overall assessment of the current situation in his
      report  Mr  Melly  conceded  that  it  was  clear  that  human  rights
      conditions in Congo had improved to some extent.  The  government  had
      substantially moved away from the extreme levels  of  repression  seen
      during the earlier years after Mr Sassou-Nguesso's return to power  in
      1997.  There was no doubt that the opposition  parties  enjoyed  wider
      freedom of activity than was the case until the end of  2002  although
      Congo was still far from being a freely functioning democracy.   There
      was still a serious risk to many individuals because of their own past
      actions or those of family members.  Those suspected of connections to
      the armed opposition to the government were at particular risk.  There
      remained a serious risk for individuals who had  acted  in  ways  that
      could spark the antagonism or  suspicion  of  the  authorities  or  of
      members of the pro-government security forces and their families  were
      also at some risk.  The individuals  most  at  risk  were  not  senior
      politicians or public figures  but  low  profile  individuals  with  a
      history of committed opposition activity or suspected  past  links  to
      armed rebel groups as they were not well-known and their safety  could
      not be monitored.

      The background material
  84. The US Department of State Country Report on  Human  Rights  Practices
      2007 on the Republic of Congo dated 11th March 2008  stated  that  the
      parliamentary elections for the Senate and National Assembly  in  June
      and August were marred by irregularities and  were  widely  viewed  as
      poorly run and highly disorganised.   The  government's  human  rights
      record remained poor; although there were few documented abuses during
      the year, serious problems remained.  Citizens'  right  to  peacefully
      change their  government  was  limited.   In  addition  the  following
      serious human rights problems were reported:  killing of  suspects  by
      security  forces;  mob  violence,  including  killing   of   suspected
      criminals; security  force  beatings,  physical  abuse  of  detainees,
      rapes, looting, solicitation of  bribes,  and  theft;  harassment  and
      extortion  of  civilians  by  uncontrolled  and   unidentified   armed
      elements; poor prison conditions; impunity; arbitrary arrest;  lengthy
      pre-trail  detention;  an  ineffective  judiciary;   infringement   on
      citizens privacy rights; limits on freedom of the press;  restrictions
      on freedom of movement; official corruption and lack of  transparency;
      domestic  violence  and   societal   discrimination   against   women;
      trafficking of persons; discrimination  on  the  basis  of  ethnicity,
      particularly against pygmies; and child labour.  Although  there  were
      no reports that the government or its agents committed any politically
      motivated killings security forces killed persons and  although  there
      were no reports of politically  motivated  disappearances  during  the
      year arbitrary arrest continued to be a problem.


  85. The Amnesty International Report on Congo dated 23rd May  2007  stated
      that political detainees and criminal suspects were allegedly tortured
      and ill-treated.  There was no progress in bringing to  justice  those
      responsible for the enforced disappearance in mid -1999 of  more  than
      350 refugees who were returning from the DRC.


  86. A Freedom House report on the Republic of Congo dated 26th  June  2007
      stated that the political opposition was weak and fragmented  and  the
      National Assembly was dominated by the Democratic and Patriotic Forces
      (FDP) coalition.  Freedom of assembly and association  were  generally
      respected in practice, although public demonstrations were rare.  NGOs
      operated freely, though two prominent Congolese activists  working  on
      behalf of the Publish What You Pay Coalition, which advocates  greater
      transparency in the oil industry were intimidated and detained by  the
      government in 2006.  The government did not fully control all  members
      or units of the country's overlapping and poorly co-ordinated security
      forces, which include the police, gendarmerie and  military.   Members
      of these forces acted with impunity in committing human rights  abuses
      and there were reports during the year  that  security  forces  killed
      people during apprehension and in police custody.


  87. A Country of Origin Information Request made on  28th  September  2007
      asking "is there any evidence that the government of the  Republic  of
      Congo or  its  agents  are  committing  human  rights  abuses  against
      opposition party members.  Is there any evidence  of  restrictions  on
      political  activities/political  opposition/membership  of  opposition
      parties" was answered on 3rd October 2007 in the following terms:


               "We can find no evidence that human rights abuses are  being
               committed against political opponents in recent years.   The
               recent elections were contested by a number of parties,  and
               boycotted by others, and although there  were  a  number  of
               irregularities which the opposition protested about, we  can
               find no evidence of restrictions on them."


  88. An allafrica.com news report dated 28th June 2007  reported  that  the
      turnout at the elections was very low  though  the  African  observers
      noted that the security had improved and those that voted were largely
      not intimidated, unlike in previous elections marred by violence.   An
      allAfrica.com  news  report  dated  13th  August  2007  reported  that
      opposition parties in Congo  had  protested  against  the  outcome  of
      general  elections  held  on  24th  June  and  5th  August  after  the
      government was returned to power by a landslide victory.

            Decision
  89. This claim has already been the subject of  an  adjudication.   It  is
      accepted that our approach is governed by Devaseelan.  In paragraph 37
      of  Devaseelan,  the  Tribunal  said  that  the  first   Adjudicator's
      determination stood as an assessment of the claim  the  appellant  was
      then making.  While it was not  binding  on  the  second  Adjudicator,
      "[a]s an  assessment  of  the  matters  that  were  before  the  first
      Adjudicator it should simply be regarded as unquestioned."   A  second
      Adjudicator must however be careful to recognise that the issue before
      him is not the  issue  that  was  before  the  first  Adjudicator,  in
      particular time would have passed and the situation may be shown to be
      different from that which obtained previously - see  paragraph  38  of
      the  determination.   The  first  Adjudicator's  determination  should
      always be the starting point, but  facts  happening  since  the  first
      Adjudicator's determination can always be taken into  account  by  the
      second Adjudicator.  The Tribunal gives guidance as  to  matters  that
      could have been before the first Adjudicator but were not in paragraph
      40 and gives further guidance  in  the  ensuing  paragraphs  -  it  is
      recognised that not  every  circumstance  could  be  provided  for  in
      paragraph 42(8).

  90. We have carefully  considered  the  report  by  Ms  Monekosso  on  the
      documentary evidence that was  before  the  Adjudicator.   The  expert
      deals with the arrest warrant which states that the appellant's family
      has been indicted for "persistence of the betrayal information".   The
      expert found that such an accusation  in  the  Congolese  context  was
      entirely normal.  While it was not possible to verify the  issue  date
      and number, there was no feature  of  the  document  that  caused  the
      expert to question its authenticity.

  91. The wanted notice accused the family of threatening affiliation to the
      former leaders in exile.  The document was signed by an individual who
      is now the head of the Congolese Armed  Forces.   There  was  also  an
      "Ordre  de  Mission"  -  an  order  to  search  and  carry   out   the
      implementation of the wanted notice and arrest warrant.  The documents
      were dated June and July 2002, after the  arrest  of  the  appellant's
      parents who were  detained  in  April  2002  and  who  were  still  in
      detention when the documents were released and  dated.   However  this
      should be understood in the context of Congolese troubles at that time
      and many cases were matters of arbitrary arrest  and  security  forces
      were not allowed to release documents before arrest.  In paragraph 4.9
      of the report it is stated:-

               "[The appellant's] arrest warrant and wanted notice read  as
               letters, where they explain the reasons  why  the  documents
               are issued.  A  typical  wanted  notice  or  arrest  warrant
               should contain the nature of the document as a title and  in
               capital letters.  However, if the  official  templates  have
               run out, the security forces can type their  own  documents,
               which may not be in the official format."


  92. The documents should have been issued by the  court  and  not  by  the
      security forces.  Papers such as "Ordre de Mission" should be internal
      security forces documents.  However, the  security  forces  used  such
      documents to intimidate the population.  Security  forces  could  even
      use the "Ordre de Mission" to  arrest  people  instead  of  an  arrest
      warrant.   The  expert  concluded  that  the  documents  were  genuine
      documents.

  93. In our view the  Adjudicator  had  proper  reasons  for  doubting  the
      authenticity of the documents adduced by the appellant.  While we take
      into account the evidence of the experts before  us  -  the  oral  and
      written evidence of Mr Melly and the written evidence of Ms  Monekosso
      - we do  not  feel  it  would  be  right,  applying  the  guidance  in
      Devaseelan on the question of the  reception  of  fresh  evidence,  to
      revisit the Adjudicator's  conclusions  on  these  matters.   He  gave
      reasons for his decision and was entitled to conclude as he did on the
      material before him. For the sake of completeness we should mention an
      article that is said to have  appeared  in  l'Observatoire,  a  weekly
      newspaper published in Congo-Brazzaville. This article,  published  in
      November 2004, mentions the disappearance of the appellant, her  MDCCI
      activism, rape and murder of her brother. Mr Melly  and  Ms  Monekosso
      state in their 2005 report that there  was  no  reason  to  doubt  the
      authenticity of the article. The appellant says in her statement of 14
      May 2008 that it was sent to her by Mr Louzala. She could not  account
      for how the journalist had obtained her photograph but there were many
      photographs taken of her when she was politically active in Congo.  We
      do not consider that the article advances the appellant's  case  given
      the points that are accepted and are summarised in paragraph 13 of the
      Tribunal's decision.

  94. We also take into account the medical evidence that was not  available
      to the Adjudicator.  This medical evidence  supports  the  appellant's
      claim to have been raped, a matter that is not in dispute  before  us.
      We accept that the medical evidence indicates that the  appellant  was
      beaten and suffered non-accidental injuries. The findings of  fact  in
      the Tribunal's determination include the appellant's  claim  that  she
      had been  beaten.   Having  given  the  matter  the  required  careful
      scrutiny, we do not consider that the material justifies us revisiting
      the Adjudicator's findings of fact as summarised in  paragraph  13  of
      the Tribunal's decision.

  95. It appears to us that the crucial aspect of the  appellant's  case  is
      her sur place activities on behalf  of  Mr  PM.   On  the  appellant's
      account she had resigned from the MCDDI and was working for Mr PM  and
      his new party in the  first  part  of  2007.   However,  she  made  no
      reference to this whatsoever in her interview  with  the  Home  Office
      later that year.

  96. The appellant says that she was not asked specific questions and  that
      she was stressed.  While we accept that the  appellant  was  no  doubt
      stressed by  the  interview,  a  stress  exacerbated  by  her  medical
      condition, the failure to mention what  is  a  central  plank  of  her
      current claim is troubling.

  97. There are other matters rightly relied on by  Ms  Isherwood.   On  the
      appellant's account she is preparing reports, sending e-mails and such
      like. Yet nothing was produced before us.  There is no evidence of the
      existence of the party apart  from  the  oral  evidence.   The  expert
      himself cannot verify the existence of the new party.

  98. Against all this there is Mr PM himself.  We have no doubt that he  is
      whom he claims to be and that he  was  a  significant  player  in  the
      political arena  in  Congo.   He  has  been  granted  refugee  status.
      Although there was an initial confusion about  when  he  had  met  the
      appellant in the United Kingdom, we do not consider that his  evidence
      about that meeting is unreliable.   We  find  that  he  did  meet  the
      appellant on more than one occasion when she was a young supporter  of
      the MCDDI in the Congo.   He  met  her  in  Makelekele  and  Mr  Melly
      remarked that this was not an implausible place for a meeting.

  99. The appellant's account is also supported by Mr Louzala.  Although  we
      did not hear from Mr Louzala, we accept Mr PM's  evidence  about  him.
      We accept that Mr PM is attempting to create interest in his new party
      throughout the diaspora.


 100. That said, there are  significant  gaps  in  the  evidence.   We  have
      already commented on the fact that the appellant's reports and e-mails
      have not been adduced.   There  is  no  documentary  evidence  of  the
      existence of the party.  There is no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      letter of resignation was  sent,  let  alone  received.   Evidence  of
      photographs of the appellant -  for  example  on  her  leaflets  -  is
      distinctly lacking.  In  short,  there  is  a  dearth  of  documentary
      evidence where one might reasonably expect it.

 101. The Adjudicator who heard the appellant's appeal some  time  ago  also
      had considerable reservations about the evidence.  Yet he was prepared
      to accept that there was a kernel of truth in  the  appellant's  case.
      We find ourselves in the same position.  We cannot speculate as to why
      the appellant failed to reveal her current association with Mr  PM  at
      interview.  It may be because she felt that to  reveal  that  she  had
      resigned from the MCDDI would damage her case.  We are  not  confident
      we have heard the truth about this.


 102. Another significant difficulty in the way  of  the  appellant  is  the
      picture painted of her in the medical evidence as being something of a
      recluse, living on her own and going out only seldom.   This  account,
      it has to be  said,  is  somewhat  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the
      intelligent  political  activist  going  out  daily  to  the  library,
      attending meetings, e-mailing and so on.

 103. Certainly, if the appellant was depressed she exhibited no sign of  it
      at the hearing.  She came across  as  an  intelligent  individual  who
      would not hesitate to correct the interpreter and had no difficulty in
      getting her case across.  We could well understand that she could be a
      useful secretarial assistant to Mr PM.

 104. However, taking into account  all  the  forceful  points  made  by  Ms
      Isherwood, we feel, as the Adjudicator did, that there still remains a
      kernel of truth in the appellant's story. We  were  impressed  by  the
      evidence of Mr PM.  Apart from the confusion about the  date  when  he
      met the appellant in the United Kingdom, he  and  the  appellant  gave
      consistent evidence.  We accept that he is genuinely committed to  his
      new party and in carrying matters  forward.   Importantly,  we  accept
      that the appellant assists him in this cause.  Although the  witnesses
      were somewhat reluctant to disclose numbers, we accept that there  may
      be reasons for this - Mr PM refers  to  reasons  of  security  in  his
      statement.  There may be reasons of  confidentiality  inhibiting  them
      from  putting  forward  e-mails  or  reports  which   might   disclose
      membership details.  We accept that while the  expert  had  not  heard
      details of the new party, he had been aware of Mr PM's plans for  some
      period of time prior to its launch.  The appellant  has  been  vouched
      for by Mr Louzala and Mr PM.  Mr Melly confirmed  that  MCDDI  leaders
      will only provide a statement confirming that an individual is or  was
      a member where they have themselves been able to  verify  this  -  the
      experts are aware of a recent case  where  MCDDI  leaders  refused  to
      provide  confirmation  because  of  discrepancies  in   the   supposed
      membership documentation - see page 89 of the report.  It  is  pointed
      out that the appellant belonged to the mainstream of the  MCDDI  loyal
      to Kolelas and not to the faction of the party led by Mampouya.

 105. The appellant's profile is not a high one and yet she is linked by her
      current work with a prominent political activist.  She  works  as  his
      administrative assistant.  As such  she  is  aware  of  the  place  of
      meetings, the membership list and other matters.  She is aware  of  Mr
      PM's movements.  She is aware of whom he meets.

 106. Ms Isherwood makes  the  point  that  if  the  appellant  were  to  be
      returned, no one would be aware of her association  with  Mr  PM.   We
      have given anxious consideration to this point.

 107. The first factor we bear  in  mind  is  that  although  the  appellant
      eventually lost her first appeal, she did not emerge  with  a  totally
      negative credibility assessment.  Various aspects of  her  claim  were
      accepted.  It was accepted that she was a secretary for the  MCDDI  in
      the  Congo  and  that  she  had  campaigned  for  the  improvement  of
      conditions for women.  It was accepted that  she  had  been  raped  in
      August 1997 and that the family had left for Gabon.  While  there  had
      been a period where she had worked for the MCDDI without difficulties,
      there had followed the  problems  to  which  we  have  made  reference
      earlier in this determination.  Mr Melly has explained why there might
      have been a period where the appellant did not suffer problems between
      1999 and 2002.  We accept his evidence.

 108. The appellant would accordingly be returned to  the  Congo  with  this
      background.  She would be returned from the  United  Kingdom  after  a
      number of years and shares the same surname as Mr PM.

 109. We accept  Mr  Melly's  evidence  that  returned  asylum  seekers  are
      questioned.  It would be surprising if they  were  not.  Ms  Isherwood
      submitted that Mr Melly's report was  undermined  by  his  failure  to
      mention the establishment of a joint police and military unit known as
      COMUS in his summary of the US State Department  Report.  However,  we
      feel that his summary was fair and impartial and we have no reason  to
      doubt his objectivity.

 110. We cannot discount the possibility that  the  authorities  would  have
      some record of the appellant or her family.  It  is  established  that
      the authorities  have  an  interest  in  the  MCDDI  databases  -  the
      President seized the headquarters  in  1997,  taking  away  all  paper
      records, computers and discs in order to try and secure the  lists  of
      its members (page 91 of the appellant's bundle).

 111. We do feel that the appellant would be  in  a  sensitive  position  on
      return.  We have no reason to doubt that she would be questioned about
      what she had been doing  since  she  had  last  been  in  Congo.   The
      Secretary of State, we understand, does not expect  returnees  to  lie
      when questioned.  We acknowledge that there  may  be  cases  where  an
      individual has been found to be so  lacking  in  credibility  that  it
      would be surprising that if on return he was suddenly to volunteer the
      truth.  However the appellant has not been found to be totally lacking
      in credibility.  The Adjudicator found a kernel of truth in her  story
      and so do we.  We also find it by no means unrealistic to suppose that
      the authorities in the Congo would have  some  information  about  the
      appellant either from past records  or  from  their  contacts.   Their
      suspicions would be likely to be aroused by the  co-incidence  of  the
      appellant having the same surname as  Mr  PM.   Further,  although  we
      found the medical report about the appellant  difficult  to  reconcile
      with her political activism as we have explained above, we  do  accept
      that she would be a somewhat vulnerable individual on  return,  having
      been raped and having lost  her  brother  and  other  members  of  her
      family.  It cannot be supposed  that  she  would  be  resilient  under
      interrogation on return.


      Our conclusion in relation to the current situation in the Republic of
   Congo
 112. We take the view that there have been improvements in the human rights
      position in the Republic of  Congo  since  the  determination  of  the
      Tribunal in BB was promulgated.   We  share  the  view  of  Mr  Melly,
      however, that this has been achieved largely  as  the  result  of  the
      neutralisation of opposition leaders by absorption into  a  government
      alliance.  The conclusion of the Tribunal in BB that past  or  present
      membership of an opposition party including the MCDDI would  not  lead
      without more to a real risk of persecution on  return  to  Brazzaville
      remains valid.  The Tribunal's view was that these  parties  continued
      to  function  although  it  seemed  equally  clear  that   they   were
      effectively excluded from any  real  chance  of  obtaining  power  and
      influence.  The background material and opinion of Mr Melly show  that
      that remains the case.  We accept, as  did  the  Tribunal  in  BB,  Mr
      Melly's view that there continues to be a danger  for  some  political
      opponents of the current regime.  The test of whether there is a  real
      risk continues to depend upon the individual's background and  profile
      including in particular the extent of his  political  involvement  and
      whether he  has  or  is  likely  to  come  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities.


 113. Given the attempts  of  President  Sassou-Nguesso  to  neutralise  the
      opposition and the absence of completely free and  fair  elections  we
      take the view that someone who would be seen  by  the  authorities  in
      Congo Brazzaville to be involved in the creation of  a  new  political
      party  opposed  to  the  current  regime  and  whose   aim   was   the
      establishment of true democracy in Congo Brazzaville would be seen  as
      a threat by the authorities in Congo Brazzaville and  would  be  at  a
      real risk of serious harm on return there.

            Our conclusion in respect of the appellant
 114. We have come to the conclusion that on return the  appellant  faces  a
      real risk of being identified as someone associated with Mr PM and his
      current political aspirations.  She will be viewed  as  a  potentially
      valuable source of information, given that  we  accept  that  she  has
      knowledge about  the  party's  membership,  details  of  meetings  and
      numbers of members etc.  We accept that the President is anxious to do
      deals with parties to broaden his power base and a  challenge  to  the
      accommodation he reached over the MCDDI would be highly unwelcome.  We
      therefore find that there is a reasonable degree  of  likelihood  that
      the authorities would impute to the appellant on return an opinion and
      they would treat the appellant  with  suspicion  and  hostility.   The
      appellant has been seriously violated in the past, although it was not
      found that there was a political dimension to this.  We do  feel  that
      there is a real risk of something similar happening to her  on  return
      and that on this occasion she would be at risk  of  suffering  serious
      ill treatment for a political reason.


 115. It is accepted that the appellant's medical condition would not  reach
      the threshold established in N.



      For the reasons we have given we reached the following decision:-

    (1)    The asylum appeal is allowed.


    (2)    The claim for humanitarian protection is accordingly dismissed.


    (3)    The appeal is allowed under Article 3 for the same reasons as we
         have allowed the asylum appeal.




Signed                                             Date 14 August 2008


Senior Immigration Judge Warr


                                  Appendix

                         Background Country material



COI Report Republic of Congo, 20 April 2007.

US State Department report on the Republic of Congo, 11 March 2008.

Amnesty International 2007 report on Congo (Republic of), 23 May 2007.

Freedom House 'Freedom in the World 2007: Congo, Republic of Brazzaville)',
26 June 2007.

COI Service Country of Origin Information Request no. 09/07-125, reply 3
October 2007,

allAfrica.com news report "First-Round Polls Marred By Poor Organisation",
28 June 2007,

allAfrica.com news report, "Opposition Protests as Government Wins Polls by
Massive majority "13 August 2007,



