

                   HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated on   |
|On 20 and 21 June 2006                     |3 August 2006                  |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HODGE OBE, PRESIDENT
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE

                                   Between



                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For Appellant H:    Mr A. Mahmood, Counsel, instructed by Messrs  Blakemores
                    Solicitors
For Appellant G:    Mr B. Ali, Solicitor, of Messrs Aman Solicitors
For Appellant M:    Mr  C.  Jacobs,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Messrs  White
                    Ryland Solicitors
For Appellant O:    Ms L.  Brakaj,  Solicitor,  of  Messrs  Halliday  Reeves
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms L. Giovannetti, Counsel, instructed by  the  Treasury
Solicitor

   1) This case gives  country  guidance  in  relation  to  the  removal  to
      Khartoum  of  certain  Sudanese  nationals.  It  replaces  as  country
      guidance the cases of AE (Relocation-Darfur-Khartoum an option)  Sudan
      CG [2005] UKAIT 00101 and MH  (Darfurians:  relocation  to  Khartoum?)
      Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00033.

   2) Neither involuntary returnees nor failed asylum seekers nor persons of
      military age (including draft evaders and deserters) are  as  such  at
      real risk on return to Khartoum.

   3) A person will not be at real risk on return to Khartoum solely because
      he or she is of Darfuri origin or non-Arab Darfuri origin. Neither  at
      the airport or subsequently will such a person face  a  real  risk  of
      being targeted for persecutory harm or ill treatment.

   4) A person of Darfuri origin or non-Arab Darfuri origin can  in  general
      be reasonably expected to relocate to Khartoum. If that person were in
      practice compelled to live in an  IDP  camp  or  a  squatter  area  in
      Khartoum, this would not expose the person concerned to a real risk of
      serious harm or ill treatment contrary  to  Article  3  or  conditions
      which would be unduly harsh, according to the legal  tests  in  Januzi
      [2006] UKHL 5, since there is no marked difference between  conditions
      in such camps and squatter areas and the living  conditions  for  most
      persons living in Sudan.

   5) In any event, it cannot automatically be assumed that a  returnee  who
      is of Darfuri origin or non-Arab Darfuri  origin  will  be  reasonably
      likely to have to live in such a camp or area -  it  will  be  for  an
      appellant to prove this in his or her case.


   6) An appellant will be able to succeed on the  basis  of  medical  needs
      only in extreme and exceptional circumstances.

   (7) There will, nevertheless, be limited categories of Darfuri  returnees
      who will be at real risk on return to Khartoum. Each case will need to
      be considered on its own individual  merits,  taking  account  of  all
      relevant circumstances, considered individually and cumulatively.  The
      Tribunal considers that  the  following  can  be  said  to  constitute
      particular  risk  categories  (see  further  paragraph  309   of   the
      determination):
   a) persons of non-Arab Darfuri origin from one of the villages  or  areas
      of Darfur which are "hotspots" or "rebel strongholds" from which rebel
      leaders are known to originate;
   b) persons (including certain students) whose conduct marks them  out  as
      oppositionists or anti-government activists;
   c) tribal leaders;
   d) persons who whilst in the United Kingdom have  engaged  in  activities
      which the Sudanese government is likely to know about  and  regard  as
      significantly harmful to its interests;
   e) female returnees, if they are reasonably likely to be associated  with
      a Sudanese male of adverse interest to the authorities  or  if  it  is
      reasonably likely that they would have no alternative but to become  a
      female-headed household in an IDP camp or squatter area.

Determination and Reasons

1. This determination deals with a number of issues relating to  the  return
   of Sudanese nationals, including those of  non-Arab  Darfuri  origin,  to
   Khartoum. On 15 February 2006 the House of Lords remitted the appeals  of
   the first three appellants  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  appellant  H,
   appellant G and appellant M) to the Tribunal for reconsideration  (Januzi
   v. Secretary of State for the Home Department & Ors [2006] UKHL 5).
2. The appeal of the fourth appellant comes  before  us  as  a  second-stage
   reconsideration, a panel having found on the last occasion that there was
   a material error of law on the part of the adjudicator  in  allowing  his
   appeal.

3. All four appellants are members of  black  African  non-Arab  tribes  who
   reside in the western part of Sudan known as Darfur. All four were  found
   to face a real risk of persecution in Darfur.

4. As stated at paragraphs 59 and 60 of the opinions in Januzi,  the  nature
   of the reconsideration in the first three appeals must take the form of a
   reassessment of the internal relocation alternative (within  the  context
   of the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the Status  of  Refugees)  that
   may  be  available  to  a  person  originating  from  Darfur,   and   the
   humanitarian considerations under Article 3 of the European Convention on
   Human Rights that may be raised  by  requiring  a  person  who  has  fled
   persecution in Darfur to relocate to Khartoum.  In our view the same must
   apply to the reconsideration of the  fourth  appellant's  case  (but  see
   paragraph 352).


The cases of Appellants H, G and M

5. At paragraphs 35 to 43 of the opinions, Lord Hope set out the  nature  of
   the claims of appellants H, G and M, the response  of  the  Secretary  of
   State to those claims and the findings of the adjudicator or  Immigration
   Judge who heard the respective appeals:-

              "...  [Appellant H]

              35.   [Appellant H] is a citizen of Sudan.  He was born  on  1
         July 1972.  He seeks asylum on the  ground  that  he  has  a  well-
         founded fear for reasons of race.  He claims that he is a member of
         the Zaghawa tribe from the village of Oro in west Darfur.  He  says
         that in November 2003 his village was  attacked  by  the  Janjaweed
         militia.  His father and brother were killed in  this  attack.   He
         and his mother went to stay  with  his  uncle  in  the  village  of
         Taweela.  But in October 2004 this village too was attacked by  the
         Janjaweed and his mother was killed.  He then went to  the  village
         of Al Shyria where he met an agent who arranged for  him  to  leave
         the country, which he did in October 2004.  He reached  the  United
         Kingdom and claimed asylum on his arrival here on 22 November 2004.



              36.   The Secretary of State resisted  [appellant  H's]  claim
         by letter dated 19 January 2005 on the ground that the responses he
         gave to questions when he was interviewed indicated to  the  asylum
         caseworker that his account of his place of origin was not genuine.
          The caseworker did not believe that [appellant H] was from Darfur.
          So she did not accept that he would be at risk of being killed  or
         subjected to any other ill-treatment if he returned to Sudan.   She
         held that he did not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
         Sudan on the grounds of his race.

              37.   [Appellant H's] case was reconsidered by an  adjudicator
         on 16 March 2005.  She accepted his  account  of  his  origins  and
         background and of what had happened to him in Sudan.  She concluded
         that he had established that he had suffered persecution because of
         his ethnicity and that he would be at risk if he were to return  to
         his home area.  But she said that if he  were  to  be  returned  to
         Sudan he would arrive at Khartoum.  In her opinion he could  remain
         there, as this was an area of his country where he would not have a
         well-founded fear of persecution.  In reaching  this  decision  she
         followed the reasoning of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  MM
         (Zaghawa - Risk on Return - internal Flight) (Sudan)  [2005]  UKIAT
         00069.  She relied on the fact that he had no history of  political
         involvement and was not  a  student.   She  said  that,  given  the
         numbers  of  displaced  people  in  Khartoum  and   their   diverse
         ethnicity, there was no reason to think that he  would  be  treated
         with suspicion and prejudice by the local security forces and there
         was no real likelihood of a risk of  persecution  or  of  treatment
         contrary to article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights.
         She accepted that he had lost his family in Darfur and had  had  to
         flee the Janjaweed.  But there was no evidence that  he  faced  any
         health issues and, as he was aged 32, he was neither very young nor
         old.  So, while it might well be difficult and even harsh  for  him
         to relocate in Sudan, it would not be unduly harsh for him to do so
         in the circumstances.  His appeal to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         Tribunal was rejected by the immigration judge.

6. It is convenient to interpose at this point two matters.  In  June  2005,
   after the adjudicator had heard appellant H's appeal there was  published
   a report by the Aegis Trust entitled "Lives in our Hands: Darfuri  asylum
   seekers facing removal to Khartoum". Appellant H is one of the 26  people
   mentioned in the report as having been  interviewed  by  the  Trust.  The
   report recites the basic facts of what happened to him in Darfur  (which,
   as we have noted, were accepted by the Immigration  Judge).  The  current
   status of his case is said, somewhat prematurely as it turned out, to  be
   "closed", given that  his  "appeals  have  been  refused".  Secondly,  in
   connection with the reconsideration, appellant  H  served  a  copy  of  a
   letter dated 17 June 2006 from a Mr Mohamed Norsal, General Secretary  of
   "The Union of the People of Darfur in U.K. &  N.  Ireland".  This  letter
   asserts, on the basis of a "thorough interview"  by  a  panel  of  office
   holders in the Union, that appellant  H  "is  Darfurian,  born  in  uruoo
   village".  Attached  to  the  letter  is  a  colour  photocopy   of   two
   photographs, showing a person (presumably appellant H) in a crowd of what
   appear to be demonstrators. Appellant H  is  holding  a  placard  bearing
   words that are critical of what is happening in Darfur.

7. As has already been  noted,  the  adjudicator  who  heard  appellant  H's
   appeal found that he had  suffered  persecution  in  Darfur.  Before  the
   adjudicator appellant H said that his  village  was  "Oro",  which  would
   appear to be the same place as that transliterated in the letter from the
   Union as ""uruoo". Before us Mr Mahmood did  not  seek  to  rely  on  the
   letter or the photographs, properly mindful of the fact that no challenge
   had been made to the adjudicator's case-specific findings of fact earlier
   in the appeal process. We have, nevertheless, approached  our  assessment
   of the risk to this appellant on return to Sudan on the  basis,  that  he
   appears in the 2005 Aegis Trust report, is mentioned in the  letter  from
   the Union of the Peoples of Darfur in the United Kingdom and  N.  Ireland
   and may have attended a demonstration whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  at
   which he carried the placard which we have just described. Otherwise, the
   specific facts of appellant H's case are as found by the adjudicator.

8. These are the facts of appellants G and M:-

              "...  [Appellant G]

         38.  [Appellant G] too is a citizen of Sudan.  He was  born  on  13
         January 1973 and is a member of the black African Muslim Al  Berget
         tribe.  He seeks asylum on the ground that he  has  a  well-founded
         fear on grounds of race and because of his family's links with  the
         Sudanese Liberation Movement ("the  SLM").   His  home  village  of
         Tawila is in north Darfur.  On 7 March 2004 it was attacked  during
         the night by the Janjaweed militia.  Three people  in  his  village
         were killed  and  many  were  injured.   Crops  and  property  were
         destroyed or stolen, some of the dwellings were burned down and his
         own home was  looted.   His  village  was  attacked  again  by  the
         Janjaweed militia during the night of 22 November 2004.  They began
         looting property and killing people at random, so he fled from  the
         village with other members of his family.  On 27 November he  heard
         that security agents had arrested his father and brother from their
         home in Sawar near Al Fashir in north Darfur  to  which  they  have
         moved after the attack on 22 November 2004.  He was told  that  the
         security agents believed that they and the appellant had links with
         and were supplying weapons to the SLM.  His uncle warned  him  that
         the security agents were looking for him too.  He went into hiding,
         and was taken to the city of Al Kofra from where  he  travelled  to
         the United Kingdom.  He arrived here on 9 December 2004 and claimed
         asylum the next day.


         39.  The Secretary of State refused [appellant G's] claim by letter
         dated 27 January 2005.  But there was no challenge in  the  refusal
         letter to the account that he had given of his ethnicity and tribal
         membership.  His case was reconsidered by an immigration  judge  on
         13 April 2005.  She found that he was a displaced black African who
         had fled internally within north  Darfur.   But  she  rejected  his
         account of what had taken place  with  regard  to  his  father  and
         brother, and she did not accept his claimed fear of return  on  the
         basis of political or imputed belief associated  with  his  family.
         This left his fear of return on the basis of the treatment  by  the
         State of members of a black  sedentary  tribal  minority,  assuming
         that he was someone who had no political profile.


         40.  Having reviewed the Secretary of State's decision in the light
         of AB (return of Southern Sudanese) Sudan CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00260,
         the immigration judge concluded that, as a minority  African  tribe
         member, [appellant G] could be returned as an internally  displaced
         person to live in a camp in or near Khartoum without any real  risk
         of treatment of a severity that  would  breach  article  3  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights.  She accepted that Sudanese of
         non-Arab Darfurian background faced a heightened risk  of  scrutiny
         by security  agents  on  their  return  to  the  country  and  that
         internally displaced  persons  often  face  forced  relocation  and
         return to their home areas.  But she found that  the  treatment  of
         black African Sudanese was  the  result  of  land  reclamation  and
         tribal warfare, not  because  there  was  a  policy  or  desire  to
         eradicate the black African  tribal  groups  on  the  part  of  the
         Sudanese government.  She said it would not be unduly harsh for him
         to move into a camp for internally displaced persons on his arrival
         at Khartoum airport as he would be one of thousands of such persons
         who are members of a black African tribe, and he was an adult  male
         who was able to fend for himself and had no political profile.  His
         appeal to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal was rejected."


         [Appellant M]


         41.  [Appellant M] is a citizen of Sudan also.  He was  born  on  1
         January 1970 and is a member of the Zaghawa tribe.  He seeks asylum
         on the ground that he has a well-founded fear for reasons  of  race
         and because of his political opinion in that he is a member  or  at
         least a supporter of the Sudanese Liberation Army ("the SLA").  His
         home is in the village of Abogamra in Darfur.  He  claims  that  in
         March 2003 his village was attacked  by  armed  Arab  militia.   He
         helped to defend the village, but eight  people  from  his  village
         were killed and  many  people  were  injured.   In  April  2003  he
         relocated to the city of Nyala where his sister lived.  He remained
         there for about a year.  He claimed that during his time  there  he
         became involved with a group  of  Zaghawans  who  were  engaged  in
         raising money and recruiting members for the SLA.  In March 2004 he
         was told that three of his colleagues had  been  arrested  and  had
         informed on him.  Fearing arrest, he fled  first  to  Omdurman  and
         then to Khartoum.  He stayed in Khartoum  for  six  months  with  a
         relative and continued with his SLA activities.   On  10  September
         2004 an SLA meeting which he was attended was raided.   He  escaped
         by jumping over a wall and went into hiding.  On 29 September  2004
         he left Sudan.  He claimed asylum on  his  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom on 1 October 2004.


         42.  The Secretary of State refused [appellant M's] claim by letter
         dated 1 December 2004.  His case was reconsidered by an adjudicator
         who on 9 March 2005 dismissed  the  appeal.   The  adjudicator  was
         invited by the Secretary of  State  to  make  adverse  findings  on
         [appellant M's] credibility, and he did so.  He said  that  he  did
         not find [appellant M's] evidence that he had  been  involved  with
         the SLA or in political activities to  be  credible.   He  accepted
         that he had left Darfur in some way because of  the  conflict,  but
         much of his evidence was in his judgment implausible,  inconsistent
         and vague.  He gave some examples of this, among which was the fact
         that his knowledge of the SLA's policies was particularly vague and
         limited.  He declined to find that he was even involved in politics
         either in Darfur or  in  Khartoum  or  that  the  authorities  ever
         targeted him or were ever interested in  him  because  of  his  SLA
         activities.  But he was prepared to find that if he were to  return
         to Darfur he would, like many others of his  tribe,  be  persecuted
         there because of his ethnicity.


         43.  Turning to the situation in Khartoum, the adjudicator said  he
         was not satisfied that [appellant M] had had  any  problems  there.
         He found that when [appellant M] was living in Khartoum he was able
         to stay with a relative there.  He was on the face of it a fit  and
         healthy young man.  He acknowledged that it might be difficult  for
         many people from Darfur to settle in Khartoum and  that  [appellant
         M] might find it necessary to  go  to  a  camp.   But  he  was  not
         satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for him to do so.  He noted
         that Darfurians suspected of political activities did appear to  be
         targeted  by  the  authorities,  but  he  was  not  satisfied  that
         [appellant M] had a profile that would make him in  any  sense  the
         target of the authorities.  In  his  opinion  there  was  a  viable
         internal relocation option for him in Sudan.  He added, with regard
         to his human rights appeal, that it had  not  been  proved  to  the
         necessary standard that he would have to stay in the  refugee  camp
         were he to return to Khartoum, or that even if he were to  have  to
         stay in one that this would lead to treatment  which  would  breach
         his rights under article 4 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights.  His appeal to the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  was
         refused."


Paragraph 44 of the opinions describes what happened next:-

        "44. On 10 June 2005 Elias J referred all these cases to the  Court
        of Appeal pursuant to section 103C of the Nationality,  Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002.  On 25 October 2005 the Court of Appeal  (Lord
        Phillips of Worth Matravers CJ, Maurice Kay LJ and Sir  Christopher
        Staughton) held that no error of law had  been  identified  in  the
        determinations and dismissed the appeal: [2005] EWCA Civ 1219.   In
        paragraph 42 of the court's judgment Maurice Kay LJ  said,  on  the
        issue of asylum, that there was no general principle or presumption
        that persecution by or on behalf of the state is incompatible  with
        acceptable internal relocation.  The court held that on both asylum
        and human rights grounds the  decisions  were  entirely  compatible
        with the country guidance contained in AE (Relocation  -  Darfur  -
        Khartoum an option) Sudan CG [2005] UKAIT 00101."

9. Although Mr Jacobs indicated on 20 June  2006  that  he  wished  to  call
   appellant M to give further oral evidence, he informed the Tribunal on 21
   June that he would  not  be  pursuing  this  matter.   The  case-specific
   findings of fact in relation to appellant M are, accordingly, those  made
   by the adjudicator who first heard his appeal. The Tribunal has, however,
   taken into account, de bene esse, the following matter. Appellant M  has,
   in an unsigned statement dated 19 June 2006, referred to his having taken
   part in meetings and demonstrations  for  the  SLM  (Sudanese  Liberation
   Movement) and being  a  representative  for  that  organisation  in  West
   Yorkshire.


Case of Appellant O

10. The  reconsideration  of  the  Tribunal's  decision  on  the  appeal  of
   appellant O was ordered by a Senior Immigration Judge on 31  August  2005
   under section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
   The reconsideration first came before  the  Tribunal  on  28  March  2006
   (Senior Immigration Judge Barnes; Senior Immigration Judge McKee;  Ms  C.
   St Clair).  The Tribunal decided that there was a material error  of  law
   in  the  determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge  who  had  heard  the
   appellant's appeal.  It is not necessary that we set out  the  Tribunal`s
   decision on this matter since, following the conclusion  of  the  hearing
   before us, the respondent`s  decision  in  respect  of  appellant  O  was
   withdrawn and hence his appeal is deemed to be withdrawn (see  paragraphs
   351-2).


The hearing

11. On 20 April 2006 the Tribunal ordered that the reconsiderations  of  the
   appeals in the cases of appellants H, G and M and the second stage of the
   reconsideration of the decision in the appeal of appellant  O  should  be
   heard together on the basis that common questions of law and  fact  arose
   in each of them (Rule  20(a)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
   (Procedure) Rules 2005).

12. The hearing of these appeals took place over two days. Due to  practical
   problems in finding  a third day suitable to all in the near  future,  it
   was agreed by the parties that they would make their closing  submissions
   in writing and our deliberations have taken account of those submissions.

13. At the hearing we heard evidence from three expert witnesses.

The expert evidence
Peter Verney

14. The first witness was Mr Peter Verney. He  has  worked  for  twenty-five
   years on Sudan-related  issues.   His  recent  work  has  included  being
   commissioned as a special adviser  to  Darfur  to  assist  the  House  of
   Commons' International Development Committee and the Overseas Development
   Institute from December 2004 to March 2005.  He last visited Khartoum  in
   1989, although he had been to the South in 1998.   One reason he had  not
   been back was that threats had been made against his late  wife  who  was
   Sudanese. He is the Editor of Sudan Update, an independent monitoring and
   information service which reviews current affairs in Sudan.

15. His written report for the Tribunal was  dated  7  June  2006.   It  was
   prepared in respect of the first of the appellants but addressed a  range
   of issues common to all four appeals before us.

16. His report considers that in order to understand properly the  situation
   for displaced persons in Khartoum, one has to recognise that the  central
   government has played a major role in the Darfur conflict.  Between  2001
   and 2005, 97% of the attacks on Darfur villages were by Sudan  government
   forces and/or their proxy  Arab  militia  (the  Janjaweed).    Two-thirds
   involved government helicopter gunship and bomber aircraft. The Janjaweed
   are supported by the Regional Government of Sudan and operate  under  the
   command of senior figures in the regime's security forces and the  entire
   campaign is remarkable for  its  explicitly  racist  political  ideology.
   This conflict represented the regime's attempt to punish an entire  group
   of people.

17. In his report he explains that someone trying to live in Khartoum  after
   being displaced from a conflict zone would face three  possibilities.  He
   could try and go to an IDP encampment on the periphery  of  the  capital.
   But that would be a place of last resort. Such camps have frequently been
   demolished and their inhabitants moved to new camps  out  in  the  desert
   periphery, often with grossly inadequate provision  of  water  and  other
   basic essentials.

18. A second possibility would be to try and go to the  unofficial  squatter
   areas, but  these  areas  too  have  been  subjected  to  clearances  and
   demolitions.

19. A third possibility would be  to  try  and  go  to  an  existing  social
   network or better established community of his or her kinfolk in  various
   parts of the city.

20. However, it had to  be  understood  that  all  areas  of  Khartoum  were
   subject  to  considerable  police  and  security  police  monitoring  and
   intervention.  This had a political and ethnic dimension.   Even in times
   of peace, when starving Darfuris came to Khartoum  seeking  respite  from
   famine in the mid-1980's, they were treated as undesirable aliens  rather
   than as fellow Sudanese. But the eruption of conflict in Darfur from 2003
   had intensified ethnic divides. Internally displaced persons (IDPs)  from
   Darfur in Khartoum face not merely "difficult living conditions" but also
   politically  driven  antagonism   by   the   authorities.   The   central
   government's security apparatus in Khartoum was pursuing a  clampdown  on
   civil society organisations assisting the victims of the Darfur conflict.
    The regime's treatment of displaced persons in and around  Khartoum  was
   directly  related  to  its  deliberate  obstruction  and  threatening  of
   humanitarian workers, human rights defenders and the media in the  Darfur
   region itself and had many  of  the  same  elements.  The  government  is
   reluctant  to  allow  UN  intervention  in  Darfur  and  the  threat   of
   prosecution for war  crimes  hangs  over  named  senior  figures  in  the
   Sudanese regime; these senior figures have become alarmed at the prospect
   of trial before the International Criminal Court and are keener than ever
   to silence potential witnesses and to maintain surveillance  and  control
   of all possible sources of embarrassment,  protest  or  unrest  over  the
   Darfur crisis.

21. A further factor  affecting  the  situation  of  displaced  Darfuris  in
   Khartoum was that the government was very aware that they, together  with
   other displaced persons and 'street' people, played a  role  in  sparking
   the April 1985 popular uprising which brought down  the  dictatorship  of
   General Numeiri. It therefore regards the influence of Darfur IDPs  as  a
   potential threat  to  its  stability  and  treats  those  attracting  the
   attention of the authorities as likely seditionaries.

      'The Darfur IDPs represent a potential catalyst for  the  downfall  of
      the regime, and while it cannot detain or  relocate  them  all,  every
      effort is made to stifle their attempts at organisation  or  self-help
      and to obstruct assistance to them.'

22. The general picture was that  in  Khartoum  forced  mass  removals,  the
   destruction of homes,  and  arrests  of  IDPs,  on  combined  racial  and
   political grounds, were frequent occurrences. The risk of being picked on
   was quite strong.

23. At paragraph 91 Mr Verney concluded that the  actions  of  the  Sudanese
   government against occupants of IDP  camps included forced mass removals,
   racially motivated arrests and the destruction of homes,  'all  of  which
   could well be described as inhuman and degrading'.

24. In his view, whilst it was  true  that  the  most  publicised  cases  of
   arrests outside Darfur have been those of persecuted students,  community
   leaders, traders, lawyers and others with some  access  to  human  rights
   bodies, less prominent individuals  have  simply  disappeared  without  a
   trace.   His report cited with approval the statement in the 2005   Aegis
   Trust report "Lives in Our Hands" that "[i]n  Khartoum now if even two or
   three people identified as being from  Darfur or  talking  about   Darfur
   are seen talking by  the   authorities,  they  can  be  in  very  serious
   trouble. And anyone who the authorities think is supplying information to
   any outside organisation about Darfur will be in trouble".

25. The start-point for any consideration of the situation for  Darfuris  if
   returned by the UK to Khartoum was, wrote Mr Verney, that they would face
   an "elevated  risk"  as  compared  with  displaced  Darfuris  already  in
   Khartoum.  There were two dimensions to the risks that would  face  them.
   First they would be identified by a combination of their  appearance  and
   dialect as being from Darfur. This identification  would  lead  to  their
   being interrogated. Those authorities would  start  with  the  assumption
   that the person was an  opposition  sympathiser  because  of  his  ethnic
   background.   The onus would be on the returnee to demonstrate loyalty to
   the regime, and prove  he  was  not  an  opposition  sympathiser.  Deeply
   embedded  racist  attitudes  mean  that  ethnic  origin  alone  is  often
   sufficient to trigger  a  cascade  of  worsening  persecutory  activities
   against a particular individual. Second, there was an  elevated  risk  of
   this adverse attention and subsequent harm, as compared with  the  Darfur
   population already in the capital, because  he  will  be  known  to  have
   returned from the UK.  He could also be suspected  of  having  passed  on
   incriminating evidence  against  the  Khartoum  regime  relating  to  its
   atrocities in Darfur whilst abroad.  If adverse interest in an individual
   was triggered by his or her ethnic origin in this way, he  or  she  would
   then face detention in 'ghost houses' and all that was known  about  such
   places suggested frequent maltreatment.

26. Even if a person managed to get through the airport, he or she  faced  a
   risk of monitoring and surveillance. Even if a person went  to  Khartoum,
   wherever he went he would  soon  be  identified  by  the  authorities  as
   someone who originated from Darfur and who had gone abroad  and  was  now
   returning. He would be highly conspicuous.

27. At paragraph 13 Mr Verney wrote:

      'Returned Darfuri asylum seekers - the genuine ones - would risk being
      subjected to a cascade of adverse treatment by  the  security  police,
      triggered  by  their  ethnic  identity  and  linked  automatically  to
      suspicion of sympathy with the rebels.  This  is  just  as  likely  to
      happen in the capital Khartoum as in Darfur region: it is  essentially
      part of the same "collective punishment" process, reflecting the  same
      government mindset and aims.'

At paragraph 84 Mr Verney stated:

      'In my opinion the ethnic identity of Darfuri  asylum  seekers  is  in
      itself a strong indicator of likely persecution if returned  to  Sudan
      via  Khartoum.  There  are  many  categories  of  persons  of  Darfuri
      ethnicity likely to be subjected to persecution. Not only students and
      conventional political  activists are at risk; the dangers are just as
      great for farmers, doctors and a spectrum of ordinary citizens  caught
      up in the conflict and suspected of aiding the rebel movements in  any
      way.'

28. In oral evidence Mr Verney amplified a passage in his  report  where  he
   described  his sources of information, in particular his 'off the record'
   interviews with half a dozen field workers acting for major  British  aid
   agencies in  Sudan, regarding the  likely  treatment  of  returnees  from
   Sudan.  All had spoken to him 'off the record'  because  it  would  place
   their work in jeopardy if there comments were known publicly.   In  terms
   of written sources, he considered that the most well-researched, detailed
   and authoritative evaluation of the situation in Khartoum was that by the
   UNHCR in its recent position paper: it was the UNHCR's first paper  since
   2001 and was in very strong terms. The other  main  written  sources,  on
   which he set much store, were the  two  Aegis  Trust  reports,  the  2005
   Report, 'Lives in Our Hands' and their very recent  June  2006  'Safe  as
   Ghost  Houses  -  Prospects  for  Darfur  African  Survivors  Removed  to
   Khartoum' report. Hitherto the Home Office had taken the line  'we  don't
   have the evidence', yet now the position was different.

29. Mr Verney put the number of recently arrived  Darfuris  in  Khartoum  as
   being between 100,000 to 200,000.  Asked about conditions  in  IDP  camps
   and the unofficial or semi-official squatter areas,  he  said  there  had
   been government bulldozing of many of  the  spontaneous  settlements  and
   forcible  relocations  to  desert  areas  where  conditions  were   quite
   appalling and where people were cut off from the local  informal  economy
   and prospects of earning money from work. The further  from  the  capital
   such people were, the more vulnerable,  because  they  were  out  of  the
   public gaze.  The most notorious forcible  relocations  which  had  taken
   place had been in May 2005 in the squatter areas  of  Soba  Aradi,  which
   left sixteen police and six civilians dead while several thousand  people
   were thrown in jail but in his view there  would  soon  be  a  repeat  of
   something similar in the near future, probably worse.

30. The official explanation for these relocations was urban  planning,  but
   there was a repeated pattern of (i) complaints by  aid  agencies  to  the
   Commissioner of Khartoum about the arbitrary manner of   the  relocations
   and of the sending of people  to  places  where  there  was  no  adequate
   provision;  (ii) promises  to  give  prior  notice  and  ensure  adequate
   provisions;  and (iii) those promises being ignored. In  his  view  there
   was a ruling group strategy behind this of keeping  IDPs  constantly  'on
   the run' so as to disrupt their lives and disperse them,  rendering  them
   incapable of fending for themselves.  In his view conditions in the camps
   had become progressively worse.  There was a regular obstruction  of  aid
   bodies.  The Sudanese government had become sophisticated about appearing
   to go along with international agencies and their work, only  to  act  in
   practice according to their own racist agenda.

31. Asked about the security dimension to the position of displaced  persons
   in Khartoum, he said it had to be understood  that  there  was  extensive
   monitoring and surveillance by  the  police  and  security  police.  They
   operated through an unseen informer society.  It would be impossible  for
   someone from Darfur to go to any place in Khartoum without their presence
   being brought to the  attention  of  the  authorities.   He  likened  the
   position of  an  ethnic  Zaghawa  to  someone  in  London  from  Highland
   Scotland, recognisable by appearance and dress.

32. Asked what would make the  Sudanese authorities  suspicious  of   failed
   asylum seekers, he said that the ruling elite is particularly nervous  of
   facing prosecution by the  ICC for war crimes and tends  to  assume  that
   anyone from  Darfur going abroad and claiming  asylum   will  have  given
   evidence about atrocities.

33. He was asked to clarify what he meant  in  his  report  about  'genuine'
   asylum seekers. He said that his work had involved  him  in  interviewing
   (with help from two colleagues with  language  skills  and  knowledge  of
   geography) a significant number of persons claiming to be asylum  seekers
   from Darfur.  In his view only about half were genuine.  The others  were
   simply opportunists jumping on the Darfur bandwagon. Of the opportunists,
   a significant number turned out on his own examination  to  be  not  from
   Darfur. But there were some from Darfur but who gave untrue  accounts  of
   their home areas and past experiences. There were also  some  members  of
   the black African tribes such as the Zaghawa who were on  the  government
   side; that was an inevitable fact of life.  A particular concern  he  had
   was that the Home  Office  did  not  seem  to  have  a  reliable  way  of
   identifying genuine Darfuri cases: he knew of instances of members of the
   Janjaweed militia whose true identity had not being picked up.

34. People who were not genuine would not in his view face  a  genuine  risk
   on return.  He reiterated the view set out  in  his  report  that  whilst
   there were certainly categories of person from Darfur  who  would  be  at
   special risk - students, members of opposition/rebel groups and merchants
   for example - even  ordinary  farmers  could  have  a  political  opinion
   imputed to them.

35. As regards risk of adverse treatment at the airport,  he  accepted  that
   ethnic identity was not a sole indicator, but it was a major  factor  and
   one that could trigger a cascade of persecutory activities.  Not everyone
   of adverse interest would be immediately arrested; it might  also  depend
   on how well-placed a person was in society; they might instead simply  be
   placed under surveillance.

36. Asked whether he knew of any monitoring of returns carried  out  by  any
   NGO or humanitarian agencies, he said he knew of none. It was  absurd  to
   think that such monitoring  would  be  practically  feasible,  not  least
   because one needed permission to visit Khartoum airport. Given  that  the
   number of returns from Europe was small, it was not surprising that there
   were no reports or only reports of problems faced in one or two cases.

37. It was important in his view not to over-estimate the number of  persons
   from Darfur who had managed  to  seek  asylum  outside  of  Africa.  Some
   200,000 had fled to Chad. He estimated that there were only about 1,000 -
   2,000 Darfuris in the UK - a very tiny proportion.

38. Mr Verney also dealt with  medical  facilities.  His  evidence  on  this
   matter is best noted separately later on.

39. In cross-examination by Miss Giovannetti, Mr Verney  said  that  he  had
   asked four international aid agencies contacts about their view  on  risk
   to  Darfuris  returned  by  the  UK  to  Khartoum.   None  specified  any
   particular numbers, but all four confirmed that such persons  would  face
   serious risks, because they had heard stories about  people  being  taken
   away or disappearing.

40. He was asked why he had  not  addressed  in  his  report  the   relevant
   evidence on returnees set out in the December 2005 Accord COI (Country of
   Origin) Seminar. He considered that the comments of the two  experts  set
   out in that report should  be  read  as  applying  to  persons  from  the
   political elites, not grass roots Darfuris. He accepted that  arrests  at
   the airport were not common now;  the  regime's  approach  was  now  more
   subtle, by way of monitoring and surveillance and  adverse  action  taken
   later on.

41. He was asked whether it was consistent with the  evidence  available  to
   him to have stated that the government had brought  a  complete  halt  to
   food distribution in every camp. He explained that he did not  mean  that
   the government had halted or would halt all food  distribution  at  once,
   but the trend was to obstruct supplies.

42. Miss Giovannetti put to him  that  some  sections  of  his  report  were
   overstated.  She highlighted his citation  of  the  2005  "Lives  in  Our
   Hands" Aegis Trust report reference to persons from Darfur being at  risk
   simply if two or three were seen together talking. He  did  not  mean  by
   citing this passage, he said, that such persons would be at risk if  they
   were just talking about the weather. But they would if they were  talking
   about incidents in Darfur.

43. He agreed that in terms of living conditions, those  in  the  camps  and
   squatter areas may not be worse  off  than  in  other  large  slum  areas
   elsewhere in Sudan and in other African countries. But  in  Khartoum  you
   could not separate living conditions  from  the  political  and  security
   dimension,  which  includes  the  strategy  of  forced  relocations   and
   obstruction of humanitarian aid agencies.

44. He was asked why it  was  that  the  January  2005  inter-agency  multi-
   sectoral Rapid Assessment Survey of IDPs in Khartoum  State  and  related
   evidence tended to indicate that persons from Darfur were in camps  where
   there was some level of education for  children  and  some  provision  of
   plots of land.  He agreed he could not say for certain to what extent  or
   how often persons in specific camps or settlements had been moved around,
   but he stood by what he said concerning overall trends.


Mr Mohamed Boraka Bourain

45. The next witness was Mr Mohamed Boraka Nourain.  His written report  was
   said to be of general application.   He is a former judge and lawyer from
   Sudan. He is from Darfur and of  the  Fur  tribe.   He  had  subsequently
   served as an MP in the Sudanese Parliament from  2001  to  2005.   During
   that time he was a member in Sudan  of  the  Parliamentary  Human  Rights
   Committee and head of the Parliamentary  Subcommittee  for  Human  Rights
   complaints.   He had been elected an a MP  as  a  member  of  the  ruling
   party, as it was  the only way for a Darfuri to have a chance of election
   at that time and he had hoped  to be able to influence the country   more
   from within the ruling party. However, he had left Sudan in late 2005 and
   had recently been recognised as a refugee in the UK.

46. In his written report he states that his work as an MP  required him  to
   work closely with many of the  most prominent international  humanitarian
   organisations as well as with the US and UK embassies in Sudan. His  work
   had also led him to meet and work closely with members of the Immigration
   and Intelligence services in Sudan.  He had retained  contact  throughout
   all levels of these services since leaving  the  country.   In  order  to
   protect their  safety  he  could  not  name  any  except  for  a  certain
   Lieutenant Colonel Mohamed Abdu (aka  Mohamed Ibrahim), formerly  of  the
   General Security Services  responsible  for  Darfur  issues,  as  he  had
   recently fled the country also (in March 2006).

47. Under a subheading 'Deportees to  Sudan (Including Asylum  Seekers)'  he
   wrote that the Sudanese government had a  policy  of  screening  Sudanese
   nationals on return to  the  country  and  particularly  members  of  the
   Zaghawa, Fur and Maseleit  tribes  who  formed  the   largest  resistance
   groups in  Darfur. He had been informed  by  immigration  officials  that
   they would particularly focus on those who did not return  on  their  own
   passports, but  with  travel  documents,  or  those  who  had  had  their
   passports replaced while they have been away. They  have  also  told  him
   that such persons will inevitably be stopped and arrested on arrival:

             'The fact that an individual  does  not  hold  their  original
             passport will be taken as indicating that they left  illegally
             and claimed asylum  unless they can somehow prove that this is
             not the  case.  Claiming  asylum  abroad  is  perceived  as  a
             betrayal of Sudan and as  tantamount  to  treason  in  and  of
             itself  and  the  authorities  are  inclined  to  punish  this
             behaviour.'

48. This, he said, would apply even to those who had  not  been  politically
   active in the past.  Since the signing of the peace agreement, members of
   both the Fur and Midoup tribes are subject to increased scrutiny because,
   unlike Minni Menawi's Sudanese  Liberation  Army  (primarily  of  Zaghawa
   ethnicity),  they did not sign  the peace agreement.

49. His report states that if someone is  returned  to  Sudan  there  is  no
   procedure to notify any independent organisations or their  relatives  to
   expect them. Accordingly, if an individual is stopped and detained at the
   airport,  there  is  no  prospect  of  anyone  informing  the  media   or
   campaigning for their release.

50. The report states that the Intelligence and Security services in   Sudan
   make widespread use of what are known as 'ghost houses', viz. illegal and
   unregistered prisons and detention facilities  which  are  used  to  hold
   political enemies and torture them with impunity:
             'It would be almost inevitable that  a  failed  asylum  seeker
             would end up either being summarily executed or being detained
             in a ghost house on return from the UK.'

51. The practice of irregular detention was compounded,  according  to  this
   report, by the lack of any due process or right to  legal  representation
   if a person was detained by the Immigration Services.

52. Mr Nourain wrote in his report that he  had  information  from  security
   officials which enabled him to  state  categorically  that  the  Sudanese
   authorities   monitor political activists in Europe and use this evidence
   against deportees. These officials had described showing video recordings
   of demonstrations in Europe to persons on return to the  country  in  the
   course  of   interrogation   about   their   activities   abroad.     His
   understanding was that the Sudanese Embassy in the UK  had  a  policy  of
   filming demonstrations and trying to maintain records of those  nationals
   of Sudan who actively campaign against them in other parts of the world:

             'I understand that political groups such as  the  Justice  and
             Equality Movement  (JEM)  and  the  Sudanese  Liberation  Army
             Movement and even simply community groups are monitored across
             Europe.


             If someone is returned from  the  UK  having  participated  in
             demonstrations against the Sudanese government there is a very
             real risk that they would be identified on  return  as  having
             been  politically  active.   This  would  be     regarded   as
             treason.'

53. He said that one should not draw inferences that things did  not  happen
   to returnees from the lack of publicity, as the media, both domestic  and
   international, is tightly controlled in Khartoum. The government actively
   take steps to exclude journalists from many areas and  it  interferes  in
   international investigations.

54. In his oral evidence Mr Nourain reiterated that he had  met  and  worked
   closely with members of the Immigration and Intelligence Service in Sudan
   when he was an MP and a human rights campaigner.  He had been involved in
   raising issues with these departments. It was  difficult  to  distinguish
   the work of these departments. He claimed he knew many  people  in  these
   departments, but when challenged he returned to the same two individuals.

55. Most of the officers he knew are from his tribe  (Fur);  they  knew  the
   government is neglecting people and destroying family life but  they  had
   to do their job. As regards the only informant he could name,  Lieutenant
   Colonel Abdu, he understood he was now in Eritrea.  Since  leaving  Sudan
   he (Mr  Nourain)  had  also  contacted  one  person  in  the  immigration
   department in Khartoum in charge of issuing passports.

56. He was asked to say more about the case of a person who,  when  returned
   to the airport in Khartoum was shown a video  of  a  demonstration  taken
   outside Sudan. The video was  stopped  at  a  particular  point  when  an
   individual was shown demonstrating.  The  returnee  was  asked  who  that
   individual was, the implication being that it was the  returnee  himself,
   and that person could not say anything. Mr Nourain had  been  told  about
   this case when a MP, he thought it would  have  been  in  2002.  In  oral
   evidence, this was the only example Mr Nourain gave of the  knowledge  of
   the Sudanese authorities of demonstrations abroad and the identity  of  a
   demonstrator. He gave no details of the location of the demonstration  or
   its size or purpose.

57. He could not help with the  periods  of  time  over  which  he  had  had
   contacts  with  different  officials  in  the  passport  and  immigration
   service, but the officials were all officers.

58. He believed there were perhaps three ghost houses in Khartoum.

59. Cross-examined, he stated that the authorities were  suspicious  of  all
   Fur, especially the young ones, but there was an exception for those  who
   work in the government or who are in the ruling party.

60. Lieutenant Colonel Abdu was in charge of all enquiries about the  tribes
   of Sudan, especially tribes from Darfur. He was an expert on tribal links
   and issues.  They brought people to him when they detained them  for  his
   expertise on their tribes. He last spoke to  the  Lieutenant  Colonel  in
   March, when the latter was in Nairobi.

61. If a person was arrested and detained at the airport  the  family  would
   not know the person was arrested. His information  that  detained  failed
   asylum seekers would be executed was common  knowledge  in  the  security
   forces. It was something he had picked up.

62. He had not seen a ghost house  first-hand  knowingly,  but  sometime  in
   2001 he had been asked by a politician whether, when  they  had  met  the
   time before, this had been in a ghost house. Nor had  Lieutenant  Colonel
   Abdu mentioned having been in one.

63. In his opinion, if a member of the  Fur,  Masseleit,  Zaghawa  or  Berti
   tribes is returned to Sudan, irrespective of whether he is a  member  of,
   or involved in, rebel groups or has been involved in a demonstration,  he
   will be at risk.

64. Asked about his mention of a video being shown to  a  returnee,  he  had
   not been told what happened to the returnee.

65. In Khartoum Abdu had been a passport  officer  for  a  very  long  time.
   Asked by the panel whether his position was that all  returnees  were  at
   risk or at least those without a passport, he said that all  people  sent
   back compulsorily would be at risk. Perhaps  Arabs  from  northern  Sudan
   would not be, unless they were involved with communist or anti-government
   opposition groups. Asked again to clarify his position, and in particular
   what would happen to   a returnee who did not say he was  anti-government
   he replied: 'If you claimed  asylum  anywhere,  you  are  anti-government
   whether you are anti it or not'.



Sarah Maguire

66. The third witness was Sarah Maguire. She has  a  law  degree  and  is  a
   barrister. Her CV outlined  her  work  as  an  independent  human  rights
   consultant since February  2003  with  organisations,  including  the  UN
   Development Program  (UNDP),  the  UN  Office  for  the  Coordination  of
   Humanitarian Africa (OCHA),  UN  Department  for  Political  Affairs  and
   Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF, UNHCR and UNIFEM. She  had
   also done consultancy work as a head adviser for  the  UK  Department  of
   International  Development  in  the  Conflict  and  Humanitarian  Affairs
   Department. Her specialisms were forced migration, post-conflict rule  of
   law, gender and armed conflict and children and armed conflict.  She  had
   extensive experience of the Darfur region of Sudan and of Khartoum.  From
   September 2004 - August 2005 she carried the human rights, protection and
   gender portfolios  of  the  Inter-agency  Real  Time  Evaluation  of  the
   Humanitarian Response to the Darfur Crisis.  This  necessitated  repeated
   visits to Darfur and to Khartoum, conducting interviews  with  internally
   displaced persons in camps and other areas, UN officials  at  all  levels
   including  the  Secretary  General's  Special  Representative   and   his
   Deputies, humanitarian NGOs and the African Union. She had last  been  to
   Darfur and Khartoum in January 2006.

67. In addition to her own experience her  report  explained  that  she  had
   relied on a number of UN and NGO  reports  and  the  report  by  the   UK
   International  Development Committee  'Darfur  -  the  Responsibility  to
   Protect' (March 2005).  She also had  sight,  inter  alia,  of  'not  for
   distribution' documents to and from NGOs, DFID and the British Embassy in
   Khartoum. She had  also  had  recent  (2006)  discussions  with  informed
   individuals working in Khartoum, as well as  discussions  with  a  person
   from Darfur currently in the UK seeking international protection and  had
   read a selected number of interviews of such persons provided to  her  by
   the Aegis Trust.

68. In her report she  first  dealt  with  the  armed  conflict  in  Darfur,
   against the background of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)  signed
   in January 2005 between the main parties involved in the  armed  conflict
   in the south - Africa's longest civil war. The CPA, the  introduction  of
   the interim constitution, the setting of  elections  in  2009  and  of  a
   referendum on the North/South divide  in  2011  and  the  creation  of  a
   Government of National Unity were all important  developments.  But  they
   had not resulted in any positive fundamental changes to the structure  of
   the government, its strategies or its accountability.

69. The Arab/African tribal characterisation of the conflict did  not  mean,
   the report said, that  it  is  a  'tribal  war'.   The  Sudan  Liberation
   Movement (SLM)/Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) and the Justice  and  Equality
   Movement (JEM) both described their grievances as being about Darfur, the
   place, not Darfur, the tribal home. One of the reasons why the government
   had turned to the Janjaweed as a proxy  militia  to  combat  these  rebel
   groups was that it had been preoccupied with the South. Its  decision  to
   target the civilian population in Darfur was taken in 2003,  in  response
   to their view that the rebels had gained too  much  power  in  the  rural
   areas. Although the government had asserted that it has  had  no  control
   over the Janjaweed and that the latter was never  under  the  control  or
   command of the  state  authorities,  the  UN  General  Assembly,  the  UN
   Security Council and the Commission on Human  Rights  have  all  taken  a
   different view.  Nor  were  the  signs  hopeful  that  the  Darfur  Peace
   Agreement (DPA) signed in early May 2006 (but not by the JEM or a smaller
   faction of the SLM/A) would be  effective:  since  then  there  has  been
   intense fighting between the rebel groups as well as attacks on  villages
   and civilians allegedly by Janjaweed.

70. The Security Council Resolution of May 16, 2006 had been met so  far  by
   government resistance to  the  active  involvement  of  UN  peacekeepers.
   Recent clashes in neighbouring Chad had  meant  a  deterioration  in  the
   security situation for refugees from Darfur.

71. Most displacement caused by the conflict in Darfur occurred in 2003  and
   2004, but during 2006 another  200,000  have  been  displaced.  The  vast
   majority of them are in camps in Darfur. Whilst facilities in most of the
   camps are substandard, the heavy involvement of humanitarian aid agencies
   has meant that provision can now be described as adequate. However it was
   not to be thought that living in an IDP camp in Darfur was a guarantee of
   protection.

72. Turning to Khartoum, Ms  Maguire's  report   stated  that  the  estimate
   made is that Khartoum State is home to approximately  400,000 IDPs living
   in official camps and between 1.1 - 3.6m IDPs living in  squatter   areas
   around Khartoum city. For various reasons most IDPs from Darfur  live  in
   the squatter areas rather than the IDP camps. Her report  considers  that
   the situation in Khartoum has to  be  viewed  in  the  context  that  the
   monitoring by security forces is under the control of the  very  powerful
   National Security and Information Service (NSIS). This service has powers
   of detention which can effectively remove people from  the  legal  system
   for long periods of time. They detain people in 'ghost houses' as well as
      in  police  stations,  military  camps  and  prisons.  All  places  of
   detention, but particularly the 'ghost houses' and  military  camps,  are
   notorious for the level of violence that takes place.   In  Khartoum  the
   NSIS  has  an  extensive  network  of  formal  and  informal  information
   gathering. It is not possible  to  live  in  Khartoum  without  the  NSIS
   knowing of one's existence and activities.

73. She considers that there is a government (GoS) strategy  of  demolitions
   and/or forced relocations:
             'From time to time and increasingly  since  the  Comprehensive
             Peace Agreement (CPA) was nearing finalisation, the  GoS  have
             demolished the shacks and shelters that IDPs have  constructed
             in the camps or squatter areas. Usually, no notice is given to
             the IDPs, nor  do  they  have  access  to  any  mechanism  for
             prevention or redress.


             According to the UN Office for  Coordination  of  Humanitarian
             Affairs,  (OCHFA),  'The  government  of  Sudan  asserts  that
             demolition of IDP property and relocation of IDPs is part of a
             rezoning process which includes the  allocations  of  land  to
             IDPs.  However, 77% of  relocated  IDPs  have  never  received
             plots   and   vulnerable   groups   including    female-headed
             households; IDPs without IDs; and  IDPs  recently  arrived  in
             Khartoum have been excluded' (emphasis added)'.

74. Her report chronicles the May 2005 assaults by GoS  security  forces  on
   the Soba Aradi settlement as well as the August 2005 destruction  of  the
   Shikhan squatter area, where the authorities  again  used  tear  gas  and
   loaded people onto a lorry with or without their possessions. The IDPs in
   Shikhan were taken to an area called Al Fateh 3 in the desert  zone  some
   55 Km outside Khartoum, where there were no facilities,  clean  water  or
   sanitation or education facilities.  Other people had been rounded up  by
   the security forces from the streets of Khartoum and taken to Al-Fateh 3.
     She mentioned another area, Thawra, to which  some  500  families  were
   removed. It was previously a rubbish dump. This camp too lacked  adequate
   access to water, sanitation, food or education. These forced  relocations
   had been condemned by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in  his  report  to
   the UN Security Council of 1 September 2005.   She noted various findings
   on IDPs made by the UN OCHA  in  its  briefing  report  on  the  IDPs  in
   Khartoum (March 2005)  based  on  an  interagency,  multi-sectoral  Rapid
   Assessment Survey conducted in January  2005,  including  that  at  least
   665,000 Sudanese IDPs living in camps and squatter areas in Khartoum have
   had their homes demolished and have been relocated at some point over the
   last sixteen years and that demolition and relocations have been  on  the
   increase since 2003.   She cited also the  opinion  by  Professor  Walter
   Kalin, the UN Secretary General's Representative on the Human  Rights  of
   Internally Displaced Persons in his 2006 report to the UN  Commission  on
   Human Rights. Professor Kalin has also supplemented that report in a note
   to the Aegis Trust stating regarding forced relocations:

             'I conclude that  IDPs in and around Khartoum are faced with a
             serious risk of being forcibly relocated in a manner  that  is
             often incompatible with the human rights of those affected and
             includes violations of their economic and  social  rights  and
             thus are exposed to living  conditions  which  fall  short  of
             international human rights standards.'

The conclusion Ms Maguire draws is that IDP camps and  squatter  settlements
in Khartoum state provide no security for IDPs and that:

             'It  is  also  apparent  that  people  from  Darfur   may   be
             particularly vulnerable to forced relocation without notice or
             redress and they are vulnerable to detention and  mistreatment
             by nature of their ethnicity and region of origin.'


75. Whilst  acknowledging  that  one  -  if  not  the  main  -  aim  of  the
   demolitions, forced relocations and rezoning was to secure the return  of
   around 600,000 people  to  the  South,  Ms  Maguire  considers  that  the
   departures, which are starting to happen, will leave IDPs from Darfur and
   other northern areas:

             'more vulnerable to forced relocation or other  violations  of
             human  rights  and  gives  the  GoS  (and  the   international
             community)  even  less  incentive  to   provide   humanitarian
             assistance in the camps and squatter areas to bring them to  a
             minimum level of subsistence to match  that  provided  by  the
             international community in Darfur.'

76. Her report emphasises the  fact  that  there  is  no  UN  or  systematic
   international NGO   monitoring of the camps or squatter areas.

77. As regards living conditions she details the finding of the  interagency
   Khartoum State Rapid Assessment Survey carried out in January 2005  which
   found that the situation for IDPs in Khartoum State compared unfavourably
   with that in Darfur both in terms of food ('[t]here is no food assistance
   to IDPs in Khartoum', she said), as well as security, health,  water  and
   sanitation and shelter.  She cites the  example  of  the  Al-Fateh  camp,
   another situated some 50 km outside of Khartoum in  the  desert.  In  her
   view the living conditions in the camps and  settlements  are  such  that
   people who have sought international protection would be forced  to  live
   in  areas  of  fundamental  insecurity  without  access  to   employment,
   financial support or humanitarian assistance. The 2006 Work Plan for  the
   UN and its Partners made reference to the Khartoum IDPs only in terms  of
   assisting with returns to the South; no reference is made to humanitarian
   or human rights assistance to this population.

78. As regards return to Khartoum, it is first of all essential,  she  says,
   to understand that almost without exception people who leave  Darfur  and
   seek international protection in other countries do so without legitimate
   papers. In order to return to Sudan from the United  Kingdom,  therefore,
   people have to obtain travel documentation from the Sudanese  Embassy  in
   the UK. Their doing so itself alerts the Sudanese authorities to the fact
   that someone has  arrived  in  the  UK  without  a  Sudanese  passport  -
   indicating that they probably sought asylum here:

             'Given the powerful nature of the NSIS,  it  is  inconceivable
             that an application for travel documents (whether made by  the
             returnee or the UK government) would not  cause  the  Sudanese
             embassy in the UK to alert the NSIS that a person from  Darfur
             (specifying which area  of  Darfur)  has  applied  for  travel
             documentation and the circumstances of the application.'

79. In any event, by virtue of  people  from  Darfur  being  distinctive  by
   their appearance, accent, characteristics and names and not being amongst
   the affluent elite of  Sudanese society, arrival off a plane from the UK:

             'immediately alerts the  immigration  officials  that  someone
             unusual has  (a) been to the UK  and (b) has been sent back'.'

Ms Maguire appears  to  see  three  problems  flowing  from  this  state  of
affairs. First it would make the person immediately liable to  suspicion  as
a draft evader.

             'If a person is found to have evaded his conscription he  will
             be liable - at best  -  to detention and interrogation  and  a
             sentence of imprisonment. If he is found to have left Sudan in
             order to evade conscription, it is not unlikely that  he  will
             be 'detained, interrogated and tortured'.

80. A second problem Ms Maguire identifies is that  anyone  from  Darfur  is
   associated by the regime with the rebel resistance. Thirdly, by virtue of
   the fact that the UK has been in the   vanguard  of  states  calling  for
   sanctions against the  GoS  ruling  elite,  there  is  a  great  deal  of
   antipathy towards the UK.  Accordingly, Darfuri  returnees  from  the  UK
   would be highly likely to be subject to detention and  abusive  treatment
   and there was no monitoring by national  or  international  organisations
   regarding the treatment of such detainees nor was  there  any  access  to
   legal representation.

81. Ms Maguire states that the Aegis Trust is in contact with a  person  now
   resident outside Sudan and the UK [currently in Egypt] who  was  returned
   by the UK as a failed asylum seeker from Darfur. This person reports that
   he was detained at Khartoum International airport, questioned  at  length
   on his activities in the UK and his connections to the rebels  in  Darfur
   and beaten when he could not give  'satisfactory'  information.   He  was
   eventually released and instructed to return  three  times  a  week  with
   information about the rebels. He  did  not  have  this  information  and,
   having returned a couple of times only to  be  further  mistreated,  made
   arrangements with a relative to leave  Sudan  again.    He  is  currently
   living outside Sudan in the region.  She states:

             'To date very few  people  have  been  returned  from  Europe,
             especially from the UK on the  basis  of  having  failed  [in]
             their application for international  protection.   The  issue,
             therefore, is how likely it is that  the  security  forces  in
             Khartoum will detain the returnee, either  at the  airport  or
             subsequently and  how  that  person  may  be  expected  to  be
             treated, particularly once it is known that he is  a  returnee
             from the UK and from Darfur. The numerous  reports  above  all
             substantiate this fear.


             The power of the  NISS  is  such  that  the  presence  of  any
             returnee from the UK will be immediately detected  on  arrival
             and they will be vulnerable to detention and interrogation  in
             circumstances that flagrantly breach all  the  relevant  human
             rights norms and standards.'

82. Even if returnees were allowed to enter Khartoum, she added, they  would
   risk being 'picked up' later and being subjected to the  same  treatment.
   In their situation there was little de jure and no de facto mechanism for
   protection and none for redress.

83. Elsewhere in her report  Ms  Maguire  emphasised  that  as  regards  the
   attitude of the Sudanese authorities to persons  from  Darfur,  the  fact
   that the SLM/A and the JEM control large parts of Darfur  and  the  armed
   conflict there is between rebels and  the  GoS,  means  that  the  latter
   perceive the civilian population in Darfur as  partisan  to  the  rebels.
   Further:

             'This is plainly so if the person concerned is  from  an  area
             considered to be a rebel stronghold. Men of less than 40 years
             old are suspected  of  being  allied  with  the  rebel  groups
             (sharing these characteristics with the rebel leadership)  and
             so are more likely to be detained for questioning.'

84. Earlier on in her report she had noted that  the  rebel  strongholds  or
   'hotbeds' or rebel activity included Tawile, Kutum and West Darfur.

85. Ms Maguire also  furnished  two  addendum  reports  in  respect  of  the
   appellant G and appellant M, both written in June 2006.

86. In her oral evidence   Ms Maguire said she had last been in Khartoum  in
   January 2006 although not on that occasion visiting any IDP  camps.   Her
   recent work in Sudan included interviewing 300 IDPs in Darfur and  50  in
   Khartoum itself.  She gave further details about her extensive network of
   contacts with the international and diplomatic agencies in Khartoum.  She
   understood from all those contacts  that  the  general  view  among  such
   bodies was that the  conditions  in  the  camps  and  squatter  areas  in
   Khartoum were poorer than those in Darfur and that they  were  not  safe.
   She gave more details of the obstacles met by international  aid  workers
   in gaining access and giving assistance to IDPs in the camps and squatter
   areas. Recent arrivals from Darfur would not get a plot. Since  the  Soba
   Aradi events in May 2005 and those in Shikhan in August  2005  there  had
   been loosening of access to some of the camps,  but  no  desire  to  make
   people's lives comfortable.  She did not think that any reliance could be
   placed on the official assurance given to international bodies that  they
   would not again forcibly relocate people without warning and planning.

87. Asked to clarify her  view  that  Darfuri  IDPs  would  be  particularly
   vulnerable to arrest and mistreatment during forced  relocations  and  at
   other times, Ms Maguire said that because of the nature of  the  conflict
   in Darfur such people were regarded as enemies of the state. Whilst  high
   ranking officials from the  visiting  Darfur  resistance  might  be  left
   alone, because of their high profile, the main adverse treatment would be
   directed at those seen as providing support or having useful  information
   about the resistance.

88. Her belief was that the departure  of  southern  Sudanese  back  to  the
   South would place the remaining Darfuri IDPs in Khartoum  more  at  risk.
   She based this belief on two main reasons: one was that there was 'safety
   in  numbers';  the  other  was  to  do  with  external   security   (less
   international  humanitarian  agencies  and  international  interest   and
   focus).

89. She accepted that conditions in the IDP camps and  squatter  areas  were
   no worse than in some other urban  slums  elsewhere  in  Africa  (if  not
   elsewhere in the Third World also), but  there  were  three  respects  in
   which the situation of Darfuri IDPs was worse. First, by virtue of  being
   persons who had fled armed conflict marked by  crimes  against  humanity,
   they had psychological, not just economic issues.  Secondly, by virtue of
   many  being  small  farmers,  they  were  ill-equipped  for  urban   slum
   conditions. Thirdly, IDPs from Darfur would not be going  back  to  their
   home area in the foreseeable future.

90. As regards persons returned from European countries to Khartoum, it  was
   relevant to note that the NSIS had a desk at the Sudanese Embassy in  the
   UK and so all information given by a Sudanese national  when  seeking  to
   renew a passport or obtain  a  travel  document  would  automatically  be
   passed back to Khartoum.  At the airport there would automatically  be  a
   security  check.  Non-Arab  Darfuris  would  be  initially   or   quickly
   identified by their ethnic appearance  or  dialect  or  personal  habits.
   Anyone from Darfur returning from  the  UK  would  be  viewed  adversely,
   particularly  given  the  ruling  elite's  anxiety  about  UK  government
   initiatives in having some of them named for UN  sanctions  and  possible
   ICC prosecution.

91.  She  amplified  her  written  view  that  the  detention  which  Darfur
   returnees would face would involve maltreatment.

92. She said that her views about risk on return were based not just on  the
   single case of the man in Egypt, but on  all  the  evidence  gathered  by
   others and relayed to her.  She reiterated  the  view  expressed  in  her
   written  report  that  those  of  draft  age  would  face  detention  and
   maltreatment on that basis alone. She accepted that her  report  had  not
   addressed what had been said on this  issue  in  the  2001  Danish  Fact-
   finding report.

93. She was aware of the work of Dr Alizadeh and Dr Schodder,  both  experts
   on Sudan, but had not had her attention drawn to what they had  presented
   to the December 2005 ACCORD COI seminar on Sudan about returnees. She was
   frankly surprised by what they stated about lack of problems  on  return.
   She did not see how they could tell; it was not  their  job  or  that  of
   their colleagues. It may  be  that  there  was  no  policy  of  arresting
   returnees at a formal policy document level, but their  observations  did
   not suggest they had in mind the situation of the Darfuri  returnee  from
   the UK where there will be  an  assumption  that  they  could  have  said
   something whilst abroad about GoS atrocities in Darfur. The methods  that
   would  be  used  when  questioning  in  this  context  would   not   meet
   international standards.

94. She did not think it realistic to imagine that a returnee could  arrange
   in advance for a friend or relative to be at the airport  with  a  mobile
   phone. The mobile phone networks were unreliable. She had not once seen a
   mobile phone in an  IDP  camp.   One  needed  permission  to  access  the
   airport.  Even if a friend or relative in Khartoum knew that  a  returnee
   who should have arrived and passed through  the  airport  had  not,  that
   person would need to be someone who knew where to go and who to raise the
   issue with and there would be anxiety on their part that  they  would  be
   putting themselves at risk.

95. Even if returnees got through the airport,  there  would  be  monitoring
   and surveillance and in this regard it was important to recall  that  the
   NSIS utilised an extensive network of informers throughout Khartoum.

96. Another consideration was that the international  agencies  in  Khartoum
   had humanitarian priorities; they had  no  role  in  monitoring  returns.
   She could only speculate on what had actually happened to the  forty  odd
   returnees from the UK over a fifteen month period in 2004-5.

97.  Once  in  Khartoum  proper  a  returnee  would   need   to   look   for
   accommodation. He would need an ID card as well  as  financial  means  to
   secure the accommodation: without an ID card  one  could  not  get  legal
   work.

98. Cross-examined by Miss Giovannetti, she  said  her   statement   in  the
   report about  there  being  few  returnees  from   Europe  was  based  on
   soundings among UK  Darfuris  who  were  in  close  touch  with  Darfuris
   elsewhere in Europe: within this  diaspora  she  said,   'everyone  knows
   everyone'.

99. She agreed that in terms of actual  cases,  although  she  had  asked  a
   number of agencies including Human Rights Watch  and  UNHCR,  the  person
   from Egypt was the only specific case of returnee  mistreatment  she  had
   heard about.

100. Ms Maguire was asked about her view that Darfuri returnees from the  UK
   would be viewed adversely for having very likely given  witness  evidence
   about GoS atrocities in Darfur. Was there any evidence that  Darfuris  in
   Khartoum who had come directly from Darfur were  being  singled  out  for
   interrogation or detention for this reason?  She said  that  such  people
   would be confined to more recent arrivals and  there  was  less  evidence
   about them.  However, in the May 2005 arrests and detention in  the  Soba
   Aradi settlement, people from Darfur were disproportionately  represented
   among the detainees and had also been  held  for  longer.   She  accepted
   however that her earlier statement that the people  in  Soba  Aradi  were
   predominantly Darfuri was contrary to the Rapid Assessment  Survey  which
   showed them as 8%.

101. She was asked whether she thought it significant that the  Sudan  human
   rights organisation, SOAT, spoke in  its  reports  about  being  able  to
   obtain access to persons and also appeared able to document in a  precise
   and detailed way arrests and detention arising out of the events at  Soba
   Aradi as well as other clashes with GoS security and police.  She did not
   think their documentation of arrest and detention should  be  treated  as
   exhaustive and plainly there were others who were simply not known about,
   e.g. because they had been taken to ghost houses. She had spoken to  SOAT
   about whether they knew of any targeting of recent arrivals from  Darfur,
   but they were unable to help.

102. She gave further details on what she had  said  about  no  humanitarian
   assistance being  supplied  to  the  IDP  camps  and  squatter  areas  in
   Khartoum. She accepted there was some evidence from the Rapid  Assessment
   Survey and other surveys of some  assistance,  including  in  respect  of
   food, education and health, but she did not think these amounted to much,
   being carried out by local NGOs.   She accepted that what she had written
   in her report about the 2006 UN Work Plan was wrong. When she  wrote  her
   report the draft of the Work Plan she had seen in January 2006  contained
   nothing about assistance to IDPs  in  Khartoum,  but  in  any  event  the
   projects now listed  in  the  Work  Plan  did  not  look  like  they  had
   sufficient levels of existing funding to be viable (i.e. at or above  35%
   - 40%).  Further, those listed were run by very small national NGOs.

103. She was asked why the views in her report as to the  current  situation
   in June 2006 did not appear to take  note  of  developments  in  the  IDP
   situation in the first half of  2006,  in  particular  the  view  of  Bob
   Turner, UNMIS Head of Returns, Reintegration and  Recovery  (respondent's
   bundle page 256) that the situation had improved dramatically in the last
   half of 2005 in the sense  that  there  had  not  been  any  large  scale
   demolitions and relocations. Ms Maguire said that it depended on how  the
   relocations were carried out: she was not against relocations as such.

104. In reply to questions from the panel, Ms Maguire said  she  thought  Mr
   Verney's estimate of recent arrivals from Darfur in  Khartoum of 100,000-
   200,000 was on the high side. She considered it unthinkable that Darfuris
   in Khartoum could or would go back to Darfur in the foreseeable future.

105. She considered that it was 'not unlikely' that  even  an  elderly  male
   Darfuri with  no political involvement and little education would  be  at
   risk on return, since from the point of view  of   the  authorities,  all
   Darfuri were capable  of  lending  support  and  giving  shelter  to  the
   rebels. However, the patriarchal nature of Sudanese  society  might  mean
   that a woman with children would not be seen in this light. At  the  same
   time a woman returnee on her own would be regarded as a  peculiar  person
   and would be conspicuous.  The authorities would know that to leave Sudan
   lawfully she would have needed permission from her family's menfolk.

106. Asked about what steps she would take if  she  were  a  Darfuri  failed
   asylum seeker   faced with removal from the UK to Khartoum  in  the  near
   future, she agreed that  she  might  well  seek  to  contact  friends  or
   relatives in Khartoum if there were any and that, if not, might seek help
   by contacting people in the Darfuri diaspora in the UK or Europe. But she
   reiterated her view that even if friends or relatives in Khartoum knew to
   expect her back, there would be the issue of their fear of  the  reaction
   of the authorities.

107. She accepted that having some financial  resources  upon  return  would
   help a person surviving in Khartoum.

108. She was asked to clarify whether her position  was  that  all  Sudanese
   returnees or just Darfuri returnees would be at risk. She  said  that  it
   was all returnees, by  virtue  of  the  suspicion  they  would  encounter
   through having gone abroad.

109. The experts` reports, particularly that of Mr Verney, also  dealt  with
   the evidence relating to medical facilities, but we shall leave  that  to
   be addressed later when examining it in the context of relocation.

The background evidence

110. We do not propose to summarise all of the  background  evidence  before
   us, particularly as  our  coverage  of  the  expert  evidence  refers  to
   significant aspects of this. However, we  shall  highlight  parts  of  it
   which have a particular bearing on the issues  we  have  to  decide.  The
   April 2006 COIS Report on Sudan affords a convenient reference point  for
   much of what we say here, by virtue of its extensive sourcing.

111. Sudan's population is variously estimated as being between  32  and  39
   million. Sudan is the biggest country in Africa.  With  an  area  of  2.5
   million square kilometres, it is as large  as  Austria,  Italy,  Germany,
   France, Spain, Portugal, the UK and Sweden together. The distance between
   Khartoum and the nearest  borders  of  Darfur  is  over  600km.   Sudan's
   population encompasses a wide diversity of tribes (500 African and Arab),
   cultures, languages and religions, one of the principal religions in  the
   South being Christianity. In rough percentages Sudan's population is said
   to consist of 50% black Africans, 40% Arabs, 6% Beja and 3-4% others.  It
   has experienced more than 30  years  of  internal  armed  conflicts,  but
   current divisions date back to colonial  times  when  different  policies
   were applied to the North and to the South.  Darfur  was  an  independent
   sultanate which became part of Sudan only in 1917. Even  though  a  peace
   agreement was signed in January 2005 ending more than 30 years  of  armed
   conflicts in the South, there remains armed conflict in Darfur,  as  well
   as in eastern Sudan. Both sides of the conflict in Darfur are Muslims.

112. The aim of the so  called  "Salvation  Revolution"  which  brought  the
   current regime to power in the 1989 coup was the islamization of Sudanese
   society. The current government  of  Sudan  has  a  strong  security  and
   military  dimension.  The  national  security  force  and  the   military
   intelligence  service  are  considered   to   be   the   most   efficient
   organisations in Sudan. Both entities, more or less, control the country.
   Since its independence in 1956, Sudan has gone through  a  militarization
   process. The agricultural and  industrial  sectors  of  the  economy  are
   dominated by the military. The December 2005 ACCORD  report  states  that
   according to staff members of the Sudanese Ministry of  Defence  and  the
   Ministry of Finance, 80% of the budget for 2003 and 2004 was spent on the
   military. The Sudanese army, including Popular Defence Force militia  and
   Borders  Intelligence,  as  well  as  air   force   and   navy,   numbers
   approximately 200,000 (COIS April 2006 5.82). The current  leadership  is
   trying to establish Sudan as the dominant military  and  political  power
   within the Arab region or at least among  the  North  African  countries,
   second to Egypt.

113. The human rights situation in Sudan has  been  described  as  extremely
   poor: there is a broad range of  violations  of  human  rights  including
   arbitrary arrests, disappearance cases, executions and torture  occurring
   in Sudan. Censorship of the press has increased since the signing of  the
   peace agreement. The number of arbitrary arrests  and  people  tried  for
   political reasons has doubled from January 2004 to  January  2005.  Under
   the 1999 National Security Act, which is  still  being  implemented,  the
   security apparatus has impunity and is free to detain persons arbitrarily
   without arrest warrants. This Act  allows  detention  without  trial  and
   judicial review for 30  days  which  can  be  extended  three  times.  In
   practice, detention can be extended indefinitely. Many detainees are held
   incommunicado and are not given access to lawyers. Family members are not
   informed about their status. Many people  are  detained  under  emergency
   law, especially when there  are  political  implications.  Moreover,  the
   judicial system is heavily overloaded. The  safeguards  of  the  Criminal
   Procedures Act are often not implemented  simply  because  courts  cannot
   cope with the number of cases. Lawyers face difficulties and  also  there
   is no real independence of the judiciary.

114. The conditions  in  prison  are  extremely  harsh  and  are  marked  by
   overcrowding, lack of exercise and  terrible  sanitary  conditions.  Many
   detainees become ill in detention and some die as a  result  of  lack  of
   treatment.

115. Torture  is  routine  and  widespread.  Many  detainees,  both  persons
   detained for political reasons and persons suspected of having  committed
   ordinary crimes, are affected. The real number of people  who  are  being
   tortured is unknown, but it may reach into thousands  every  year.  There
   are a number of recorded deaths in custody as a result  of  torture,  and
   even after release from the results of torture. In case of  ill-treatment
   by  security  officials,  there  is  no   complaint   mechanism.   Whilst
   disappearances are not seen as taking place on a large scale, many people
   disappear every year.

116.  Members  of  opposition  parties   or   movements   have   experienced
   persecution in the past and whilst in  2005-2006  there  have  been  some
   improvements in their position, the regime still imprisons them from time
   and time.

117.  Members  of  civil  society  and  human  rights  defenders  are  under
   surveillance and might be arbitrarily arrested and detained. Depending on
   the charges, their status  and  the  location,  they  may  then  also  be
   subjected to torture.

118. The present government is closely involved in  the  armed  conflict  in
   Darfur, often lending direct assistance to the Janjaweed. In Darfur there
   are around 40 tribes, 28 of which are non-Arab or  "ethnic"  tribes.  The
   main non-Arab groups are the Fur, the Zaghawa and the Masseleit.  Smaller
   ethnic groups include the Tama, Eringaa, Berti, Bergit, Dorok and  Tunjur
   (COIS April 2006 Annex E, also 6.118). The military operation  in  Darfur
   started in June 2003 with a "cleansing" of the  villages  of  the  ethnic
   groups in South Darfur, especially the Fur and the  Zaghawa  tribes.  The
   COIS April 2006 report states:

    '6.125 The UN ICI report also notes that "It is reported  that  amongst
    the African tribes, members of the Zaghawa, Fur  and  Masaalit  tribes,
    which have a marked concentration of population  is  some  areas,  have
    been particularly targeted. This is generally attributed  to  the  fact
    that the two main rebel groups in Darfur are ethnically African and are
    largely drawn from these three tribes. It is for this reason that  some
    observers have concluded that a  major  objective  of  destruction  and
    depopulation  of  targeted  areas  is  to  eliminate  or  pre-empt  any
    possibility of support for the rebels...The UN SG`s March 2006  monthly
    report on the situation in Darfur states that:

         "Civilians living close to rebel territory and who share  the  same
         ethnicity as the rebels are particularly vulnerable to human rights
         violations by the Sudanese Armed Forces..."'

119. The two main rebel groups are the Sudanese Liberation  Movement  (SLM),
   which in 2003 reportedly had as many as 2,500 armed troops, and the  SJEM
   or JEM (Sudanese Justice and Equality  Movement),  estimated  around  the
   same time to number several hundred men (COIS April 2006 4.40).  However,
   the conflict in Darfur is not a straight "Arab v African" ethnic one.  At
   6.121 and 6.123 the COIS April 2006 report states:

    "...Some Arabs groups are fighting with the  rebels  and  some  African
    tribes have joined the Government's militia forces...There  is  also  a
    marked suggestion of affiliation based on a tribe's land ownership  and
    access to Darfur`s scarce natural resources. Members  of  those  tribes
    without their own Dar (homelands) appear to have mainly sided with  the
    Government, whilst those  tribes  with  a  Dar  have  generally  allied
    themselves with the rebels...6.123 The  report  of  the  ...UN  ICI  on
    Darfur to the UN Secretary General listed a number of differing uses of
    the term `Janjaweed` in connection with the conflict in  Darfur,  which
    further detailed that the conflict was not solely one of ethnicity:

         "The fact that the Janjaweed are described as  Arab  militias  does
         not imply that all Arabs are fighting on the side of the Janjaweed.
         In fact, the Commission found that many Arabs in Darfur are opposed
         to the Janjaweed, and some Arabs are fighting with the rebels, such
         as certain Arab commanders and their men  from  the  Misseriya  and
         Rizeigat tribes. At the same time, many  non-Arabs  are  supporting
         the Government and serving in its army. Thus, the term  'Janjaweed'
         referred to by victims in Darfur certainly does not mean 'Arabs' in
         general, but  rather  Arab  militias  raiding  their  villages  and
         committing their violations".

120. We do not attempt at all to summarise the current situation  in  Darfur
   here beyond noting that the conflict has  broadened  geographically  over
   time (COIS April 2006 6.118), the  rebels  operate  as  mobile  guerrilla
   groups so that the areas they control are  not  fixed  (COIS  April  2006
   p.151) and, despite the recent peace accord, the situation in that region
   is still very precarious.

121. Despite  its  growing  oil  production,  Sudan  is  amongst  the  least
   developed countries. The  Europa  2005  Survey  records  that  "Sudan  is
   primarily an agricultural and pastoral country, with  about  59%  of  the
   economically active population engaged in the agricultural sector  -  the
   majority in essentially subsistence production" (COIS 2006 3.01). We lack
   details  about  the  specific  situation  in  Sudan's  urban  areas,  but
   according to the December 2004 UN report, "Africa on the move:  an  urban
   crisis in the making", around 72% of people  living  in  urban  areas  in
   Africa live in slums.  Our  determination  deals  separately  below  with
   health care provision, but it can be summarised as being generally  at  a
   very low level.  The Human Development Index for 2005  has  Sudan  ranked
   141st (out of 177 countries).

122. The various armed conflicts which have taken  place  in  Sudan  in  the
   past 30 years have caused the displacement of millions  of  people,  some
   externally, and some internally. As regards those who have gone to  other
   countries as refugees, the February 2005 IRIN  report  recorded  a  UNHCR
   estimate that 600,000 Sudanese refugees had already  returned  to  Sudan,
   including  over  200,000  non-registered   refugees   from   neighbouring
   countries, possibly as many as 400,000 IDPs, and that thousands more were
   expected to return in the following months (COIS April 2006 6.89).

123. The number of IDPs in Sudan is said by a number of reports to  be  more
   than 6 million: 1.8 million are in Darfur and approximately 2 million  in
   Khartoum (Khartoum`s overall population being  6-7  million).  The  Sudan
   Organisation Against Torture (SOAT), in its Annual Report of  April  2006
   (appellants' bundle, pp.  338-398),  puts  the  estimated  population  of
   Khartoum at "approximately eight million people,  of  these  at  least  a
   third are IDPs" (p.349). There are said to be another 1.4 million in  the
   South, the rest being in the East and in other areas. Generally  speaking
   all the displacements have been inter-linked with   resource issues,  for
   example to secure oil-production and agricultural land.

124. According to COIS, one fifth of the  IDPs  in  Khartoum  live  in  four
   official camps, and four fifths in  up  to  30  squatter  settlements  or
   areas. That would give a figure for the  camps  of  some  400,000,  which
   accords with the figure given by Ms Maguire. SOAT considers  that  around
   325,000 IDPs reside in official IDP camps and  that  the  "remaining  1.7
   million reside in approximately 30 different  squatter  areas".  The  IDP
   camps include Mayo Farms, Jebel Awlia, Wad el Bashier (WeB) and  Omdurman
   es Salaam (OeS) and the squatter areas include  Soba  Aradi,  Haj  Yusuf,
   Jalbabekir, Boraka, Alingas and Salaama. Camps which have been set up  in
   the outskirts of Khartoum, or in adjoining desert areas include Al  Fateh
   3, Thawra and (from February 2006) Sunduz.  Estimates of  the  number  of
   IDPs in Khartoum from Darfur vary from 8-16% of the total number of IDPs.
   Although IDPs are disliked  by  Khartoum  residents,  they  are  said  to
   provide  all  the  cheap  manual  labour  force.  Whilst   estimates   of
   unemployment of IDPs in the official economy are as high as  75%,  it  is
   difficult to ascertain to what extent IDPs are able to find some work  in
   the unofficial or  black  economy.  Some  light  is  cast  by  the  Rapid
   Assessment Report (respondent's bundle page 430) which has  this  to  say
   about economic activity in the camps and squatter areas:-

         "Only 39% of heads of households surveyed reported that they had  a
         regular source of income.  Of these households, 37% were headed  by
         women, with a range between the camps (47% in WeB, 44% in Mayo, 41%
         in Soba and 27% in OeS).  It is  no  surprise  that  female  headed
         households (FHH) are most vulnerable in terms of access to  income,
         as data reveals that the higher the ration of FHH in an  area,  the
         higher a percentage of household reporting little or no income.


         Income was reported as being generated either through employment or
         entrepreneurship, with 22% reporting being employed,  but  only  5%
         reporting being entrepreneurs.  There was a distinct range  between
         the surveyed areas, with 33% in OeS reporting being employed, 9% in
         WeB, 26% in Soba Aradi and 27% in Mayo Farms.


         Access to employment included working as daily labourers,  security
         guards,   building,   being   engaged   as   cleaners/houseworkers.
         Entrepreneurship  included  selling   vegetables,   selling   water
         (mudagagat),  making  brooms,  operating  small  shops  (toboliya),
         illegal activities, making blocks, building, selling  tea,  washing
         clothes.   Boys in particular were involved in  shoe  shining,  and
         using donkeys to sell water.  Girls earn money  by  selling  cooked
         foods, water melon seed and fried ground nuts.


         FGDs in all three areas (WeB, Oes and Soba Aradi) reported that the
         entire family were involved in providing income to  the  household,
         although it was mentioned in Soba Aradi that parents tried to  keep
         their children out of the market so that they would attend school."

125. In considering the legal situation of internally displaced  persons  in
   Khartoum it is important to bear in mind the difference between  new  and
   old arrivals.  Those who arrived before the outbreak  of  the  civil  war
   with the  South  in  1983,  usually  gained  some  rights  as  so  called
   "squatters". But the majority,  who  arrived  later,  lack  such  rights.
   Documentation is a huge problem. The December 2005  ACCORD  report  notes
   that according to a survey which was carried out by CARE and IOM in 2003,
   36%  of  IDPs  in  Khartoum  had  no  documents.  Only  37%   had   birth
   certificates, 15%  had  certificates  of  nationality  and  only  8%  had
   Sudanese ID cards.

126. The living and health conditions of IDPs are said by some observers  to
   be appalling. According to the  UN  assessment  conducted  in  2005,  the
   housing and nutritional situation of IDPs in Khartoum is  worse  than  in
   Darfur.

127. Since 2003, the demolition of IDP camps and squatters'  settlements  in
   Khartoum has progressed and about 250,000 IDPs have been made homeless by
   the government, sometimes being sent to new sites far away from the  city
   into the desert with no water or any other services. However, there  have
   not been any forced relocations since the May and August 2005 events.

128. The background country sources also deal with the evidence relating  to
   medical facilities, but we shall leave that  to  be  addressed  later  as
   already indicated.

129. In the course of the hearing of the evidence of the  expert  witnesses,
   four documents bearing on the issue of risk on return as well as military
   service were particularly touched upon and therefore it is important that
   we summarise their contents at this stage.


The 2001 Danish Fact-finding Report

130. The first is the 2001 Danish Fact-finding report.  What it  says  in  a
   lengthy Section 2 about conscription has been summarised in  the  Country
   Guideline case of BA (military service - no risk) Sudan CG  [2006]  UKAIT
   0006 and is covered in this determination at paragraphs 187-194.

131. There followed another detailed section  headed  'Conditions  of  Entry
   and Exit'. The following subsection is recited here in full:
    "3.1 Entry to Sudan
    Abdulbagi Albushra Abdulhay, Major General, Director  of  Passport  and
    Immigration, General Administration,  Khartoum,  denied  that  Sudanese
    citizens who had stayed abroad for  some  time  would  be  arrested  or
    questioned by the authorities on their return home.  He  said  that  no
    Sudanese would be questioned  about  his  circumstances  while  abroad,
    however long he had been away, and  whether  he  had  been  in  Western
    Europe, the USA or other countries, with the exception of Israel. If  a
    person had been in Israel he would be questioned.
    He also explained that Sudanese who worked abroad were obliged  to  pay
    tax on their foreign income either at a Sudanese Embassy or to the  tax
    authorities in Sudan. Abdulhay said that no Sudanese had been  arrested
    or even questioned on their return from abroad  unless  they  had  some
    unresolved business with the Sudanese tax authorities or were suspected
    of previous criminal activities in Sudan.
    Abdulhay explained that the airport police at Khartoum  airport  had  a
    register of all wanted persons. The airport police showed  these  lists
    when the delegation visited the airport. The lists contain  information
    about approximately 1700  Sudanese  citizens  who  are  wanted  by  the
    authorities. The lists are drawn up manually and  there  is  no  wanted
    persons database. Abdulhay also said that  any  foreigner  could  enter
    Sudan freely. Even former militant members of the  opposition  who  had
    fought against the Government could enter without having problems  with
    the authorities. He added that there was an amnesty for such people  in
    Sudan.
    Anyone entering the country who appears on the list and  is  identified
    by the authorities will immediately be arrested and handed over to  the
    Detective Police/Central Intelligence Department (CID) at the  airport,
    which after further investigations may hand him over  to  the  security
    service. A source at the airport police said that this  happened  three
    or four times a month. However, the  head  of  the  CID,  Colonel  Emad
    Kalafalla M. Khier, said that five or six people were handed over every
    day. This figure included those travelling on false passports.
    Waltmans-Molier said that the Netherlands Embassy did not follow up any
    deportations of rejected asylum applicants from the Netherlands.  There
    was no form of monitoring and the Embassy therefore did not  know  what
    subsequently happened to those who had been returned. The  Embassy  was
    not  informed  in  advance  by  the   Netherlands   authorities   about
    forthcoming deportations, nor was it told if these were happening  with
    or without a Dutch police escort.
    Waltmans-Molier was not aware of the existence of an  alleged  Sudanese
    decree called Decree No 4/B/307 from the head of the  general  security
    apparatus to senior border guards [24]. However, she knew that  it  was
    the practice for Sudanese citizens who had been away from  the  country
    for a couple of years or more and who were now  returning  home  to  be
    questioned by the Sudanese police on their arrival. Often this would be
    because of a failure to pay tax. The Netherlands Embassy was not  aware
    of any examples of people suffering any harm while being questioned.
    Questioning was carried out by the immigration authorities  or  by  the
    security service and was, according to Waltmans-Molier,  quite  normal.
    She mentioned a case in which a Sudanese woman had been  returned  from
    the Netherlands to Khartoum. The woman claimed to be the member  of  an
    opposition party but could not give any account of  its  ideology,  and
    had been repeatedly questioned  by  the  security  service.  The  woman
    complained to the Netherlands Embassy but the matter was not felt to be
    serious and the Embassy had not heard that the woman had  come  to  any
    harm. Waltmans-Molier did not have  information  about  the  number  of
    Sudanese citizens sent back from the Netherlands in the last year.
    A well-informed local source in Cairo said that  Sudanese  citizens  in
    possession of a valid national passport could enter Sudan  without  any
    difficulty. However, if they only had a temporary travel document  they
    would be questioned about their circumstances on arrival in Sudan. This
    applied only to those returning voluntarily to Sudan. The source had no
    information about conditions on entry for Sudanese  citizens  who  were
    being forcibly repatriated to Sudan.
    Johannes Lehne said that  Germany  had  never  had  problems  with  the
    deportation of rejected asylum applicants to Khartoum, either on  entry
    or following entry. In the previous year a total of 15 people had  been
    sent back to Sudan from Germany. Only in some individual cases had  the
    deportation been followed up".

10th ACCORD COUNTRY OF ORIGIN SEMINAR REPORT, Budapest, December 2005

132. The second document touched on (quite considerably) during the  hearing
   is the December 2005 ACCORD COI report which sets out the opinions of  Dr
   Schodder and Dr Alizadeh.  This report deals with a wide range of  issues
   and we have already drawn on other parts of  it  in  the  course  of  our
   summary immediately above. However, we set out here what is  said  in  it
   under the heading of "3.10.  Exit,  Political  Activities  in  Exile  and
   Return". Dr Schodder comments here:

    "Sudanese citizens need [an] exit visa to leave the country, and  these
    are denied to persons the government doesn't want to travel abroad, for
    example to attend critical meetings or conferences.  While  considering
    an application for an exit visa, the authorities keep the  passport  of
    the applicant. It's not a fact that political opponents don't get  exit
    visa at all; it just might [take] a couple of months or even years, and
    through all those years the passport stays with the authorities".


     In relation to political activities in exile, Dr Alizadeh states:


    "Of course, the Sudanese government  observes  activities  of  Sudanese
    nationals in Europe.  Each  consulate  or  embassy  has  at  least  two
    security officers who deal with intelligence  information.  Each  event
    that is related to Sudan is attended by people  from  the  embassy  who
    observe and report - not  to  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  but
    directly to their headquarters in  Khartoum.  The  security  apparatus,
    consisting of both internal security and intelligence service, monitors
    the activities of Sudanese citizens abroad."

133. In relation to the return of failed asylum seekers Dr Alizedeh  states:



    "Failed asylum seekers won't face severe problems upon return, as  long
    as they are not recognized as a threat to the state. However,  if  they
    are seen as a threat - there is no guarantee. In the beginning  of  the
    90s there were cases of people who just disappeared. A lot  of  persons
    who left the country after the coup returned from exile. Of course they
    feared that  they  would  be  arrested  at  the  airport,  but  nothing
    happened. However, this does not mean that the situation will  continue
    like this."

Dr Schodder adds:

    "In the past persons who left the country after  the  coup  and  stayed
    away  for  more  than  one  year,  would  be  questioned  upon   return
    automatically. This is no routine policy anymore; also the practice  of
    arrests straight at the airport is not common anymore  at  the  moment.
    Returnees  might  get  visits  from  security  officers  later  and  be
    questioned or warned not to start any  "funky  ["funny"]  business"  in
    Sudan. I have no information that these people are  particularly  being
    targeted. Instead, some people who have been  abroad  for  many  years,
    maybe for political reasons, have  come  back  to  Khartoum.  They  are
    subject to close surveillance and they know that they cannot engage  in
    political activities.  They  also  know  that  they  can  be  arrested,
    questioned, and detained at any time.  They  feel  a  little  bit  more
    secure if they obtained a foreign passport before their return. But  if
    they are still Sudanese citizens, they have no protection at all. There
    have been some positive developments, but the  security  is  monitoring
    the situation very closely and it is quite unpredictable".

The situation as regards military service is said by Dr Schodder  to  be  as
follows:

    "Forced recruitment, where young men were rounded up  on  the  streets,
    occurred before the peace agreement. This practice has  stopped.  Sudan
    now plans to establish a  draft  registration  system.  However,  young
    persons who finish their secondary education  will  not  get  a  school
    certificate unless they do  the  military  service.  If  they  plan  to
    continue their education at university, they usually do two  months  of
    basic service, then study at university and have to  finish  the  other
    ten months of service  before  getting  their  university  certificate.
    There is no possibility of conscientious objection. With the  exception
    of some people with relevant connections, there is no  way  of  getting
    around military service.


    Women are being drafted as well, but usually there is less pressure  on
    the drafting of women and then they  are  being  used  in  the  nursing
    profession, the reserve and similar fields. According to  the  military
    law, the punishment for draft  evasion  is  three  years  imprisonment.
    Desertion carries the death penalty. Draft evaders,  instead  of  being
    punished, are often coerced into certain contingents of active service.
    Depending on where they  are  sent  to  fight,  this  could  constitute
    another death penalty."

Dr Alizadeh adds: "The law foresees the death penalty for desertion, but  we
don't know any case where a person was executed, also due  to  the  Sudanese
culture."

UNHCR Position paper February 2006

134. The third document of  particular  relevance  in  these  cases  is  the
   February 2006 UNHCR Position Paper entitled "UNHCRs Position on  Sudanese
   Asylum-Seekers from Darfur". At paragraph 3 it states:

    "Forced  returns  to  Sudan  entail  risk  for  certain  categories  of
    Sudanese, regardless of their place of  origin,  including  Darfurians.
    These categories include young men of fighting age  who  are  regularly
    singled out for detention and interrogation. These  arrests  are  often
    pursuant to an administrative decree  dated  28  February  1993,  which
    authorizes border authorities to arrest  returning  Sudanese  who  left
    after the June 1989 coup and have stayed away for  more  than  a  year.
    Such individuals can be  subject  to  "investigations"  and  "necessary
    security measures".  Currently,  the  decree  is  applied  selectively,
    depending on the profile of the  individual  returning.  Young  men  of
    fighting age are particularly susceptible to be targeted".

Paragraphs 6-8 deal with the situation in Khartoum:

    "6. In Khartoum there are approximately two million IDPs  in  four  IDP
    camps and in some 16 squatter areas in  and  around  the  capital.  The
    majority of the IDPs are from South Sudan, but there is a sizeable  IDP
    population from Darfur as well, many of whom arrived in Khartoum during
    the 1980s as a  result  of  drought.  Survey  estimates  indicate  that
    approximately 10-15% of the two  million  IDPs  in  Khartoum  are  from
    Darfur. The IDP population in  and  around  Khartoum  is  socially  and
    economically marginalised and lives in  very  poor  living  conditions,
    despite the activities of the UN and  NGOs.  Harassment  and  arbitrary
    violence on the part  of  the  authorities  is  a  regular  occurrence.
    Internally displaced persons from Darfur in Khartoum  also  often  face
    protection risks, including forced  relocation  and  forced  return  [a
    footnote here gives the example of a March  2004  eviction  of  a  camp
    composed of non-Arab Darfuri IDPs to the outskirts of Khartoum].


    7. Exacerbating the problem,  the  Government  has  accelerated,  since
    2003, a "replanning process" for the IDP camps and  squatter  areas  in
    and around Khartoum. This has led to demolition of IDP  homes,  schools
    and medical centres. It is assessed by UNHCR that approximately 250,000
    IDP households have been made homeless as a result of the ongoing  home
    demolitions. Thousands of families have been  left  with  no  place  to
    live, because plots allocated are too few and no  alternative  shelters
    have been provided. There is no effective government policy  addressing
    the needs of those excluded from accessing new plots. Especially  hard-
    hit are undocumented  IDPs,  female-headed  households  and  those  who
    arrived in Khartoum after 1996. The latter include  most  of  the  IDPs
    from Darfur who were compelled to move to the capital, as a  result  of
    the Darfur crisis.


    8.  The  fact  that  Internally   Displaced   Persons   are   receiving
    international assistance in Darfur and in Khartoum should not give rise
    to the conclusion that it is safe or reasonable for  the  claimants  to
    return to parts of  Sudan.   Internally  Displaced  Persons  in  Darfur
    continue to face serious threats to their physical safety and  personal
    security.  In UNHCR's assessment, the threats are so widespread that it
    cannot be said that there is an internal flight alternative anywhere in
    Sudan for asylum-seekers from Darfur, including for those  who  resided
    in Khartoum before the Darfur crisis.  Sudanese of  'non-Arab'  Darfuri
    background returning to Sudan face a heightened risk of scrutiny by the
    security apparatus.  Furthermore,  where  internal  displacement  is  a
    result of 'ethnic cleansing' policies, denying refugee  status  on  the
    basis of the internal flight or relocation concept could be interpreted
    as condoning the resulting situation on the ground and therefore raises
    additional concerns."

135. The report ends with the following recommendations:

      . "States provide international protection to Sudanese asylum-seekers
        from Darfur of "non-Arab" ethnic background, through according them
        recognition as refugees under the 1951 Convention relating  to  the
        Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol  or  under  the  1969  OAU
        Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of  Refugee  Problems  in
        Africa, as appropriate [the footnote to this paragraph states  that
        "While UNHCR`s recommendation that a presumption of eligibility  to
        refugee status under the above-mentioned instruments applies to non-
        Arab Darfurians, asylum claims  submitted  by  Darfurians  of  Arab
        origin shall be considered on their individual merits"];


      . Where a State feels unable to grant refugee status under  the  law,
        but the individual is not excluded from  international  protection,
        at least a complementary form of protection should be  granted;  no
        non-Arab  Sudanese  originating  from  Darfur  should  be  forcibly
        returned until such time as there is a significant  improvement  in
        the security situation in Darfur;


      . Due attention  is  paid  to  the  particular  needs  of  especially
        vulnerable asylum-seekers from Darfur,  such  as  female  heads  of
        households, medical cases or victims of past persecution;


      . Due attention should, nevertheless be paid to possible grounds  for
        exclusion, in according with Article 1(F) of  the  1951  Convention
        and/or  Article  1.5  of  the  1969  OAU  Convention,  in   certain
        individual cases".

American University of Cairo June 2006 Report
136. Also of relevance  is  the  very  recent  June  2006  report  from  the
   American University in Cairo entitled "A Tragedy of  Failures  and  False
   Expectations: report on the events surrounding the three-month sit-in and
   forced removal of Sudanese Refugees in Cairo, Sept-Dec 2005." Perhaps the
   first point by way  of  clarification  about  this  report  is  that  the
   reference to "forced removals" is not to refoulement from Egypt to Sudan,
   but to the forcible eviction by  the  Egyptian  authorities  of  Sudanese
   asylum-seekers from a sit-in in Cairo. This report notes at page  7  that
   in June 2004, as a result of the ceasefire  declared  earlier  that  year
   between the government of Sudan and the Sudan People`s  Liberation  Army,
   UNHCR suspended Refugee Status Determination  (RSD)  procedures  for  all
   Sudanese asylum-seekers, regardless of whether they originated  from  the
   South, Darfur, or elsewhere. Instead they were issued with a yellow  card
   offering temporary protection. The report sees this as among the  factors
   giving  rise  to  frustrations  amongst   the   Sudanese   asylum-seeking
   community, which eventually led to  the  September  2005  sit-in.  On  17
   December UNHCR reached an agreement with leaders of the  sit-in  offering
   to revive RSD on a limited basis.   However,  the  sit-in  continued  and
   eventually ended in forcible removals resulting in 28 deaths and over 600
   detentions. Threats to deport the detainees were retracted pending  UNHCR
   examination of their files and status determination; the report does  not
   mention any deportations having taken place as yet.

137. The report  also  notes  that  some  Sudanese  security  officials  had
   monitored the sit-ins and entered the prisons where former  demonstrators
   were held. We also have a note dated 19 June from Dr Barbara E.  Harrell-
   Bond OBE, Distinguished Adjunct Professor, Forced Migration  and  Refugee
   Studies  Programme,  American  University  of  Cairo,   describing    the
   experiences since 2000 of  a  refugee  legal  aid  project  in  Cairo  in
   relation to Darfuri  persons  seeking  asylum:  "Without  exception,  the
   asylum-seekers that we assist report having to hide in Khartoum, to  move
   around to avoid detection by authorities and waves of arbitrary arrest in
   the city": She states:
"'In Cairo, UNHCR`s current policy is to  give  `yellow  cards`  (indicating
the holder is seeking  asylum)  to  all  Darfurians  arriving  in  Egypt  to
protect them from refoulement. It has recently issued yellow  cards  to  the
many that they had previously rejected for  asylum  when  they  had  arrived
during the 1990s and early 2000s. Our experience is that UNHCR tends  to  be
more restrictive than many governments, yet it  clearly  considers  Khartoum
unsafe for persons of a Darfurian identity".

 Tribunal country guidance post-Januzi
138. It is important when undertaking the task which was envisaged for  this
   panel by the House of Lords in Januzi that we note the  fact  that  since
   Januzi was decided the Tribunal has issued the new country guidance  case
   of MH (Darfurians: relocation to Khartoum?) Sudan  CG  UKAIT  00033.  The
   panel in that case was aware that the rehearing of the cases remitted  by
   the House of Lords in Januzi would afford an occasion for a comprehensive
   review, but considered that it was important to bring the situation up-to-
   date at the relevant time (3 April 2006).  Its conclusions at  paragraphs
   33-4 state:
   "33. It cannot be expected that the above is a  comprehensive  review  of
   the substantial amount of background material relating to Sudan  and  its
   present difficulties. The bundle prepared by the  appellant's  solicitors
   for the purposes of this appeal ran into some 445 pages and was augmented
   by  additional  material  in  the  course  of  the  hearing.  The  latest
   background material confirms the trends that  were  identified  in  early
   2005. It demonstrates that  there  have  been  at  least  two  additional
   closures of IDP camps in May and August 2005. Further, closure has  taken
   place in violation of promises  made  by  the  Sudanese  government.  The
   breaking of these commitments was prefigured in the information  set  out
   as long ago as August 2004 and the report Broken promises? Nor can it  be
   said that the breaches are the  action  of  maverick  politicians  acting
   outside the scope of their authority because there is evidence  that  the
   decisions have been made at the highest level, namely, by the Governor of
   the State of Khartoum. We place no weight on the  promises  made  by  the
   Sudanese authorities. Nevertheless, Sudan is the recipient of aid and the
   donor countries have formed a Consultative Committee  which  attempts  to
   exercise some control on what are undoubtedly violations of promises made
   in relation to proper respect for the rights of IDPs. It  is  clear  that
   the UN are well aware of the breaches - as is amply demonstrated  in  the
   interview with the head of the UN's Internal Displacement Division on  30
   September 2005 and the report of the UN Secretary General of 12 September
   2005. Although the former indicates that the August closure of  the  camp
   at Omdurman was carried out  in  violation  of  settled  procedures,  the
   interview indicates the  intention  of  the  international  community  as
   represented by the  Consultative  Committee  to  influence  the  Sudanese
   government in effecting the orderly relocation of IDPs. We are  satisfied
   that the United Nations and the wider international community  are  aware
   of the conditions of IDPs and that access to the camps  is  available  to
   observers. Importantly, with that degree of knowledge about events on the
   ground, neither the United Nations nor the UNHCR have declared that those
   in the camps are at risk of persecution or that those returned  to  Sudan
   face a similar risk. Whilst the humanitarian concerns persist as  to  the
   manner in which the Sudanese government is handing  its  IDP  population,
   the evidence does not suggest that all IDPs (or all  those  from  Darfur)
   are at risk or that those returned to the  country  from  abroad  face  a
   specific and heightened risk of persecution or ill-treatment. Nor, in our
   judgment, is it unreasonable in the sense that  it  is  unduly  harsh  to
   expect those from the Darfur region to  relocate  to  Khartoum.  In  this
   context, we take  account  of  the  appellant's  personal  strengths  and
   resilience. He is a young male, apparently fit, who has shown himself  to
   be resourceful.
   34.  Since hearing this appeal the House of Lords has issued its opinions
   in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5. We have not had the benefit of submissions  from
   the parties as to the possible implications of  this  judgment  in  cases
   such as this. It is clear that the House of Lords envisages a need for an
   up-dating country guidance decision dealing with internal  relocation  in
   Sudan and we understand that steps are being taken to  ensure  that  this
   happens as soon as practicable. We have, however, considered whether what
   is said in Januzi requires us to reappraise anything we have said in this
   determination. We have concluded  that  it  does  not.  Insofar  as  that
   judgment sets out the law dealing with internal relocation,  we  consider
   that our approach is consistent with  that  approach.  Insofar  as  their
   judgment deals with the factual situation in Sudan and expresses  concern
   about the current situation in Khartoum in the light of the  most  recent
   country materials, we consider that our decision takes account of all the
   background evidence, past and present, having a material bearing  on  the
   issue of relocation in Khartoum  and  can  thus  properly  represent  the
   position of the Tribunal on this issue for the immediate future  and  (in
   the absence of a change of circumstances in Sudan now) until such time as
   there is a new country guidance case dealing with the cases  remitted  by
   their Lordships' House.
   For these reasons we are not satisfied that  the  two  divisions  of  the
   Tribunal in MM and AE came to the wrong conclusion as a result  of  their
   not being shown background material that properly reflected conditions in
   Sudan in the early part of 2005".

139. The Tribunal concluded that whilst it could  not  say  that  conditions
   had improved since  early  2005,  it  did  not  consider  that  they  had
   deteriorated to a  significant  extent  and  "certainly  not  to  such  a
   significant extent that those returned  to  Khartoum  are  now  at  risk,
   thereby effectively reversing the decisions in all of the  various  cases
   that have sought to make an assessment of risk."

140. It will be apparent that what is said by  the  panel  in  MH  above  at
   paragraph 33 is  no  longer  correct.  They  were  plainly  unaware  when
   deciding this case of the February 2006 UNHCR Position Paper which, as we
   have  seen,  does  state  in  its  recommendations  that  States  provide
   international protection to Sudanese asylum-seekers from Darfur of  "non-
   Arab ethnic background" through according them recognition under the 1951
   Convention or the 1969 OAU Convention as appropriate.  It  will  also  be
   apparent that although when assessing conditions in Khartoum  this  panel
   did take into account many of the reports on which the  experts  in  this
   case have drawn,  the  background  materials  before  us  are  much  more
   comprehensive.

The Legal Framework

Country Guidance cases

141. As the concept of Country Guidance cases was mentioned in the  opinions
   in Januzi, (see esp. paragraph 50 (Lord Hope)), it is necessary to remind
   ourselves of the legal basis underlying that concept. Until the advent of
   the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, a case  styled  by  the  Immigration
   Appeal Tribunal as Country Guidance carried persuasive force but  had  no
   statutory authority. Since  4  April  2005,  however,  the  position  has
   changed. On that day, paragraph 22(1) of Schedule 2  to  the  Asylum  and
   Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 inserted into section
   107 (practice directions) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
   2002 a new subsection (3), in the following terms:-

     "(3) A practice direction may, in particular, require the  Tribunal  to
    treat a specified decision of the Tribunal as authoritative in  respect
    of a particular matter."

The President's Practice Direction 18.2, made on 4 April 2005,  provides  as
follows:-

    "18.2 A reported determination of the Tribunal or of  the  IAT  bearing
    the letters "CG" shall be treated as an authoritative  finding  on  the
    country guidance issue identified in the determination, based upon  the
    evidence before the members of the Tribunal or the IAT that  determined
    the appeal. As a result, unless it has been superseded or  replaced  by
    any later "CG" determination, or is inconsistent with  other  authority
    that is binding on the  Tribunal,  such  a  country  guidance  case  is
    authoritative  in any subsequent  appeal, so far as that appeal:


        a) relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
        b) depends upon the same or similar evidence."

142. There is thus a statutory basis that underpins the CG system and  which
   requires Country Guidance issues to be treated by all  divisions  of  the
   Tribunal as authoritative. Practice Direction 18.2 ensures that, as  Lord
   Hope makes plain in paragraph 50 of Januzi, each case is dependent on its
   own facts but, as PD 18.4 emphasises (and as was noted with  approval  by
   the Court of Appeal in R  and  others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  Home
   Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982), legal error will  attend  a  failure  to
   follow extant, relevant Country Guidance. Given that the AIT is a "single
   tier" Tribunal, it is  particularly  important  that  everyone  concerned
   appreciates the underlying legal framework.

143.  Given  that  these  appeals  were  listed  together  with  a  view  to
   considering the situation in Sudan and Khartoum afresh, and given that we
   have had a very comprehensive body of  evidence  placed  before  us,  our
   decision covers a number of issues relating to appeals by Sudanese asylum-
   seekers.

Internal relocation

144. Since the present appeals concern appellants who  have  been  found  to
   have a well-founded fear of persecution in their home area in Darfur, all
   raise the issue  of  whether  they  have  a  viable  internal  relocation
   alternative in Khartoum or elsewhere in Sudan. In  Januzi  the  House  of
   Lords gave specific guidance  on  how  internal  relocation  or  internal
   flight is to be assessed by decision makers.  At  paragraphs  20-21  Lord
   Bingham stated as follows:

             "20.  ...   It  is,  however,  important,  given  the  immense
        significance of  the  decisions  they  make,  that  decision-makers
        should have some guidance on the  approach  to  reasonableness  and
        undue harshness in this context.  Valuable guidance is found in the
        UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection of 23 July  2003.   In
        paragraph 7 II(a) the  reasonableness  analysis  is  approached  by
        asking "Can the claimant, in the context of the country  concerned,
        lead a relatively normal life without facing undue  hardship?"  and
        the comment is made: "If not, it would not be reasonable to  expect
        the person to move there".  In development  of  this  analysis  the
        guidelines address respect for human rights in paragraph 28:


              "Respect for human rights


              Where respect for basic human rights standards,  including  in
           particular non-derogable  rights,  is  clearly  problematic,  the
           proposed area cannot  be  considered  a  reasonable  alternative.
           This does not mean that the deprivation of any  civil,  political
           or  socio-economic  human  right  in  the  proposed   area   will
           disqualify  it  from  being  an  internal  flight  or  relocation
           alternative.  Rather, it requires, from a practical  perspective,
           an assessment of whether the rights that will not be respected or
           protected are  fundamental  to  the  individual,  such  that  the
           deprivation of those rights  would  be  sufficiently  harmful  to
           render the area an unreasonable alternative."


       They [UNHCR] then address economic survival in paragraphs 29-30:


              "Economic survival


              The socio-economic conditions in the  proposed  area  will  be
           relevant in this part of the analysis.  If the situation is  such
           that the claimant will be unable to earn a living  or  to  access
           accommodation, or where medical care cannot  be  provided  or  is
           clearly inadequate, the area may not be a reasonable alternative.
             It  would  be  unreasonable,  including  from  a  human  rights
           perspective, to expect a person  to  relocate  to  face  economic
           destitution or existence below at  least  an  adequate  level  of
           subsistence.  At the other end of the spectrum, a simple lowering
           of simple standards or worsening of economic status  may  not  be
           sufficient to reject a proposed area as unreasonable.  Conditions
           in the area must be such that a relatively normal life can be led
           in the context of the country concerned.  If,  for  instance,  an
           individual would be without family links and  unable  to  benefit
           from an  informal  social  safety  net,  relocation  may  not  be
           reasonable, unless the person would otherwise be able to  sustain
           a relatively normal life at more than just a minimum  subsistence
           level.


              If the person would be denied access to  land,  resources  and
           protection in the proposed area because he or she does not belong
           to the dominant clan, tribe, ethnic,  religious  and/or  cultural
           group, relocation there would not be reasonable.  For example, in
           many parts of Africa, Asia and elsewhere, common ethnic,  tribal,
           religious  and/or  cultural  factors  enable  access   to   land,
           resources and protection.  In such situations, it  would  not  be
           reasonable to expect someone who does not belong to the  dominant
           group, to take up residence there.  A person should also  not  be
           required to relocate to areas, such as  the  slums  in  an  urban
           area, where they would be  required  to  live  in  conditions  of
           severe hardship."


       These guidelines are, I think, helpful, concentrating  attention  as
        they do on the standards prevailing generally  in  the  country  of
        nationality.  Helpful also is a passage of  socio-economic  factors
        in Storey, op cit, p 516 (footnotes omitted):


              "Bearing in mind  the  frequency  with  which  decision-makers
           suspect certain asylum seekers to be simply economic migrants, it
           is useful to examine  the  relevance  to  IFA  claims  of  socio-
           economic factors.  Again, terminology differs widely,  but  there
           seems to be broad agreement  that  if  life  for  the  individual
           claimant in an IFA would  involve  economic  annihilation,  utter
           destitution  or  existence  below  a   bare   subsistence   level
           (Existenzminimum) or deny  'decent  means  of  subsistence'  that
           would be unreasonable.  On the other end of the spectrum a simple
           lowering of living standards  or  worsening  of  economic  status
           would not.  What  must  be  shown  to  be  lacking  is  the  real
           possibility  to  survive  economically,  given   the   particular
           circumstances of the individual concerned  (language,  knowledge,
           education, skills, previous stay or employment there, local ties,
           sex,   civil   status,   age   and   life   experience,    family
           responsibilities, health; available or realisable assets, and  so
           forth).  Moreover, in the context of return, the  possibility  of
           avoidance of destitution by means of  financial  assistance  from
           abroad, whether from relatives, friends or even  governmental  or
           non-governmental sources, cannot be excluded."


       21.  In arguing, on behalf of  Messrs  [H,G  and  M]  that  internal
        relocation is never an available option where persecution is by the
        authorities of the  country  of  nationality,   Mr  Gill  QC  gains
        support from the conclusions of the San Remo experts in 2001.  They
        considered that where the risk of being  persecuted  emanates  from
        the State  (including  the  national  government  and  its  agents)
        internal relocation "is not normally a relevant consideration as it
        can be presumed that the State is entitled to  act  throughout  the
        country of origin".  The UNHCR Guidelines of  July  2003  similarly
        observe (paragraph 7 I (b)):


              "National authorities  are  presumed  to  act  throughout  the
           country.   If  they  are  the  feared  persecutors,  there  is  a
           presumption in principle that an internal  flight  or  relocation
           alternative is not available."


       There can, however, be no absolute rule and it is,  in  my  opinion,
        preferable to avoid the language  of  presumption.   The  decision-
        maker, taking account of all relevant circumstances  pertaining  to
        the claimant and his country of origin, must decide whether  it  is
        reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether  it  would
        be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  do  so.   The  source  of  the
        persecution giving rise to the claimant's well-founded fear in  his
        place of ordinary domicile may be agents of the state authorised or
        directed by the state to persecute; or they may be  agents  of  the
        state whose persecution is connived or tolerated by the  state,  or
        not restrained by the state; or the persecution may be by those who
        are not agents of the state, but whom the state does not or  cannot
        control.  These sources of persecution may, of course, overlap, and
        it may on  the  facts  be  hard  to  identify  the  source  of  the
        persecution complained of or feared.  There is, as Simon  Brown  LJ
        aptly observed  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2002] EWCA Civ 74 [2002] I WLR 1891,  paragraph  55,  a
        spectrum of cases.  The decision-maker must do his best to  decide,
        on such material  as  is  available,  where  on  the  spectrum  the
        particular  case  falls.   The  more  closely  the  persecution  in
        question is linked to the state, and the greater the control of the
        state over those acting or purporting to act  on  its  behalf,  the
        more likely (other things being equal) that a victim of persecution
        in one place will be similarly vulnerable in another  place  within
        the state.  The converse may also be true.  All must  depend  on  a
        fair assessment of the relevant facts".

145. Mention should also be made of a passage at  paragraph  19  where  Lord
   Bingham  was  giving  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Hathaway/New  Zealand
   approach:-

         "Fifthly, adoption of the rule would give the Convention an  effect
         which  is  not  only  unintended  but   also   anomalous   in   its
         consequences.  Suppose a  person  is  subject  to  persecution  for
         Convention reasons in the country of his nationality.  It is a poor
         country.  Standards of social provision are low.  There is  a  high
         level of deprivation and want.  Respect for human rights is  scant.
         He escapes to a rich country where, if recognised as a refugee,  he
         would enjoy all of  the  rights  guaranteed  to  refugees  in  that
         country.  He could, with no fear of persecution, live elsewhere  in
         his  country  of  nationality,  but  would  there  suffer  all  the
         drawbacks of living in a poor and backward country.   It  would  be
         strange if the accident of  persecution  were  to  entitle  him  to
         escape, not only from that persecution, but from the deprivation to
         which his home  country  is  subject.   It  would,  of  course,  be
         different if the lack of respect for human rights posed threats  to
         his life or exposed him to risk of inhuman or  degrading  treatment
         or punishment."

 At paragraphs 47-50 and 54 Lord Hope said:

       "47.  The question where the issue of internal relocation is  raised
        can, then, be defined  quite  simply.   As  Linden  JA  put  it  is
        Thirunavukkarasu v Canada (Minister of Employment and  Immigration)
        (1993) 109 DLR (4th) 682, 687, it is whether  it  would  be  unduly
        harsh to expect a claimant who is being persecuted for a Convention
        reason in one part of his country to move to a  less  hostile  part
        before seeking refugee status abroad.  The words "unduly harsh" set
        the  standard  that  must  be  met  for  this  to  be  regarded  as
        unreasonable.  If the claimant can live a  relatively  normal  life
        there judged by the  standards  that  prevail  in  his  country  of
        nationality generally, and if he can reach the  less  hostile  part
        without  undue  hardship  or  undue  difficulty,  it  will  not  be
        unreasonable to expect him to move there.


       48. Care must, of course, be taken to allow the argument that  there
        is an internal relocation option to defeat the  basic  purposes  of
        the Convention.  That is why there is a further question that  must
        be considered  where  the  claimant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
        persecution for a Convention reason which is due to  action  taken,
        or threatened to be taken, against him by the  state  or  by  state
        agents within the country of his nationality and  it  is  suggested
        that he could  reasonably  be  expected  to  live  in  a  place  of
        relocation there.  The dangers of a return to a country  where  the
        state is in full control of events and its  agents  of  persecution
        are active everywhere within its borders are  obvious.   It  hardly
        needs to be said that in such a case internal relocation is not  an
        option that is available.  Remoteness of  the  suggested  place  of
        relocation from the place of origin will provide no answer  to  the
        claimant's assertion that he has a well-founded fear of persecution
        throughout the country of his nationality.


       49.  On the other hand control of events by  the  state  may  be  so
        fragmented, or its activities may be being conducted in such a way,
        that it will be possible to identify places  within  its  territory
        where there are no grounds for thinking  that  persecution  by  the
        state or its agent of the claimant for a Convention reason will  be
        resorted to.  A civil war may take that pattern where the extent of
        it is localised.  So  too  may  the  process  of  ethnic  cleansing
        affecting people of the claimant's ethnicity which is  in  progress
        in one area but not in others.  The state may be  ruthless  in  its
        attempts to move people of a given ethnicity out of one area.   But
        it may be benign in its treatment of them when they reach  an  area
        which it regards as appropriate for people of that  ethnicity.   Of
        course, one kind of brutality  may  lead  to  another.   Those  who
        object to the state's policy may be treated differently from  those
        who do not, wherever they happen to be for  the  time  being.   And
        those who move to a safe area may be at risk  of  being  forced  to
        move back again.  The situation in the country  of  the  claimant's
        nationality may be so unstable, or the persecution which the  state
        condones in one place may be so difficult to limit to a given area,
        that it would be quite  unreasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to
        relocate anywhere within its territory.


        50.  In practice the tribunal tries to provide guidance as  to  how
        cases that originate from areas of particular difficulty should  be
        dealt with.  The country guidance  cases  that  have  already  been
        mentioned seek to achieve this result: see AB (return  of  Southern
        Sudanese) Sudan CG [2004] UKIAT 00260; MM (Zaghawa - Risk on Return
        - internal Flight) (Sudan) [2005] UKIAT 00101.  Where this is done,
        that guidance should be followed  by  immigration  judges.   It  is
        desirable that they should do so in the interests of  fairness  and
        consistency.  But in the end of the day each case, whether  or  not
        guidance is  available,  must  depend  on  an  objective  and  fair
        assessment of its own facts".
        ...
        54. Once it is accepted, as in  my  opinion  it  must  be,  that  a
        comparison between the basic norms of civil, political  and  socio-
        economic rights that are regarded as acceptable internationally and
        the situation in Kosovo is not relevant, the  argument  that  there
        was a defect in the Court of Appeal`s reasoning in Mr Januzi`s case
        falls away. I would wish to sound a note of caution  on  one  point
        only.  In  paragraph  28  of  his  judgment  Buxton  LJ  said  that
        conditions which extend throughout Kosovo  are  irrelevant  because
        they apply in both cases and cannot be taken into  account  in  the
        balance. I would prefer  to  put  the  point  that  he  was  making
        differently. It is the fact that there is a difference between  the
        standards that apply  throughout  the  country  of  the  claimant's
        nationality and those that are regarded as  acceptable  internally,
        and this fact only, that is irrelevant.  The  fact  that  the  same
        conditions  apply  throughout  the  country   of   the   claimant's
        nationality  is  not  irrelevant  to  the  question   whether   the
        conditions in that country generally as regards the most  basic  of
        human rights that are universally recognised - the right  to  life,
        and the right not to be subjected to cruel or inhuman  treatment  -
        are so bad that it would be unduly harsh for the claimant  to  have
        to seek a place of relocation there. As Mr Rabinder  Singh  QC  for
        the Secretary of State observed, one does not need to rely  on  the
        European Convention on Human Rights to conclude that if  conditions
        are that bad relocation  there  would  be  unduly  harsh.  But  the
        evidence about the conditions in Kosovo on which  Mr  Blake  relies
        does not begin to approach that standard..."


146. From the opinions of their  lordships  in  Januzi  we  extract  several
   propositions of particular importance in deciding the issues before us in
   this case.

147. First, it is essential when considering  internal  relocation  to  have
   regard to both considerations of: (1) safety, in the sense of an  absence
   of  persecution;  and  (2)  reasonableness,  in  the  sense  of   whether
   conditions are unduly harsh (Januzi, paragraphs 7, 8, 47 and 48).

148. Secondly, whilst it may be relevant to deciding a  particular  case  to
   have regard to whether a person  sought  to  avail  himself  of  internal
   relocation prior to departure, the test of  whether  someone  faces  real
   risk under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  under  Article  3  essentially
   concerns whether refoulement or return of a person  would  give  rise  to
   current risk: see for example Lord Bingham's approval at paragraph 20  of
   analyses made "in the context of return" and  Lord  Hope's  reference  in
   paragraph 48 to "the dangers of return".

149.  Thirdly,  there  is  no  presumption  that  internal   relocation   is
   impossible simply because the persecutors in a  person's  home  area  are
   agents of the state. Nevertheless, evidence of state involvement, whether
   that involvement is direct or indirect, is relevant  (paragraphs  21,  48
   and 49).

150. Fourthly, the issue of reasonableness or whether conditions are  unduly
   harsh is a rigorous one (Lord Carswell, paragraph 67); and it is wrong to
   decide this, as urged by the Hathaway/New Zealand approach,  by reference
   to whether those conditions meet the requirements of international  human
   rights law in full. The issue is whether  "conditions   in  that  country
   generally as regards the most basic human  rights  that  are  universally
   recognised - the right to life and the right not to be subjected to cruel
   or inhuman treatment - are so bad that,  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
   expect a person to seek a place of relocation" (Lord Hope, paragraph 54).
   At most all that can be expected is that basic human rights standards, in
   particular non-derogable rights, are not breached.

151. Fifthly, it is of particular importance  in  the  context  of   whether
   internal relocation is reasonable in  the  sense  of  unduly  harsh  that
   matters are looked at  cumulatively,  taking  account  of  "all  relevant
   circumstances":  the  importance  of  this  approach  is  manifest   from
   paragraphs 20-21 and 50 of their Lordships' opinions.

152. Sixthly, integral to the assessment which must be made is a  comparison
   between the conditions in the country as a whole and those which  prevail
   in the place of intended alternative relocation (paragraphs 19 and 54).

153. In this determination we  shall  also  have  cause  to  consider  legal
   principles arising in the context of  claims  made  by  Sudanese  asylum-
   seekers based in whole or in part on sur place activities; however, these
   are best examined in their specific context later on.


Our Assessment


The General Issues

154. Before turning to assess the evidence, including  the  expert  evidence
   we have heard, it is important that we state three particular  points  at
   the outset, as they are central to addressing matters in the way required
   by their lordships' opinions in Januzi. The first concerns the extent  to
   which the situation in Khartoum so far as persons of Darfuri  origin  are
   concerned  can  properly  be  seen  as  an  extension  of  the   Sudanese
   Government's attitude to non-Arab Darfuris in  Darfur.   It  has  been  a
   central part of the appellants' case before us that there  was  a  common
   approach, perhaps summed up by  Ms  Maguire's  claim  that  non-Arabs  of
   Darfur origin in Khartoum were regarded as "enemies  of  the  state".  We
   reject that contention. To use Lord Hope's  example  of  "civil  war"  in
   paragraph  49,  the  "civil  war"/armed  conflict  in  Darfur  has   been
   relatively localised and has certainly not extended to Khartoum.

155. In this regard, it is  useful  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  Darfur
   conflict is not the first situation where courts  and  tribunals  in  the
   United Kingdom have had to  consider,  in  the  context  of  the  Refugee
   Convention, whether a person who asserts persecution by the state in  one
   part of his country may be expected to  relocate  elsewhere  within  that
   country. The civil war in Sri Lanka provides a  recent  example.  As  the
   Court of Appeal found in E and Another v Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1032,  a  Tamil  might  be  subjected   to
   persecutory acts by the Sri Lankan army itself, whilst in  the  north  of
   the country, and yet be able to  live  without  a  well-founded  fear  in
   Colombo (see paragraph 13 of the judgments in that case).

156. We have no hesitation in accepting that the Sudanese  government  makes
   important  connections  between  the  two   situations,   notwithstanding
   Darfur`s geographical and political separation from Khartoum  (and  North
   Sudan generally). We also think that the evidence of state involvement in
   the armed conflict in Darfur and of state responsibility  for  wide-scale
   crimes against humanity committed in Darfur is overwhelming. However,  we
   think the evidence falls well short of demonstrating  that  the  Sudanese
   authorities have  maintained  the  same  approach  to  non-Arab  Darfuris
   outside the Darfur region as they have to those in Darfur.  In  our  view
   the  evidence  at  most  bears  out  that  in   Khartoum   only   certain
   subcategories of non-Arab Darfuris are targeted for serious harm -  those
   connected  with  the  resistance,  for  example.  It  is  true  that  the
   continuing war  with  the  rebels  being  waged  by  the  Janjaweed  with
   government  assistance  in  Darfur,  notwithstanding  the  peace  accord,
   appears to be overseen closely by members of the  central  government  in
   Khartoum. But the evidence does not suggest that the GoS leadership  sees
   Khartoum or other areas outside Darfur as a further front of this war  or
   that they are applying (what Mr Verney described at paragraph 54  of  his
   report as) its "directive to kill Darfuri civilians" to  Darfuris  living
   in Khartoum.  Nor is there anything to suggest  that  the  authorities  -
   except in Darfur- regard or treat  non-Arab  persons  of  Darfuri  origin
   generally as objects of persecution.

157. We emphasise this finding at the outset because it was clearly seen  by
   their lordships in Januzi as being important for the Tribunal  to  assess
   the nature of the interconnection.

158. The second point concerns the approach we have adopted  when  assessing
   conditions for IDPs in Khartoum. We consider that the  proper  comparison
   is between their situation and that which prevails in  the  rest  of  the
   country generally. Insofar as the question of conditions in Darfur arises
   in that context, in our view it would in general be misconceived to  seek
   to focus on conditions in the IDP camps there. The IDP  camps  in  Darfur
   are where people have fled to from  their  homes  in  Darfur;  almost  by
   definition they are not in the individual's home area. The home  area  in
   Darfur stands to be considered, therefore, as the normal habitat of those
   living there, leaving to one side the fact of persecution.

159. Thirdly, we reject Mr Mahmood`s (curious)  contention  that  the  legal
   analysis in Januzi treats as determinative  of  refugee  eligibility  the
   issue of whether a viable internal relocation alternative  existed  prior
   to departure. We consider that all the passages he referred to in support
   of this contention simply illustrate that their Lordships see  the  issue
   of whether someone had  failed  to  relocate  prior  to  departure  as  a
   relevant consideration when addressing  the  issue  of  current  risk  on
   return.

160. We should also mention  that  the  fact  we  have  not  referred  to  a
   specific item of  evidence  should  not  be  taken  as  showing  that  we
   overlooked it. We have considered all the oral and  documentary  evidence
   placed before us.


Our evaluation of the expert evidence
161. We attach weight to Mr Verney's evidence. He  brings  to  bear  in  his
   reports a wealth of knowledge built up over some thirty years  about  the
   situation in Sudan. However, in the nature of this hearing we have had to
   examine his views more closely than previously and we are  bound  to  say
   that the weight we felt able to attach to his reports and  testimony  was
   lessened to some extent by two features of his evidence. First, we do not
   think, when describing and evaluating certain aspects of the situation in
   Sudan, that he always sought to give a balanced picture. The need to give
   a balanced picture, in the sense of identifying evidence for and against,
   is indispensable. It is one reflected, for example in 1.4 of the Practice
   Direction supplementing Part  35  of  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules.  This
   states:

    "An expert should consider all material facts,  including  those  which
    might detract from his opinion".

162. We asked Mr  Verney  why  in  his  report  he  had  not  addressed  the
   evidence  given  by  two  experts,   both   having   UNHCR   credentials,
   specifically addressing risk on return presented  to  the  December  2005
   ACCORD COI Budapest seminar,  jointly  sponsored  by  UNHCR,   which  was
   plainly to different  effect  than  his  own.  His  answers  covered  the
   respects in which he  did  not  think  the  two  experts  concerned  were
   specifically focussing on the situation of returnees  of  Darfuri  origin
   (we return to this below). But it did not explain to our satisfaction why
   he had failed to take account of it when drawing up his  own  account  of
   the same general issues as were covered in this report,  particularly  as
   he said he set particular store by the UNHCR Position paper  of  February
   2006.

163. In his report he placed considerable  reliance  on  the  Aegis  Trust`s
   2005 "Lives in Our Hands" report, for example at paragraphs  69-72.  This
   report contained a "dossier" on the plight of  "African"  asylum  seekers
   from Darfur now facing removal to Khartoum". It includes profiles  of  26
   "genocide survivors" including one whose evidence we know has been  found
   not credible by an Immigration Judge. Whilst we accept that Mr Verney may
   not have known this when he prepared his report, he  nowhere  appears  to
   have shown awareness of the evidential significance of the fact that  the
   accounts given in this dossier,  despite  being  known  to  be  those  of
   "asylum-seekers"  have not been tested,  whilst  others  have  had  their
   appeals dismissed. Indeed, so far as concerns  the  wider  issue  of  the
   evidence adduced before us by those representing the appellants  in  this
   case, it is a  matter  of  some  surprise  to  us  that  neither  written
   statements nor oral evidence from any  of  the  26  persons,  except  for
   appellant H, was offered, in  particular  from  the  two  whose  accounts
   involved  being  returned  to  Khartoum.  Both  those  representing   the
   appellants and the  Aegis Trust have been fully aware for some time  that
   this panel was seeking all relevant evidence relating to risk on return.

164. Secondly, we noted a tendency to  exaggeration  or  at  least  to  make
   assertions going beyond the evidence  which  he  cited  in  support.  For
   example at paragraph 13 when describing the "cascade of adverse treatment
   by the  security  police,  initially  triggered  by  their  ethnic  [non-
   Arab/black African] identity and linked  automatically  to  suspicion  of
   sympathy with the rebels" he said that  "[t]his  is  just  as  likely  to
   happen in the capital Khartoum as in Darfur region". He saw this as  part
   of what he considered to be a "collective  punishment"  strategy  of  the
   current government.  However, it is plainly  not  the  case  that  crimes
   against humanity have been carried out against Darfuris anywhere in Sudan
   outside the Darfur region. There is another example at  paragraph  60  of
   his report where he cited with approval the "Lives in Our Hands" report's
   statement that: "In Khartoum now, if even two or three people  identified
   as being from Darfur or talking about Darfur  are  seen  talking  by  the
   authorities,  they  can  be  in  very  serious  trouble...".  In   cross-
   examination he agreed that this went too far and  would  not  cover,  for
   example, Darfuris who were simply talking about the weather. Further,  at
   paragraph 61 of his report he stated that "[m]any "African" students have
   been subjected to detention, physical abuse, denial of rights and serious
   life-threatening harm", yet he mentioned only  three  such  students.  At
   paragraph  17  he  said  there  had  been  a  "complete  halt   to   food
   distribution", an assertion which he accepted in  cross-examination  went
   too wide. Whilst we  accept  that  seen  over  time  there  have  been  a
   significant number of forcible relocations, we see no help to  the  cause
   of accuracy for him to describe IDPs as being constantly  "on  the  run",
   especially as both he and Ms Maguire accepted that, even though  some  of
   the relocations had been unannounced, many  had  been  motivated  by  the
   interests of planners in utilising the sites for  industrial  or  related
   purposes and that there had been no  forcible  relocations  since  August
   2005.  Both  of  these  points  are  made  by  UNMIS`s  Head  of  Return,
   Reintegration and Recovery (respondent's bundle, page 256).

165. Turning to the evidence of the second witness, Mr  Nourain,  we  regret
   to say we have very considerable difficulty  in  attaching  even  limited
   weight to it. We use the word regret because we do not doubt for a moment
   that in Sudan he did at some stage hold a judicial  position  and  was  a
   Member of Parliament.  However, he simply failed in his oral testimony to
   come up to proof. It cannot  be  that  any  fault  lies  with  the  legal
   representatives who prepared his statement,  as  they  have  specifically
   confirmed to us that they provided a translation of his report in his own
   language for him to check. In any event particular care was taken at  the
   hearing by those questioning him to ensure  he  understood  what  he  was
   recorded as saying in his statement  and  he  did  not  seek  to  suggest
   anything  recorded  was  inaccurate.   His  oral  evidence  gave   little
   indication that he had thought carefully about the general assertions  he
   made in his written report and reiterated in  his  oral  evidence.    His
   reference to having contacts "throughout all levels" of  the  immigration
   and intelligence services in Sudan was exposed in cross-examination to be
   no more than a single individual, plus one person who was  said  to  have
   left the country.  We quite understood Mr Nourain`s position that he  did
   not want to and would not name all but one of his  claimed  sources;  but
   considering that he said he had met and worked closely with  many  people
   involved in the immigration  and  intelligence  services,  we  found  his
   inability in respect of all but two to give any particulars at all -  for
   example about where and when he had met them or spoken with them, or what
   discussions he had with them -  a  serious  shortcoming.  What  made  the
   vagueness of Mr Nourain's evidence even more curious in our view was that
   on his account the officials with whom he had contact were fellow members
   of the Fur tribe.   We would have thought that their recollection of  any
   specific instances of mistreatment of fellow black Africans  from  Darfur
   would have been acute and that Mr Nourain would have been able to reflect
   that in speaking about what they told  him.  Moreover,  the  witness  has
   never, by his own admission, met a person who has been  deported  to  the
   Sudan.  Nor was he able to tell the Tribunal that any of his contacts had
   witnessed, let alone been involved in, any ill-treatment of  a  returnee.
   The  evidence  about   the   authorities   having   video   evidence   of
   demonstrations attended by Sudanese nationals  abroad  was  shown  to  be
   vague in the extreme and based at best  on  one  specific  example,  from
   2002.  The Tribunal agrees with Ms Giovannetti that Mr Nourain's evidence
   is substantially unreliable in relation to all the main issues with which
   we are concerned with in this appeal.

166. We turn finally to the evidence of Ms Maguire. Whilst she did not  have
   as many years experience in Sudanese affairs as did Mr  Verney,  she  has
   plainly acquired in  a  relatively  short  space  of  time  a  formidable
   knowledge of what is going on in Sudan. The fact that she had worked  for
   the UN and for the UK government enhances  the  perspective  she  has  on
   events there.  As we did with Mr Verney, we must  record  our  particular
   thanks to her for the care and efforts she showed in trying to assist  us
   on a wide range of matters during a particularly lengthy examination.  As
   with Mr Verney, however, we did not find ourselves able  to  attach  full
   weight to all aspects of her evidence. In our  view  her  written  report
   (and her "Ghost Houses" report written for the Aegis Trust) were somewhat
   weakened by the same two features we identified with Mr Verney's  report.
   Her report did not show that on certain key issues she had borne in  mind
   the duty on any expert to identify evidence contrary to his  or  her  own
   opinion. We found particularly surprising the failure of  her  report  to
   identify or address the Report of the 10th  European  Country  of  Origin
   Information Seminar, 1-2 December  2005,  Budapest  arising  out  of  the
   seminar organised by ACCORD, HHC and UNHCR.  This report was based on the
   presentation given by Dr Hamayoun Alizadeh,  Regional  Representative  of
   the Office of the  United  States  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights
   (OHCHCR) for South East Asia and former head of OHCHR in Khartoum, and Dr
   Hans Schodder, Senior Protection Officer of the UNHCR  representative  in
   Khartoum, on 1 and 2 December  2005.    This  report,  some  thirty-three
   pages long, covered a wide range  of  refugee  related  issues  including
   those of military service and 'Return (of  Failed  Asylum  Seekers)`  (we
   have summarised those above at paragraphs 132-133).   Given  the  efforts
   Ms Maguire made to seek and obtain information from relevant bodies  with
   knowledge and expertise about the situation in  Khartoum,  we  find  this
   omission particularly surprising, all the more so given that  Ms  Maguire
   acknowledged that she knew of both and  that  she  fully  accepted  their
   credentials.

167. Equally surprising in our view was her failure to  show  any  awareness
   of the 2001 Danish Fact Finding Mission report. Again this report is  one
   of the very few  to contain specific  evidence    on  a   number  of  key
   issues affecting asylum   seekers,  including  the  same  two  issues  of
   military service  and  risk  on  return  to  failed  asylum  seekers  and
   continues to be regarded as the fullest treatment of these issues.

168. We also felt that what Ms Maguire said about living conditions  in  the
   IDP camps and squatter areas in Khartoum lost much of its  force  through
   failing to show that she had taken into account important  parts  of  the
   2006 UN Work Plan bearing on projects for IDPs in Khartoum. Even  in  its
   early draft this contained information about projects relating  to  IDPs.
   This Work Plan also made a distinction between funding  for  humanitarian
   projects and funding for development projects (in terms of minimal levels
   of funding required) which she did not show she appreciated. Again, given
   that her June 2006 report purported to be up-to-date, we  were  surprised
   that she appeared unaware of the briefing expressed in February  2006  by
   Mike McDonagh of OCHA (an organisation  which  has  not  previously  been
   afraid to voice criticism of the Sudan regime's treatment of IDPs) to the
   effect that the GoS had 11,000 plots for IDPs and the  statement  of  Bob
   Turner of UNMIS that the situation has improved  fairly  dramatically  in
   the second half of 2005.

169. We also  consider  that  her  written  reports  showed  a  tendency  to
   exaggerate. For example, in her report she stated (without qualification)
   that IDPs recently arrived in Khartoum have been excluded from  receiving
   plots and that there was "no food assistance to IDPs in  Khartoum",  even
   though there was evidence strongly suggesting that this  was  not  always
   the case.  For example, her statement in her report (which she  retracted
   in oral evidence) that Soba Aradi was "considered to be largely  occupied
   by people from Darfur" was difficult to square with the  only  UN-related
   assessments made in 2005, showing that this was not so.   We  also  found
   lacking in balance her comments about the one case the Aegis Trust was in
   touch with of a person outside Sudan [presently in Egypt] who said he had
   had serious problems after being returned from the UK as a failed  asylum
   seeker. In our view, her comment that "[t]he circumstances of the failure
   to obtain refugee status in the UK is immaterial for  this  account"  was
   seriously lacking in balance (we return to this point below at  paragraph
   205).

170. Before leaving the evidence of the three  experts,  however,  we  would
   like to clarify in respect of Mr Verney  and  Ms  Maguire  the  following
   point.  Although  we  have  not  felt  able  to  accept  their  principal
   contentions about risk categories for those facing return to Khartoum, we
   have benefited significantly from their input into these appeals.

171. We turn now to consider the principal issues  we  have  been  asked  to
   address in the four appeals before us.

Risk to involuntary returnees from Sudan

172. We start with the most general risk category which  has  been  proposed
   to us in the course of submissions.  It  is  that  we  should  find  that
   involuntary returnees to Sudan generally would be at risk. This  was  not
   of course the scope of the review of the situation in Sudan  contemplated
   by the House of Lords in Januzi when remitting the three Sudan  cases  to
   the AIT. The arguments canvassed in that case were confined to the  issue
   of risk to persons of non-Arab/black African Darfuri origin facing return
   to Khartoum. The original grounds of appeal in the four cases  before  us
   did not argue for such a general risk category. Nor, as we have seen,  is
   such a broad risk category advanced by any  of  the  established  country
   reports or even by the latest  UNHCR  Position  Paper.   Nor  is  it  one
   subscribed to by Mr Verney in  his  written  and  oral  evidence  to  us.
   Nevertheless, it is one we have to address because it has  been  advanced
   by both Mr Nourain and Ms Maguire. We say that because  both  were  asked
   point blank to clarify whether that was in fact their position  and  both
   confirmed that they considered that anyone forcibly returned  from  Sudan
   would be at risk.

173. We are not persuaded that there is such a  general  risk  category  for
   several interrelated reasons.   If the general argument here advanced was
   right, of course, then even   Sudanese nationals returning on  up-to-date
   Sudanese passports who were members of the Sudanese government  would  be
   at risk. That itself defies common sense. It also  contradicts  the  very
   considerable evidence from a number of sources and supported by  both  Mr
   Verney and Ms Maguire, that the current  regime  is  extremely  security-
   minded and highly  sophisticated  in  its  approach  to  the  control  of
   political opposition of every kind. But even considering that in practice
   this category would be confined to those who would be returning on  other
   travel documents, we cannot see that the argument is made out.  First  of
   all, we can see no good reason why, for example, an involuntary  returnee
   who was an Arab from northern Sudan or who was a member of  the  Sudanese
   government would be viewed adversely. It may be that certain  individuals
   from  one  or  both   of   these   sub-categories   may   have   specific
   characteristics which would put them at risk: e.g. if they were a  member
   of the government who had turned "whistleblower" (and so had  effectively
   become outspokenly anti-government), but here  we  are  considering   the
   category on its own.

174. Secondly, such a risk category assumes a general  practice  or  pattern
   of adverse treatment of involuntary  returnees  on  return,  satisfactory
   evidence for which is lacking.  It has been submitted that a practice  or
   pattern of ill-treating involuntary returnees  is  not  one  which  would
   necessarily be known about, especially given the secretive and repressive
   nature of the NSIS in its security and intelligence work. However, it  is
   clear  from   the   background   evidence   that,   internal   censorship
   notwithstanding, organisations within Sudan, both parliamentary and  NGO-
   based, have shown ability to document and bring to light evidence of NSIS
   activities and abuses. The  Sudan  Organisation  Against  Torture  (SOAT)
   reports on the Soba Aradi incidents of May 2005  are  one  such  example.
   Whether SOAT is wholly based outside Sudan or not, it is clearly able  to
   obtain and document a great deal  of  relevant  information  from  inside
   Sudan. It is also clear that even outside international bodies,  such  as
   Amnesty International, have been able to obtain and make public  evidence
   of human rights abuses:  see  for  example  its  detailing  of  some  330
   detentions of political opponents covering mid-2004- mid-2005 (at pp.160-
   170 of the bundle relating to appellant M).   Even  where  investigations
   have not been able to give complete information, e.g. in relation to  the
   regime's use of 'ghost houses', nevertheless the underlying practice  has
   been identified and documented to some degree.

175. It may be that there is no international or  national  body  or  agency
   monitoring returns to Khartoum Airport, but by virtue of  the  protracted
   civil war in the South, the issue of risk  on  return  to  failed  asylum
   seekers has long been seen as one which the international  community  has
   had to examine: see for example the 2001 Danish Fact-finding report. From
   the evidence of the Aegis Trust and Mr Verney and  Ms  Maguire,  we  also
   know that it is a topic which national and external NGOs in Khartoum have
   been asked to think about for some time now.

176. In such  circumstances  we  would  expect  those  contending  that  the
   situation has changed such that there is now a general risk on return, to
   evidence how and why.

177. We agree with Miss Giovannetti that if there was a  practice,  official
   or unofficial, of adverse treatment of involuntary  returnees,  it  would
   have become known and would  have  been  adequately  documented.   On  Mr
   Verney's and Ms Maguire's own approach, such a pattern would have started
   some time in 2003, when the current regime decided to  oppress  the  non-
   Arab Darfuri population, so there have been three years in which  such  a
   pattern would have become discernible.

178. Despite the scrutiny of national and international bodies, we  note  in
   this regard that there have only been two specific case examples cited in
   the evidence before us of returnees facing mistreatment.  We  shall  deal
   with them below when considering  non-Arab  Darfuri  returnees,  but  the
   general point we make here is this: if there was an established  practice
   or pattern, we would have expected to see much more extensive evidence in
   the form of a significant number of adequately documented case examples.

179. Thirdly, as already  touched  on,  the  background  evidence  does  not
   suggest that the current leadership saw fit to adopt such a practice even
   during the periods when the war in the South was at its most intense. The
   October 2001 CIPU Report, for example stated at paragraph 5.51:

   "In general, Sudanese nationals who have been abroad for  some  time  can
   enter Sudan without any problems. Leaders and  high  ranking  members  of
   opposition political parties, however, may encounter  problems  with  the
   security forces on return to Sudan. This, however,  would  not  apply  to
   members of the Umma Party as the leader and leading members of  the  Umma
   Party have returned to  Sudan  recently  without  any  hindrance  by  the
   security forces. Members of the SPLM/A who have  been  abroad  and  would
   like to return to Sudan would be at risk of persecution. People returning
   to Sudan from countries having strained or hostile relations  with  Sudan
   may be questioned about their activities in the country or countries they
   had been in."

180. This account falls well short of  identifying  returnees  generally  as
   having been at risk on return at that time.

181. As we have seen, the 2001 Danish Report from around the  same  time  on
   the fact-finding mission to  Cairo,  Khartoum  and  Nairobi  contained  a
   specific subsection on conditions for entry and exit.   The  report  drew
   not just on evidence  from  the  Sudanese  government  itself  (the  then
   Director of Passport and Immigration, General Administration,  Khartoum).
   It also drew on evidence from officials of  the  Netherlands  and  German
   embassies and a well informed local source in Cairo.  The  furthest  that
   the evidence in this report went was to identify that  Sudanese  citizens
   who had been away from the country for a  couple  of  years   would  face
   questioning by the Sudanese police  on  their  arrival,  often  regarding
   failure to pay tax. Questioning was not said to lead to any harm. Many of
   the same considerations  said  to  arise  now:  for  example,   anger  at
   international condemnation of the Government of Sudan's handling  of  the
   armed conflict in question, were present then, albeit in respect  of  the
   South.

182. As regards the likely position of returnees in terms of  documentation,
   the points we make at paragraphs 201-202 also apply here.


Risk to failed asylum seekers

183. The main thrust to the contention about involuntary  returnees  appears
   to be in fact that a somewhat more limited subcategory would be at  risk,
   namely failed asylum seekers. It may be the two groupings should be  seen
   as interrelated because the  argument  has  been  that  if  a  person  is
   returned on emergency travel documents that in  itself  would  cause  the
   Sudanese authorities to regard him or her as a  person  who  had  claimed
   asylum abroad (unsuccessfully).   That argument is not uncontentious.  We
   have no difficulty accepting that when dealing with involuntary returnees
   the Sudanese authorities would have in mind that  the  persons  concerned
   might be failed asylum-seekers. The evidence is that  they  know  who  is
   who. But for similar reasons we think it likely  that they will also know
   that some involuntary returnees might simply be deportees (deported,  for
   example,  for  having  committed  criminal  offences).  We  do  not  see,
   therefore, why they would always equate the two. But even supposing  this
   argument to be correct, the question we have to  decide  is  whether  the
   Sudanese authorities would treat such persons  adversely  simply  because
   they were failed asylum seekers.

184. In this regard the contention  throughout  has  been  that  they  would
   because of (i) the act of claiming asylum, which would be seen in  itself
   as anti-government and an act of treason; and, (ii)  the  current  regime
   being particularly sensitive about its nationals having given evidence to
   foreign, particularly  Western,  governments,  about  atrocities  it  has
   committed inside Sudan.

185. However, despite what is claimed to be the  low  numbers  involved,  we
   come back to the palpable lack of any satisfactory evidence  that  either
   returnees  generally  or  failed  asylum  seekers  generally  are   being
   mistreated on return for any reasons (see also paragraph 204).

186. As regards the likely position of failed asylum  seekers  in  terms  of
   documentation, what we say at paragraphs 201-202   also applies here.

Risk to persons eligible for military service

187. It is accepted that Sudan has a system of compulsory  military  service
   for those (mainly men) of fighting age. It has been  argued,  principally
   on the strength of Ms Maguire's expert evidence read  together  with  the
   February 2006 UNHCR Position paper, that as a  consequence  all  Sudanese
   nationals of eligible military age would be at risk on return  by  reason
   of (a) being punished as a draft evader or draft deserter; or  (b)  being
   subjected to additional and oppressive  investigations  upon  return,  in
   connection with the draft issue. Both these aspects need to be taken into
   account when analysing this proposed risk category.

188. Ms Maguire sets out her view of why there is such a  risk  category  at
   page 20 of her report as follows:

         'Conscription
         It will quickly be apparent to the officials at Khartoum airport if
         a person has been absent from Sudan for months or years. This would
         make the person immediately liable to suspicion as a draft evader.


         Sudan conscripts its young people into the armed forces (either the
         regular army  or  the  ODF).   There  are  no  exemptions,  and  no
         facilities for conscientious objection. If a  person  is  found  to
         have evaded his conscription, he will be liable  -  at  best  -  to
         detention and interrogation and a sentence of imprisonment.  If  he
         is found to have left Sudan in order to evade conscription,  it  is
         not unlikely that he will be detained, interrogated and tortured.


         As stated in the UNHCR paper (February  2006), a decree  passed  in
         2003 authorises the detention of all people who  left  Sudan  after
         the coup of 1989 and have been away for over 12  months.  Detainees
         may  be  subjected  to  'investigation'  and  'necessary   security
         measures'.   UNHCR posits that  young  men  of  conscript  age  are
         particularly at risk of such detention, which  is  currently  being
         applied selectively. Given the hostility referred to herein towards
         the UK and the nature of the armed conflict in Darfur, it is, in my
         view, highly likely that a person from Darfur who has been  out  of
         Sudan for many months and has sought to stay out of Sudan in the UK
         would be subject to this detention and measures as described. There
         is  no  monitoring  or  scrutiny  of  national   or   international
         organisations regarding the treatment of such detainees'  (emphases
         added).

189. Ms Maguire's  claim  here  is  formulated  so  as  to  cover  not  just
   conscriptable returnees of (non-Arab) Darfuri  origin  but  conscriptable
   returnees generally. Insofar as it addresses with  the  former,  we  deal
   with that in a moment.   As regards the latter, we have already made  the
   point in respect of Ms Maguire's evidence on this matter that  it  lacked
   balance: she herself acknowledged that  as  an  expert  she  should  have
   engaged with  evidence  appearing  to  take  a  less  definite  view,  in
   particular the evidence as presented in  the  2001  Danish  Fact  Finding
   Report. Albeit written before the Darfur crisis that report examined  the
   experiences of conscripts during the war in the South and  is  still  the
   most detailed treatment of the issue.

190. Such criticism aside, it still remains for us to  evaluate  whether  on
   the basis of all the evidence now before us it can be said  that  persons
   of conscript age would be at risk. In our  view  we  have  not  seen  any
   evidence that persuades us to take a different view from that reached  by
   the Tribunal in BA (military service - no risk)  Sudan  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
   0006, a case heard in December 2005.

191. That case concluded that there was:

         "33.        ..a clear preponderance of evidence to the effect  that
             the general response of  the  Sudanese  authorities  to  draft
             evaders when caught is not to imprison them, but to take steps
             instead to ensure they are seen to serve in  the  army,  under
             supervision. Thus the 2001 Danish FFM  report  (which  is  the
             most detailed and multi-sourced study on  this  issue)  states
             that:

                  "A well informed local source in Cairo said that deserters
                  were not normally punished with imprisonment.   [In  2001]
                  if a deserter was caught he would be  sent  to  the  front
                  under  genuine  threat  of  harassment  and  under   close
                  supervision. Otherwise  the  sentence  for  desertion  was
                  three years, but there had been few examples of  deserters
                  being sentenced to three years in prison."

         34.  The same report noted further that:

                  "The same well informed [Cairo] source also explained that
                  a person's ability to avoid military  service   in   Sudan
                  [in 2001] would  depend very much on his and his  family's
                  connection to the  regime, and  the  social  and  economic
                  position for the family in  Sudan."

         35.  The report also states that  two  other  sources,  Barach  and
             Ngot, confirmed that deserters were  not  usually  imprisoned,
             but  were  often  sent  directly  to  the  front  under  close
             supervision. It stated that another source, Lehne,  said  that
             in  practice  the  military  authorities  did  not  insist  on
             sentences [for avoiding military service] (52).   At  p.53  it
             noted that a further source, El Mufti, was not aware of  cases
             of  deserters  or  draft  evaders  being  punished  for  their
             actions. If the authorities  caught  such  people  they  would
             simply demand that they returned to service.


                  Accordingly, we  conclude  that  the  background  evidence
                  considered in the round does not  demonstrate  that  draft
                  evaders and deserters in  general  face  a  real  risk  of
                  imprisonment in Sudan."

192. Since the December 2005 hearing of the above case, the only four  items
   of evidence of any significance  bearing on this issue are  the  February
   2005 letter from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  confirming  that
   there has been no change to the laws  governing  military  service  since
   2001 (COIS April 2006 paragraph 5.114),  the  December  2005  ACCORD  COI
   Budapest report,  the February  2006 UNHCR   Position   paper, and  an  8
   March 2006 UNHCR statement that "[s]ome three years  ago  the  government
   stopped rounding up young men  in  the  cities  to  conscript  them  into
   National Service. Students are now required  to  undergo  45  days  to  2
   months military training prior to entering University and then serve  one
   year National Service upon graduation. National service  can  be  in  the
   army or in governmental institutions depending on professions  and  state
   of health" (COIS April 2006 5.130).

193. As regards the December  2005  ACCORD  report,  we  consider  it  lends
   further support to the findings made in BA: Dr Schodder  notes  that  the
   practice of  forced  recruitment  has  stopped  and  states  that   draft
   evaders, instead of  being  punished,  are  often  coerced  into  certain
   contingents of active service. Dr Alizadeh adds: "The  law  foresees  the
   death penalty for desertion, but we don't know any case  where  a  person
   was executed, also due to the Sudanese culture."

194. We turn next to what  is  said  on  this  topic  in  the  latest  UNHCR
   Position paper.  We  attach  significant  weight  to  the  February  2006
   Position Paper, which has clearly not been written in haste. However,  in
   contrast to some other parts of this paper which are sourced, e.g. to  UN
   reports, this part is unsourced and certainly does not refer to  anything
   not considered by the Tribunal in BA.  Whilst we can  accept  that  young
   men of fighting age would face investigation and interrogation, the paper
   fails to identify evidence of a practice or pattern  of  mistreatment  of
   such persons, whether one considers such young men situated inside  Sudan
   or returning from abroad. Significantly, given the specific  focus  given
   to this issue in the 2001 Danish Fact Finding report and in the  December
   2005 ACCORD seminar co-sponsored by UNHCR and involving experts on  Sudan
   working for UNHCR, we would have expected that  any  change  of  position
   would be supported by a comparably balanced survey, taking  into  account
   Sudanese government evidence and evidence from  Western  governments,  as
   well as evidence from well-informed academic and NGO sources.

Risk to returnees of Darfuri origin

195. We formulate this mooted risk category  in  this  way  because  of  the
   emphasis placed in the February  2006  UNHCR  Position  paper  on  forced
   returns that  there  are  risks  for   certain  categories  of   Sudanese
   "regardless of their place of  origin, including  Darfurians".  Doubtless
   one important consideration  in the UNHCR's mind  here is  the  existence
   of a very significant number of Darfuris who  have  resided  in  Khartoum
   for a considerable period and so may not be immediately  classifiable  as
   'from Darfur'. Possibly another is that some Arabs have  sided  with  the
   rebels in Darfur. (Possibly too the author bore  in  mind  Dr  Schodder`s
   point, as expressed in the December 2005  ACCORD  seminar  report,  that,
   insofar as the  conflict  there  is  one  between  nomads  and  sedentary
   farmers, the farmers are not necessarily  Africans  and  the  nomads  not
   necessarily Arabs.)

196. Nevertheless, in practice we think that  what  is  primarily  meant  by
   returnees of Dafuri  origin  is  non-Arab/black  African  Darfuris,  i.e.
   persons from the black African tribes who dwell in Darfur, in  particular
   the Fur, Zaghawa and Masseleit. (Indeed the UNHCR paper in the course  of
   its recommendations draws an important distinction between  non-Arab  and
   Arab  Darfuris  when  it  comes  to  assessing  risk  under  the  Refugee
   Convention.)  When  the  three  expert  reports  refer  to  Darfuris  (or
   Darfurians), this in most contexts is plainly what they mean.

197. We must take very seriously what a  UNHCR  Position  paper  says  about
   risk, and it is important to note that, in contrast  to   UNHCR  Position
   papers on some other countries, it does not merely  identify  persons  it
   considers in need of international protection by  reference  to  a  broad
   reading of that term (going beyond protection under  either  the  Refugee
   Convention or ECHR norms). As we can see, the first bullet point  of  its
   recommendations makes specific  reference  to  the  need  for  States  to
   provide international protection to Sudanese asylum-seekers  from  Darfur
   of "non-Arab" ethnic  background  by  recognising  them  under  the  1951
   Refugee Convention. Nevertheless, it seems to us that this  paper's  risk
   assessment is predicated on a particular UNHCR reading  of  the  internal
   relocation alternative regarding state complicity which in our view is at
   odds with that adopted in Januzi and thus with United Kingdom law and  at
   odds therefore with an interpretation of  the  1951  Convention  that  is
   binding on us. At paragraph 8 of the paper, in support of its  view  that
   the threats to asylum-seekers  from  Darfur  anywhere  in  Sudan  are  so
   widespread that it cannot be said  there  is  a  viable  internal  flight
   alternative anywhere in Sudan, it is stated:

    "Furthermore, where  internal  displacement  is  a  result  of  "ethnic
    cleansing" policies,  denying  refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  the
    internal flight or relocation concept could be interpreted as condoning
    the resulting situation on the ground and therefore  raises  additional
    concerns".

198. The footnote to this sentence is to the July 2003 UNHCR  Guidelines  on
   Internal Protection: "Internal Flight Alternative" within the Context  of
   Article 1A (2) of the 1951 Convention  which  were  analysed  in  Januzi.
   Those Guidelines considered that in the case of persecution in  the  home
   area inflicted by state agents, there was  a  presumption  that  internal
   flight would not be available to victims of that persecution elsewhere in
   the country. At  paragraph  21  of  Januzi  Lord  Bingham  rejected  that
   approach (as had the Court of Appeal in Hamid [2005] EWCA Civ  1219)  and
   identified instead  a  factual  approach  which  considered  where  on  a
   spectrum of cases a particular case fell. We  do  not  think,  therefore,
   that the UNHCR approach to  the  internal  relocation  test  specifically
   adopted in this February 2006 Position paper on Sudan and that adopted in
   the UK case law are in all respects the same.

199. Furthermore, we have some concerns about the paper's  lack  of  sources
   for certain key parts of its analysis of this issue. In relation  to  the
   situation in Darfur and Eastern  Chad,  it  makes  copious  reference  to
   various (UN) sources, including very up to  date  sources.  But  when  it
   comes to the situation of IDPs in Khartoum, only one source is given  and
   that dates from  2004.   Another  factor  making  it  more  difficult  to
   overlook this comparative  lack  of  sourcing  (when  compared  with  the
   report's treatment of the situation in Darfur) is our knowledge that less
   than  two  months  before,  at  the  UNHCR-sponsored  ACCORD  seminar  in
   Budapest, a Senior Protection Officer of UNHCR in Khartoum  said  nothing
   to indicate that asylum-seekers from Darfur would be at  risk.   (If  the
   June 2006 report from the American University of Cairo is accurate,  then
   it would also seem that even as late as June 2006, UNHCR  there,  despite
   reviving Refugee Status Determination on a  limited  basis  for  Sudanese
   asylum-seekers, is not recorded as having  accepted  that  asylum-seekers
   from Darfur would qualify as refugees by virtue  of  return  to  Khartoum
   being unsafe. Dr Harrell-Bond's letter does not resolve the matter since,
   on the report`s analysis,  the  yellow  card  is  issued  as  a  form  of
   temporary protection and does not in any  way  imply  acceptance  that  a
   person is a refugee).

200. We turn then to consider the matter for ourselves on the basis  of  the
   large body of evidence before us.

201. As regards Arab Darfuris, it is not immediately obvious to us why  they
   would be in any different position from someone who  was  an  involuntary
   returnee from  anywhere  else,  except  that  their  travel  document  or
   passport would flag up their place of origin. The authorities at Khartoum
   airport appear able  quickly to check or elicit not only  which  part  of
   Sudan a returnee is from but what his or her ethnic origin is. Whilst  it
   may be that some  Arabs  have  sided  with  the  rebels  in  Darfur,  the
   authorities in Khartoum can be taken to know that the great  majority  of
   Arabs have  sided  with  the  government.  Against  that  background,  we
   struggle to see how the distinction (between involuntarily returned  Arab
   Darfuris and other Sudanese involuntary returnees) would be important, on
   its own, when it came to risk.  However, we shall continue to  frame  the
   risk  category  in  this  broad  way,  so  as  to  ensure   all   genuine
   possibilities are covered.

202. The argument for identifying returnees of Darfuri origin  as  being  at
   risk starts with the  UK  part  of  the  process  of  returning  Sudanese
   nationals, i.e. by examining what happens  at  the  Sudanese  Embassy  in
   London. We accept the evidence of Mr Verney and Ms Maguire that very  few
   Darfuri returnees will have their own passport or one which  is  current.
   That is because all the evidence  about the circumstances in  which  such
   people have made their  way to the  UK and other countries indicates that
   they left without documents, by ship through Port Sudan or through  Chad,
   Libya and other routes and passed  controls  by  using   false  documents
   secured for them by agents. In this connection, the evidence of  both  Mr
   Verney and Ms Maguire is that  the  Sudanese  Embassy  in  London  shares
   information with the security and  intelligence  services  in  Sudan  and
   indeed maintains a specified NSIS desk at the Embassy. On  the   strength
   of this evidence we believe it reasonable to infer  that persons who  are
   of Darfuri origin may  be identified at this stage  of  obtaining  travel
   documents and that Sudanese officials at the  airport  in  Khartoum  will
   have been alerted to their possible return in advance. Of course,  it  is
   possible that agreement to issue a person with  a  travel  document  upon
   application in London itself operates as a type of clearance. But we have
   no  evidence  about  that  and,  because  we  cannot  discount  the  real
   possibility that the Sudanese authorities might want  to  facilitate  the
   return of people they have an adverse interest  in,  we  proceed  on  the
   basis that the obtaining of a travel document still leaves the individual
   in the position of having to be security-cleared or screened  on  return,
   albeit by reference to information that may have been passed to  Khartoum
   from the London Embassy.

203. Like the Secretary of State, we have no difficulty  in  accepting  that
   on return failed asylum seekers generally and persons  of  Darfur  origin
   will face screening.  We also have no  difficulty  in  accepting  that  -
   either immediately or during the course  of  that  screening  -  it  will
   become obvious what their ethnic origin is and where they are from  (both
   originally and when last in Sudan).  Such  identification  is  apparently
   made without difficulty  on  the  basis  of  a  person's  combination  of
   physical appearance, language and dialect and personal habits.  But  such
   evidence only takes us so far.

204. It is a principal contention of the  appellants  that  on  return  they
   will face not only  interrogation  based  on  their  known  identity  and
   background as non-Arab/black African  Darfuris,  but  also  mistreatment.
   According to Mr Verney and Ms Maguire,  mistreatment will  arise  because
   the  Sudanese  authorities  will  start  with  a  presumption  that  such
   returnees are allied with the rebels.  We do not find this contention  to
   be borne out by the evidence. Here we come back again to the points dealt
   with earlier in relation to involuntary returnees  and/or  failed  asylum
   seekers.   If there was a practice or pattern of  non-Arab/black  African
   Darfuris being mistreated, we believe  that  there  would  by  now  be  a
   significant number of adequately documented cases. It is now three  years
   since the Darfur conflict has erupted and over that period a vast  number
   of people have faced internal or external displacement. It is  true  that
   the UK removal figures at least do not suggest that there have been  very
   many removals of any kind from the UK (voluntarily or  involuntarily)  to
   Sudan.   We do not even know how many, if any,  of  the  forty   Sudanese
   nationals recorded as being returned by the UK in a fifteen month  period
   spanning 2004/2005 were of  Darfuri origin. Possibly most would have been
   from the South.  However, we have not heard  of  any  country  suspending
   removals to Sudan save for Egypt (for a period during 2004-2005).  So  we
   see no evidential basis for  finding  that  removals  back  to  Sudan  of
   Sudanese nationals by other countries over  the  past  three  years  have
   excluded persons of non-Arab Darfuri origin.

205. In our view this throws into  sharp  relief  the  significance  of  the
   following fact. Over the past three years there is virtually no  specific
   evidence of such  persons  facing  difficulties.  Despite  the  extensive
   inquiries by Mr Verney and Ms Maguire of relevantly  placed  individuals,
   they have only been able to point to two specific cases. We have  already
   made mention of the first: he being the individual mentioned in the  2005
   Aegis Trust report whose evidence was later  found  not  credible  by  an
   immigration judge. The second is referred to in Ms Maguire`s report under
   the sub-heading, "Evidence of detention on arrival" at page 21 and is  as
   follows:

    "The Aegis Trust is in contact with a person now resident outside Sudan
    and the UK who was returned as a failed asylum seeker from Darfur  [her
    footnote here states `[t]he circumstances  of  the  failure  to  obtain
    refugee status in the UK is immaterial for this account`]. This  person
    reports  that  he  was  detained  at  Khartoum  International  Airport,
    questioned at length on his activities in the UK and his connections to
    the rebels in Darfur and beaten when he could not  give  `satisfactory`
    information. He was eventually released and instructed to return  three
    times a week with information  about  rebels.  He  did  not  have  this
    information and having returned a couple of times only  to  be  further
    mistreated, made arrangements with a relative to leave Sudan again...".

206. As indicated  earlier,  we  cannot  agree  with  Ms  Maguire  that  the
   circumstances of this man's failure to obtain refugee status  in  the  UK
   are "immaterial" to  a  report  purporting  to  identify  "[e]vidence  of
   detention on arrival". The fact that he was returned as a  failed  asylum
   seeker indicates that his own claim for asylum was rejected. We  are  not
   told on what basis it was rejected, but if,  for  example,  he  had  been
   found by an  adjudicator  or  an  immigration  judge  to  be  lacking  in
   credibility, that would be a highly material piece of  information  about
   his story. In any event, this account is at best untested evidence. It is
   also an  account  which  on  its  face  would  normally  receive  further
   scrutiny: why, one would want to ask for example, would he have  reported
   back to the Khartoum authorities (rather than fleeing)  even  after  they
   had mistreated him when he made his first report back to  them?  We  have
   not even had a statement from this  man  which  might  have  enabled  the
   respondent to make inquiries as  to  the  extent  to  which  his  account
   tallied with what he had said to the UK authorities when here.

207. Still on the subject of specific case examples, we reiterate  here  our
   surprise that despite the Aegis Trust's` "Lives In Our Hands" 2005 report
   having been regarded as reliable evidence  by  a  number  of  bodies  and
   individuals, including Mr Verney and Ms Maguire, for the contention  that
   returnees of Darfuri origin face risk  on  return,  neither  of  the  two
   claimants out of the 26 individuals covered in the  report  who  asserted
   that they had been sent back to Khartoum have been produced as witnesses.
   One of these is a person whose  story  was  roundly  disbelieved  by  the
   Immigration Judge who heard  his  appeal  in  December  2005.  The  other
   returnee, according to the interview as recorded in the report,  was  not
   subjected to ill-treatment in Khartoum. Instead, he reported receiving  a
   beating whilst apparently still in the United Kingdom from those who were
   trying to get him onto  the  plane  (his  story  was  that  the  Khartoum
   authorities had sent him back to the UK).   Apart  from  these  two,  the
   other  individuals  featured  in  the  report  were,  like  the   current
   appellants, people claiming to be from Darfur who did not want to be sent
   to Khartoum.

208. In striking contrast to the reports of Mr  Verney  and  Ms  Maguire  we
   have the evidence given by the two Sudan experts  in  the  December  2005
   ACCORD report. We note that neither Mr Verney nor Ms Maguire disputed the
   credentials of the two experts who gave presentations to this seminar and
   we think that anyone reading their presentations in full would  at  least
   recognise their close grasp of current Sudanese affairs. Both  Mr  Verney
   and Ms Maguire did, however, seek to argue  that  the  section  of  their
   presentations dealing with risk on return  were  ill-founded.  We  cannot
   agree. It is true that neither specifically identified  the  category  of
   returnees of Darfuri origin, but their report shows close appreciation of
   the Darfur crisis and the huge extent of the displacements it has caused.
   Furthermore, both plainly understood that in the relevant  sections  they
   were looking at entry generally and  at  risks  to  returnees  generally/
   failed asylum seekers generally, and there is simply no reason to suppose
   that somehow they omitted persons of Darfuri origin  from  consideration.
   We wholly fail to understand the comment made by Ms Maguire that  it  was
   "not their job": for UNHCR protection officers the assessment of risk  on
   return is one of their principal duties. In such circumstances  we  think
   their evidence is  weighty  and,  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  of
   developments since December 2005 casting a significantly different light,
   we see no reason to adopt a different view.

209. The contention on behalf of the appellants is that persons  of  Darfuri
   origin -or at least of non-Arab Darfuri origin- would face on  return  to
   Khartoum airport a real risk of serious harm  or  treatment  contrary  to
   Article 3. Just as with the argument raised in  relation  to  involuntary
   returnees generally and failed asylum seekers generally, this  contention
   urges us to avoid rejecting it simply because we may think  there  is  no
   substantiated evidence of the existence of any  practice  or  pattern  of
   mistreatment of persons of non-Arab Darfuri origin in  Khartoum  airport.
   This contention states that it is the type of practice that would be kept
   hidden and so it is justifiable to infer its existence  from  surrounding
   circumstances.  However, in our view this contention does  not  withstand
   scrutiny.  As   already   explained   when   dealing   with   involuntary
   returnees/failed asylum-seekers, if such a practice or pattern  has  been
   going on, it is one  which  would  have  come  to  light  and  have  been
   documented. We reject in particular the arguments intended  to  establish
   that the fate of returnees said to have been detained or "disappeared" at
   the (airport) point of return would not be known about.

210. Such arguments ask us to assume  that  returnees  of  non-Arab  Darfuri
   origin said to have met with mistreatment  would  not  have  taken  steps
   before removal to Khartoum to inform family and/or friends in the  United
   Kingdom or other country from which they were returned,  when  they  were
   due to be removed and when they were due to arrive in Khartoum.  It  asks
   us to assume that if an involuntary returnee is detained  on  arrival  or
   otherwise "disappears", that family or friends in the United  Kingdom  or
   other country of departure do not tell NGO's or others that  contact  was
   lost after the due date of arrival. It also asks us to assume that  there
   are never contacts in Khartoum who have been asked to check whether  such
   persons have arrived safely and who  have  never  alerted  family  and/or
   friends in the United Kingdom etc. if they have not.

211. Such a series of assumptions is not to be  equated  with  evidence.  On
   the contrary, it is a piece of speculation that runs contrary  to  common
   sense. Ms Maguire herself expressly agreed with us  that  if  she  was  a
   person of non-Arab Darfuri origin she would seek to take steps to  ensure
   those close to her were able to check that she  had  arrived  and  passed
   through controls safely. We had  evidence  from  several  quarters  about
   anxieties felt within  the  non-Arab  Darfuri  community  in  the  United
   Kingdom about return: the 2005 Aegis Trust report is a prime example.  In
   our view the existence of such anxieties would increase such  motivation.



212. The assumptions therefore must be asking us  to  accept  that  previous
   returnees (not just from this country) were without families and  friends
   in a non-Arab Darfuri diaspora where, according to Ms Maguire,  "everyone
   knows everyone". We see no evidential basis for such an assumption.

213. There is no evidence of any barrier to communication  between  Khartoum
   and the United Kingdom.  Whether  mobile  telephones  are  available,  or
   commonly work, is beside the point. We have  no  evidence  to  show  that
   other telephone links and, indeed, postal links do not exist or  are  too
   exiguous to be relied upon. Indeed, Mr Verney's work involves him keeping
   in contact with people in Sudan.

214. We think there is force in Miss Giovannetti's closing  submission  that
   appellants  anxious  about  return  could  have   contacted   the   Sudan
   Organisation Against Torture or some other Sudanese NGO with  details  of
   their travel plans so that outside observers were primed for their return
   to Sudan.

215. Ms Maguire said in her  evidence  on  this  issue  that  even  if  such
   contact would have been made, account  had  to  be  taken  of  the  'fear
   factor', the anxiety resident non-Arab Darfuris might have about alerting
   human rights bodies or   the  authorities  themselves  about  anyone  who
   failed to make it through the airport. However, we have not seen anything
   to suggest that this has been a significant factor in relation to persons
   arrested and detained in the May 2005 Soba Aradi incidents  or  in  other
   reported incidents involving the authorities relating either to  IDPs  or
   other categories of persons.  We  do  not  see  that  anxiety  about  the
   attitude of the Sudanese authorities would in fact prevent enquiries from
   being made directly or indirectly.

216. We must also address the  alternative  argument  that  mistreatment  on
   return has not been going on up to now (because of the  small  number  of
   persons of  non-Arab  Darfuri  origin  being  involuntarily  returned  by
   countries inside and outside Europe), but that it would start  as soon as
   any returns were made.

217. In our view, even if the situation were that there have been  virtually
   no returns of persons of Darfuri origin,  the  evidence  from  the  past,
   which must be accorded weight, does not support a  conclusion  that  such
   persons would meet with risk  on  return  solely  because  they  were  of
   Darfuri -or non-Arab Darfuri - origin. We  think  it  highly  significant
   that no such practice or pattern  existed  in  respect  of  persons  from
   southern Sudan during the height of the North/South conflict.  We  recall
   what was said on this subject in the 2001 Danish Fact Finding Report.

218. It is argued that one reason why  the  authorities  in  Khartoum  would
   have a particular reason to  mistreat  a  returnee  of  non-Arab  Darfuri
   origin is that they believe that persons who have fled  abroad  may  well
   have given evidence to bodies abroad about government  atrocities,  which
   could assist the  International  Criminal  Court  to  bring  prosecutions
   against  key  figures  in  the  current  government.  In  our  view  this
   suggestion substitutes the particular for the general.  We have no doubt,
   given the evidence charting the strong international condemnation of  the
   government's handling of the armed conflict in Darfur and the  naming  of
   certain members of the Sudanese ruling elite as persons wanted for crimes
   against humanity,  that  there  would  be  a  specific  interest  in  any
   individual who had in fact  given  evidence  to  bodies  or  agencies  in
   witness of atrocities. We can easily accept that this is a  consideration
   which the  authorities  might  bear  in  mind  in  the  course  of  their
   interrogation of non-Arab Darfuri returnees at  the  airport  or  on  any
   subsequent occasion. But we cannot accept that this would  operate  as  a
   risk factor for all non-Arab Darfuri returnees.  If  there  was  such  an
   official concern  about  non-Arab  Darfuri  witnesses  to  atrocities  in
   Darfur, we would expect there to be evidence showing that persons already
   in Khartoum who have fled directly from  Darfur  have  been  arrested  or
   detained for this reason.  In this respect, the point must be firmly kept
   in mind that the  Sudanese  authorities  will  also  be  aware  that  the
   involuntary returnee will, by definition, have failed in any  claim  that
   he may have brought in a third country to be  in  need  of  international
   protection (see also paragraphs 301-302).

219. It is also submitted on behalf of the appellants that persons  of  non-
   Arab Darfuri origin who are  relatively young men of military service age
   would  face a risk on return by  reason  of  being  perceived  as  having
   already, or being likely in  the  future,  to  resist  the  Janjaweed  by
   military means. However, there is, as the Tribunal has already indicated,
   no evidence to show that non-Arab Darfuris  of  military  age  are  being
   targeted in Khartoum.  If the Sudanese authorities are not targeting such
   young men already in and around the capital, the Tribunal sees no  reason
   why they would adopt a different stance in  respect  of  those  returning
   from abroad. We note also that there was no evidence presented to  us  of
   any non-Arab  Darfuris who had fled Darfur seeking to go back to join the
   rebels.

220. It is further argued that there  is  evidence  of  the  authorities  in
   Khartoum targeting non-Arab Darfuris.  We  shall  address  that  argument
   below and explain why we reject it.

Darfuris in Khartoum proper

221. It has been argued that even if  persons  of  non-Arab  Darfuri  origin
   were to pass through airport controls without any significant difficulty,
   they would face adverse treatment in Khartoum. The first thing to note is
   that even Mr Verney and Ms Maguire have not suggested that  the  Sudanese
   government has a  policy  of  compelling  returnees  (including  non-Arab
   Darfuris) to live in IDP camps.

222. Some of the points made above also apply when considering the  Khartoum
   proper scenario, but separate examination is needed.

223. One aspect of this argument, which we deal  with  first,  is  that  the
   NSIS would place returnees under surveillance  and  would  monitor  their
   movements. It makes sense to us that persons of Darfuri origin, like  any
   other nationals of Sudan coming into Khartoum, will face further official
   attention. We accept the evidence  that  it  is  very  likely  that  such
   persons  will  soon  become  known  to  the  authorities.  Even  if   the
   authorities did not come to know directly through their own observations,
   there exists a large informer network, who, we are  prepared  to  accept,
   would see it as their job to alert the authorities to the arrival of  any
   person of non-Arab Darfuri origin. However, it is   important here not to
   confuse this evidence of government attention with  evidence  of  adverse
   government attention. In respect  of  the  latter  we  have  no  specific
   substantiated evidence and are left instead with  what  the  experts  say
   they have been told, typified by Mr Verney`s statement at paragraph 88 of
   his report: "[s]ome individuals have managed to avoid  detention  at  the
   airport, only to be picked up by the security police shortly  afterwards,
   Sudanese non-government organisation officials have  told  me".   In  the
   circumstances we do not think that evidence of this type is  good  enough
   to support a claim of real risk to an individual returnee.

224. We would emphasise that our rejection of Mr Verney`s and  Ms  Maguire's
   contentions about risk to persons of Darfuri origin in Khartoum must  not
   be read as suggesting that they are wrong in stating that, as  a  general
   proposition, non-Arab Darfuris in Khartoum, particularly those  who  have
   only  relatively   recently   arrived   from   Darfur,   face   increased
   surveillance. We accept too that a non-Arab Darfuri  who,  whether  as  a
   result of such surveillance or  otherwise,  becomes  of  serious  adverse
   attention to the authorities, may well be at risk of detention  and  ill-
   treatment, whether in a "ghost house" or otherwise.  But the evidence  is
   far from showing that there is a  real  risk  to  any  non-Arab  Darfuri,
   including any recently arrived, of being subjected to such ill-treatment.

225. It is not entirely clear whether or, if so, at what  point  a  returnee
   of Darfuri  origin  (or  indeed  any  other  returnee  holding  a  travel
   document) would be able to obtain  an  identity  card.  According  to  Ms
   Maguire's evidence, there are offices  in  Khartoum  itself  which  issue
   identity cards. We have nothing to show that identity card  documentation
   is denied to Sudanese nationals able to produce a valid  travel  document
   issued by a Sudanese Embassy and who have been able, following screening,
   to pass through Khartoum airport. But equally we have no evidence to show
   that such documentation is granted.  In the light of the complete absence
   of evidence, we shall assume that a returnee cannot  obtain  an  identity
   card simply on the strength of holding a valid travel document.

226. At the heart of the appellants' submissions in the cases before  us  is
   the contention that, in general, returnees of Darfuri origin face  having
   to live in the worst parts of Khartoum, in  the  IDP  camps  or  squatter
   areas as undocumented IDPs.  However, even assuming  such  persons  would
   not be able to obtain identity cards,  it does not seem to us  that  this
   contention is borne out by the evidence.    We  entirely  accept  that  a
   significant number of Darfuris presently in Khartoum,  being  almost  all
   persons who have fled in haste from Darfur and gone straight to Khartoum,
   may be destitute and may face no choice but to go to  areas  in  Khartoum
   where conditions are worst.  But  in  our  view  one  cannot  equate  the
   situation of failed Darfuri asylum seekers in the UK with theirs.

227. There is an important point here in our view concerning the  burden  of
   proof as regards their personal resources. The  evidence  does  not  show
   that any returnee from the UK  would,  regardless  of  circumstances,  be
   required by the authorities to live only in a camp or squatter area.  The
   likelihood of the returnee having to do so is  accordingly  part  of  the
   individual factual matrix to be established by the appellant  in  seeking
   to prove his case to the "lower" standard. A returnee  who  had  personal
   resources to enable the trip to be made to the United  Kingdom  may  very
   well have such resources to use for his support  upon  return.  A  person
   whose credibility has been so damaged as not to be  a  witness  of  truth
   will therefore be in difficulty is showing that he is  reasonably  likely
   to be devoid of funds or other help on return.

228. However, even if returnees of Darfuri origin have to be  considered  on
   the basis that they would be left with no alternative but to live in  IDP
   camps or squatter settlements, we still  do  not  consider  that  in  the
   general run of cases the conditions they would face give rise  to  either
   persecutory harm, ill  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  or  to  undue
   hardship in the context of a claim for international protection under the
   Refugee Convention. We now turn to explain why.


Conditions for IDPs in Khartoum State

229. We remind ourselves here that both Mr Verney and  Ms  Maguire  regarded
   the conditions in the  unofficial  or  semi-official  squatter  areas  as
   better than those in the IDP camps. The overall evidence on this issue is
   not clear-cut, but we are prepared to approach  matters  on  that  basis.
   Both experts also agreed that generally returnees of Darfuri origin would
   do all they could to avoid both the squatter areas and the IDP camps  but
   if they failed in this, they would first enter the squatter areas (indeed
   it was Ms Maguire's evidence that the majority of  Darfuris  in  Khartoum
   were in the squatter  areas).  Nevertheless,  for  the  purposes  of  our
   assessment of living conditions, we shall assume that  such  persons  may
   have to live in either a squatter area or an IDP camp.

230. When considering the living conditions in the  squatter  areas  and  in
   the IDP camps, we have, following Januzi, always  to  bear  in  mind  and
   examine two distinct matters. One relates to safety.  The  other  relates
   the extent to which conditions are unduly harsh or unreasonable.

231. So far as safety is concerned, it has been submitted that returnees  of
   non-Arab Darfuri origin would be at risk of being singled out or targeted
   by the police and security  forces.   Opinions  from  Mr  Verney  and  Ms
   Maguire were to this effect. However, their opinions on this  issue  were
   not in our view borne out by the evidence. To our mind  the  evidence  is
   that since the start of the Darfur crisis the authorities in  Sudan  have
   targeted only certain categories of non-Arab Darfuris  (e.g.  activists).
   The evidence does not suggest that non-Arab Darfuris generally face round-
   ups or targeting. When asked to identify evidence of such targeting,  the
   only thing Ms Maguire was able to point to was what she described as  the
   "disproportionate" number of Darfuris arrested in the course of the   May
   2005 incidents at  Soba Aradi.  However, she herself  accepted  that  her
   figures of the number of Darfuris  in  the  Soba  Aradi  camp  were  very
   different from those which had been documented by the only recent surveys
   done and we have not seen any sources which give a breakdown of  area  of
   origin for all arrestees or detainees. Even accepting, however, that  the
   number   of   Darfuris   arrested/detained   in   these   incidents   was
   disproportionate  on  this  occasion,  the  evidence  relating  to  other
   incidents does not suggest any pattern to this.

232. That neither expert was able to point us to any  satisfactory  evidence
   of a practice or pattern of arrests or detentions of non-Arab Darfuris is
   made more striking in our view by the fact  that  both  spoke  of  having
   asked a number of agencies and contacts in Khartoum about  this.   Whilst
   the responses were to say (in some cases at least) that there was such  a
   pattern, they did not identify any evidence in  support.  This  state  of
   affairs is in marked contrast to the very detailed evidence SOAT, Amnesty
   International and other groups have been able  to  assemble  relating  to
   arrests and detentions by the police  and  security  forces  in  Khartoum
   generally.

Life in squatter areas and IDP camps

233. We have before us a great deal of evidence relating to  the  conditions
   in the squatter areas and IDP camps in Khartoum. In assessing it we  have
   to bear in mind our earlier findings at paragraphs 161-170 regarding  the
   evidence of Mr Verney and Ms Maguire, which we did not find as helpful as
   we hoped because neither showed that they had always looked  at  evidence
   going the other way and had avoided exaggerated conclusions.

234. Nevertheless what both experts highlighted to us  was  that  conditions
   in IDP camps in Khartoum have been the subject of specific  attention  by
   UN bodies, including by the UN Secretary General's Representative on  the
   Human Rights  of  Internationally  Displaced  Persons,  Professor  Walter
   Kalin, in a 2006 report. This report  deals  with  the  issue  of  forced
   relocations and living conditions for IDPs in  Khartoum  State.  We  also
   have from Professor Kalin a supplement commissioned by the  Aegis  Trust.
   We asked Ms Maguire about this and other reports by international  bodies
   familiar with international human rights law norms,  in  particular  with
   the absolute prohibition on torture or inhuman or degrading treatment  or
   punishment (familiar in Europe in the form of Article 3 of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights).  She  accepted  that  neither  in  Professor
   Kalin's report nor in his  supplement  nor  in  any  other  international
   report has there been a finding  that  conditions  in  the  Khartoum  IDP
   squatter areas and camps are  sufficiently  serious  to  cross  the  high
   threshold of harm required for there to be a breach of  this  basic  non-
   derogable human right. In this regard we note that these reports  do  not
   bear out Mr Verney's apparent assessment at paragraph 91  of  his  report
   that the  conditions  facing  Darfuris  in  Khartoum  were  'inhuman  and
   degrading'.

235. The lack of any UN-related finding that conditions in the camps  and/or
   squatter areas are generally at the level of the international equivalent
   to what we in Europe refer to as the  Article  3  ECHR  standard,  is  an
   important reference point for us in having to decide the issues  in  this
   case, since it is clear from Januzi that what  we  have  to  consider  is
   whether the conditions in a place of relocation fall below the most basic
   human rights, in particular non-derogable human rights  (see  Lord  Hope,
   Januzi,  paragraph 54).

236. We recall at this point that Mr Verney`s and Ms Maguire's evidence  was
   that in general terms, albeit the living conditions in Khartoum IDP camps
   compared unfavourably with those in Darfur currently, conditions  in  the
   squatters areas and IDP camps in Khartoum were no worse than  the  living
   conditions found in other slum settlements elsewhere in Sudan or much  of
   the rest of African or other third world countries.

237. However, both argued that it was  false  to  draw  a  comparison  based
   solely on living conditions in Khartoum since non-Arab Darfuri IDPs there
   faced a combination of difficulties, not all of which related  to  living
   conditions. Living conditions in the Khartoum IDP camps could not simply,
   they said, be considered in terms of basic  standards,  for  example,  in
   terms of access to drinking water and sanitation.

238. One of the additional difficulties identified by Ms  Maguire  was  that
   Darfuris in Khartoum faced specific psychological problems arising out of
   the fact  that  many  were  victims  of  atrocities/gross  violations  of
   international humanitarian law. However, as Miss Giovannetti pointed out,
   correctly in our view, this was an aspect of the experience  of  many  of
   the IDPs in Khartoum from the south (who had fled  from  the  north/south
   civil war) and also of many  other  IDPs  in  camps  and  squatter  areas
   elsewhere in Sudan (and in the rest of Africa). Furthermore, many  people
   living in Sudan have experienced armed conflict of one  sort  or  another
   over the past 25 years. In any event we do not think that difficulties of
   this kind suffice to make unduly harsh places of safety to which  victims
   of armed conflict flee.

239. The  other  distinguishing  feature  or  additional  difficulty  in  Ms
   Maguire`s view was that returnee non-Arab Darfuris were ill-equipped  for
   city dwelling slum life, having come in the main from  rural  'sedentary'
   backgrounds as farmers. However, once again that is a feature  shared  by
   many other non-Darfuri IDPs in Khartoum  and  many  other  slum  dwellers
   elsewhere in Sudan and other parts of the world.

240. For Mr Verney the set of circumstances obtaining for  people  in  these
   camps had to be looked at in the round. Account needed to be taken of not
   just access to basic  facilities  but   also  the  ethnic  and  political
   dimensions, the government's strategy in respect of forcible relocations,
   the close attention of the police and security forces to the presence  of
   persons of Darfuri origin, their concerns  that  persons  returning  from
   abroad  may  have  given   evidence  to  bodies   in   touch   with   the
   International  Criminal  Court  and  the  implications  of  the    recent
   departures from Khartoum of southerners returning to the South.  This  is
   not intended as a full list of all the factors he mentioned.  But  it  is
   enough  to  indicate  that  he  did  not  think  there   could   be   any
   straightforward comparison with conditions facing IDPs in  IDP camps  and
   squatter areas in other parts of Sudan  or  Africa  or  other  developing
   countries.

241. So far as the  ethnic  dimension  is  concerned,  we  accept  that  the
   conflict in Darfur has featured deliberate  targeting  of  civilians  and
   that the Sudanese government bears sometimes direct, sometimes  indirect,
   responsibility for the atrocities. We accept that even  Darfuris who came
   to Khartoum in the 1980s at the time  of  the  drought  have  never  been
   accepted as  first-class Sudanese citizens by  their  fellow  countrymen,
   although it has to be said that most Darfuris, being Muslims,   at  least
   do  not  face  the  religious  animosity  directed  towards  the  largely
   Christian IDPs from the South. We are also prepared to  accept  that  the
   attitudes of the current  government  (whose  members  are  largely  from
   northern tribes) contain an element of  entrenched  racism.  However,  we
   have to  examine  what  type  of  treatment  Darfuris  actually  face  in
   Khartoum, from the authorities there as well as from the local populace.

242. We accept, as  already  noted,  that  certain  categories  of  non-Arab
   Darfuris in Khartoum have been targeted  in  the  past,  and  would  face
   targeting by the Sudanese authorities  in  the  future.  However,  if  Mr
   Verney and others are right, and the current government regard black non-
   Arab Darfuris per se as 'the enemy',  we  would  expect  to  see  a  very
   different pattern of events taking place in Khartoum than  we  have  seen
   and are seeing. We would expect to see the types  of  operations  carried
   out against Darfuri civilians in Darfur being carried out against Darfuri
   IDPs in Khartoum.  What we have seen suggests rather that it is  only  in
   relation to those black non-Arab Darfuris  who  are  connected  with  the
   rebel movements in a specific way or have other specific  characteristics
   (e.g. being an activist), that there is any targeting in Khartoum.

243.  In  our  view  the  preponderance  of  the  evidence  points  to   the
   authorities in Khartoum  largely  confining  their  adverse  interest  to
   persons connected with the rebel movement or with oppositionist groups or
   movements, not because they are persons of non-Arab Darfur origin.

244. As to the contention that there is a deliberate government strategy  of
   forced relocations, we have already explained why  we  have  reservations
   about some of the language  used  by  Mr  Verney   and  Ms  Maguire  when
   describing these: e.g. Mr Verney`s reference to the authorities trying to
   keep Darfuri IDPs constantly "on the  run".   We  accept  that  there  is
   considerable evidence that forced relocations  abusive  of  human  rights
   standards have been made from time to time,  sometimes  unaccompanied  by
   notice and sometimes leading to clashes.  It may well be that there is  a
   government strategy of  making  life  difficult  for  IDPs  and  also  of
   relocating IDPs to camps away from  the  capital.  Clearly  too,  extreme
   caution has to be exercised when  evaluating  promises  by  the  Khartoum
   authorities to adhere to the Guiding Principles on  Internally  Displaced
   Persons and give proper notice of relocation intentions.  However, we  do
   not consider that the evidence in this regard establishes that Darfuri  -
   or non-Arab Darfuri  -  IDPs  have  been  singled  out  for  any  special
   treatment. Nor do we consider that merely by virtue of being subject from
   time to time to relocations, sometimes involving force and  human  rights
   violations, means that IDPs  in  Khartoum  State  face  a  real  risk  of
   serious harm or of ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 or of unduly harsh
   conditions.

245. Another plank of  the  submissions  reliant  on  Mr  Verney's  (and  Ms
   Maguire's) written and oral evidence was that there is starting to  be  a
   further worsening of the situation for Darfuri  IDPs  in  Khartoum  as  a
   result of the significant level of departures of southern  IDPs  back  to
   the South which observers are beginning to  see.  However,  even  leaving
   aside the December 2005 ACCORD seminar experts' doubts that such  returns
   will ever happen on a large-scale basis, it is not immediately obvious to
   us why such departures  should  result  in  increased  vulnerability  for
   remaining non-Arab Darfuri IDPs. As for "safety in numbers", the  numbers
   would still be very large. One might say  that  it  is  equally  arguable
   there would be more plots to go around the remaining IDPs,  fewer  people
   competing for cheap labour work and less  pressure  on  scarce  resources
   such as water,  sanitation  and  shelters.  This  is  a  topic  requiring
   evidence to be looked at with some care.   But, leaving aside any  doubts
   of this kind, it remains that neither Mr Verney nor Ms Maguire  has  been
   able to point to any specific evidence  in  support  of  this  "increased
   vulnerability" thesis.

Medical facilities

246. Earlier when outlining the expert and background evidence, we  said  we
   would  deal  with  the  evidence  relating  to  medical  facilities  when
   examining its specific bearing on the issue of  internal relocation. That
   is what we turn next to do.

247. We have to keep to the fore here the fact that the February 2006  UNHCR
   Position paper stated at paragraph 7 that in Khartoum, "[e]specially hard-
   hit are undocumented IDPs, female-headed households and those who arrived
   in Khartoum after 1996" and includes in its closing recommendations  that
   "[d]ue attention is paid to the particular protection needs of especially
   vulnerable  asylum-seekers  from  Darfur,  such  as   female   heads   of
   households, medical cases  or  victims  of  past  persecution"  (emphasis
   added) .

248. So far as the  background  evidence  is  concerned,  this  reveals  the
   following picture. Medical services in Sudan are  covered  at  paragraphs
   5.145 to 5.164 of the respondent's COI Report on Sudan (April 2006). From
   these, we learn that average life expectancy  at  birth  for  a  Sudanese
   person was 56 years in 2003, that varying ecological  conditions  in  the
   country, poor hygiene and widespread inadequacies  of  diet  resulted  in
   high incidence of fatal infectious disease and  that,  according  to  the
   Foreign and Commonwealth Office in August  2005,  medical  facilities  in
   Sudan are not comparable to western standards.   A  number  of  observers
   commented on regional disparities in health provision.  According to  the
   World Health Organisation in April 2005, the infrastructure  network  and
   workforce in the North of Sudan were quite developed in absolute numbers,
   although up to a third of health facilities were reported not to be fully
   functional.  Services and coverage were worse in the South,  where  there
   was an absence of infrastructure, poor transport and  low  technical  and
   managerial capacity of local authorities.  Public  health  financing  was
   low and skewed towards hospital services and urban areas.   Encyclopaedia
   Britannica ("The Sudan: Administration  and  Social  Conditions"  (2004))
   considers that most of the country's  small  number  of  physicians  were
   concentrated in  the  urban  areas  of  the  North,  as  were  the  major
   hospitals.  Most trained nurses and midwives also worked  in  the  North.
   Reliefweb extracted portions from the World Health  Organisation's  April
   2004 Report "Health Services in Darfur States", which stated  that  there
   was an  acute  shortage  in  the  number  of  health  facilities,  health
   personnel and support of services in  the  three  states  of  Darfur,  as
   compared to other northern states.

249. So far as HIV-AIDS is concerned, the COIS April 2006  report  notes  at
   paragraphs 5.155-6  that a joint United  Nations  Programme  reported  in
   June 2004 that Sudan was by far the worst affected country in the  region
   [North Africa and the Middle East]. The epidemic was most severe  in  the
   southern part of  the  country.   The  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
   considered in April 2004 that no anti-retroviral therapy was available in
   Sudan through the state medical scheme but in July 2004 it advised that a
   Dr. Hamdoun, an importer of antiretroviral  drugs  in  Khartoum,  had  no
   problem importing such drugs and that supply more than met  demand.    So
   far as mental health care is concerned,  the  World  Health  Organisation
   reported in 2005 that most major initiatives  of  the  mental  healthcare
   system in Sudan were formulated in the mid-late 1990s.  There  were  only
   0.2 psychiatric beds per 10,000 population, 0.09 psychiatrists  and  0.17
   psychologists  per  100,000  population  in  2005.   Many  mental  health
   professionals including most psychiatrists were said  to  have  left  for
   other countries.  It was also recorded that since mental health  was  not
   integrated in primary care level, most of the therapeutic drugs were  not
   available at  that  level.  Although  the  WHO  considered  that  special
   attention  had  been  given  to  migrants,  the  elderly,  refugees,  the
   displaced and homeless and children, the UNHCR stated in March 2006 that,
   contrary to the WHO report, there were no special programmes in Sudan for
   the mental health of refugees.

250.  Mr  Verney`s  report  contained  a  subsection  dealing  with  medical
   facilities in Khartoum. He pointed out that  as  a  proportion  of  total
   government spending of GDP, health expenditure in Sudan has  remained  at
   very low levels even in comparison with other  developing  countries.  In
   urban areas the quality in the private  sector  is  higher  than  in  the
   government facilities, but barely accessible to the majority of people on
   grounds of cost.  The availability of health care facilities in  Khartoum
   was highly variable but generally low in  quality,  and  access  depended
   largely on the patients' wealth or that of  his  or  her  family.  Mental
   health facilities were generally very poor and  limited  in  availability
   and  non-existent  elsewhere  in  the  country.   In  IDP  camps  medical
   facilities were fragmentary and inadequate  to  basic  needs  and  mental
   health care facilities non-existent.

251. At pages 277 to 298 of the respondent's main bundle  there  are  listed
   the projects contained in the OHCA Consolidated Appeal: Sudan  Work  Plan
   2006.  Pages 299 to  313  contain  details  of  specific  Sudan  projects
   running, or due to run, in 2006.   There are  some  117  health  projects
   listed in the work plan for 2006, covering a wide range of health  issues
   in various different parts of Sudan. The project details for Project Sud-
   06/H73 (primary healthcare for internally displaced persons  in  Omdurman
   el Salaam Camp, Khartoum State) reveal that the objective of the  project
   is to provide sustainable improvement of the health status of the  target
   population in the OES Camp, to reduce morbidity and mortality and achieve
   effective mitigation of the negative affects of demolitions on the health
   status of beneficiaries.  The appealing agency is  MEDAIR.    As  of  the
   date at which the work plan was last updated (14 June 2006)  17%  of  the
   necessary funds had been covered for this project.  Ms Maguire  told  the
   Tribunal in oral evidence that a project could not begin to run until  it
   was 40% funded. In her closing submissions, Miss Giovannetti pointed  out
   that Ms Maguire produced no evidence to show  that  40%  was  the  figure
   needed before any of the relevant  projects  could  begin.  The  Workplan
   specifically stated that redevelopment projects  were  only  included  if
   they had obtained 30% funding  but  humanitarian  projects  had  no  such
   limitation.

252. Sud-06/H75 is a project proposed by what  Ms  Maguire  described  as  a
   small French NGO, aimed at improving access to basic health services  and
   health education for vulnerable families affected by demolitions and  the
   replanning process in Shikan and Al Fateh Camps,  Khartoum.    As  at  14
   June, it was funded to the tune of 22%.  Sud-06/H80 is a  project  by  an
   NGO called GHF to provide primary health services and  rehabilitation  of
   health facilitates for IDPs in Khartoum State.   Its  funding  as  at  14
   June stood at 20%.

253. The Tribunal considers that the existence of these  projects,  none  of
   which was referred to by Mr Verney or Ms Maguire in their reports,  shows
   that firm proposals are in hand to effect improvements in what it must be
   accepted is an extremely basic level of healthcare available to  IDPs  in
   Khartoum State (estimated as numbering some two  million  (see  paragraph
   123). What is also noteworthy  from  the  Work  Plan  is  the  number  of
   projects  proposed  across  the  length  and  breadth  of  Sudan,   which
   reinforces the observations made by the bodies to which we  have  earlier
   referred in this part of the determination, as to the generally low level
   of provision for healthcare in Sudan as a whole.

254. It is clear from the opinions in Januzi that medical care is  a  factor
   that may need to be considered in  determining  whether  there  exists  a
   "relocation alternative" within the country of that person's nationality.
    At paragraph 20 of the opinions, Lord  Bingham  quotes  from  the  UNHCR
   Guidelines on International Protection  of  23  July  2003.    Under  the
   heading "Economic Survival" those guidelines provide as follows:-

         "The  socio-economic  conditions  in  the  proposed  area  will  be
         relevant in this part of the analysis. If  the  situation  is  such
         that the claimant will be unable to earn  a  living  or  to  access
         accommodation, or where medical  care  cannot  be  provided  or  is
         clearly inadequate, the area may not be a reasonable alternative".

255. It is equally clear, however, that, as with other aspects  of  life  in
   the place  of  alternative  relocation,  a  person's  access  to  medical
   facilities is to be compared with the position in the appellant's country
   as a whole, rather than the United Kingdom.   This is emphasised by  Lord
   Bingham in paragraph 20 where, having quoted from the  UNHCR  guidelines,
   he finds them  "helpful,  concentrating  attention  as  they  do  on  the
   standards prevailing generally in the country of nationality".

256. Although appellants H, G and M were,  of  course,  three  of  the  four
   appellants whose cases were before the House of Lords in  Januzi,  it  is
   relevant to observe that Mr Januzi himself raised  medical  issues  as  a
   reason why he could not re-locate  from  his  home,  near  Mitrovica,  to
   another part of Kosovo such as Pristina.   His case was that it would  be
   unduly harsh, in  the  context  of  his  untreated  severe  psychological
   distress, for him to be required to live in  a  place  where  he  had  no
   family, friends or community ties.  As Lord Hope observed at paragraph 52
   of the opinions, "the submission that account  should  be  taken  of  the
   extent to which  conditions  in  Pristina  fall  below  those  which  are
   regarded internationally as acceptable was  an  essential  step  in  that
   argument".

257.  Januzi decides  that  a  relocation  alternative  in  the  country  of
   nationality is not to be ruled out because the situation in the place  of
   potential relocation lacks the basic norms of civil, political and socio-
   economic rights that are regarded as acceptable internationally.  As Lord
   Hope states at paragraph 54 of the opinions, this  does  not  necessarily
   mean that a person will fail in a claim to be regarded as  a  refugee  if
   there is no essential difference between the conditions in  the  area  of
   proposed relocation  and  conditions  in  the  rest  of  the  country  of
   nationality; it simply means that this factor is irrelevant:-

         "It is the fact that there is a difference  between  the  standards
         that apply throughout the country of the claimant's nationality and
         those that are regarded as  acceptable  internationally,  and  this
         fact only, that is irrelevant.  The fact that the  same  conditions
         apply throughout the country of the claimant's nationality  is  not
         irrelevant to the question whether the conditions in  that  country
         generally as regards the  most  basic  of  human  rights  that  are
         universally recognised - the right to life, and the right not to be
         subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment - are so bad that it  would
         be unduly harsh for the  claimant  to  have  to  seek  a  place  of
         relocation there. As Mr Rabinder Singh  QC  for  the  Secretary  of
         State  observed,  one  does  not  need  to  rely  on  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights to conclude that if conditions are  that
         bad relocation there would be unduly harsh."

258. No specific evidence  relating  to  the  state  of  medical  facilities
   available to appellants H, G or M in their home areas in Sudan  has  been
   submitted.  As is apparent from the general  evidence  regarding  medical
   facilities in Sudan, however, it cannot be assumed that the situation was
   markedly different from the overall low standard that prevails in  Sudan.
   No evidence was submitted - nor any submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
   appellants - to show that healthcare in Sudan is so bad as to fall within
   the description set out in paragraph 54 of the opinions in Januzi.

259. Nor does the evidence show, in the Tribunal's  view,  that  the  health
   facilities available in  the  squatter  areas  and  camps  for  displaced
   persons in and around Khartoum are so bad as to deprive  those  who  live
   there, not just of the  "basic  norms  of  civil,  political  and  socio-
   economic rights that are regarded as acceptable internationally" but also
   of "the most basic of human rights that are universally recognised -  the
   right to life, and the right not to be  subjected  to  cruel  or  inhuman
   treatment".  If the position were otherwise, the NGOs listed in the Sudan
   Work Plan 2006 would, we consider, be focusing their attention to  a  far
   greater extent upon those camps, in response to what would be  likely  to
   be regarded, by those NGO's at least, as a  humanitarian  crisis  amongst
   the 2 million or so people who live in these areas and camps.

260. The analysis that we have just conducted has been  in  the  context  of
   determining whether, in general terms, it would be unduly harsh to expect
   an appellant to relocate to Khartoum, if the evidence shows a  real  risk
   that the appellant may find himself having to live there  in  a  camp  or
   squatter area. Before leaving the topic of health facilities, however, it
   is useful to remind ourselves that, where an appellant bases his claim on
   a medical condition for which he is being treated in the  United  Kingdom
   and which he asserts cannot be treated at all, or as  satisfactorily,  in
   the place to which he is to be returned, the issue of whether it would be
   contrary to article 3 to remove  that  person  is  to  be  determined  by
   reference to the test expounded by the House of Lords in N v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2005]  UKHL  31.  In  essence,  that  test
   requires it to be shown that the medical condition  has  reached  such  a
   critical state that there are compelling  humanitarian  grounds  for  not
   removing the person concerned to  a  place  where  he  would  face  acute
   suffering and be unable to die with dignity. A case based  on  article  8
   must show a truly exceptional state of affairs (Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27;
   Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105).

Risk to persons of Darfuri origin

261. By way of summarising our conclusions on the proposed risk category  of
   persons of Darfuri origin, we would emphasise three particular points.

262. First of all, we do not find that persons of Darfuri  origin  generally
   will face on return a real risk to their safety: we do not consider  that
   the evidence establishes that they are being  or  would  be  targeted  on
   return to Khartoum either at the airport or subsequently. In this regard,
   we are not able to accept the underlying assumption made by Mr Verney and
   Ms Maguire that  the  Sudanese  authorities  would  employ  a  catch-all,
   blunderbuss approach to returnees of non-Arab Darfuri origin. The history
   of Sudan over recent years is such that the present Government  of  Sudan
   will be well aware that its citizens  have,  for  some  time,  sought  to
   relocate to other countries.  Until recently,  a  state  of  war  existed
   between the North and South of Sudan, as a result of which large  numbers
   fled the South.  The same is true of the conflict in the Nuba  mountains.
   The government will also be aware that, at various times, there are those
   who have fled Sudan asserting a fear based on political grounds.   Whilst
   the Tribunal accepts that, on the respondent's  own  figures,  relatively
   few people have been returned from the United Kingdom to Sudan, certainly
   in the past two or three years, we have seen no  evidence  to  show  that
   there has been an absence of such returns on the part of  other  European
   countries, or other countries to which asylum seekers and others may have
   gone.  Bearing in mind the sophisticated nature of the  Sudanese  regime,
   the Tribunal does not consider it remotely likely  that  that  regime  is
   unaware of the fact that many of those who left  Sudan  in  recent  years
   failed to secure international protection, either  because  their  claims
   were not  regarded  as  credible  or  because  in  reality  the  Sudanese
   authorities had no significant adverse interest  in  them.   It  is  also
   significant in this regard to recall that Mr  Verney  told  the  Tribunal
   that in his view a substantial number of those  claiming  asylum  in  the
   United Kingdom in the wake of the Darfur situation were doing so as (non-
   "genuine")  opportunists or, in some cases, as people who in reality were
   the persecutors, rather than the persecuted.

263. Secondly, even assuming returnees of Darfuri origin will  not  be  able
   to obtain an identity document, we do  not  think  that  people  in  this
   category generally will be compelled to live in a squatter area or an IDP
   camp.  The burden of proof is  on  an  appellant  to  show  a  reasonable
   likelihood of having to live in such a place. This will  involve  showing
   that it is not reasonably likely that the returnee of Darfuri origin will
   have any money, or access to money,  or access to  friends  or  relatives
   who may be able to assist in helping the returnee  to  establish  him  or
   herself. As Mr Verney acknowledged, there are non-Arab Darfuris living in
   Khartoum otherwise than in such areas and camps. Some amongst  those  who
   are settled in this way work in the police and  immigration  services  if
   not also in other government jobs. Such persons cannot in  any  sense  be
   described as being at the margins of society.  Their existence means that
   it cannot be assumed that returnees of Darfuri  origin  would  return  to
   Khartoum destitute and lacking in ability to make contact  with  Darfuris
   in Khartoum who are settled and who may at least be able  to  steer  them
   away from having to live in the worst areas of Khartoum.

264. Thirdly, even if we are wrong about this and so  returnees  of  Darfuri
   origin have to be considered on the basis that they would be left with no
   alternative but to live in IDP camps or squatter settlements, we still do
   not think that the conditions they would face in such places would in the
   general run of cases give rise to either persecutory harm, ill  treatment
   contrary to Article 3 or to undue hardship in the context of a claim  for
   international protection under the Refugee Convention.

265. Although straightforward comparison between living conditions for  IDPs
   in Khartoum and those for IDPs in other parts of Sudan (and Africa) would
   be over simplistic, we are not persuaded that the  specific  features  of
   the situation faced by IDPs in Khartoum,  when  properly  analysed,  give
   rise either to persecutory harm, ill treatment contrary to Article  3  or
   difficulties which are unduly harsh or unreasonable  in  the  context  of
   claims for international protection. In this regard we particularly  bear
   in mind the fact that most people in Sudan live at subsistence level  and
   that over 70% of those who live in urban conurbations  are  slumdwellers.
   Considered thus the living conditions,  even  for  non-Arab  Darfuris  in
   Khartoum who are  IDPs,  are  not  markedly  different  from  the  living
   conditions in Sudan as a whole.

Particular risk categories

266. It will be apparent from the above that we do not  accept  any  of  the
   very general or relatively general risk categories advocated on behalf of
   the appellants in this case. Accordingly our firm  view  is  that  asylum
   claims or Article 3 claims submitted  by  non-Arab  Darfuris  faced  with
   return to Khartoum should be considered on  their  individual  merits.  A
   person cannot succeed merely because he or she is an involuntary returnee
   or a failed asylum seeker or a person of conscriptable age  or  a  person
   who is of Darfuri origin or  of  non-Arab  Darfuri  origin.  However,  as
   previous Tribunal panels have done when considering  the  "relocation  to
   Khartoum" issue, we do think that the evidence  justifies  identification
   of some particular risk categories and some particular factors which  may
   be of special relevance in considering an individual  claim;  and,  given
   the voluminous amount of evidence we have been  presented  with  in  this
   case, it is appropriate that we subject this to our own  analysis  rather
   than simply adapting those identified in previous Country Guidance cases.
   It should be borne in mind that some of these risk categories may operate
   in combination so as to create a real risk, even if each one, on its own,
   would not do so.

Persons from Darfur "hotspots"

267. Both Mr Verney and Ms Maguire stated that the risk to a returnee  would
   be aggravated if the latter  would  be  as  regarded  as  coming  from  a
   "hotspot" in Darfur.  Ms Maguire  referred  to  places  regarded  by  the
   authorities as hotbeds or strongholds of rebel activity: for  example  at
   page 20 of her report she wrote:

    "As mentioned above, because the SLM/A and the JEM control large  parts
    of Darfur, and because the armed conflict is  between  rebels  and  the
    GoS, the latter perceive the civilian population of Darfur as  partisan
    to the rebels. This is especially so if the person concerned is from an
    area considered to be a rebel `stronghold`. Men of less than  40  years
    old, are suspected of being aligned with the rebel groups (sharing  the
    characteristics with the rebel leadership) and so are more likely to be
    detained for questioning".

268. Mr Verney suggested that a person whose village had  been  attacked  by
   the Janjaweed  would  as  such  be  at  risk  because  that  village  had
   necessarily been targeted.

269. The Tribunal was not given any comprehensive list  of  places  regarded
   by the witnesses as being "hotspots".  Reference was, however, made inter
   alia to West Darfur as being  such  a  spot.   The  Tribunal  finds  some
   difficulty with this aspect of the evidence. Most commentators appear  to
   regard  the  armed  conflict  in  Darfur  as  having  gradually  extended
   geographically. Most  view  the  rebel  groups  as  operating  as  mobile
   guerrilla groups rather than being attached to any fixed place. Most  too
   regard the Janjaweed incursions as extending to a terror campaign against
   the civilian population, rather than being confined solely to a  military
   operation against rebels.  It would appear from pages  3  and  4  of  the
   Aegis Report "Safe  as  Ghost  Houses"  that  even  Ms  Maguire  draws  a
   distinction between what happened during 2003, when the  Janjaweed  first
   began to be used by the Sudanese  authorities,  and  the  position  since
   2003, where the Janjaweed attacks appear, in the view of Ms  Maguire,  to
   have turned into "a concerted campaign to raid, destroy, loot,  kill  and
   rape their way across and around Darfur". We consider that  the  Sudanese
   authorities can be taken to be aware of the wide  geographical  sweep  of
   the Janjaweed and governmental operations aimed at non-Arab  Darfuris  in
   Darfur.  In the Tribunal's view it is not possible, therefore,  to  infer
   that a person whose village was attacked by the Janjaweed would, for that
   reason alone, be regarded on return to Khartoum as  a  member  or  active
   supporter of a rebel movement.

270. However, we do think,  although  not  constituting  a  risk  factor  in
   itself, that the finding of  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  a  non-Arab
   Darfuri originates from a village known to be closely associated with the
   current rebel leadership is a relevant consideration when  examining  the
   individual  merits  of  a  claim:  there  is  evidence  that  the   rebel
   leadership`s origins are known.  Hence  where  an  immigration  judge  is
   presented with credible and specific evidence regarding  the  history  of
   the particular  place  from  which  a  person  claims  to  emanate,  this
   consideration will be relevant.  Similarly, we consider it would also  be
   a relevant, albeit not necessarily decisive, consideration if the  person
   concerned  had  spent  any  significant  time  in  Chad:  as  Ms  Maguire
   emphasised, the recent flare-up between Sudan and Chad would be something
   in the minds of the immigration and security authorities in Khartoum.

Activists

271. We have already noted in a  number  of  places  evidence  showing  that
   persons in Sudan who have been involved with opposition political parties
   or movements or who have  identified  themselves  as  anti-government  by
   speaking out against the authorities would be at greater risk as a result
   of surveillance than ordinary returnees. Although the extent to which the
   regime cracks down on oppositionists appears to fluctuate,  we  think  it
   safe to infer that those who have been activists involved with opposition
   parties or movements or  who  have  spoken  out  against  the  government
   continue to constitute a current risk category (we deal separately  below
   with persons who rely on sur place activities).


Students,  merchants/traders,   lawyers,   journalists,   trade   unionists,
    teachers, intellectuals and tribal leaders

272. At paragraph 16 of his report, Mr Verney states:-

    "16.     It is not necessary to have a history of political involvement
         in the sense of party activism to be regarded as a rebel  or  rebel
         sympathiser.  The most publicised cases of arrests  outside  Darfur
         have been those of persecuted Darfur students,  community  leaders,
         traders, lawyers and others with some measure of  access  to  human
         rights bodies.  However, it is not only these most  articulate  and
         well-connected members of the  community  who  are  potentially  at
         risk.  Less prominent individuals have simply  disappeared  without
         trace."

273. It is fair  to  say  that  students  and  merchants/traders  have  been
   suggested in previous determinations of the Tribunal and the  IAT  to  be
   particularly at risk.  Reference has also been  made  in  the  background
   materials to problems faced by (at  least  politically  active)  students
   (COIS April 2006 6.42-6.45), some journalists (see e.g. COIS ibid.  6.12-
   6.13) and some trade unionists ( 6.68). The COIS 2006 report also  states
   at paragraph 6.54 that:

    "Amnesty International (AI) and the Sudan Organisation Against  Torture
    (SOAT) recorded in October and December 2004  and  January  2005,  that
    Darfuris residing in Khartoum and  other  areas  of  north  Sudan  were
    arrested and detained, apparently on suspicion of supporting the  armed
    opposition groups in Darfur...The vast majority of the  cases  reported
    by AI and SOAT involved  students,  educated  persons,  or  influential
    members of a tribe or community, such as Sheiks and Omdas...".



274. However, it seems to us that  when  analysed  in  detail  the  evidence
   about arrests and detentions does  not  demonstrate  that  all  students,
   merchants/traders, journalists,  trade  unionists  or  intellectuals  are
   being targeted but only those who  have  been  identified  through  their
   political activity or their expression of anti-government views. We  note
   too that what Mr Verney appeared to say  in  his  oral  evidence  to  the
   Tribunal was that the kinds of people he describes in paragraph 16 of his
   report are not  targeted  because  they  are,  for  example,  traders  or
   merchants but, rather, because they are more likely than others, if  they
   encounter difficulties with the authorities, to seek to  publicise  those
   difficulties via human rights  bodies.  There  is  currently  not  enough
   evidence, in our view, to treat any of these categories (save for  tribal
   leaders) as being risk categories in themselves.

275. Some light is shed by  the  Amnesty  International  list  of  political
   detainees in Sudan, set out at pages 161 to 170 of the appellants' bundle
   "B".  Although in some cases it is difficult to ascertain from  the  list
   whether one, or more than one, individual is referred  to  in  the  first
   column, it appears that in the period spanning, roughly, mid 2004 to  mid
   2005, Amnesty recorded the detention of some 330 people, in the whole  of
   Sudan.  Of these, around 160  were  arrested  in  Khartoum.   27  of  the
   Khartoum detainees (not being students) are recorded as belonging to  the
   Popular Congress.  This party, also referred to as the People's  National
   Congress or Popular National Congress Party, was founded  in  June  2000.
   According to the COI Report on Sudan  (April  2006,  page  143)  the  BBC
   reported that the Sudanese authorities arrested the leader of the Popular
   Congress and other members of that party  in  the  Spring  of  2004.   In
   September 2004, the Government of Sudan accused the party of plotting  to
   overthrow the current regime  and  there  was  a  mass  arrest  of  party
   activists - including  students  -  in  Khartoum  and  Darfur  and  tight
   security controls on the capital followed.  The leader of the  party  was
   released by the Government on 30 June 2005 but "many other members of the
   party are known or believed  to  still  be  in  detention".   Of  the  27
   Khartoum  students  specified  in  the  Amnesty  International  list   of
   political detainees, all but five are recorded as being "Popular Congress
   Student Council".  One of the five is described as a  "member  of  Darfur
   Student (sic) Association".  The purport of the list is confirmed by what
   is said at paragraphs 6.42 - 6.45 of the COIS April 2006 report.

276. At page 248 of the bundle of appellant H there is a press release of  1
   October 2004 from the Sudan Organisation Against Torture.   This  records
   the arrest on 23 September 2004 of two University of  Khartoum  students,
   both belonging to the Ma'alia tribe in Darfur, who were respectively  the
   secretary and chairperson  of  the  Darfur  Student  Association  at  the
   University of Khartoum.

277. Also highly pertinent is the evidence from  the  December  2005  ACCORD
   seminar report.  At that seminar, Dr Alizadeh and Dr Schodder, considered
   the situation of students since summer 2005. Dr Schodder stated that:-

             "Since summer, students have been targeted very much. More and
        more students from  Khartoum  University  have  been  arrested  and
        tortured. Students who were active in student unions or who were in
        contact with Darfuri students or Nuba students - various activities
        that were not in line with the official  student  movement  of  the
        regime. As in many countries, students  appear  to  be  politically
        more sensitive and more active, but there is no real development of
        new opposition forces in  any  organised  way  yet,  and  it  would
        certainly not be permitted by the regime."

278. The reference to Darfuri students is not, we consider, to be  taken  as
   suggesting that a person of  non-Arab  Darfuri  ethnicity  who  lives  in
   Khartoum will as such be persecuted if he happens to be a student  there:
   indeed Ms Maguire at one point saw being a student in Khartoum as  giving
   a Darfuri legitimacy.  Dr Schodder is referring to what  the  authorities
   would regard as subversive behaviour. Students in  Khartoum  who  make  a
   point at the present time of seeking to forge contacts with  students  in
   Darfur can only be doing so, in the authorities' eyes, in order  to  make
   some  political  statement  that  is  by  implication  critical  of   the
   government.

279. The conclusion to be drawn from this evidence  regarding  the  position
   of students is, the Tribunal finds, that a person  is  not  currently  at
   real  risk  in  Khartoum  of  being  detained  and  ill-treated  by   the
   authorities merely by reason of his being a student.  That is so, whether
   or not the student originates from Darfur.  Such a person is, however, at
   real risk  of  detention  if  that  person  is  a  member  of  a  student
   organisation that the Sudanese authorities regard  as  hostile  to  their
   interests. If a returnee was,  prior  to  leaving  Sudan,  a  student  in
   Darfur, he is likely to be questioned closely about  his  activities.  If
   the authorities have reason to believe for instance that he was a  member
   of the Darfur Students Association, ill-treatment is reasonably likely. A
   non-Arab Darfuri who has been a student in Khartoum or elsewhere in Sudan
   (outside Darfur) might also be at risk if he had been  actively  involved
   with anti-government organisations or movements. Being a student  in  one
   or more of these situations is thus a risk factor, and will  need  to  be
   weighed carefully by a judicial fact-finder, but it is not  automatically
   something that will entitle a person to refugee status in  this  country.
   Although there is less detailed evidence available, we consider that what
   we have said about students also applies to teachers (and intellectuals),
   a number of  whom feature on the list of detainees.

280. Of the 160 or so people arrested in Khartoum  as  political  detainees,
   according  to  Amnesty  International,  eight  are  described  as  tribal
   leaders.  It is difficult on the state of the evidence to  say  what  the
   level of risk is for a Darfuri tribal leader, identified as such  by  the
   authorities, residing in Khartoum. But in the event  of  any  trouble  in
   Khartoum involving non-Arab Darfuris, they seem  an  obvious  target  for
   adverse  attention.   The   Tribunal   considers   that,   in   all   the
   circumstances, it would be appropriate to conclude that such a person may
   well be at real risk.

281. The position is, however, otherwise in  relation  to  merchants/traders
   and lawyers.  Looking  at  the  column  "Occupation/Affiliation"  in  the
   Amnesty International list, it cannot be said that either of these groups
   is disproportionately represented.  In any event,  as  has  already  been
   observed, they are more likely than other groups to be able to  make  the
   fact of their detention known to the outside  world.   It  must  also  be
   borne in mind that there  is  a  large  non-Arab  Darfuri  population  in
   Khartoum that has been resident there for a considerable period of  time.
   We know from the appellants'  own  evidence  that  non-Arab  Darfuris  in
   Khartoum are employed by the government, for instance as police.  We also
   note that Mr Nourain is a non-Arab/black African Darfuri who was formerly
   a lawyer and judge, who served as an MP from 2001 to 2005 "as a member of
   the ruling party" (page 1 of his statement).  Against this background, it
   cannot be said that the Sudanese  Government  targets  non-Arab  Darfuris
   merely because they happen to have a professional qualification  or  have
   shown some aptitude for commerce.

282. There is scant evidence regarding journalists, one of whom featured  in
   the Amnesty list. The  US  State  Department  report  (2006)  notes  that
   "journalists were arrested and detained during 2005".  As  regards  trade
   unionists, paragraph 6.89 of the COIS April 2006 report  records  Freedom
   House as stating  that "the situation of activists in  Sudan  is  one  of
   concern  and  trade  unionists,  among   others,   had   been   harassed,
   intimidated, arbitrarily arrested, detained and tortured".

283. On careful consideration, therefore, we consider  that  to  the  extent
   that students, merchants/traders, lawyers, journalists,  trade  unionists
   (and intellectuals) face risk it will be because  they  come  within  the
   Activist  category  identified  earlier;  they  do  not  constitute  risk
   categories in their own right.

Risk on return for sur place reasons

284. A further risk category we were asked  to  identify  was  that  arising
   from the sur place activities of  a  national  of  Sudan  in  the  United
   Kingdom.

285. It seems to us that  asylum  claims  made  by  Sudanese  asylum-seekers
   raise two distinct, albeit sometimes interrelated,  types  of  sur  place
   claims: one concerns knowledge on the part of the Sudanese authorities of
   activities undertaken in the UK; the other concerns  knowledge  on  their
   part - in at least some detail - of facts about a person's asylum  claim.
   We shall deal with these separately.

286.     (1) Sur  place  activities.  Sur  place  activities,  as  they  are
   sometimes called, can take a variety of forms: for example, presence at a
   demonstration ostensibly held to complain about  a  foreign  country;  an
   asserted connection with a group or body that  is  said  to  evince  some
   hostility to that country but about which little or nothing is known;  or
   leadership of, or other strategic or high-level involvement with, a  body
   that is shown  to  be  putting  serious  pressure,  whether  directly  or
   indirectly, on the government of a foreign country.

287. In addition to assessing precisely what is being  asserted  by  way  of
   sur place activities, the motivation of the person engaging  in  them  is
   also likely to be highly relevant.  The  leading  case  continues  to  be
   Danian v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1999] EWCA Civ 3000.
    In that case, the Court of Appeal held that a person may  have  a  well-
   founded  fear  of  persecution   for   a   Refugee   Convention   reason,
   notwithstanding that he or she has cynically manufactured that  state  of
   affairs by engaging in opportunistic activities in the country of claimed
   asylum.  However, paragraph 28 of the  judgment  of  Brooke  LJ  deserves
   particular scrutiny.  In that paragraph, he quoted from a letter  written
   to the appellant's solicitors by the Deputy Representative in the  United
   Kingdom of the United Nations High Commissioner  for  Refugees.    Having
   found that, in the opinion of UNHCR,  the  legal  position  was  as  just
   stated, the letter continued as follows:

         "We realise that this may encourage the misuse of the asylum system
         by persons who, without  having  real  protection  needs,  want  to
         create    a    refugee     claim     for     themselves     through
         irresponsible/opportunistic actions.   This  consideration  is,  no
         doubt, an important one, as the misuse of  the  asylum  system  may
         eventually be detrimental to the interests  of  bona  fide  asylum-
         seekers and genuine refugees.  For this  reason,  UNHCR  would  not
         object to a more stringent evaluation of the well-foundedness of  a
         person's fear  of  persecution  in  cases  involving  opportunistic
         claims.


         In this connection, it should be borne in mind  that  opportunistic
         post-flight activities will not necessarily create a real  risk  of
         persecution in the claimant's home  country,  either  because  they
         will not come to the attention of the authorities of  that  country
         or because the opportunistic nature  of  such  activities  will  be
         apparent to all, including to those authorities."

288. Brooke LJ held that this letter "correctly sets out the guidance  which
   should be followed by appellate authorities and courts  which  are  faced
   with an issue of this kind".   Paragraph 28 of his judgment concludes  as
   follows:-

         "I wish to end this judgment by saying that nothing in it should be
         read as giving any kind of green light to bogus asylum-seekers.  If
         the UNHCR's guidance is followed, in the vast majority of cases  of
         the type I have been considering  the  claim  for  asylum  will  be
         peremptorily dismissed without any real difficulty.  It is only  in
         what  Lee  J  in  [Mohammed  v   Minister   for   Immigration   and
         Multicultural Affairs [1999] FCA 868 (Federal Court of  Australia)]
         describes as an extraordinary case that a  genuine  entitlement  to
         protection from refoulement may arise, and in such a case the claim
         should be tested on the principled basis I have  set  out  in  this
         judgment.  It should not be rejected peremptorily on a  basis  that
         appears to have no sound foundation in international law".

289. It is often argued before this Tribunal that regimes of countries  from
   which asylum-seekers most frequently come to these shores are  inherently
   paranoid in nature and will not  scruple  to  distinguish  between  those
   returning failed asylum-seekers who have engaged in sur place  activities
   in the United Kingdom  as a result of genuine  and  entrenched  hostility
   towards that regime and those who have engaged in such activities  as  an
   opportunistic device to enhance their chances of  being  able  to  remain
   here.   However, what the judgments in Danian make  clear  is  that,  far
   from being accepted uncritically, such an assertion must be supported  by
   cogent evidence.

290. In the light of these observations, we turn first of  all  to  consider
   whether and, if so, to what extent, activities undertaken in  the  United
   Kingdom which might broadly be described as expressing opposition to  the
   authorities in Sudan may lead to a real  risk  of  persecution  or  other
   serious harm upon arrival of the person concerned in Khartoum.  In  doing
   so we must inevitably bear in mind our  earlier  findings  rejecting  the
   contention that there is a  general  risk  on  return  to  failed  asylum
   seekers, including those of Darfuri or non-Arab Darfuri origin.

291. We recall first of all what was  said  about  political  activities  in
   exile by Dr Alizadeh in the December 2005 ACCORD seminar. He stated:


    "Of course, the Sudanese government  observes  activities  of  Sudanese
    nationals in Europe.  Each  consulate  or  embassy  has  at  least  two
    security officers who deal with intelligence  information.  Each  event
    that is related to Sudan is attended by people  from  the  embassy  who
    observe and report - not  to  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  but
    directly to their headquarters in  Khartoum.  The  security  apparatus,
    consisting of both internal security and intelligence service, monitors
    the activities of Sudanese citizens abroad."

292. We have noted elsewhere the June  2006  American  University  of  Cairo
   report`s references to Sudanese government officials monitoring the  sit-
   in in Cairo by Sudanese asylum-seekers.

293. Whilst neither Mr Verney nor Ms Maguire`s evidence dealt  significantly
   with the issue of sur place activities, both their reports did  emphasise
   the sophisticated  nature  of  the  Sudanese  security  and  intelligence
   services and the fact, which we also accept, that  the  NSIS  maintain  a
   special desk of its own at the Sudanese Embassy in London.  Ms  Maguire's
   evidence  highlighted,  at  page  17  of  her  report,   the   particular
   sensitivity of the Government of Sudan towards the United Kingdom and the
   United States of America due to  the  negotiations  at  the  UN  Security
   Council regarding Darfur and the  imposition  of  sanctions.   Those  two
   countries have been portrayed in the local press as threatening to invade
   Sudan and have been referred to as "Crusaders".  As a result "people from
   Darfur and/or those Sudanese who speak out about the situation there  are
   likely to be targeted for detention  and  punitive  treatment  if  it  is
   considered that they have given information to the  'Crusaders'".   Later
   on the same page, Ms Maguire pointed out that the UN's High Commissioner
   for Human Rights has stated that there is a stark difference between  the
   latitude granted by the Government of Sudan for civil  society  capacity-
   building and the government's reaction  "to  people  speaking  out  about
   human rights concerns or being suspected of having any  affiliation  with
   the rebel movements".

294. Although we were  unable  to  place  any  significant  reliance  on  Mr
   Nourain`s evidence, it is important to recall  that  his  written  report
   highlighted the story he had been told by a  Sudanese  official   that  a
   returnee had been shown by that official, on return to Khartoum, a  video
   of the individual attending a demonstration outside Sudan.  The  official
   had stopped the video at a point  where  the  individual  was  apparently
   shown on the video and had asked that individual if  he  was  the  person
   depicted.  The latter had  been  unable  to  say  anything.   Mr  Nourain
   believed that he had been told that about  this  sometime  in  2002.   In
   cross-examination, Mr Nourain was asked whether a person who had not been
   involved in demonstrations, and who had no activity  with  rebel  groups,
   would be at risk on return.  The witness replied  that  if  the  returnee
   were from a Massaleit, Fur, Zaghawa, Berti or other  tribe  from  Darfur,
   then he would be at  risk,  whether  or  not  he  had  been  involved  in
   politics.  It would be better to send such a person  to  somewhere  other
   than Sudan.   Asked if he had been told what had happened to  the  person
   who had been shown a video depicting that individual in demonstration, Mr
   Nourain replied that he had not.  He  had,  however,  been  told  by  the
   official that they had "power" and "were everywhere".   In  answer  to  a
   question from the Tribunal, the witness repeated that a returnee would be
   regarded  as  being  "anti-government"  whether  or  not  he   had   been
   politically involved.

295. As has already been said, the Tribunal does not regard the evidence  of
   Mr Nourain as being reliable in any material respect.   His  story  about
   being told of a returnee being shown a video of a demonstration in  which
   that person is said to have featured is no more than  a  single,  vaguely
   sourced, anecdotal remark from as long ago  as  2002.   We  know  nothing
   about the nature of the individual concerned, nor of  the  nature,  size,
   location or purpose of  the  alleged  demonstration.    It  is  also  not
   credible that, although Mr Nourain claimed to have been told this  story,
   he knew nothing of what was supposed to have happened to  the  individual
   in question.  Indeed, Mr Nourain told the Tribunal that he has never  met
   someone who has been deported to Sudan.

296. Nonetheless we have earlier  explained  that  we  have  approached  our
   assessment of the risk to the  appellants  on  the  basis  that  includes
   certain activities in the United Kingdom. The question thus  arises,  how
   are we to evaluate this type of evidence  in  these  cases  and  that  of
   others who rely in whole or in part on sur place activities?

297.  Immigration  judges  are  frequently  faced  with  the  production  of
   photographs of an appellant  who  is  said  to  be  demonstrating  (often
   outside  the  London  embassy  of  the   country   of   the   appellant's
   nationality), in connection with the submission  that,  as  a  result  of
   attending that demonstration,  the  appellant  is  likely  to  have  been
   photographed by embassy staff or security operatives of  the  country  in
   question.  But even before one brings to bear  the  careful  scrutiny  of
   such evidence that  the  Danian  principles  require,  it  is  manifestly
   difficult to see how a photograph of members of a crowd of  demonstrators
   is likely to lead to the authorities at an  airport  in  the  appellant's
   country of nationality identifying the appellant as  a  person  who  took
   part in the demonstration.  Even in the unlikely event that they would be
   able to do so, however,  the  appellant  would  have  to  produce  cogent
   evidence that they would for that reason be reasonably likely  to  regard
   him as more than an apolitical opportunist.

298.  Immigration  judges  are  also  familiar  with  letters  produced   by
   appellants, which  purport  to  come  from  United  Kingdom  branches  of
   resistance armies or political organisations active (or formerly  active)
   in the appellant's country of nationality. Such letters are often  highly
   problematic. Their authors rarely appear before the Tribunal to give oral
   evidence and it is often difficult to ascertain whether the  organisation
   in  question  exists  in  any  meaningful  way,  let  alone  whether  the
   government of the country concerned is reasonably likely to be interested
   in its activities.

299. On  the  evidence  before  us,  we  do  not  consider  that  sur  place
   activities in the United Kingdom will put a Sudanese citizen at real risk
   on return unless those activities are reasonably likely to be regarded by
   the Sudanese government as being significantly harmful to its  interests.
   We say this based on  the  evidence  in  the  Danish  2001  Report  about
   returnees to Sudan at the time when Sudan faced  international  criticism
   about the war in the South (paragraphs 131 and 181) and the  government's
   awareness that some of its citizens may  say  critical  things  about  it
   whilst abroad in  an  attempt  to  secure  a  permanent  residence  there
   (paragraph 262). The precise nature of the risk, if any, from  sur  place
   activities will need to be considered on a case by case basis, bearing in
   mind that there is no evidence of which we have been made aware that  the
   Sudanese authorities are unable to see opportunistic activities conducted
   abroad for what they are (see above).

300. The Tribunal wishes to record that it has  not  been  referred  to  any
   evidence about the nature  and  extent  of  the  activities  of  Sudanese
   intelligence  officials  specific  to  the  United  Kingdom  beyond   the
   existence of an NSIS desk at the Sudanese Embassy in London.

301. (2) Detailed knowledge of asylum claim etc. made in the  U.K.  We  turn
   to the second aspect of sur place claims made in the context of claims by
   Sudanese asylum-seekers, relating to  knowledge  of  their  asylum  claim
   beyond the mere fact or inference that they have made such  a  claim.  We
   have dealt earlier with  arguments  based  on  the  Sudanese  authorities
   perceiving involuntary returnees adversely simply because they  would  be
   assumed to be failed  asylum  seekers,  including  in  particular  failed
   asylum seekers of non-Arab Darfuri origin. But in the case of  the  three
   Sudanese appellants who were before the House of Lords in Januzi,  it  is
   asserted that, simply by virtue of the high profile given to such  cases,
   the Sudanese authorities are likely to be aware  of  the  nature  of  the
   asylum claims made beyond the mere knowledge that a claim has been  made.
   The authorities would thus know that appellant G claimed that his  family
   had links with the SLM and that appellant M had claimed involvement  with
   the SLA in Sudan whilst in that country.

302. These assertions are speculation. We doubt whether  Sudanese  officials
   are in the habit of  reading  United  Kingdom  law  reports,  even  those
   relating to the House of Lords. But even if they are, the assertions lead
   nowhere. For if one assumes that the Sudanese authorities have access  to
   the opinions in Januzi, it is also plain that those authorities  will  be
   aware that the claims of appellant G and appellant M were not found to be
   credible, applying the lower standard of proof by which appeals  of  this
   kind are judged in the United Kingdom.   Given  the  dearth  of  evidence
   regarding difficulties faced by returning failed asylum  seekers,  we  do
   not accept that the Sudanese authorities are likely to regard appellant G
   or appellant M (or anyone in a similar position) as other than  a  person
   who has tried to gain a better life in the United Kingdom.

303. In  this  connection  we  remind  ourselves  of  what  we  recorded  at
   paragraphs 132-133    as being said by Drs Alizadeh and Schodder  at  the
   December 2005 ACCORD seminar.

304. When asked about those passages, Mr Verney pointed out that a  returnee
   would be under surveillance and would not be able to engage in  political
   activities.  Mr Verney regarded that as  a  serious  restriction  of  the
   person's rights.  Where, however,  a  returnee,  such  as  those  in  the
   present appeals, has shown no interest in political affairs whilst in the
   Sudan, and no genuine, or at  any  rate  significant,  interest  in  such
   matters whilst abroad, the Tribunal considers that  the  observations  of
   Drs Alizadeh and Schodder represent the truth of what will happen in  the
   case of a returnee of Darfuri origin.

Gender

305. It appears to be common ground that very few  Sudanese  asylum  seekers
   are female.  A married woman needs the permission of her husband in order
   to leave Sudan.  Ms Maguire said in evidence that  a  returning  Sudanese
   female to Khartoum, arriving without a  male,  would  be  regarded  as  a
   "peculiar person".  It would be  assumed  that  she  had  left  with  her
   husband. We accept the basic thrust of  Ms  Maguire's  evidence  on  this
   issue; namely that  the  Sudanese  authorities  would  not  be  adversely
   interested in a female returnee in her own right.  Whilst  she  would  be
   likely to be questioned, the Tribunal does not consider that, unless  the
   authorities had real grounds for believing that the woman in question was
   in any way involved with a man  in  whom  they  had  significant  adverse
   interest, she would  suffer  serious  harm,  either  at  the  airport  or
   afterwards. Of the 330 or so  political  detainees  recorded  by  Amnesty
   International (see above), it appears that very few are female.  None  of
   the appellants in the present appeals is female.

306. We  note  that  the  February  2006  UNHCR  Position  paper  stated  at
   paragraph 7 that in Khartoum,  "[e]specially  hard-hit  are  undocumented
   IDPs, female-headed households and those who arrived  in  Khartoum  after
   1996" (emphasis added) and includes in its closing  recommendations  that
   "[d]ue attention is paid to the particular protection needs of especially
   vulnerable  asylum-seekers  from  Darfur,  such  as   female   heads   of
   households, medical cases  or  victims  of  past  persecution"  (emphasis
   added). Although the paper does not cite evidence  in  support,  in  this
   instance we think there is such evidence: we noted earlier that the Rapid
   Assessment Survey findings on economic activity in the camps and squatter
   areas commented: "It is no surprise that female headed  households  (FHH)
   are most vulnerable in terms of access to income, as  data  reveals  that
   the higher the ration of FHH in an  area,  the  higher  a  percentage  of
   household reporting little or no income".

307.  However,  we  have  explained  earlier  that  we  do  not  think  that
   involuntary returnees of Darfuri origin, male or female,  would  normally
   find themselves with no alternative but to live  in  an  IDP  camp  or  a
   squatter area. However, if in the particular circumstances of a case this
   were considered to be  a  real  possibility,  then  we  accept  that  the
   circumstances of a female returnee who would  on return be a female  head
   of household living  in  a  camp  or  squatter  area  would  require  due
   scrutiny.

308. We emphasise two matters. First, for a person to succeed in  an  asylum
   or Article 3 claim on the basis of one of more of  the  above  particular
   risk categories, he or she will need to give credible evidence  of  their
   personal history and circumstances. Someone who  has  failed  to  give  a
   credible account in material particulars cannot be assumed to fall within
   any of these categories. On the other hand,  if  a  person  has  given  a
   credible account, it will be necessary to consider his or her position in
   relation to the above categories or factors with some care,  taking  into
   account that  his  circumstances  have  to  be  considered  cumulatively.
   Secondly, we emphasise what  is  said  at  paragraph  266  regarding  the
   consequences of a combination of risk factors in Sudan.


Summary of conclusions

309. The Tribunal's conclusions as to return to Khartoum are as follows.

           1)  The  fact  that  a  returnee   has   unsuccessfully   sought
              international protection in the United Kingdom is  likely  to
              be known to the Sudanese authorities,  either  by  way  of  a
              generalised assumption (based upon his documentation) or as a
              result of the questioning which he is likely  to  receive  at
              the airport from  the  immigration  authorities.  However,  a
              person will not  as  such  be  at  real  risk  on  return  to
              Khartoum, either  at  the  airport  or  subsequently,  simply
              because he or she is  an  involuntary  returnee  of  Sudanese
              nationality (paragraphs 172-182).


           2) A Sudanese national will not be at risk on return to Khartoum
              either at the airport or subsequently merely  because  he  or
              she is a failed asylum-seeker. Although the  fact  of  having
              claimed asylum (and having spent time in the UK)   is  likely
              to be known to the Sudanese authorities there,  the  evidence
              does not suffice to show that this would make him or her  the
              subject of adverse attention (paragraphs 183-186).

           3) A person who may be eligible for military service will not be
              at risk on return for that reason alone, even if he or she is
              or would be perceived as being a  draft  evader  or  deserter
              (paragraphs 187 to 194).


           4) A person will not be at risk on return to Khartoum either  at
              the airport or subsequently solely because he or  she  is  of
              Darfuri origin or non-Arab Darfuri  origin.  Neither  at  the
              airport or subsequently will such a person face a  real  risk
              of being  targeted  for  persecutory  harm  or  ill-treatment
              merely for that reason  (paragraphs 195 to 220).

           5) The evidence does not show that any returnee of either of the
              origins  described in sub-paragraph (4) will,  regardless  of
              their personal circumstances, have no option but to  live  in
              an IDP camp or a squatter area, if returned from  the  United
              Kingdom to Khartoum. It  has  not  been  suggested  that  the
              Sudanese authorities have a policy of requiring a returnee of
              either of the origins  described in sub-paragraph (4)  to  go
              and live in IDP camps or squatter areas. The burden of  proof
              is on the appellant to show a reasonable likelihood of having
              to live in such a place. This will involve showing that it is
              not reasonably likely that the returnee will have any  money,
              or access to money, or access to friends or relatives who may
              be able to assist in helping the returnee to establish him or
              herself (paragraphs 221-228).

           6) But even if a such a  person  shows  that  it  is  reasonably
              likely he or she  will  end  up  in  such  a  camp  or  area,
              conditions there, though poor, are  not  significantly  worse
              than the subsistence level existence in which people in Sudan
              generally live. Applying the principle set out in Januzi, the
              conditions in such camps or areas are not generally  such  as
              to amount to unduly harsh conditions (paragraphs 229-245).

           7)  Health  facilities  in  the  camps  and  squatter  areas  of
              Khartoum are, compared with the provision of such  facilities
              in Sudan as a whole, not as bad as to  deprive  those  living
              there of the most basic of human rights that are  universally
              recognised. A  person  who  bases  his  claim  on  a  medical
              condition for which he is being treated in the UK must do  so
              by reference to the article 3 test espoused by the  House  of
              Lords in N or show truly exceptional  circumstances  contrary
              to article 8 (paragraphs 246-260).

           8)   Sub-paragraphs  (1)-(7)  above  deal   with   the   general
              assessment of  risk  and  of  likely  conditions  on  return.
              However we do think that there will be  persons  who  may  be
              able to show  that  to  return  them  to  Khartoum  would  be
              contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under either the
              Refugee Convention or Article 3 of the ECHR or  both  because
              of particular risk factors arising in their case:

              i.  The fact that a person of non-Arab Darfuri origin is  from
                 one of the villages or areas of Darfur which are "hotspots"
                 or "rebel strongholds" or whose village has been raided  by
                 the Janjaweed and/or government forces would not in  itself
                 give rise to a real risk of persecutory harm,  although  it
                 would be a significant factor when assessing risk on return
                 if, for example, he was from one the  villages  from  which
                 the current rebel leaderships come or if he has spent  some
                 time recently in Chad (paragraphs 267-270).


             ii.  However,  persons  whose  conduct  marks   them   out   as
                 oppositionist or anti-government activists remain a current
                 risk category. Persons in this category  may  include  some
                 (but  certainly  not  all)   students,   merchants/traders,
                 lawyers,  journalists,  trade   unionists,   teachers   and
                 intellectuals. Such conduct may take the form  of  being  a
                 political opponent of the government  or  of  speaking  out
                 against the government. It may also take the form of  being
                 a member of a student organisation that  is  allied  to  an
                 opposition party or that is  opposed  to  the  government's
                 policies (paragraphs 271-283).


            iii. Those who have been tribal leaders of Darfuri tribes whilst
                 in Sudan are also likely to  be  at  real  risk  on  return
                 (paragraph 280).


             iv. Not all  sur  place  activities  conducted  by  a  Sudanese
                 citizen, whilst in the United Kingdom, will give rise to  a
                 real risk on return. Whilst the  fact  that  a  person  has
                 engaged in such activities may become known as a result  of
                 questioning,  if  not  through   the   work   of   Sudanese
                 intelligence agents, the authorities are reasonably  likely
                 to be concerned only about activities which they regard  as
                 significantly harmful to their interests and  will  not  be
                 concerned about a person who is in  reality  an  apolitical
                 opportunist. Nor will mere knowledge on  the  part  of  the
                 Sudanese authorities about  at  least  some  details  of  a
                 Sudanese asylum-seeker's claim  (e.g.  following  publicity
                 about a high-profile case) suffice (paragraphs 286-304).


              v. A female returnee will not be at real risk unless there  is
                 reason to believe her to be associated with a man who is of
                 adverse interest to the authorities.  However  if  a  woman
                 shows that there is a reasonable likelihood that  she  will
                 be returned as a female head of  household  to  live  in  a
                 squatter area or IDP camp, the circumstances  of  her  case
                 may call for consideration as to whether  they  would  give
                 rise to treatment contrary to Article 3 or  undue  hardship
                 (paragraphs 305-308).



Our assessment of the appellants' individual cases

Appellant H

310. The facts of the case of appellant H are, as has  already  been  noted,
   set out at paragraphs 35 to 37 of the opinions in Januzi (see paragraph 5
   of this determination).  In his closing submissions, in  particular,  but
   also to an extent in his skeleton argument,  Mr Mahmood,  on  behalf  of
   appellant H, seeks to advance a proposition that does not appear to  have
   been put to the Court of Appeal or the House of Lords.  This is that  the
   respondent is said to have accepted "from the outset [that  appellant  H]
   could not have sought to  internally  relocate  when  he  was  in  Sudan"
   (paragraph 5 of  the  closing  submissions).   Reliance  is  placed  upon
   paragraph 24 of the judgments in E and Another v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
   1032 that "the nature of the test  of  whether  an  asylum  seeker  could
   reasonably have been [emphasis supplied] expected to have moved to a safe
   haven  is  clear.   It  involves  a  comparison  between  the  conditions
   prevailing in the place of habitual residence and those which prevail  in
   the safe haven, having regard to the impact that  they  will  have  on  a
   person with the characteristics of the asylum seeker".  Reference is also
   made by Mr Mahmood to paragraph 7 of the opinions in Januzi,  where  Lord
   Bingham, having noted the fact that the Refugee Convention does not refer
   expressly to the "relocation alternative", said:-

         "But the situation  may  fairly  be  said  to  be  covered  by  the
         causative condition to which reference has  been  made:  for  if  a
         person is outside the country of his  nationality  because  he  has
         chosen to leave that country and seek asylum in a foreign  country,
         rather than move to a place of relocation within  his  own  country
         where he would have no well-founded fear of persecution, where  the
         protection of his country would be available to him  and  where  he
         could reasonably be expected to relocate, it can properly  be  said
         that he is not outside the country of his nationality  owing  to  a
         well-founded fear of being persecuted for a Convention reason".

311. Mention is made in Mr Mahmood's closing  submissions  to  the  Canadian
   case  of  Thirunavukkarasu  v  Canada   (Minister   of   Employment   and
   Immigration) (1993) 109 DLR (4th) 682I, referred to in paragraphs  8  and
   12 of the Januzi opinions, which concerned the  question  of  whether  it
   would be unduly harsh to expect a person who is being persecuted  in  one
   part of their country to move to another less hostile part of the country
   "before seeking refugee status abroad".  The use of  the  past  tense  in
   paragraph 91 of the UN Handbook (cited at paragraph 7 of the opinions  in
   Januzi) is relied upon.  The point which is sought to be advanced appears
   to be as follows:  the fact that appellant H could not seek  to  relocate
   whilst he was in Sudan affects the general approach to  the  question  of
   whether it would be unreasonable for appellant H to relocate to  Khartoum
   and, in particular - contrary to what the House of Lords held in Januzi -
   the comparison to be  drawn  in  determining  that  question  is  between
   conditions in Khartoum and those  in  the  "safe  haven"  of  the  United
   Kingdom.

312. Paragraphs 7 to 13 of the adjudicator's determination in the appeal  of
   appellant H record  that  the  respondent's  basic  contention  was  that
   appellant H was not from Darfur at all.  The only reference to the aspect
   upon which Mr Mahmood  now  attempts  to  place  such  importance  is  at
   paragraph 12 of the determination.  Here  the  adjudicator  set  out  the
   respondent's submissions, notwithstanding the latter's  disbelief  as  to
   the credibility of the appellant's  account.  The  respondent  considered
   that there was no evidence that members of the appellant's tribe would be
   at risk of persecution on the basis of ethnicity  alone  in  an  area  of
   Northern Sudan:-

         "Although the appellant could not have relocated at the time of his
         alleged problems due to difficulties with movement, on  his  return
         to Sudan he would not have  to  return  to  Darfur.   He  would  be
         returned to Khartoum from whence he could move to another  area  in
         Sudan."

313. In his written statement, the appellant described his home  village  of
   Uruoo being attacked and his moving to Taweela Village,  which  was  also
   attacked.  It was during that second attack that the  appellant's  mother
   was killed; his father had been killed in the earlier raid on Uruoo.  The
   appellant then went to Al-Fhyria Village where  he  "saw  an  agent"  and
   "gave the agent six million Sudanese Pounds.  This money was given to  me
   by my father before he died.  I then went to Port Sudan by lorry  on  the
   same day".   At Port Sudan, the appellant boarded a ship.

314. It is difficult to see how the matter recorded in paragraph 12  of  the
   adjudicator's determination can  be  regarded  as  a  concession  by  the
   respondent that  appellant H could at no  time  have  relocated  to  some
   other part of Sudan, before he left by  ship.   Neither  the  appellant's
   statement nor his interview record suggests that he tried and  failed  to
   seek internal relocation. According to the interview, after  the  killing
   of his mother he "ran and I found the [people] smuggler.  He told me when
   he met me he told me (sic) he would take me to a safe place" (q.71).  The
   journey to Port  Sudan  was  achieved  by  lorry.   The  lorry  was  not,
   according to the appellant, stopped at any checkpoints.   Asked  if,  had
   he stayed in Port Sudan, he would have been at risk from  the  Janjaweed,
   the appellant replied "I don't know whether they would have killed me  or
   not.  I am scared for my life there as well as here"  (q.75).  In  short,
   the Tribunal does not accept that the respondent  formally  conceded  the
   impracticability of  appellant  H  relocating  when  in  Sudan;  or  that
   appellant H's own evidence so suggested.

315. But, even if we are wrong, the Tribunal does not  consider  that  there
   is any merit in Mr Mahmood's submissions on this issue.  Nowhere  in  the
   opinions in Januzi is there a statement that the test to  be  applied  in
   determining the reasonableness of internal relocation  differs  according
   to whether a person did, or did not, have a means of access to the  place
   of relocation before that person left the country of his nationality.  We
   have already noted at paragraph 148 the  emphasis  placed  by  both  Lord
   Bingham and Lord Hope on the "context of return". The reliance sought  to
   be placed upon the use, in various places, by various courts,  of  tenses
   in their judgments and opinions, risks distorting the basic points  being
   made in those cases.  The essential task of a court  or  tribunal  is  to
   determine whether a person falls within the definition in  Article  1A(2)
   of the Refugee Convention by reason of a well-founded fear of persecution
   as at the date upon which the assessment falls to be carried out.  It  is
   noteworthy that the verbs in Article 1A (2) are entirely in  the  present
   tense.  Furthermore, there is no indication at all in paragraphs 15 to 19
   of Lord Bingham's opinion in Januzi, where he sets out five  reasons  for
   preferring the Court of Appeal test in E and Others to the  "Hathaway/New
   Zealand Rule", that supports the drawing of a distinction between, on the
   one hand, a person who can be sent from the United Kingdom to a place  of
   relocation within his country of nationality, but who  was  not  able  to
   access that place whilst in the country of nationality and, on the other,
   a person who could have done so.  It is particularly noteworthy that,  at
   paragraph 17, Lord Bingham derives  assistance  from  the  provisions  on
   internal protection contained  in  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC.  These
   provide that, as part of the assessment of the application  for  internal
   protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in  need
   of international protection:-

         "if in a part of the country of origin  there  is  no  well-founded
         fear of being persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious  harm
         and the applicant can [emphasis supplied] reasonably be expected to
         stay in that part of the country".

316. The fifth reason given  by  Lord  Bingham,  at  paragraph  19,  applies
   equally to both the types of cases to which we have  just  referred  (see
   paragraph 145 of this determination).

317. We would reiterate what we said earlier, in our analysis of  the  legal
   framework, that, whilst it may be relevant in deciding a particular  case
   to have regard to whether a person sought to avail  himself  of  internal
   relocation, the test is whether return would give rise to a current  real
   risk. The Tribunal accordingly rejects the submissions made on behalf  of
   appellant H, insofar as these concern any historic inability on his  part
   to access Khartoum from Darfur. In the  circumstances  of  appellant  H's
   case, that inability does not materially advance his claim.

318. The Tribunal turns now  to  the  application  to  appellant  H  of  our
   general findings regarding Darfur claimants.   As regards risk on return,
   appellant H does not have the characteristics of a person who would be at
   real risk.  We so find, examining the risk factors  we  have  identified,
   both individually and cumulatively (as we have also done in the cases  of
   appellants G and M). He is a 33 year old man in apparently  good  health.
   There is no evidence whatsoever of his having any  political  involvement
   whilst in Sudan, including involvement with rebel groups.   There  is  no
   evidence to show a reasonable likelihood that  the  Sudanese  authorities
   would regard him as a rebel by reason of the location and timing  of  the
   raids in which members of his family died.   He  was  found  "not  to  be
   politically active" in the case study on him in the report of  the  Aegis
   Trust.  Paragraph 37 of the opinions in Januzi records the same  finding.
   Those comments and findings are reasonably likely to be available to  the
   Sudanese authorities.  His account described in the Aegis Trust  document
   makes no specific criticism of the Government of Sudan.

319. Appellant H has been in contact with the Union of the People of  Darfur
   in the UK and N. Ireland in order to obtain written confirmation that  he
   comes from Darfur. The Tribunal has before it a letter  from  that  Union
   entitled "To whom it may concern" and written by a Mr Mohamad Noral,  who
   styles himself the General Secretary of that Union. The UDP  is  said  to
   have been created in November 2003 "in order to support Darfuris who have
   been touched or affected by the devastating situation in Darfur caused by
   the Sudanese authorities and their Janjaweed militia allies". Appellant H
   is not said to be a member of the Union;  he  is  merely  a  person  who,
   according to the letter, has undergone a "thorough interview" in order to
   establish that he is a Darfuri, born in a particular village.

320. Applying the approach to which the Tribunal has  earlier  referred,  we
   do not consider that the matters referred to in  the  previous  paragraph
   materially advance the case of a  appellant  H.  The  position  might  be
   otherwise if there were  evidence  that  he  is  actively  and  genuinely
   involved in the Union of the People of Darfur in the UK and N Ireland and
   that that organisation is a genuine body, which the Sudanese  authorities
   would be reasonably likely to regard as inimical to their interests in  a
   material way, such as by seriously attempting to influence United Kingdom
   policy towards Sudan. No such evidence has, however, been submitted.

321. We note that the letter is dated 17 June  2006.    No  explanation  has
   been given to the Tribunal  as  to  why  it  was  thought  necessary  for
   appellant H to procure such a document,  which  merely  confirms  a  fact
   accepted by the adjudicator who originally heard the appeal, and recorded
   by the House  of  Lords.  In  all  the  circumstances,  we  consider  the
   production of this letter to be an opportunistic attempt on the  part  of
   appellant H to bolster his claim to remain in the United Kingdom and  one
   which does not materially advance his claim.

322. Likewise, the photographs of a person, said to be appellant H,  holding
   a placard in a crowd of people do not materially advance his claim.  Even
   if the Sudanese authorities could, at Khartoum Airport  (or  thereafter),
   make the connection between the returning appellant H and any photographs
   their intelligence personnel may have taken of the demonstration, if such
   there be, the evidence falls far short  of  showing  that  appellant  H's
   activities, whilst in the United Kingdom, are reasonably likely  to  lead
   to the Sudanese authorities regarding him as a threat.

323. As mentioned in paragraph 318, appellant H featured in the Aegis  Trust
   document of June 2005. There is nothing in  the  record  of  the  Trust's
   interview with appellant H and the other specific references to him  that
   would be reasonably likely to cause or contribute to any risk on  return.
   Appellant H does not assert any rebel or other anti-government  activity.
   He does not even seek to  implicate  the  government  of  Sudan  in  what
   happened to him in Darfur. He is recorded as having  been  found  by  the
   Home Office not to be politically active.  He  claims  that  he  will  be
   killed upon identification as a Zaghawa. That is not, however, reasonably
   likely to be true, as we have already found.

324. The Tribunal considers that, for the reason given earlier, the  absence
   of any specific case examples of mistreatment of  returnees  as  such  is
   significant.

325. For the reasons we have given, the Tribunal does not consider  that  an
   adult male in the position of appellant  H,  even  if  he  were  to  find
   himself in a squatter area or a camp for internally displaced persons  in
   Khartoum, would thereby either suffer Article 3 ill-treatment or lack the
   real possibility of surviving economically.

326. Mr Mahmood submits on behalf of appellant H that any  prospect  of  his
   being able to work in Khartoum should  be  discounted  since  without  an
   identity card appellant H would  be  unable  to  work  legally,  and  the
   Tribunal should discount any possibility (however likely  it  may  be  in
   practice) that he would work illegally.  This is on the basis that,  just
   as the Tribunal has in the  past  found  that  a  person  should  not  be
   required to lie, a person should not be required to break the law of  the
   country of his nationality.

327. The Tribunal considers that this proposition  goes  too  far.   If  the
   evidence shows that a person could only survive, if returned, by engaging
   in unlawful activities that carry a real risk of significant  punishment,
   it could well be unreasonable, in the context of internal relocation,  to
   expect that person to return.  But whilst there may be  such  cases,  the
   present ones are not of this kind.   The  Tribunal  has  not  been  given
   evidence to show that what might be described as working "off the  books"
   in Khartoum is a criminal matter, let alone a serious one, as opposed  to
   being a regulatory infringement.

328. Ms Maguire was specifically  asked  about  the  issue  of  unauthorised
   employment.  She said, as did Mr Verney, that most  work  engaged  in  by
   those IDPs who live in camps was not "legitimate".  She referred  to  the
   difficulties in keeping a job in Khartoum, if one were compelled to  live
   in an IDP camp located a significant distance  outside  the  city.    She
   said that an ID card would be needed for a "real" job but not for such an
   activity as casual building work.

329. The Rapid Assessment Survey Report (respondent's bundle page  430)  has
   some detailed things to say about economic  activity  in  the  camps  and
   squatter areas (see paragraph 124 of this determination).

330.  Whilst  that  report  highlights  the  problems  faced  by  heads   of
   households who are women (as to which see paragraphs 305-307),  it  makes
   plain that there is a good deal of economic  activity  going  on  in  the
   camps and squatter areas, amongst the displaced persons there.  There  is
   also no suggestion  that  the  Sudanese  authorities  are  enforcing  any
   regulatory requirements relating to employment or self-employment.  There
   is  no  evidence  of  people  being   arrested   for   employment-related
   infringements. The Rapid Assessment Report is, we find,  to  be  read  as
   giving an accurate general picture of what happens on the ground.  It  is
   in this respect to be preferred to the account given by  Professor  Kalin
   at page 214 of appellant M's bundle. That account was of a  single  visit
   to speak to an unspecified number of  people  who  had,  it  seems,  been
   transferred forcibly to a new settlement.

331. There is no evidence to show a reasonable likelihood that  appellant  H
   has failed to  complete  his  national  service.  Even  if  he  might  be
   perceived on return as a draft evader or deserter, the Tribunal has found
   that this would not on its own place appellant H at real risk on  return.
   Given that his overall profile does not contain anything that would  make
   it reasonably likely the  Sudanese  authorities  would  take  an  adverse
   interest in him, the military service issue is not something that  brings
   appellant H to the level of being at real risk, even when viewed as  part
   of that profile.

Appellant G

332. The facts of the case of appellant G are set out at  paragraphs  38  to
   40 of the opinions in Januzi (see paragraph 8 of this determination).

333. Appellant G is also 33 years old, with no known health problems.    His
   home village was Tawila in North Darfur.  That village  was  attacked  by
   the Janjaweed in March and November 2004.   His  claim  of  family  links
   with the SLM was rejected by the immigration judge who heard his  appeal.
   Ms Maguire has supplied an  addendum  report,  relating  specifically  to
   appellant G.  Insofar as that report attempts to  challenge  the  adverse
   credibility findings of the Immigration  Judge,  it  deals  with  matters
   extraneous to the present reconsideration.  Ms  Maguire  further  submits
   that, since during the current proceedings  the  appellant  has  gone  on
   record as a supporter of the SLM/A, that information would  be  available
   to the Sudanese National Security and Information Service.  We have dealt
   with this matter in general terms at  paragraphs  301-302.   As  we  have
   found, a reading of the Januzi opinions makes plain  that  appellant  G's
   account of involvement with the SLM/A was  not  found  to  be  reasonably
   likely to be true.

334. Ms Maguire states that the appellant is from the  area  of  Tawila  "in
   which the International Commission of Inquiry and, in turn, the office of
   the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court have shown  particular
   interest.  In my opinion, it is likely, therefore that the security  wing
   of  the  Government  of  Sudan  will  be  especially  interested  in  the
   appellant's account of his experience and that of his  family  in  Tawila
   during 2004".  The attacks on the appellant's village in 2004 occurred at
   a point when, according to Ms Maguire, the conflict in Darfur had  become
   characterised by Janjaweed raids on civilians.  We do not  consider  that
   there is any evidence before us to show that the Sudanese authorities are
   reasonably likely to regard appellant G as being associated  with  rebels
   because he comes from Tawila. That is all the more so, given what we have
   just said about the Januzi judgment. As to what Ms Maguire says  in  her
   addendum report  about  the  International  Commission  of  Inquiry,  any
   questioning of appellant G on return will disclose that, as is the  case,
   he has not had any political involvement during his time  in  the  United
   Kingdom. There is certainly no evidence that he has, whilst here,  sought
   to make his account available to the International Commission of Inquiry,
   or anyone else.  That being so, it is difficult to see why,  upon  return
   to Khartoum, the Sudanese authorities should see appellant G as a  person
   who is then likely to give his support to international bodies  that  are
   investigating what went on in Darfur.

335. As with  appellant  H,  the  Tribunal  does  not  find  the  fact  that
   appellant G is of military service age is a relevant risk factor.  As far
   as we can see, he has never  asserted  a  failure  to  complete  national
   service.  Someone of his age would, we consider, have been likely to have
   performed his military service.   In any event, for the reasons  we  have
   already given, this is not a matter which, in all the circumstances,  can
   advance appellant G's claim to be in need of international protection.

336. As with appellant H, the Tribunal  finds  that  appellant  G  can  live
   without undue hardship in Khartoum,  even  if  compelled  to  live  in  a
   squatter area or IDP camp. In so finding, the Tribunal has had regard  to
   the written closing submissions of Mr Ali (as we have in respect  of  our
   other  findings).  Mr  Ali  submits  that,  whilst  conditions  for   the
   appellants in Darfur "were not  brilliant  they  were  certainly  not  as
   appalling or extreme as what awaits them in Khartoum" (paragraph  34(i)).
   In fact, we have very little evidence from appellant G (or  appellant  H)
   as to what standard of living was enjoyed in Darfur but, in any event, as
   the opinions in Januzi make plain, the comparison  to  be  drawn  is  not
   between the lifestyle enjoyed by the individual concerned before  leaving
   his home, as compared with what awaits him in  the  place  of  relocation
   but, rather, between conditions in  that  place  and  conditions  in  the
   country generally.

337. Mr Ali puts considerable weight on the House of Lords' opinions  in  ex
   parte Adam [2005] UKHL 00066. In that case, the denial of  basic  support
   to asylum seekers in the United Kingdom who were compelled as a result to
   live rough was found to violate Article 3 of the  ECHR.  Mr  Ali  submits
   that that case should be used as a benchmark in deciding whether  Article
   3 would be breached if appellant G were to have to  live  in  a  camp  in
   Khartoum. The Tribunal does not accept this submission. Soering v  United
   Kingdom (1989) 11 EHRR439, ECt HR makes it clear that a distinction is to
   be drawn between foreign and domestic claims based on Article 3. But,  in
   any event, as the Adam case makes plain,  their  Lordships  regarded  the
   climatic conditions that persons sleeping rough  would  be  compelled  to
   endure in the United Kingdom at certain times of the year as  significant
   in their assessment. So too was the fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State
   prohibited the asylum seekers from  working.  Those  two  features  alone
   render comparisons between that case and these unfruitful.

Appellant M

338. The facts of the case of appellant M are set out at  paragraphs  41  to
   43 of the opinions in Januzi (see paragraph 8 of this determination).  We
   have, as stated at  paragraph  9,  taken  account  of  the  assertion  by
   appellant M that he has, since being in the United Kingdom, taken part in
   meetings and demonstrations for the SLM and that he is a  "representative
   for the SLM in West Yorkshire".

339. What we have said at paragraph 320, in respect of the Union  who  wrote
   on behalf of appellant H, applies to  the  "SLM  in  West  Yorkshire".  A
   person who has a history of active involvement with the SLM in Darfur is,
   we consider, very likely  to  be  of  serious  adverse  interest  to  the
   Sudanese authorities and could well be a person who would suffer  serious
   ill-treatment upon return to Khartoum, were the fact of that  involvement
   to become known.  The  Tribunal  has,  however,  been  provided  with  no
   evidence to show what the "SLM in West Yorkshire"  might  be.  Given  the
   sophisticated nature of  the  Sudanese  regime,  there  is  not,  on  the
   evidence that is before the Tribunal, any reason to suppose that, even if
   there are individuals in West  Yorkshire  who  have  chosen  to  describe
   themselves as the SLM in that county, the Sudanese authorities  would  be
   reasonably likely to regard those individuals as a  threat  in  any  real
   sense. That is so, even if the individuals  do  in  reality  dislike  the
   Sudanese regime but it is all the more so if the reality of the matter is
   that the individuals are styling themselves as the SLM for  opportunistic
   reasons.

340.  The  account  given  by   appellant   M   to   the   adjudicator   was
   comprehensively  disbelieved  by  the   latter.    In   particular,   the
   adjudicator did not find credible appellant M's  assertion  that  he  had
   been  involved  in  politics  in  Darfur  or  in  Khartoum  or  that  the
   authorities had ever targeted him or were ever interested in him  because
   of those activities.  Whilst in Khartoum, the adjudicator  did  not  find
   that appellant M had had any problems and he was a "fit and healthy young
   man" [now 36].  The only positive findings which appeared  to  have  been
   made were that appellant M came from Darfur, that he was  a  businessman,
   was able to stay with a relative in Khartoum and left that city  by  air.
   The adjudicator did not  make  a  specific  finding  as  to  whether  the
   appellant had left in an authorised manner.  The  adjudicator  considered
   that the appellant "may have contacted the SLA in the UK  but  I  am  not
   satisfied that such would bring  the  appellant  to  the  notice  of  the
   Sudanese authorities, nor do I find that even if the appellant attended a
   demonstration in London 17 December 2004 he would  therefore  be  put  at
   risk.  There is no evidence to that effect and I am not satisfied in  any
   event that the appellant is a genuine SLA supporter" (paragraph 20 of the
   determination). In the light of these findings,  the  Tribunal  does  not
   consider that appellant M's alleged involvement  with  the  SLM  in  West
   Yorkshire, even if different from what the adjudicator said about contact
   with the SLA in the United Kingdom, is  anything  other  than  a  further
   piece of opportunism on his part. Applying the Danian principles,  it  is
   not something that is reasonably likely to interest  the  authorities  in
   Khartoum.

341. Ms Maguire has submitted an addendum report in the  case  of  appellant
   M.  In this, she states that it will be apparent that appellant M  sought
   asylum outside Sudan and that he left with no legitimate  papers  and  is
   clearly being returned from the UK.   According to her "this will lead to
   the supposition that he had some reason to fear  remaining  in  Khartoum,
   which will lead to the belief that the appellant is or was a member of  a
   rebel organisation".

342. The Tribunal does not consider that there is any  evidence  to  support
   those assertions. In particular, we fail to see why the authorities would
   regard anyone who exited from Khartoum as being,  on  that  ground,  more
   likely to be of adverse interest than someone who exited from, say,  Port
   Sudan.

343. As with appellant G, Ms Maguire considers that the Government of  Sudan
   "will have followed the House of Lords case closely  and  will  be  aware
   that this appellant is one of  those  who  sought  determination  at  the
   highest level".  We refer to what we have already said on this matter.

344. Ms Maguire considers that  appellant  M,  being  a  young  man  without
   obvious connections in Khartoum, apart from perhaps one relative "and  no
   reason to have lived in Khartoum (such as being a student,  or  having  a
   job with an international organisation)" is  accordingly  "likely  to  be
   suspected of trying to agitate in Khartoum". This comment may  be  linked
   to what follows, where Ms Maguire states that appellant M "is in the same
   age group as the majority of the rebel leadership (SLM/A and Justice  and
   Equality Movement) and has a level of education (High  School)  which  is
   more likely to have placed him in contact with senior or middle levels of
   the rebel leadership".

345. The Tribunal considers that the last comment  of  Ms  Maguire  is  pure
   speculation.  In any event, if, as contended, the authorities  will  know
   about Januzi, they will know what the truth of  the  matter  is;  namely,
   that appellant M is a mere opportunist, who had no legitimate  reason  to
   leave Khartoum.

346. Ms Maguire's  addendum  report  states  that  "the  appellant  did  not
   complete military service as is obligatory".  She considers that he  will
   "face being regarded as a draft  evader  and  subject  to  detention  and
   questioning in that regard.  Such questioning will lead to the disclosure
   that he sought asylum in the UK".  The  Tribunal  is  not  aware  of  any
   evidence submitted by appellant M, which has been found to  be  credible,
   to the effect that he has failed to complete his military  service.   Our
   findings in respect of appellants H and G on this issue are applicable to
   appellant M.

347. Turning to conditions in Khartoum, appellant M has not brought  forward
   any evidence which is reasonably likely to be  true,  to  show  that,  if
   returned to Khartoum today, he would find himself so short  of  resources
   that he would be compelled to live in a camp or  squatter  area  of  some
   kind.  His case falls within that category where a  person's  credibility
   is so undermined that he has no reason to be believed in relation to  any
   salient part of his claim to be  in  need  of  international  protection.
   There is, in other words, no credible evidence that appellant M has spent
   all that he possessed in order to  reach  this  country  or  that  he  is
   otherwise without means of assistance or  support  in  Sudan.    Even  if
   there were, however, appellant M is a relatively young man with no  known
   health problems who has experience of working in what appears  to  be  an
   entrepreneurial capacity.  He is not at  real  risk  of  Article  3  ill-
   treatment or of falling below subsistence level, were he  to  live  in  a
   camp or squatter area.

348. In his  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  appellant  M,  Mr  Jacobs
   attempts to shut out the first part of the analysis we have undertaken in
   the previous paragraph. He submits that the adjudicator in  the  case  of
   appellant M "accepted that it is reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant
   will end up in a camp in Khartoum" and that the House of Lords "took  the
   view that the risk to this appellant in having to  live  in  a  camp  was
   indistinguishable from the same risk in respect of [appellants H and  G],
   who would also end up in a camp".

349. The Tribunal rejects that  submission.  As  far  as  the  adjudicator's
   findings are concerned, he approached the issue on  the  basis  that,  if
   appellant M were returned to Khartoum, "he may be able to stay  with  his
   relatives or he may unfortunately find it necessary  to  go  to  a  camp.
   Either way I am not satisfied that it would be either  unsafe  or  unduly
   harsh for him to do so" (paragraph 21 of the  determination).  Given  the
   robust adverse credibility findings of the adjudicator and the fact  that
   he twice stated earlier  in  paragraph  21  that  he  did  not  find  the
   appellant had had any problems in Khartoum, on any fair  reading  of  the
   determination the  adjudicator  was  effectively  making  an  alternative
   finding that, even if appellant M did find himself in a camp, that  would
   not be unduly harsh.

350. As for the House of Lords,  Mr  Jacobs'  submission  is,  the  Tribunal
   considers, founded on a misreading of paragraphs 55 to 60 of the opinions
   in Januzi. Their Lordships were not requiring this Tribunal to  undertake
   its detailed assessment of the evidence on the basis that  any  returning
   Darfuri must be assumed, regardless of individual  circumstances,  to  be
   reasonably likely to have to live in a camp.  Of  course,  that  evidence
   might have shown this to be the case but, having been  fully  considered,
   it does not do so. Having said this, we have,  as  the  adjudicator  did,
   approached the case of appellant M on the alternative basis that he found
   himself living in one of the camps.

Appellant O

351. On 30 June the respondent withdrew his immigration decision in  respect
   of appellant O. Appellant O is to be granted refugee status.

352. In view of the withdrawal of the immigration decision,  the  appeal  of
   appellant O is treated as withdrawn by reason of rule 17(2) of the Asylum
   and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  this  determination
   constitutes notice of that fact under rule 17(3).

Decision

353. The appeals of appellants H, M and G are dismissed on asylum and  human
   rights grounds.






Signed


Senior                Immigration                Judge                Storey

                                                  Date









Appendix A

Background Materials considered by the Tribunal (in chronological order):


|Udloendinge Styrelsen Report on fact-finding mission to|08.08.01- |
|Cairo, Khartoum and Nairobi: Human rights situation,   |19.08.01  |
|military service, and entry and embarkation procedures |20.11.01- |
|in Sudan                                               |23.11.01  |
|Paper by Samia Elsheikh and Chamhuri Siwar, Faculty of |October   |
|Economics, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia: "Tenant     |2002      |
|Households and Poverty in the Gezira Irrigated Areas,  |          |
|Sudan: Analysis and Implications"                      |          |
|Home Office statistics: Asylum applications received in|2004      |
|the UK by Sudanese nationals, 2004                     |          |
|Home Office statistics: Removals and voluntary         |2004      |
|departures of Sudanese asylum applicants, 2004         |          |
|Letter from Jan Shaw, Refugee Programme Director,      |20.02.04  |
|Amnesty International to White Ryland Solicitors       |          |
|BBC News: "Refugees killed in Sudan riots"             |18.03.04  |
|Allafrica.com UN Integrated Regional Information       |22.03.04  |
|Networks: News: "Sudan: Darfur is World's Greatest     |          |
|Humanitarian Disaster, Says UN Official"               |          |
|SOAT Sudan Organisation Against Torture: Arbitrary     |01.10.04  |
|arrest of two students in Khartoum                     |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/133/2003 UA 258/04 Human  |08.10.04  |
|Rights Defender / Fear for safety                      |          |
|Irinnews.org: UN Office for the Coordination of        |15.10.04  |
|Humanitarian Affairs: "Sudan: Demolitions render       |          |
|thousands of IDPs homeless"                            |          |
|SOAT Sudan Organisation Against Torture: Arrests and   |20.10.04  |
|torture of Darfurian Students                          |          |
|UNHCR Map: Darfur Administrative Units                 |24.11.04  |
|Amnesty International: "Sudan No one to complain to: No|December  |
|respite for the victims, impunity for the perpetrators"|2004      |
|Africa on the move: an urban crisis in the making - A  |Dec 2004  |
|submission to the Commission for Africa by Dr Anna     |          |
|Kajumulo Tibaijuka, Under Secretary General of the     |          |
|United Nations                                         |          |
|Freedom House: Freedom in the World - Sudan (2005)     |2005      |
|HDR 2005, Country Fact Sheets: Sudan.  The Human       |2005      |
|Development Index - going beyond income.               |          |
|Home Office statistics: Removals and voluntary         |Jan 2005 -|
|departures of Sudanese asylum applicants               |Mar 2006  |
|Khartoum State Interagency Rapid Assessment Report     |19.01.05  |
|Nov/Dec 2004                                           |          |
|Global IDP: Profile of Internal Displacement: Sudan    |24.03.05  |
|UNHCR Map: IDP and Refugee Locations - West Darfur and |05.05.2005|
|Eastern Chad                                           |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/047/2005 UA 116/05 Fear   |09.05.05  |
|for safety                                             |          |
|BBC News/World/Africa: "A violent day in Khartoum's    |24.05.05  |
|suburbs"                                               |          |
|Amnesty International Sudan: List of Political         |24.05.05  |
|Detainees                                              |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/053/2005 UA 136/05 Fear of|24.05.05  |
|Torture or ill-treatment/Fear of Arbitrary Arrest      |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/060/2005 Fear of          |16.06.05  |
|Torture/Fear of Arbitrary Arrest/Incommunicado         |          |
|detention/Death in Custody                             |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/061/2005 Fear of          |24.06.05  |
|Torture/Fear of Arbitrary Arrest/Incommunicado         |          |
|detention/Death in Custody                             |          |
|Lives in Our Hands: Darfuri asylum seekers facing      |30.06.05  |
|removal to Khartoum, The Aegis Trust                   |          |
|Okenden International article: "Historic Day in Sudan" |08.07.05  |
|Medecins Sans Frontieres article: "Malnutrition: A     |20.07.05  |
|Critical Situation in Akuem, Sudan"                    |          |
|Sudan Humanitarian Review                              |15.08.05- |
|                                                       |15.09.05  |
|Amnesty International Public Statement AFR 54/072/2005 |23.08.05  |
|"Sudan: The rights of Khartoum's displaced must be     |          |
|respected"                                             |          |
|United Nations Security Council: Report of the         |12.09.05  |
|Secretary General on the Sudan                         |          |
|UNHCR Sudan Locator Map                                |October   |
|                                                       |2005      |
|Action Against Hunger article: "Crisis in South Sudan" |05.10.05  |
|Irinnews.org: UN Office for the Coordination of        |07.10.05  |
|Humanitarian Affairs: "Sudan: Khartoum destruction     |          |
|triggers southern returns"                             |          |
|UNHCR Map: Darfur IDP Gatherings Map                   |08.10.05  |
|FIDH.ORG Arbitrary detention / Ill-treatment / Judicial|20.10.05  |
|proceedings - SDN 002 / 1005 / OBS 096                 |          |
|FIDH.ORG Call for an immediate stop of forced          |21.10.05  |
|relocations of the 2 million IDPs around Khartoum      |          |
|Amnesty International AFR 54/074/2005: UA 277/05       |21.10.05  |
|Arbitrary Arrest/Fear for safety/prisoner of conscience|          |
|United Nations Security Council Report of the          |12.09.05  |
|Secretary-General on the Sudan                         |          |
|Action Against Hunger article: "Another Niger?         |19.09.05  |
|Emergency in Southern Sudan Ignored"                   |          |
|The Economist Intelligence Unit - Country Report:      |Dec 2005  |
|Sudan; "Sudan at a glance 2006-07"                     |          |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project:           |Dec 2005 -|
|SUD-06/P/HR/RL70                                       |Dec 2006  |
|10th European Country of Origin Information Seminar,   |01.12.05- |
|Budapest.  Final Report                                |02.12.05  |
|United Nations Sudan Situation Report                  |10.12.05  |
|Amnesty International> Annual Reports> Report 2006:    |2006      |
|Africa: Sudan                                          |          |
|United Nations System - Standing Committee on          |Jan 2006  |
|Nutrition: "Nutrition in Crisis Situations" Vol 8      |          |
|UNHCR Human Rights Watch World Report 2006 - Sudan -   |Jan 2006  |
|January 2006                                           |          |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/E24|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/H73|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/H80|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/E16|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/E12|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/E28|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/H69|Jan - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |
|United Nations Economic and Social Council: Commission |11.01.06  |
|on Human Rights: Advisory Services and Technical       |          |
|Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights: Report of the|          |
|Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation in the|          |
|Sudan, Sima Samar E/CN.4/2006/111                      |          |
|Physicians for Human Rights: "Darfur - Assault on      |11.01.06  |
|Survival: A call for security, justice and             |          |
|restitution".                                          |          |
|Report by Peter Verney: Sudanese nationals             |13.01.06  |
|Medecins Sans Frontieres article: BBC World: Doctors on|16.01.06  |
|the frontline                                          |          |
|Human Rights Watch World Report 2006: Sudan            |18.01.06  |
|Amnesty International Press Release "Sudan: Amnesty    |23.01.06  |
|International representatives detained and human rights|          |
|activists harassed" AFR 54/001/2006                    |          |
|Amnesty International USA Issue Brief "Sudan: Ending   |February  |
|the Nightmare in Darfur"                               |2006      |
|UNHCR's Position on Sudanese Asylum-Seekers from Darfur|10.02.06  |
|OHCHR Report of the Representative of the              |13.02.06  |
|Secretary-General on the human rights of internally    |          |
|displaced persons. Walter Kalin. United Nations        |          |
|Economic and Social Council: Specific Groups and       |          |
|Individuals: Mass Exoduses and Displaced Persons.      |          |
|Mission to the Sudan 3-13th October 2005               |          |
|United Nations Mission in Sudan Media Monitoring Report|14.02.06  |
|by Public Information Office                           |          |
|FCO "The People of Darfur Want Peace" Darfur at the    |14.02.06  |
|Crossroads - Jack Straw                                |          |
|Medecins Sans Frontieres article: Darfur, Sudan: 'The  |16.02.06  |
|chronic insecurity has led us to redefine and step up  |          |
|our activities'                                        |          |
|OHCHR United Nations Economic and Social Council:      |28.02.06  |
|Report of the Special Rapporteur, Philip Alston on     |          |
|extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions: Follow |          |
|up to country recommendations (Sudan excerpt)          |          |
|Sudan Tribune article: "Khartoum state to relocate     |18.02.06  |
|IDPs"                                                  |          |
|FIDH.ORG Human rights and humanitarian organisations at|07.03.06  |
|risk in Sudan                                          |          |
|USSDR US Department of State Country Reports on Human  |08.03.06  |
|Rights Practices - Released by the Bureau of Democracy,|          |
|Human Rights, and Labor: SUDAN                         |          |
|Home Office Country of Origin Information Report: SUDAN|10.03.06  |
|April 2006                                             |          |
|United Nations Security Council: Report of the         |14.03.06  |
|Secretary General on the Sudan                         |          |
|Amnesty International Public Statement AFR/54/009/2006 |16.03.06  |
|(Public): "Continued harassment of Sudanese NGO and    |          |
|curtailment to freedom of expression and association in|          |
|Sudan".                                                |          |
|Daily Press Review, humanitarianinfo.org/darfur...     |20.03.06  |
|OHCHR Report of the Special Representative of the      |22.03.06  |
|Secretary-General, Hina Jilani, on the situation of    |          |
|human rights defenders: Summary of cases transmitted to|          |
|Governments and replies received (Sudan excerpt) -     |          |
|Promotion and Protection of Human Rights: Human Rights |          |
|Defenders                                              |          |
|Extract: Sudan COI Report April 2006: "Internally      |April 2006|
|Displaced Persons" / "Medical Services" / "Accord: 3.9 |          |
|Internally Displaced Persons"                          |          |
|Amnesty International Public Statement: Sudan:         |04.04.06  |
|Continuing blockade of humanitarian aid AFR 54/010/2006|          |
|Country of Origin Information (COI) Request. Country:  |Reply of  |
|SUDAN.  Subject: IDP's in Khartoum                     |05.04.06  |
|European Parliament resolution on Darfur               |06.04.06  |
|Aegis Report: Note by the Representative of the UN     |10.04.06  |
|Secretary-General on the human rights of internally    |          |
|displaced persons, Walter Kalin, on conditions in      |          |
|Khartoum camps accommodating displaced persons         |          |
|SOAT Annual Report the Human Rights Situation in Sudan |12.04.06  |
|March 2005-March 2006                                  |          |
|Amnesty International - The Wire Vol 36 No.4: Paragraph|May 2006  |
|on SUDAN                                               |          |
|United Nations Country Team in Sudan: United Nations   |04.05.06  |
|Sudan Situation Report                                 |          |
|Extract: Operational Guidance Note: Sudan: 4.4 Medical |05.05.06  |
|Treatment                                              |          |
|United Nations Press Release: Statement by UN High     |05.05.06  |
|Commissioner for Human Rights Louise Arbour following  |          |
|her visit to Sudan from 30 April to 5 May 2006         |          |
|United Nations News "Sudan: UN rights chief paints grim|05.05.06  |
|picture of worsening Darfur crisis"                    |          |
|Home Office Operational Guidance Note: SUDAN           |05.05.06  |
|Amnesty International Public Statement: African        |11.05.06  |
|Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights: Oral statement|          |
|on forced evictions in Africa AFR 01/005/2006          |          |
|PBS Online: Online NewsHour Report , Africa > Business |15.05.06  |
|& Economy > China Influence on Rise in Sudan > "Chinese|          |
|Investment Spark Economic Boom in Sudan"               |          |
|Guardian.co.uk "Darfur's rebel forces turn on each     |17.05.06  |
|other"                                                 |          |
|Irinnews.org: "Sudan: Fleeing war to face starvation"  |18.05.06  |
|CARE: "Sudan: The Journey Home"                        |18.05.06  |
|Ein.org.uk "United Nations 'Report of the              |19.05.06  |
|Secretary-General on Darfur'"                          |          |
|Amnesty International Report 2006: Sudan               |23.05.06  |
|Ein.org.uk "Third periodic report of the United Nations|23.05.06  |
|High Commissioner for Human Rights on the human rights |          |
|situation in the Sudan"                                |          |
|ABC Online article (Australian Broadcasting            |24.05.06  |
|Corporation): "Cholera outbreak kills at least 500 in  |          |
|south Sudan"                                           |          |
|Amnesty International USA Statement "Amnesty           |25.05.06  |
|International USA Welcomes Important Steps Taken by    |          |
|Bush Administration and Congress to Improve Situation  |          |
|in Darfur"                                             |          |
|Amnesty International Press Release AFR/54/019/2006    |25.05.06  |
|(Public): "Sudan: UN Security Council must meet        |          |
|'responsibility to protect' civilians"                 |          |
|Medecins Sans Frontieres article: Darfur, Sudan: no    |25.05.06  |
|peace, no food                                         |          |
|Letter from Hafiz Mohamed, Darfur Programme            |26.05.06  |
|Coordinator, Justice Africa                            |          |
|The American University in Cairo, Forced Migration and |June 2006 |
|Refugee Studies (FMRS): "A tragedy of failures and     |          |
|false expectations" - Report on the events surrounding |          |
|the three-month sit-in and forced removal of Sudanese  |          |
|refugees in Cairo, September - December 2005.          |          |
|Aegis Report: Safe as Ghost Houses: Prospects for      |June 2006 |
|Darfur African Survivors Removed to Khartoum by Sarah  |          |
|Maguire, Commissioned by The Aegis Trust               |          |
|Ein.org.uk: Voice of America News, "Camps for Darfur   |05.06.06  |
|Displaced Becoming Like Home"                          |          |
|Ein.org.uk: "Groups Urge President Bush to Speed       |05.06.06  |
|Deployment of International Force in Darfur; US Must Do|          |
|More to Meet Humanitarian Needs and Press All Parties  |          |
|to Implement Darfur Peace Agreement".                  |          |
|Ein.org.uk: United Nations News. "Security Council     |06.06.06  |
|members hold talks with Sudan's President in Khartoum" |          |
|Report by Peter Verney: Sudanese nationals UPDATED     |07.06.06  |
|REPORT for the purposes of this case, with revision and|          |
|reiteration of points & additional background          |          |
|references                                             |          |
|Sudan Development Program article on water and         |Printed   |
|sanitation & The Water Development Program             |from      |
|                                                       |website   |
|                                                       |07.06.06  |
|UNICEF article: "Crisis in western Sudan"              |Printed   |
|                                                       |from      |
|                                                       |website   |
|                                                       |08.06.06  |
|Sarah Maguire Expert Report (and addenda)              |8.06.06   |
|Report of Mohamed Baraka Mohamed Nourain               |09.06.06  |
|UNICEF Sudan Statistics: Basic Indicators / Nutrition /|Printed   |
|Health / HIV AIDS / Education / Demographics /         |from      |
|Economics / Women / Child Protection / Rate of Progress|website   |
|                                                       |14.06.06  |
|OHCA / Financial Tracking Service - Consolidated       |14.06.06  |
|Appeal: Sudan Work Plan 2006 (Humanitarian Action      |          |
|Component): Agriculture / Coordination and support     |          |
|services / Economic recovery and infrastructure /      |          |
|Education  / Food / Health / Mine action / Multi-sector|          |
|/ Protection-Human Rights- Rule of Law / Sector not yet|          |
|specified / Security / Shelter and Non-food items /    |          |
|Water and sanitation                                   |          |
|Note from Barbara E Harrell-Bond                       |19.06.06  |
|unsudanig.org - Project Details for Project: SUD-06/E23|Nov - Dec |
|                                                       |2006      |


















d


