
SK ("Adoption" not recognised in UK) India [2006] UKAIT 00068

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                   Heard at: Birmingham   Date of Hearing:  15 February 2006
                                     Date of Promulgation: 01 September 2006

                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                    Designated Immigration Judge O'Malley
                            Immigration Judge Cox

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr M Gill QC, instructed by Heer Manak
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr L Petryszyn, Home Office Presenting Officer


The restrictions on the notion of adoption (paragraphs 6 and 310(vi)(a)  and
de facto adoption (paragraphs 309A and  310(vi)(b))  are  not  shown  to  be
contrary to Article  8,  disproportionate  or  irrational.  The  Immigration
Rules taken as a whole appear to be an appropriate response to  the  varying
status of children who seek admission to join sponsors  who  are  not  their
natural parents.  Any  different  solution  would  have  to  deal  with  the
difficulty of the admission of a person who would not  be  regarded  as  the
child of the parents for any purposes of the general law.   A  country  such
as the United Kingdom  that  attributes  specific  effects  to  adoption  is
entitled  to  require  formalities  acceptable  to  it  before  adoption  is
recognised as having those effects.





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  India,  born  on  7  March  1993.   She
    appealed to an Adjudicator against the decision of the respondent dated
    17 October 2003 to refuse her entry clearance with a view to settlement
    as the adopted child of the sponsors.  The  Adjudicator  dismissed  her
    appeal.  She applied for and was granted permission to  appeal  to  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  Following the coming into  force  of  the
    appeals provisions of the 2004  Act,  the  grant  of  permission  takes
    effect for an order for reconsideration by this Tribunal.

 2. The sponsors are husband and wife and are both settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant is the child  of  the  brother  of  the  female
    sponsor.  She is one of four siblings.  Following  discussions  between
    the sponsors and her parents an adoption was arranged.  On one  of  the
    sponsors' several visits to India, there was a legal process,  followed
    by a religious ceremony.  Thereafter, an application was made  for  the
    appellant's admission on the basis that she had  become,  by  adoption,
    the child of the sponsors.

 3. The appeal against the refusal of that application was on  the  grounds
    that the appellant was entitled  to  admission  under  the  Immigration
    Rules as correctly interpreted, alternatively that her exclusion  would
    breach Article  8.   The  Adjudicator  dismissed  the  appeal  on  both
    alternative grounds.  In considering Article  8,  he  applied  the  law
    which  he  believed  to  be  binding  on  him:  he  did  not   consider
    independently whether the exclusion of the appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would be a proportionate interference with whatever rights  she
    had established would be the subject of interference by her  exclusion.
    Before us, it was acknowledged that that process was erroneous in  law:
    as the Court of Appeal has explained in Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105,  the
    Adjudicator's task was to decide independently whether  her  Article  8
    rights would be breached.  Both parties submitted, and we agreed,  that
    the Adjudicator's decision contained a material error of law  and  that
    we should proceed now to decide whether the appeal should be allowed or
    dismissed.

 4. The Grounds of Appeal, as expanded in Mr Gill QC's skeleton and in  his
    submissions before us, may be summarised as follows.  They assert  that
    the adoption was properly carried out in India and  that  there  is  no
    lawful or rational or proportionate  or  non-discriminatory  basis  for
    excluding an Indian adoption from recognition as an adoption in English
    law; that in the alternative the appellant was  to  be  regarded  as  a
    party to a de facto adoption as set out in paragraph 309A of HC 395  on
    its  true  construction;  that  the  appellant  met   all   the   other
    requirements  of  paragraph  310;   that   her   exclusion   would   be
    disproportionate either as discriminatory against Indian adoptees or as
    failing to promote the interests of parents and children in  conducting
    family life together.

 5. We do not mean in so summarising to belittle either the richness or the
    complexity of the submissions Mr Gill made both in writing and  orally.
    As we pointed out at the hearing, however, the concentration on one  or
    two Immigration Rules to the exclusion of others, and the concentration
    on one aspect of adoption to the exclusion of others, runs the risk  of
    causing one to lose sight of the full picture.  In order to see how the
    relevant Immigration Rules work we  shall  need  to  say  something  in
    general about adoption and to look rather more broadly at the  way  the
    Immigration Rules provide for the admission of children who are not the
    natural children of their sponsors.  First, though, we must set out the
    facts in a little more detail.  The  Adjudicator  heard  oral  evidence
    from the sponsors.  His findings of fact  were  largely  in  accordance
    with that evidence, although there were one or two matters on which  he
    noted discrepancies.  We also heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsors.
    We see no reason to doubt its credibility.

The facts

 6. The male sponsor was born in 1942, the female sponsor  in  1953.   They
    married in March 1985 and are both present and settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  They were unable to conceive any children.   The  problem  is
    the female sponsor's and appears to be hereditary: all of  her  sisters
    suffer similarly.  Extensive fertility treatment failed,  and  by  1999
    (by which time the female sponsor was 47) they had accepted  that  they
    were going to have no children of their own.

 7. The female sponsor's brother and his  wife  have  four  children.   The
    appellant is the youngest of them.  The link between the  sponsors  and
    the appellant has always been very close: the sponsors  attribute  this
    to the fact that the appellant was born at exactly the time  that  they
    were undergoing fertility treatment.  It is not absolutely  clear  when
    it was that it was decided that the sponsors would adopt the  appellant
    as their child.  In her statement the  female  sponsor  suggested  that
    that decision dated right back to the appellant's birth, and  that  the
    appellant had always known the sponsors as her mother and  father.   We
    do not think that can be quite right, despite the close link  to  which
    we have referred, because the sponsors had not yet completely given  up
    hope of having children of their own.  But  they  were  visiting  India
    regularly and were keeping quite close  contact  with  the  appellant's
    parents and her family.  It looks as though it was  in  1999  that  the
    families agreed that the appellant should become the  sponsors'  child.
    In early 2003 the families agreed that the adoption arrangement  should
    be formalised in India.

 8. As we have said, there was a legal process and  a  religious  ceremony.
    There is evidence before us that the legal process amounts to  a  valid
    adoption under the relevant Indian  statute,  the  Hindu  Adoption  and
    Maintenance Act 1956 (which, despite its title, applies also  to  those
    of the Sikh religion).  We are content to assume that, so far as Indian
    law is concerned, the appellant is the child of the sponsors.

 9. Very soon after the adoption ceremony the sponsors had to return to the
    United Kingdom, because the male sponsor's brother was terminally  ill.
    The sponsors made arrangements for the appellant to be looked after  by
    a guardian.  She was not left with her natural parents.   The  sponsors
    have subsequently made a number of visits  to  India  to  be  with  the
    appellant.  The  sponsors  have  been  responsible  for  the  financial
    support of the appellant for some time.  There is no  real  doubt  that
    they have been solely responsible for her support since  the  adoption.
    We have no doubt that, if the appellant were  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom,  there  would  be  adequate  maintenance   and   accommodation
    available to her through the sponsors.

10. On the evidence before him, the Adjudicator declined to find  that  the
    appellant was adopted due to the inability of her original  parents  to
    care for her, that  that  had  been  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility to the adopted parents, and that she had lost or  broken
    her ties with her family of origin.  His findings on all  those  issues
    are the subject of complaint in the Grounds  of  Appeal.   For  reasons
    which will become apparent, we do not need to make  findings  on  these
    issues.  We will, however, record that on the  evidence  before  us  we
    would have found in the appellant's favour on the second and  third  of
    those issues but not the first: although the appellant's parents' means
    are no doubt modest, the  adoption  arose  from  choice,  not  strictly
    speaking from their "inability" to care for the appellant.

"Adoption" in the Immigration Rules

11. The Immigration Rules considered by the Adjudicator are those contained
    in paragraphs 310 and 317 of HC 395.   Those  were  the  paragraphs  to
    which his  attention  was  directed  by  the  respondent's  Explanatory
    Statement: but there can be no doubt that the reference  to  paragraphs
    317 was an error by both.  Paragraph 317 applies only to  adults.   The
    relevant paragraph is 297, which applies to those under 18  years  old.
    Nothing turns on this, as the  wording  on  which  the  decision  turns
    (which we set out below) is the same.  Both paragraph 310 and paragraph
    297 present in limine a difficulty for the appellant, which  difficulty
    was the principal subject of submissions before us.

12. Paragraph 310 is headed

        "Requirements for Indefinite to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  the
        adopted child of a parents or parents present and settled or  being
        admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom".

    One of the requirements is that the child:

      "(vi)(a)   was adopted in accordance with a  decision  taken  by  the
               competent administrative authority or court in  his  country
               of origin or the country in which he  is  resident  being  a
               country whose adoption orders are recognised by  the  United
               Kingdom; or
            (b)  is the subject of a de facto adoption."

    "De facto" adoption is defined for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in paragraph 309A, to which we shall return in due course.

13. Paragraph 297 is headed

        "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter in the  United  Kingdom
        as the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled
        or being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom".

    It is thus not specifically concerned with relatives by adoption.   But
    the  relationships  in  paragraph  297  are  governed  by  the  general
    definitions at the beginning of the Rules, amongst which  we  find  the
    following in paragraph 6

      "'a parent' includes
      ...
      (d)   an adoptive parent, where a  child  was  adopted  in  accordance
             with a decision taken by the competent administrative authority
             or court in a country whose adoption orders are  recognised  by
             the United Kingdom or where the child is the subject  of  a  de
             facto adoption in accordance with the requirements of paragraph
             309A of these Rules (except that an adopted child or child  who
             is the  subject  of  a  de  facto  adoption  may  not  make  an
             application for leave to enter or remain in order to accompany,
             join or remain with an adoptive parent under paragraphs 297  to
             303)"

14. The problem in either case is that, although the evidence is  that  the
    legal process in India did amount to a decision taken by the  competent
    administrative authority there, India is not a country  whose  adoption
    orders are recognised by the United Kingdom.  The relevant  legislation
    is the Adoption (Designation of Overseas Adoptions) Order 1973 (SI 1973
    No.  19),  as  variously  amended.   The  order  contains  a  list   of
    Commonwealth  countries  including  Sri  Lanka,  and  a  list  of  non-
    Commonwealth countries including China (for adoptions  on  or  after  5
    April  1993),  but  the  lists  do  not  include  India,  Pakistan   or
    Bangladesh.

15. It follows that although an Indian adoption may be effective in  India,
    it does not create the relationship of parent and child for the general
    purposes of the Immigration Rules, nor does it enable  the  subject  of
    the adoption to  obtain  entry  clearance  under  paragraph  310.   The
    appellant cannot therefore meet the requirements  of  either  paragraph
    310 or paragraph 317: she is not to be regarded as the daughter or  the
    adoptive daughter of the sponsors.

16. It is this result which is challenged by her  representatives.   It  is
    said, first of all, that there is no proper basis  for  excluding  some
    countries from the lists of designated countries  in  the  Order.   For
    cultural reasons an Indian adoption may be different from  an  adoption
    in some other countries, but that is no  reason  for  excluding  Indian
    adoptees from admission to the United Kingdom.   The  Order  itself  is
    discriminatory; and its inclusion by  reference  into  the  Immigration
    Rules makes the Immigration Rules discriminatory too.

17. Secondly, it is said that the apparent strictness of the provisions  to
    which we have been making reference  is  breached  by  paragraph  309A,
    which allows de facto adoptions in such circumstances.  Mr Gill submits
    that,  correctly  interpreted,  paragraph  309A  covers   the   present
    circumstances.

18. Thirdly, it is said that the relationship between the parents and child
    in an Indian adoption is in any event to be regarded under Article 8 as
    a family relationship which itself gives  rise  to  rights  under  that
    Article and that to exclude the appellant from the United Kingdom is  a
    breach of those rights.

Discussion

19. It appears to us that the principal difficulty with Mr Gill's arguments
    is, as we have indicated above, that they fail to deal with  the  whole
    picture.   The  rules  relating  to  adoption  cannot  be  governed  by
    considerations of immigration law.  Indeed, the rules of  adoption  are
    no more part of immigration law than the rules of  nature  relating  to
    the generation of children are  part  of  immigration  law.   They  are
    merely part of the background to the law of status.

20. Adoption involves a change of status.  From  the  earliest  times  such
    changes have been subject to legal regulations,  because  they  are  of
    more than private importance.  In Roman law adrogatio or  the  adoption
    of a person sui juris was subject to regulation at the  highest  level,
    precisely because the effective extinguishment of  one  family  by  its
    adoption into another was a matter of public interest.  In English  law
    adoption is a pure creation of statute, the earliest such statute being
    as recent as 1926.

21. Adoption appears to be regulated everywhere.  The greater  the  effects
    of the adoption, the more likely the regulation is to be  intense.   In
    English law, as in many other  countries,  the  legal  consequences  of
    adoption are very substantial, affecting status,  marriage,  succession
    and social security benefits.  Any country  asked  to  attribute  legal
    consequences to a private arrangement is entitled to enquire  into  the
    process of their acquisition, simply because the arrangement is  not  a
    natural, but purely a legal process.

22. There is no jus gentium or natural law right to adopt  or  be  adopted,
    and no jus gentium or natural law right to have the rights which  in  a
    particular state accrue from adoption.  There can be no  "human  right"
    to enjoy in any particular state the consequences of  adoption,  unless
    the adoption is one recognised as such in that state.

23. Mr Gill's argument that the  Immigration  Rules  and  other  provisions
    relating to immigration law should be read  as  if  they  permitted  an
    Indian adoption  to  be  recognised  as  an  adoption  for  immigration
    purposes would not necessarily do  applicants  any  favours,  precisely
    because adoption is not a matter of immigration  law  and  has  effects
    which go well beyond immigration law.  As the  title  of  the  Adoption
    (Designation of Overseas Adoptions) Order 1973  indicates,  it  is  not
    legislation about immigration: it is legislation about adoption.  If Mr
    Gill's arguments were to be accepted, and  the  appellant  were  to  be
    granted a visa as the adopted child of the sponsors, she would have her
    visa, and would no doubt be granted admission: but that  would  not  be
    sufficient to make her the adopted child of the sponsors.   On  arrival
    she would not be treated  as  their  child,  because  India  is  not  a
    designated country.  Although she had obtained her visa, she  would  be
    the sponsors' child for no other purposes unless and until they adopted
    her in a form recognised in English law.  The Immigration Rules  cannot
    properly be segregated from the general law for the purpose  of  attack
    on their rules on adoption: on the contrary, the Immigration Rules are,
    so far as we can see, constructed in such a way  as  to  be  consistent
    with the rest of English and United  Kingdom  law  on  the  effects  of
    overseas adoptions.  They need to be coherent,  because  otherwise  the
    person might be treated as a child of the family  for  immigration  law
    purposes but not otherwise; or vice versa.  Mr Gill asserts that  there
    is no rational basis for treating India differently from the  countries
    that are on the list of designated countries: he provided no  arguments
    in support of that assertion.  As we understand  it,  the  position  in
    India, Pakistan and Bangladesh  is  that  adoption  is  regarded  as  a
    private arrangement between families, with no public  effects  or  need
    for public scrutiny.  In the absence of evidence we can  take  no  firm
    view on the issue, but we incline to the view that, if that is  so,  it
    would be a proper reason for exclusion from designation.

24. It follows from what we have said above that nobody is entitled to  say
    that  an  adoption  is  entitled  to  worldwide  recognition  in   each
    individual state simply because it is an  adoption  recognised  by  the
    laws of some other state or the customs of some other culture.  As  the
    effects of  adoption  vary  from  state  to  state,  there  is  nothing
    surprising, or wrong, or disproportionate, or irrational in saying that
    the legal requirements for adoption in the state in which the  adoption
    is asserted must be met before the adoption will be  recognised  there.
    Nobody is entitled to say "I have adopted (or been  adopted)  according
    to my rules; therefore you are obliged to  recognise  the  adoption  as
    entirely valid under your rules".  Unless an  Indian  adoption  can  be
    found to be subject to the same requirements and the  same  intentions,
    and to have the same effects as an  adoption  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    there would appear to be no reason why it should be treated  as  though
    it were a United Kingdom adoption.  And if it is not to be  treated  in
    general as a United Kingdom adoption, there is no reason why it  should
    be treated as a  United  Kingdom  adoption  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The truth of the  matter  is  that  adoption  means
    different things in different countries.  The fact that the  same  word
    is used does not mean that the effects are, or ought to be, the same.

25. Paragraph 316A, to which Mr Gill did not refer  us,  but  on  which  we
    sought submission at the hearing, is the complement to  paragraph  310.
    It is headed

        "Requirements for limited leave to enter the United Kingdom with  a
        view to settlement as a child for adoption".


    The limited  leave  obtained  under  that  paragraph  can  mature  into
    indefinite leave to remain under paragraph  311  in  due  course.   The
    purpose of paragraph 316A is in part to make  provision  for  claimants
    coming from countries whose adoptions are not recognised in the  United
    Kingdom.  Paragraph 316A enables such individuals to be brought to  the
    United Kingdom with a view to being adopted according to United Kingdom
    law.  The requirements are more onerous than  those  of  paragraph  310
    appear to be on their face: but there is no reason at  all  to  suppose
    that the requirements for securing  an  adoption  in  a  country  whose
    adoptions are recognised by the United Kingdom are  in  substance  more
    onerous than those for securing an  adoption  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Paragraph 316A was introduced on 2 October 2000, no doubt in the  light
    of the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 on that day;  but
    it has subsequently been amended in order  to  comply  with  The  Hague
    Convention on Protection of Children  and  Cooperation  in  Respect  of
    Inter-Country Adoption, to which both the United Kingdom and India  are
    parties.

26. If the effect of the Immigration Rules' incorporation of  the  Adoption
    (Designation of Overseas Adoptions) Order had been that a person from a
    country not  designated  in  that  Order  had  no  access  to  adoption
    recognised in the United  Kingdom  (because  an  adoption  in  his  own
    country would not have effect as such for any United  Kingdom  purpose)
    that would be a serious matter.  As Mr Gill reminded us, in Re J [1998]
    INLR 424, the Immigration Rules were described as  "hopeless"  in  that
    they offered nothing to the claimants,  who  in  that  case  were  from
    Pakistan.  The Immigration Rules have, however, been amended  a  number
    of times since the decision in Re J.  One  of  the  amendments  is  the
    introduction of paragraph 316A.  It may  well  be  that  paragraph  310
    taken on its own would offer the appellant nothing:  but  there  is  no
    reason to take it on its own.  The Immigration Rules must be seen as  a
    whole.


27. Similar consideration to those in Re J were the subject of the judgment
    of Hodgson J in R v AIT ex parte Tohur Ali [1987] Imm AR 189, Hodgson J
    had to consider whether  an  unreported  Tribunal  decision,  Sunah  Bi
    (3132), was correctly decided.  In Sunah Bi the Tribunal had held  that
    "without  any  legally  recognisable  adoptive   process"   individuals
    claiming to have a relationship by adoption could not fall within those
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (then HC 169) relating to parents
    and children.  In holding that Sunah Bi was not correctly decided,  the
    learned Judge said this at p193:

        "I also bear in mind the fact that  in  Islamic  law  there  is  no
        'legally recognisable adoption process' ... .  If,  therefore,  the
        Sunah Bi construction  is  correct,  a  huge  number  of  would  be
        immigrants would  be  excluded  from  the  provisions  in  Rule  50
        relating to adoption."

    He went on to hold that paragraph 50 needed  to  be  interpreted  in  a
    wider sense than the Tribunal had allowed in Sunah Bi.

28. It is probably fair to say that Hodgson  J's  statement  about  Islamic
    law,  adopted  as  it  was  from  one   single   introductory   (albeit
    authoritative) source, was a little sweeping.   The  Hanaf?s  interpret
    the Koranic prohibition as meaning that no adopted child has the duties
    of a natural child or inheritance rights from its adoptive parents, but
    allow adoption subject to  those  restrictions.   The  M?likites  allow
    inheritance rights to be created by adoption, and it is said that  some
    tribes of Southern Palestine allow what might  be  regarded  as  "true"
    adoption.  Be that as it may the interpretation adopted by Hodgson J is
    not open to us.  The present formulation of the Immigration Rules makes
    it clear that adoption is to bear a  specific  legal  meaning  for  the
    purposes of the Rules.  As we have shown above, the position  of  those
    who have not yet been adopted in accordance  with  that  definition  is
    ameliorated by paragraph 316A.

29. We appreciate that the Rules as they now  are  make  no  provision  for
    those individuals who for whatever reason, whether religion, culture or
    choice, are not to be made the subject of an  adoption  in  which  they
    take all the rights of a natural child.  But we  would  take  the  view
    that it is clearly in accordance with public policy to treat those  who
    are not to have the rights of a natural  child  under  the  heading  of
    "other relatives" rather than that of "children".  We heard no evidence
    relating to Sikh law in this appeal.  The evidence  from  the  sponsors
    did not suggest that in their case there was any religious objection to
    a full adoption: they simply preferred to rely, if they could,  on  the
    process that had taken place in India.

"De facto" adoption

30. We turn now to paragraph 309A, which reads as follows:

      "309A.     For the purposes of adoption under paragraphs  310-316C  a
               de facto adoption shall be regarded as  having  taken  place
               if:
      (a)   at the time immediately preceding the making of the application
               for entry clearance under these Rules the adoptive parent or
               parents have been living abroad (in  applications  involving
               two parents both must have lived  abroad  together)  for  at
               least a period of time equal to the first  period  mentioned
               in sub-paragraph (b)(i) and must have cared  for  the  child
               for at least a period of time equal  to  the  second  period
               material in that sub-paragraph; and
      (b)   during their time abroad, the adoptive parent or parents have:
            (i)  lived together for a minimum period of 18 months, of which
                  the 12 months immediately preceding the  application  for
                  entry clearance must have been spent living together with
                  the child; and
            (ii) have assumed the role of that child's parents,  since  the
                  beginning of the 18 month period, so that there has  been
                  a genuine transfer or parental responsibility."


    Mr Gill's argument was that paragraph 309A made a substantial breach in
    the integrity of a system purporting to  restrict  the  recognition  of
    adoptive relationships to those where the adoption was  one  recognised
    in  English  law.   It  followed,  he  submitted,  that   any   further
    restriction was simply irrational: no restriction  could  be  justified
    once an exception  had  been  allowed.   That  was  the  basis  of  his
    submission that, correctly interpreted, paragraph  309A  permitted  the
    present appellant to be treated for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as the adopted child of these sponsors.

31. We are unable to accept that argument.   Paragraph  309A  provides  one
    specific exception to the restrictions on adoptive  relationships.   It
    enables, for the purposes of the Immigration Rules  only,  an  adoptive
    relationship to be created by the parents and the child living together
    outside the United Kingdom for a substantial period of time.   What  it
    does not do, and cannot in our view be interpreted to do, is to  remove
    all the restrictions carefully imposed by  other  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Mr Gill partly based his argument on the fact  that
    the phrase used for the relationship engendered by the circumstances in
    paragraph 309A is "de facto adoption".  He referred to  the  fact  that
    "de facto adoption" is  the  phrase  often  used  of  the  relationship
    recognised under former versions of the  Immigration  Rules,  following
    the judgment of Hodgson J in Tohur Ali.   But  the  mere  use  of  that
    phrase cannot be taken to import all the old law about what was  a  "de
    facto adoption" for the purposes of the Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph
    309A carefully defines what the present Immigration Rules mean by a "de
    facto adoption", and there is no reason to give that phrase  any  other
    meaning for the purposes of those Rules.

32. There is no doubt that the child who is  the  subject  of  a  de  facto
    adoption and is admitted as such forms an exception to  the  system  of
    admission either as an adopted child or as a child  for  adoption.   No
    doubt that exception is based on the fact that if the  requirements  of
    paragraph 309A have been fulfilled, the  relationship  between  parents
    and child has been genuinely  developed  and  tested  in  circumstances
    which, as far  as  may  be,  have  been  removed  from  any  notion  of
    immigration.  What Mr Gill would like us to do is to say  that  because
    the Secretary of State is prepared to make an exception for  this  type
    of relationship, and calls the relationship "de facto  adoption",  then
    any other relationship which Mr Gill or anybody else  calls  "de  facto
    adoption" should be  treated  as  adoption  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration Rules.   In  our  view  paragraph  309A  cannot  bear  that
    interpretation.

Singh v Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi

33. Of the various authorities cited to us, the one we need to  mention  in
    particular is Singh v Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ
    1075.  The facts in that case bore some  similarity  to  those  of  the
    present case.  The question for the Court of Appeal was,  however,  not
    primarily whether the  appellant  should  be  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom, but whether the Adjudicator had been entitled to find, as  she
    did, that Article 8 was engaged.  In dealing  with  that  question  the
    Court based its observations on  the  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact
    (which were not disputed) and  rejected  the  respondent's  submissions
    that family life within the meaning of Article 8 could not  arise  from
    an adoption not valid in English law.  In reaching a  conclusion  about
    the existence of family life it was right to take into account the fact
    that this was not a case  of  child-trafficking,  and  there  was  some
    weight to be attributed to the fact that  the  adoption  was  valid  in
    India.  The Adjudicator had  found  that  there  had  been  "a  genuine
    transfer of responsibility", substantial  links  in  fact  between  the
    appellant and the sponsors, and an emotional tie.  The Court held  that
    the Adjudicator's conclusions were open to her.

34. The limit of the decision in Singh v Entry Clearance Officer New  Delhi
    are crucial to its correct understanding.  At paragraph [17], Dyson  LJ
    (who gave the principal judgment) said this:

        "Subject to the points raised by the respondent's notice, the  sole
        issue that arises on this appeal is whether family life within  the
        meaning of Article 8(1) of the European Convention  exists  between
        the appellant and the sponsors."

    The case has, therefore, nothing to say about whether interference with
    family life would be proportionate.  There is no consideration  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  (including  paragraph  309A,  which  postdates  the
    original decision in Singh's case) as a whole, and no consideration  of
    the consequences of the proposed admission of  a  child  who  would  be
    regarded as the child of the sponsors for immigration law purposes  but
    not for other purposes.  There is, in  addition,  no  consideration  of
    whether the Entry Clearance Officer's decision in accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules was properly subject to reversal on the  ground  that
    the appellant's case was "truly exceptional" within the meaning of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Huang [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105,  which
    postdates the decision in Singh.


35. In the present case we have been content to assume that  "family  life"
    could have existed between the appellant and the sponsors at  the  date
    of the decision.  The submissions before us, and  our  discussion,  has
    been concerned with whether, if "family  life"  were  established,  the
    interference with it would be unlawful as  disproportionate.   We  have
    decided that it would not be.  We have not,  as  a  result,  needed  to
    consider the question whether  "family  life"  did  exist  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor at the date of the decision.

36. (In case any point  should  be  taken  on  the  tense  of  "exists"  in
    paragraph [17] of the judgments, it should be noted that  in  Singh  it
    was common ground that the relevant date was the date  of  the  hearing
    before the Adjudicator.  As a result it was  possible  (see  paragraphs
    [34], [40] etc) to take into account developments  since  the  date  of
    decision.  It is not at all clear  that  the  position  taken  by  both
    parties was correct in law at the time Singh was decided.   So  far  as
    the present appeal is concerned, s85(5) is the governing provision: the
    relevant date is the date of the decision, and there is no  distinction
    between "immigration" and "human rights" arguments for these purposes.)

Paragraph 297(i)(f) and Article 8

37. During the hearing  we  observed  that  it  appeared  to  us  that  the
    appellant  might  have  been  entitled  to  admission  under  paragraph
    297(i)(f).  Provided that other conditions relating to maintenance  and
    accommodation were met, this paragraph permits the admission of a child
    under 18 who is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and  has
    not formed an independent family unit, if

        "One parent of a relative is present  and  settled  in  the  United
        Kingdom ... and there are serious and compelling  family  or  other
        considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable  and
        suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care".

      Like paragraphs 316A and 309A, this paragraph provides  a  reason  for
    not  taking  individual  immigration  rules  out  of  context.   As  it
    provides, in certain cases, a route for a child's admission,  it  needs
    to be considered before any criticism of  the  Rules  as  a  whole  can
    properly be mounted.

38. The Rules contain a restriction on the application  of  paragraph  297.
    In paragraph 6, the relevant part of which we have set out above, there
    is a prohibition on applying paragraph 297 to a child who is adopted or
    de facto adopted and proposes to  live  with  adoptive  parents.   That
    restriction does not apply in the present appeal, because paragraph 297
    is of relevance only on the basis that  the  appellant  is  not  to  be
    regarded as the adopted child of  the  sponsors.   She  is  the  female
    sponsor's niece, and so a relative within the meaning of paragraph 297.
     We should add that there is in this case not the  slightest  suspicion
    in this case that the  arrangements  are  anything  other  than  proper
    family arrangements made with the consent of the  appellant's  parents.
    This is not a case where considerations of trafficking arise.

39. Mr Petryszyn submitted that paragraph 297(i)(f) was not  applicable  in
    the present case,  because  the  circumstances  were  not  serious  and
    compelling.   There  is  no  doubt  that  any  appellant   would   have
    considerable difficulty in satisfying this requirement  of  the  Rules.
    There are, however,  a  number  of  factors  making  the  present  case
    unusual.  First, there is the sponsors' inability to have children  and
    the attempts they have made over a long period of time to have children
    of their own.  Secondly, there is the evidence that it had for  a  long
    time been thought that the appellant would be adopted by the  sponsors.
    Thirdly, there is the long history of visits, developing a relationship
    between the  appellant  and  the  sponsors.   Fourthly,  there  is  the
    sponsors' need to leave India immediately after the purported adoption,
    because of the grave illness and eventual death of the  male  sponsor's
    brother.  In order to meet the requirements of paragraph  297(i)(f)  it
    is not necessary that the applicant be destitute  abroad,  but  in  the
    present case there was clear evidence that the appellant's parents live
    in very modest circumstances indeed.

40. The Grounds of Appeal and the Grounds for Review do not claim that  the
    appellant should be admitted under paragraph  297,  although  there  is
    some authority (again to be found in Tohur  Ali)  that  that  paragraph
    ought to have been considered in any event.  We prefer to approach  the
    matter  by  a  slightly  different  route.    This   appeal   and   the
    reconsideration of it have been based from the  beginning  in  part  on
    Article 8 grounds.  We take the view that, both  at  the  date  of  the
    decision and now, by a very narrow margin, the appellant would meet the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).  We would therefore regard  it  as
    disproportionate and hence a breach  of  Article  8.2,  to  refuse  her
    admission.

Conclusion

41. Having reached the view that this appeal should therefore  be  allowed,
    we do not need to consider further  Mr  Gill's  arguments  relating  to
    irrationality or discrimination.  We find that the appellant  does  not
    and cannot meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  relating  to  adopted
    children, but that she is entitled to admission under  Article  8  with
    reference to paragraph 297.  On her admission she will not be  regarded
    as the sponsors' child for  any  purposes;  and  it  will  be  for  the
    sponsors to establish from time to time, as  may  be  required  by  any
    relevant authority, that suitable arrangements for her  welfare  remain
    in place.

42. For the foregoing reasons this appeal is allowed.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                            Date:
