

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

|AR and NH (lesbians) India CG [2016] UKUT 00066   |                                         |
|(IAC)                                             |                                         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                             |                                 |
|Heard at Field House                         |Sent to parties on:              |
|On 23 June 2015                              |                                 |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN



                                   Between

                                  AR and NH
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellants:          Ms  N  Hashmi,  Counsel,  appearing  by  Direct
                         Access
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

    1) The guidance in MD (same-sex oriented males) India CG [2014] UKUT 65
       (IAC) stands.  The guidance at (a)  -  (f)  in  MD  (India)  applies
       equally to lesbians.



    2) A risk of persecution or serious harm for a lesbian woman in  India,
       where it exists, arises from her family members, and the  extent  of
       such risk, and whether  it  extends  beyond  the  home  area,  is  a
       question of fact in each case.



    3) The risk of persecution or serious harm  is  higher  for  uneducated
       lower class lesbian women in  rural  areas,  who  remain  under  the
       control of their family members and may not be  permitted  to  leave
       the home to continue meeting their lesbian partners.




    4) Where family members are hostile to  a  lesbian  woman's  sexuality,
       they may reject her completely and sometimes formally  renounce  her
       as a member of that family.  In such a case, whether relocation to a
       city is unduly harsh will be a question of fact,  depending  on  the
       ability of such a lesbian woman to survive  economically  away  from
       her family and social networks.



    5) If a lesbian woman's family wishes to pursue and  harm  her  in  the
       place of internal relocation, their ability to do so will depend  on
       the reach of the family network, how persistent they  are,  and  how
       influential.   The  evidence  indicates  that  there   is   normally
       sufficient state protection for women whose families  seek  to  harm
       them in their place of internal relocation.



    6)  In general, where there is a risk of persecution or serious harm in
       a lesbian woman's home area, for  educated,  and  therefore  'middle
       class' women, an internal relocation option is available.  They  are
       likely to be able to relocate to one of the major  cities  in  India
       and are likely to be able to find employment and support themselves,
       albeit with difficulty, and to live  together  openly,  should  they
       choose to do so.  In general, such relocation  will  not  be  unduly
       harsh.



                            DECISION AND REASONS



   1. This appeal concerns two lesbian women of Indian citizenship, who have
      entered into a civil partnership in the United Kingdom.   They  appeal
      with permission against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
      each  of  their  appeals,  dismissing  their   appeals   against   the
      respondent's decision to remove them  to  India  after  refusing  them
      refugee status, humanitarian protection or  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom on human rights grounds.




   2. These appeals have been identified as potentially suitable for country
      guidance on the position of lesbian women in  India.   The  respondent
      accepts that as lesbians in India these appellants are  members  of  a
      particular social group.



Terminology and acronyms

   3. In this decision, we have in general referred to LGBTI for the  entire
      same-sex oriented community, and  to  lesbians  or  same-sex  oriented
      males, save where the passage cited, or the oral or  written  evidence
      used a different description (such as LGBT, LGBTQ, or gay),  in  which
      case we have followed the description used by the witness, or  in  the
      evidence.  The Indian Penal Code is abbreviated to IPC.




Existing country guidance

   4. On 12 February 2014 the Upper Tribunal gave guidance dealing with  the
      position of non-heterosexual males in India, in MD (same-sex  oriented
      males: risk) India CG [2014] UKUT 65 (IAC),  in the following terms:

      "a.            Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code 1860  criminalises
          same-sex sexual activity. On 2 July 2009  the  Delhi  High  Court
          declared section 377  IPC  to  be  in  violation  of  the  Indian
          Constitution insofar as it criminalises  consensual  sexual  acts
          between adults in private. However, in a judgment of 11  December
          2013, the Supreme Court held that section 377 IPC does not suffer
          from the vice of unconstitutionality and found the declaration of
          the Delhi High Court to be legally unsustainable.

      b.             Prosecutions for consensual sexual acts  between  males
          under section 377 IPC are, and have always been, extremely rare.


      c.             Some persons who are, or are perceived to be,  same-sex
          oriented males suffer ill  treatment,  extortion,  harassment  and
          discrimination from the police and the general populace;  however,
          the prevalence of such incidents is  not  such,  even  when  taken
          cumulatively, that there can be said in general to be a real  risk
          of an openly same-sex oriented male suffering treatment  which  is
          persecutory or which would otherwise reach the threshold  required
          for protection under the Refugee Convention, Article 15(b) of  the
          Qualification Directive, or Article 3 ECHR.


      d.          Same-sex orientation is  seen  socially,  and  within  the
          close  familial  context,  as   being   unacceptable   in   India.
          Circumstances for  same-sex  oriented  males  are  improving,  but
          progress is slow.


      e.             It would not, in general,  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
          harsh for an open same-sex oriented  male  (or  a  person  who  is
          perceived to be such), who is able to demonstrate a real  risk  in
          his home area because of his particular circumstances, to relocate
          internally to a major city within India.


      f.               India  has  a  large,  robust  and  accessible  LGBTI
          activist and support network, mainly to  be  found  in  the  large
          cities. "


The country guidance issue

   5. The Upper Tribunal in MD did not receive  evidence  or  give  guidance
      about the position of women homosexuals (lesbians).  We note  that  in
      (f) the Upper Tribunal did make a generic  finding  as  to  the  LGBTI
      community which may be applicable to these appellants, but as  regards
      the position of lesbians in general, there  is  a  lacuna  in  the  MD
      analysis which merits further consideration.



   6. We also consider the effect on  risk  to  lesbians  arising  from  the
      decision of the Indian Supreme Court in  Koushal  and  another  v  Naz
      Foundation and Others (Civil Appeal No. 10972  of  2013),  which  held
      that section 377 of the Indian Penal  Code  (IPC)  which  criminalised
      homosexual sex was not unconstitutional and said that it was a  matter
      for  the  Indian  legislature  to  determine  how,  if  at  all,  that
      controversial provision should be amended.



Indian legal and constitutional framework

   7. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution guarantees that:


      "21. Protection of life and personal liberty
      No person shall be deprived of his life  or  personal  liberty  except
      according to procedure established by law."


   8. Sections 368 and 377 of the IPC are as follows:




      ""368.      Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped
      or  abducted  person.-Whoever,  knowing  that  any  person  has   been
      kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or  confines  such
      person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or
      abducted such person with the same intention or knowledge, or for  the
      same purpose as that with or for which he  conceals  or  detains  such
      person in confinement. ...


      377.  Of Unnatural Offences: Unnatural offences.-
      Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature
      with any man, woman or animal, shall be punished with imprisonment for
      life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which  may
      extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
      Explanation.--Penetration  is  sufficient  to  constitute  the  carnal
      intercourse necessary to the offence described in this section."



   The Naz Foundation judgment  is  currently  the  subject  of  a  curative
   petition, which was heard in April 2014 but for which no decision has yet
   been published by the Indian Supreme Court. If the curative  petition  is
   successful, the Naz Foundation judgment will be set aside and reheard  in
   the Supreme Court.



   9. In April 2014, in National Legal Services Authority v Union  of  India
      and  others  Writ  Petition  (Civil)  No.604   of   2013[1],   another
      constitution of the Indian Supreme Court required  the  government  to
      legislate for legal, constitutional and human rights  for  transgender
      (TG) persons and to include on all official forms  the  options  male,
      female and third sex.  We discuss that judgment below.



  10. In April 2015, a private members' bill for the welfare of  TG  persons
      passed the Indian Parliament and government legislation is expected in
      the next session of Parliament, which may or may  not  affect  section
      377 overall.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

  11. In reaching our decision, we have had the benefit of oral and  written
      evidence from Professor Nishant  Shahani,  a  country  expert  jointly
      instructed by both parties, and of hearing the  appellants  themselves
      give evidence.  We had a bundle of country and individual evidence 205
      pages in length, to  which  we  have  had  regard,  paying  particular
      attention to those documents and passages to which  the  parties  drew
      our attention. We received oral  and  written  submissions  from  both
      parties.




  12. We have set out, at Appendix A, a list of  all  the  country  evidence
      before us, and at Appendices B  and  C,  a  summary  of  the  relevant
      evidence  therein  contained,  including  the  evidence  of  Professor
      Shahani and the appellants.




Procedural history


First appellant's appeal

  13. On 5 September 2012, the respondent 5 September 2012 refused to  grant
      the first appellant refugee status, humanitarian protection  or  leave
      to remain  on  human  rights  grounds,  having  regard  to  the  first
      appellant's sexual orientation and her relationship  with  the  second
      appellant.



  14. The first appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  First-
      tier  Tribunal  Judge  accepted   the   appellant's   lesbian   sexual
      orientation and her  relationship  with  the  second  appellant.   The
      parties  had  conducted  their  relationship  in  India   with   great
      discretion and had not been suspected of being lesbians.  He found  as
      a fact that they would do so again on return.



  15. The first appellant's parents  were  aware  of  the  relationship  and
      disapproved of it, but there was  no  suggestion  that  they  had  any
      propensity for violent or abusive acts.  The Judge  accepted  at  [27]
      that in the light of the  background  evidence,  the  local  community
      might well react in a hostile, aggressive and even violent way if they
      perceived the appellants as being in a same-sex relationship, but then
      found that 'on a fair reading of all the sources of evidence'  it  was
      pure speculation for her to suggest that she was at risk  of  acts  of
      persecution or serious harm from members of the local community in her
      home area.  He also rejected the first  appellant's  Article  3  claim
      which was based on an asserted risk of suicide if she were returned to
      India.



  16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the appellants had  family
      life together as a couple, but considered that the first appellant had
      shown only a 'quite slender' level  of  private  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom  outside  that  relationship,  based  on  a  short  period  of
      residence here, her liking for the United Kingdom, and her desire  not
      to return to India.  The private life asserted was not  sufficient  to
      outweigh the legitimate aim of main of effective immigration  control.
      Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  had  not
      then been inserted and so the First-tier Tribunal did  not  deal  with
      section 117B thereof.



  17. The first appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission. On
      12 October 2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson found that  there  was  a
      material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision, in relation
      to the Judge's reasoning.  He set aside the decision and directed that
      it be remade in the Upper Tribunal, and that the First-tier Tribunal's
      findings should be preserved with  regard  to  the  first  appellant's
      sexual orientation, the history of her relationship  with  the  second
      appellant, and the evidence that her parents knew of the  relationship
      and her sexual orientation.



  18. Judge Dawson considered that on the  remaking  of  the  decision,  the
      Upper Tribunal should deal with two issues:   first,  whether  it  was
      open to the appellant and her partner  to  resume  their  relationship
      discreetly in their home area, as before, and second, if that was  not
      possible, whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant  to
      exercise an internal relocation option to one of the larger cities  in
      India, having regard to her  sex,  her  sexual  orientation,  and  the
      nature of the relationship between the appellants.




Second appellant's appeal




  19. The parties then entered into a  civil  partnership,  and  the  second
      appellant also made an asylum claim. In a letter dated 23  July  2013,
      the respondent refused to grant the second appellant  refugee  status,
      humanitarian protection, or leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
      human rights grounds.  The second appellant appealed to the First-tier
      Tribunal.



  20. The First-tier Tribunal in the second  appellant's  appeal  considered
      that there was no evidence, pending the deliberations  of  the  Indian
      Supreme Court in Naz Foundation, that LGBTI persons in India had  been
      forced to conceal their  sexuality.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      found that there was a  slowly  emerging  LGBTI  movement  in  India's
      larger cities.  The press reports with which  she  had  been  provided
      indicated that lesbians could be the victims of  violent  assaults  or
      attacks, particularly in rural areas, but the Judge found  that  these
      appeared to be isolated incidents.



  21. The second appellant's relatives were able to exercise power only in a
      particular area of the Punjab, where she was  born  and  raised.   The
      appellant was an educated, intelligent young woman  with  considerable
      ambition.  The Judge 'did not believe' that the second appellant would
      be prevented from living openly as a lesbian, or  forced  to  moderate
      her lifestyle or compromise her sexual orientation in order to  ensure
      her safety on return.

  22. The First-tier Tribunal found that there was sufficiency of protection
      against non-state actors in India.  If a risk did exist in the  second
      appellant's home area, the Judge  considered  that  it  would  not  be
      unduly harsh to expect the second appellant to  exercise  an  internal
      relocation option to one of the large cities, where she would not need
      to conceal her sexuality and could continue to pursue  her  ambitions.
      She had been in the United Kingdom for less than 3 years at this  time
      and she could resume her family and private life in India  on  return.
      The two appellants could continue their relationship in their  country
      of origin and their return was proportionate,  having  regard  to  the
      legitimate aim of protecting the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
      Kingdom.  If permission to appeal against  her  decision  were  to  be
      granted, she considered that the appeals should be linked for  hearing
      before the Upper Tribunal, which has been done.



  23. On 12 January 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Clive  Lane  found  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error of  law
      and set aside the decision, without preserving any of  the  facts;  it
      appears that he did so  because  he  considered  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal should have adjourned the appeal to be heard jointly  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal with that of the  first  appellant.   He  directed
      that the appeals be heard together.



  24. That was the basis on which these individual appeals came  before  the
      Upper Tribunal for remaking.

Upper Tribunal hearing
Appellants' evidence
  25. We received a short witness statement from each  appellant,  asserting
      that they had ceased contact  with  their  family  members,  including
      changing their mobile telephone numbers, after they  were  'outed'  by
      the first appellant in  2012;  that  a  family  friend  ('Uncle  Raj')
      accommodates them and has attempted to intercede with  their  parents;
      but that their parents remain angry and will kill them on  return  (in
      the case of the second appellant, unless she returns  to  heterosexual
      orientation).




  26. They both stated that Indian society does not treat  women  well,  and
      lesbians worse, and that they had no home and no income  if  returned.
      In their evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellants  had  not
      suggested, and they did not now suggest, that they  had  suffered  any
      persecution in India before coming to the United Kingdom.



  27. The appellants' accounts developed  significantly  during  their  oral
      evidence, and in a manner which was surprising to us.  It appears that
      no member of the appellants'  families  lives  in  India  outside  the
      Punjab.  The first appellant's father works in Dubai,  returning  only
      once a year.  Her mother and slightly older brother still live in  the
      Punjab, as do 16 uncles and aunts, 8 for each parent.  Her brother has
      a mechanical engineering qualification; her mother is uneducated.  The
      second appellant's father has died, and the head of household  in  her
      family is her paternal uncle, who has a  taxi  business.   She  has  a
      mother and younger brother and sister still in India.  They may be  at
      university: she has no contact with her family.




  28. The appellants are highly educated women.  They both studied in  India
      at university for 5 years, living  together  in  student  hostels  and
      accommodation, as many young women do.  They were not 'out'  to  their
      families or the community.  The appellants each achieved a Bachelor of
      Law and an LLB degree, and the second appellant stayed on for an extra
      year to study for a diploma in Forensic  Science,  because  the  first
      appellant had not finished her LLB.




  29. In the United Kingdom, they have both studied for a  1-year  Strategic
      Management Diploma from SciTech,  at  the  Park  Royal  campus.   They
      completed their qualifications in the summer  of  2012  but  there  is
      still money due to the university, because their  parents  refused  to
      pay any more after the revelation of  the  appellants'  sexuality,  so
      they cannot  collect  their  Diploma  certificates.   Both  appellants
      accepted in evidence that, contrary to what  they  asserted  in  their
      witness statements, they would be able to get good jobs in India  with
      these  qualifications,  although  one  expressed  reservations  as  to
      whether  they  could  do  so  if  their  employers  discovered   their
      sexuality.




  30. 'Uncle Raj', the person with whom the appellants live  in  the  United
      Kingdom, is not an uncle to either of them, but he is a family friend,
      related to them neither by blood nor marriage.  He is the uncle  of  a
      friend of the first appellant's brother.  He has four  daughters,  and
      he keeps an off licence.  The appellants' families arranged  for  them
      to live with Uncle  Raj,  when  the  appellants  came  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  Each family spent about �5000 on flights, fees and so on  to
      send the appellants to study in the United Kingdom.




  31. The appellants' families have Uncle Raj's name and his address and his
      telephone number,  but  no  family  member  has  come  to  see  either
      appellant to try to persuade them  to  return  home.   Neither,  after
      being unable to reach the appellants because in January 2012 they  had
      changed their mobile telephone numbers, did any family member write to
      Uncle Raj or telephone his home number to try to resolve matters.




  32. Uncle Raj has been prepared to accommodate the appellants for the last
      4 years, without  any  financial  recompense  or  support  from  their
      families.  The appellants are not working.  He gives  them  food,  and
      money when they need it.  His daughters share their clothes and so  on
      with the appellants.

Country evidence

  33. The respondent's country of origin  information  on  the  position  of
      lesbians and LGBTI persons in  India  consists  of  three  country  of
      origin information and guidance reports, the first dated 18 July  2014
      on the topic of 'India, sexual orientation and gender  identity';  the
      second, dated February 2015, on  actors  of  protection  and  internal
      relocation;  and  the   third,   on   women   fearing   gender   based
      harm/violence, of April 2015. In addition, the respondent produced  an
      Operational  Guidance  Note  in  May  2013,  which  predates  the  Naz
      Foundation judgment and is therefore of limited, if any, assistance to
      us in assessing the risk now.




  34. The respondent's conclusions in the country  reports,  so  far  as  it
      concerns lesbians, may be summarised as follows:




   India, sexual orientation and gender identity (18 July 2014)




   a) Section 377 is never enforced,  save  when  child  abuse  or  rape  is
      alleged.  In the 150 years since it was introduced in 1860, fewer than
      200 people have been prosecuted, with only a minority being consenting
      adults (this is taken from the evidence in the  Naz  Foundation  case,
      and the reference is given).  The Naz Foundation itself  stated  in  a
      letter to the Delhi British High Commission  in  September  2013  that
      they were not aware of any instance 'in  the  last  couple  of  years'
      where an  individual  was  convicted  under  section  377  in  a  case
      involving consenting adults, anywhere in India. The threat of  section
      377 was sometimes used to harass people.




   b) There is no provision in Indian law for civil partnerships or same-sex
      marriage.




   c) Joint adoption of children by a same-sex couple is not  permitted  but
      surrogacy is legal and single male or female parenthood is recognised.




   d) There are no laws in India pertaining specifically to  lesbian  sexual
      activity.


   e) India is a vast diverse multicultural country, with more tolerance  of
      homosexuality in cities  than  in  the  rural  areas.   An  Australian
      Refugee Review Tribunal case on  19  September  2007  (Case  071494945
      [2007] RRTA 276) held that in Mumbai, Delhi, and  also  Bangalore  and
      Kolkata, it was possible to live in  a  publicly  acknowledged  sexual
      relationship,  although  not  easy.   Most  LGBTI  people  kept  their
      sexuality private for that reason.


   f) The major pressure on lesbians in India was the  societal  and  family
      pressure to marry.


   g)  There  was  no  law  against  landlords  discriminating   on   sexual
      orientation grounds but as the Upper Tribunal found in MD (India)  the
      evidence did not disclose this to be endemic 'or anywhere  approaching
      it'.


   h) There were difficulties in the workplace sometimes,  but  70%  of  all
      working people were self-employed and only 17% were in formal salaried
      employment.



   i) Many prominent non-governmental organisations were available  to  help
      LGBTI groups, including the Naz Foundation,  the  Sangini  Trust,  the
      Aanchal  Trust,  the  Humsafar  Trust,  Challenge,  Gay  and   Lesbian
      Vaishnava Association, the Lakshya Trust (for TG persons) and the  Dai
      Welfare  Society  (for  Hijras).  Other  smaller  locally  based  non-
      governmental organisations were also available.




   India:  Background  information,  including  actors  of  protection,  and
   internal relocation (February 2015)



   j) In general, a person is likely to be able to  access  effective  state
      protection against persecution by  non-state  actors  or  rogue  state
      actors.  That may not always be the case in conflict areas where armed
      insurgent  or  terrorist  groups  are  active,  or  by  reason  of  an
      individual's particular circumstances.


   k) Similarly, internal relocation is generally viable but will depend  on
      the nature and origin of  the  threat  as  well  as  the  individual's
      personal circumstances.




   India: women fearing gender-based harm/violence (April 2015)




   l) Women in India are a particular social group.   They  are  subject  to
      widespread and deep-rooted discrimination in  the  exercise  of  their
      rights.  However, in all cases a real risk of gender-based persecution
      must  be  established  on  the  facts  as   the   general   level   of
      discrimination does not meet  the  high  threshold  for  international
      protection.




   m) The legislative framework has been strengthened by the  Protection  of
      Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 and the Criminal Law (Amendment)
      Act 2013,  with  a  high  percentage  of  police  investigations  into
      criminal offences against women resulting in charges and prosecutions.
      Nevertheless, gender-based violence against women  remains  a  serious
      problem and although internal relocation  will  in  many  cases  be  a
      viable solution,  in  some  circumstances,  the  inability  to  access
      accommodation, lack of support networks and inability to secure access
      to a livelihood may make internal  relocation  ineffective.   In  some
      circumstances, effective state protection may not be available.



Amnesty International 2014/2015



  35. The 2014/2015 Amnesty International report for India notes the  change
      of government in India in May 2014, after the elections, when Narendra
      Modi became Prime Minister of a majority BJP government.



           "The Supreme Court agreed to hear a petition seeking a review of
           its ruling in December  2013  which  effectively  recriminalized
           consensual same-sex sexual activity by upholding Section 377  of
           the Indian Penal Code. In the run-up to the  2014  parliamentary
           elections,   prominent   political    parties    committed    to
           decriminalizing homosexuality.




           In  April,  the  Supreme  Court  granted  legal  recognition  to
           transgender  people  in  a  landmark   judgment.   It   directed
           authorities   to   recognize    transgender    persons'    self-
           identification as male, female or a "third gender"  and  put  in
           place social  welfare  policies  and  quotas  in  education  and
           employment. However, cases of harassment  and  violence  against
           transgender people continued to be reported."



Human Rights Watch 2015




  36. The 2015 Human Rights Watch report is to the same effect:




           "The rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,  and  Transgender  (LGBT)
           people suffered a setback in  December  2013  when  the  Supreme
           Court  reversed  a  landmark  2009  Delhi  High  Court  decision
           striking down a colonial-era law criminalizing adult  consensual
           same-sex relations. At time of writing, a petition to review the
           decision was pending before the Supreme Court.  In  April  2014,
           the Supreme Court recognized transgender individuals as a  third
           gender and asked the government to  treat  them  as  a  minority
           eligible for quotas in jobs and education."

US State Department Report 2014

  37. The US State Department Report on Human Rights Practices in  India  in
      2014 was published on June 24 2015 and is thus the  most  up  to  date
      international assessment of the issues with which we are concerned  in
      this appeal:
           "Acts of Violence, Discrimination, and  Other  Abuses  Based  on
           Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
           On January 28, a high court dismissed petitions challenging  the
           December 2013 Supreme Court  judgment  that  overturned  a  2009
           ruling by the Delhi High Court, which had ruled unconstitutional
           a colonial-era portion  of  the  penal  code  that  criminalized
           homosexual sex. The Supreme Court ruled that only parliament may
           make changes to the law that  bans  consensual  same-sex  sexual
           activity. The media, activists, prominent individuals, and  some
           government officials reacted strongly  against  the  ruling.  On
           April 22, the Supreme Court agreed to hear a  curative  petition
           challenging the December ruling.  At  year's  end  the  curative
           petition hearing was pending.
           Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and  transgender  (LGBT)  persons  faced
           physical attacks, rape, and  blackmail.  Some  police  committed
           crimes against LGBT persons and used the  threat  of  arrest  to
           coerce victims not to report the incidents. Several states, with
           the aid of NGOs, offered education and sensitivity  training  to
           police.
           LGBT groups reported that they faced  widespread  discrimination
           and violence throughout society, particularly  in  rural  areas.
           Activists  reported  that  transgender  persons  who  were   HIV
           positive  continued  to  have   difficulty   obtaining   medical
           treatment. Advocacy  organizations,  such  as  the  Mission  for
           Indian  Gay  and  Lesbian   Empowerment   (MINGLE),   documented
           workplace discrimination against LGBT persons,  including  slurs
           and unjustified dismissals.
           Transgender  persons  in  Rajkot,   Gujarat,   and   surrounding
           neighbourhoods   complained   of   discrimination   in   finding
           accommodation. An NGO advocating for LGBT rights  reported  that
           at least 32 transgender persons could not find accommodation  in
           Rajkot and  that  three  had  attempted  suicide  following  the
           discrimination.
           LGBTI activists in Hyderabad expressed satisfaction with  public
           awareness efforts, including protests against the Supreme  Court
           judgment to uphold the criminalization of same-sex conduct.  The
           activists stated, however, that they were  aware  of  homophobia
           among students at  certain  university  campuses.  According  to
           LGBTI students, there was also a systematic disregard for  LGBTI
           rights on university campuses.
           On April 15, the Supreme  Court  codified  the  right  to  self-
           identify as male, female, or third gender. The  ruling  gives  a
           person the right to identify as "third gender" when  registering
           to vote, own property, marry, or apply for  a  passport,  ration
           card, and driver's license. The judgment also  instructed  state
           and  central  governments  to  extend  affirmative   action   or
           reservations to transgender individuals for admission to higher-
           education  facilities,  public  appointments,  and   health-care
           services. The  Supreme  Court  assigned  a  committee  to  study
           problems  faced  by  the  transgender  community   and   provide
           suggestions on how to address discrimination. On  September  11,
           the central government filed a formal request asking the Supreme
           Court for clarifications  on  the  policy  implications  of  the
           ruling as well as an implementation extension.
           Following the April Supreme Court verdict, Bharathy Kannamma,  a
           transgender individual from  Madurai,  Tamil  Nadu,  ran  for  a
           parliamentary  seat  in  the  Lok  Sabha  (the  upper  house  of
           parliament)  as  an  independent  candidate  during  the   April
           national elections.
           In July, following the April Supreme  Court  ruling  recognizing
           "transgenders" or  "third  genders,"  the  Maharashtra  election
           commission authorities rejected a  petition  to  include  "third
           gender" on electoral rolls.
           On August 19,  the  government  of  Telangana  commissioned  the
           Intensive Household Survey to collect social and  economic  data
           to  ensure  those  who  qualified  for  welfare  programs   were
           registered and receiving benefits. According  to  a  transgender
           rights activist, the survey collected  data  for  at  least  800
           transgender individuals, consequently entitling them to multiple
           welfare programs due to the April Supreme Court judgment.

           On September 24, the Delhi Development Authority, under its vice
           chairman's direction, provided a third gender option on its 2014
           housing eligibility forms, which for  the  first  time  included
           "male, female, or third gender."

Professor Shahani's evidence

  38. Professor Nishant Shahani was born and raised in Mumbai (also known as
      Bombay) in India, but left for the United States in 1999, when he  was
      23,  to  pursue  higher  education  there.   He  retains  his   Indian
      citizenship but has permanent residence in the United  States,  and  a
      green card entitling him to work there.




  39. Professor Shahani returns regularly to Mumbai  every  summer  and  his
      evidence is based on the knowledge he then  gains,  and  his  personal
      experience as a member of the LGBTI community,, together with critical
      scholarship  on  LGBTI  identities   in   India,   recent   historical
      developments, and his personal interactions with LGBTI communities and
      activists on the ground, in Mumbai in particular.




  40. Professor Shahani is an  Associate  Professor  at  the  Department  of
      Critical Culture, Gender and Race Studies Graduate  Program  (formerly
      the Women's Studies Department) at Washington State University. He has
      been associated with that Department since 2006. His  academic  career
      began with a BA, later an  MA,  in  English  from  the  University  of
      Bombay,  in  1997-1999,  followed  by  a  Master's  degree  from   the
      University of Florida in 2001 on the subject 'Queering India:  Towards
      a Post-Colonial Queer Methodology', and finally, a PhD from  the  same
      university in Spring 2006 on the subject 'Queer Pedagogy and  American
      Studies: a Reparative Re-thinking'.  He  has  published  and  lectured
      extensively on what he describes as 'queer politics and  sexuality  in
      India'  and  in  particular,  on  reparative  return  and   reparative
      performance.




  41. Professor Shahani recognised that section 377 and other  Indian  Penal
      Code (IPC) provisions do not expressly reference lesbianism; the  risk
      to lesbians in  his  opinion  is  from  non-state  actors,  using  the
      legislation as a threat to enforce certain conduct, rather than  using
      it through the Courts in the normal way. His  evidence  was  that  the
      threatened use of section 368, which deals with kidnapping, is used to
      force younger women to return  home  after  leaving  to  join  lesbian
      groups and enter into lesbian relationships.  Mere  cohabitation  with
      another woman could be seen as evidence of sexual activity.




  42. Professor Shahani  noted  that  there  had  been  no  prosecutions  of
      lesbians whatsoever under either section 368 or 377 and that the right
      to privacy is guaranteed by Article 21  of  the  Indian  Constitution.
      Professor  Shahani's  opinion  is  that  lesbianism   has   not   been
      criminalised  'in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term'  but  the  BJP's
      insistence on the maintenance of  traditional  family  structures  has
      devastating impacts on the lives of lesbian women.  He observes that:



           "India, of course, is a highly diverse country that is  mediated
           by class, linguistic and religious lines. While homophobia might
           manifest itself in different  formulations  and  look  different
           depending on  these  multiple  vectors  of  identity,  prejudice
           against same-sex cuts across these different modalities."



  43. The core of Professor Shahani's thesis is that the majority  of  women
      in India with same-sex desires are forced into heterosexual marriages,
      and into secrecy.  For those who resist, physical threats result in  a
      form of domestic imprisonment, particularly in  smaller  towns,  where
      moral  character  is  vital  and  most  families  know  one   another.
      Cosmopolitan centres such as Mumbai, Delhi and  Bangalore  allow  more
      economic independence and an opportunity to  break  away  from  family
      constraints, but those opportunities are more easily available to  men
      than women, due to the lower status of women in India.  Women who live
      without a husband, family, or identifiable  origin,  even  in  cities,
      attract suspicion of being 'loose women'  or  prostitutes  and,  apart
      from students living in student  hostels,  women  living  together  is
      quite uncommon, in Professor Shahani's experience.



  44. The references in Professor Shahani's report are  helpfully  supported
      by internet hyperlinks, as  well  as  in  some  cases  the  hard  copy
      documents, and are summarised in Appendix B below.  We had regard,  in
      particular to an article by Morgan Welch on  the  website  FourTwoNine
      dated Friday April 18 2014, which was not included in  the  bundle  of
      documents but is incorporated by reference and is still  available  on
      the web:



           "...Two of the political parties in India,  the  anti-corruption
           Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), and the ruling Indian National  Congress,
           have included Section 377's removal in their political agendas.


            However, the party currently leading the polls,  the  Bharatiya
           Janata Party (BJP)  has  made  no  such  declarations,  and  its
           president  Rajnath  Singh  has  said  his  party  supports   the
           upholding of Section 377. According to the Times  of  India,  he
           said, "Gay sex is not natural and we  cannot  support  something
           which is unnatural." A member of  AAP,  Harish  Iyer,  told  the
           Global Post, "In order for this invisible  community  to  become
           invincible,   we   have   to   show   numbers   and   politicize
           ourselves...We need to fight not only for LGBT  people  but  for
           all those who want  to  live  their  lives  without  the  Indian
           government peeping in their bedrooms."


           Already, the Indian LGBT community has seen  what  speaking  out
           can do; the AAP did not initially include striking  Section  377
           back down in its political manifesto, but  did  after  activists
           made their voices heard. ...


           On April 15, the Indian Supreme Court directed state and federal
           governments  to  include  transgender  people  in  all   welfare
           programs for the poor, including  health  care,  education,  and
           jobs to help them overcome social and economic challenges.  They
           also ordered the introduction and legal recognition of  a  third
           gender category, and the apex court stated that they will run  a
           public awareness campaign to erase social stigma.  According  to
           the Times of India, the court also admitted that Section 377  of
           the penal code, which includes language calling certain types of
           sexual  activity  "against  the  order  of  nature,"  was  being
           mistreated and misused by both  the  police  and  various  other
           authorities.


            A national executive member of the BJP, Shaina NC, stated  that
           "Gays and lesbians are not criminals, but we are a  conservative
           party  that  strongly  believes  in   the   traditional   family
           structure, and the need to keep  our  social  and  moral  fabric
           intact."  It's an argument many  societies  no  longer  consider
           persuasive, and may not last much longer in India either. ..."

Press reports

  45. The press reports in the Upper Tribunal  bundle  record  a  number  of
      instances where lesbian couples sought to marry and live  together  as
      spouses (see Appendix B, at [39], [46],  and  [50]),  and  others  who
      lived together.  In some cases, one partner is described as taking the
      male role, wearing short hair and masculine clothes.  There appear  to
      be  a  number  of  religious  ceremonial  options  which   have   been
      successfully used by lesbian couples wishing to  marry.   The  reports
      relied upon are not all  post-Naz  Foundation  and  it  is  the  later
      reports, from 2014 onwards, which are most  significant  in  assessing
      the current position.  The reports are set out in Appendix B  and  are
      discussed below.

Submissions
  46. For the respondent, Mr Nath relied on his skeleton  argument  and  the
      agreed questions.  He contended that the Naz  Foundation  judgment  of
      the Indian Supreme Court, whatever its current status, should  not  be
      treated as determinative  of  any  larger  issue  than  overturning  a
      specific decision of the Delhi High  Court.   He  contended  that  any
      negative effect which the judgment might have would in law be  limited
      to Delhi State and thus would not entail any legal or  social  changes
      elsewhere in India.  There was no real risk in general of  enforcement
      of the IPC provisions, and no evidence  of  increased  risk  to  LGBTI
      persons, including lesbians in India.  Although there was evidence  in
      2014 of  nearly  600  arrests  of  homosexuals  in  India,  there  had
      apparently been no prosecutions  and  there  was  no  evidence  as  to
      whether any of those arrested were lesbians.

  47. Mr Nath relied upon the judicial  headnote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      country guidance decision in MD (same-sex oriented males: risk)  India
      CG [2014] UKUT 65 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).In relation to  the
      risk from State actors, Mr Nath also relied on paragraph 145 of the MD
      (India) decision:

      "145.    Further, the evidence before us does not support a conclusion
      that the fact of the Supreme Court's judgment will trigger any, or any
      significant, increase in the levels of violence or extortion  attempts
      levelled at same-sex oriented males by the police, or indeed  by  non-
      state actors, such that there will be a real risk  to  any  particular
      same-sex oriented male of being subjected to such treatment. There was
      no real risk of a same-sex  oriented  male  being  subjected  to  such
      treatment in the years immediately preceding the 2009 judgment of  the
      Delhi  High  Court,  and  since  the  section  377  litigation  began,
      homosexuality has emerged into the public sphere and  the  number  and
      reach of the LBGTQ support organisations has steadily grown."


  48. The real question, Mr Nath argued, was whether there would be  a  risk
      from non-state actors if the appellants were returned to India.   Even
      assuming that they were at risk in their  home  area  in  the  Punjab,
      which the respondent did not accept, Mr Nath contended that the expert
      evidence of Professor Shahani as to risk  was  insufficiently  sourced
      and  could  not  carry  much  weight.   The  appellants  were   living
      independently before coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  and,  unusually
      perhaps, all of their extended family members lived in a single Indian
      state.  Professor Shahani's assertion that these appellants could  not
      relocate safely elsewhere  in  India  was  unsourced,  unsupported  by
      evidence, and speculative.   As to the possibility of their supporting
      themselves by working,  while  Professor  Shahani  had  accepted  that
      educated women in India worked, she had been unable  to  provide  much
      assistance beyond that.  His evidence as to whether they would be able
      to sustain themselves in Mumbai, Bangalore or Delhi, as they had  done
      in the past, was also pure speculation.



  49. In reality, the evidence indicated  that  such  risk  as  existed  for
      lesbians in India came from family members and local police  in  their
      home areas.  In this case, the appellants' family members  had  washed
      their hands of them.  There had been no letters, no  telephone  calls,
      and no written threats.  No member of the extended family had  visited
      the United Kingdom to seek to persuade the appellants to return  home.





  50. Mr Nath did not ask the Tribunal to go  behind  the  findings  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal that these appellants were credible  witnesses  in
      relation to the evidence  which  had  been  given  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing, but he submitted that their  oral  evidence  at  the
      Upper Tribunal hearing entitled the Upper Tribunal to find that  their
      responses on continuing risk were self-serving. There were a number of
      support organisations available to assist them  if  required  and  the
      appellants  were  highly-educated  and  able  to  work   and   support
      themselves on return, a circumstance which they had not  disclosed  to
      the First-tier Tribunal.



  51. In summary, Mr Nath asked the Upper Tribunal  to  place  no,  or  very
      little, weight on the expert evidence.  There were no  reported  cases
      of prosecution under  the  IPC  and  no  overall  evidence  of  police
      misconduct at a level which  engaged  international  protection.   The
      appellants would have access to numerous support networks in India and
      with their skill sets, it was inconceivable that they would  not  find
      work in a larger city.  There was no obligation upon  them  to  inform
      any employer of their sexuality, even having regard  to  the  guidance
      given by the  United  Kingdom  Supreme  Court  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
      (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]  UKSC
      31.  There was a new  government  in  India  and  a  new  policy;  the
      appellants had produced no evidence that the Naz  Foundation  judgment
      had fuelled an increase in difficulties for LGBTI  persons  in  India.
      Nor was there reliable evidence of police complicity  in  relation  to
      LGBTI groups.




  52. In Mr Nath's submission, no risk of persecution or  serious  harm  had
      been made out and he asked the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeals.



  53. For the appellants, Ms Hashmi also relied on  her  skeleton  argument,
      and on  the  country  evidence  in  the  appellants'  bundle,  on  the
      treatment of women  generally  in  India.  Ms  Hashmi  relied  on  the
      expert's report as to the risk to  lesbians  in  India.   In  MD,  the
      Tribunal had not been concerned with the position of women.  Ms Hashmi
      accepted that section 377 of the IPC in its original form was  clearly
      understood in India to apply only  to  non-heterosexual  men,  not  to
      lesbians.



  54. It was very important to consider such evidence as there  was  in  the
      cultural context of  India.   India  had  an  enforced  moral  policy,
      leading LGBTI people to keep themselves closeted. Women in India  were
      more vulnerable than men, and the bundle included evidence of domestic
      and other violence against women in the  Punjab,  albeit  without  any
      context as to the sexuality  of  the  victims.  Both  women  and  non-
      heterosexual men  were  disadvantaged  in  India:  the  appellants  as
      lesbians bore a double yoke of disadvantage. She  contended  that  the
      current ruling party, the BJP, was openly  hostile  to  LGBTI  issues,
      greatly increasing the pressure on lesbian women in Indian society.




  55. Ms Hashmi argued that absence of evidence should not  be  regarded  as
      evidence of absence.  Data as to the treatment of  lesbians  was  less
      available and probably inaccurate: the only study the  appellants  had
      been able to discover was a paper entitled  "The  nature  of  violence
      faced by lesbian women in India: A study conducted by  Bina  Fernandez
      and Gomathy N.B" prepared in 2003 for the Research Centre on  Violence
      Against  Women,  Tata  Institute  of  Social  Sciences,  Mumbai  2003)
      ("Fernandez-Gomathy case study"). There was  some  evidence  that  the
      police used section 377 as a pretext to harass women, especially where
      families were involved.  There were no official  statistics  regarding
      the position of  lesbians:  their  sexual  orientation  was  not  even
      recognised by the Indian government.



  56. Ms Hashmi accepted  that  the  appellants  would  be  able  to  secure
      employment when they returned to India, albeit they  might  have  some
      difficulty, and would have  access  to  NGO  support  in  the  cities.
      However, she questioned whether the employment  would  last  once  the
      appellants' sexual orientation became known.  India did not  recognise
      same-sex marriages or civil partnerships and news of their orientation
      might travel.  There would be a problem in retaining a  job  when  the
      fact emerged that they were in a lesbian couple.  Ms  Hashmi  asserted
      that there was widespread discrimination and  violence  against  LGBTI
      persons in India, particularly in rural areas.  She reminded the Upper
      Tribunal of the male LGBTI workers who had been arrested 11 years ago,
      in 2004, for handing out safe sex leaflets, and  of  the  evidence  of
      'cure' centres in Goa.



  57. Ms Hashmi submitted that what occurred between lesbians  was  regarded
      as a  deviant  sexual  act  and  there  was  no  need  for  it  to  be
      specifically  criminalised.  The  Supreme  Court   judgment   in   Naz
      Foundation had led to more public discussion of LGBTI  issues  but  it
      had nevertheless fuelled homophobia, although the  average  person  in
      India would be unaware of the decision.  The evidence was  that  after
      the judgment was published in 2014 there had been almost  600  arrests
      of  homosexuals,  but  to  the   appellants'   knowledge,   still   no
      prosecutions.



  58. Ms Hashmi accepted that the appellants' family members had not  sought
      to use section 368 against  them,  but  considered  that  it  was  not
      necessary for the family to turn up in the United  Kingdom  to  pursue
      the appellants: the threats which they had made were effective without
      their presence.  The primary question for the Upper Tribunal was  what
      would happen if the appellants returned to  India,  and  the  Tribunal
      should be prepared to find that, on the balance of probabilities, they
      would be at risk in the  Punjab  because  of  the  attitude  of  their
      families and the families' knowledge of the appellants' sexuality.



  59. Even if the risk from the appellants' families  were  limited  to  the
      Punjab, they could not be expected  to  relocate  elsewhere  in  India
      because there existed a risk from non-state actors throughout India by
      reason of the moral policing which had been fuelled by section 377 and
      the Naz Foundation judgment.  Section 377 provided further  ammunition
      and tools for men to discriminate against and harass  women,  and  the
      police were complicit.




  60. Returning to the questions originally posed, Ms Hashmi did not seek to
      assert section 377 of the IPC  criminalised  lesbianism  or  made  any
      provision in  relation  to  lesbian  acts;  that  there  had  been  no
      prosecutions under section 377; but she asked  us  to  find  that  the
      threat of prosecution was used as a pretext for harassment. Ms  Hashmi
      asked us to allow the individual appeals.



  61. We reserved our decision, which we now give.




Discussion




  62. The provisions in the IPC relied upon by the  appellants  are  section
      368 and 377:



           "368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped
           or abducted person.-Whoever, knowing that any  person  has  been
           kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or  confines
           such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if  he  had
           kidnapped or abducted such person with  the  same  intention  or
           knowledge, or for the same purpose as that with or for which  he
           conceals or detains such person in confinement. ...




           377.  Unnatural   offences.-Whoever   voluntarily   has   carnal
           intercourse against the order of nature with any man,  woman  or
           animal, shall be punished with [imprisonment for life], or  with
           imprisonment of either description for a term which  may  extend
           to ten years, and shall also be liable  to  fine.  Explanation.-
           Penetration is sufficient to constitute the  carnal  intercourse
           necessary to the offence described in this section."




  63. The mere existence in national  legislations  of  criminal  provisions
      prohibiting LGBTI sexual activity does not amount to persecution.  The
      approach to be taken was set out  by  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
      European Union in Minister voor Immigratie en Asiel v X, Y & Z  [2013]
      EUECJ C-199/12:


      "1.      Article 10(1)(d) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29  April
      2004 ... must be interpreted as meaning that the existence of criminal
      laws, such as those at  issue  in  each  of  the  cases  in  the  main
      proceedings,  which  specifically  target  homosexuals,  supports  the
      finding that those persons must be regarded as  forming  a  particular
      social group.


      2.      Article 9(1) of Directive 2004/83, read together with  Article
      9(2)(c)  thereof,  must   be   interpreted   as   meaning   that   the
      criminalisation of homosexual acts per se does not constitute  an  act
      of persecution.  However,  a  term  of  imprisonment  which  sanctions
      homosexual acts and which is actually applied in the country of origin
      which adopted such legislation must be regarded as being a  punishment
      which is disproportionate or discriminatory and  thus  constitutes  an
      act of persecution.


      3.      Article 10(1)(d) of  Directive  2004/83,  read  together  with
      Article 2(c)  thereof,  must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  only
      homosexual acts which are criminal in accordance with the national law
      of the Member States are excluded from its scope.  When  assessing  an
      application for  refugee  status,  the  competent  authorities  cannot
      reasonably expect, in order to avoid  the  risk  of  persecution,  the
      applicant for asylum to conceal his homosexuality in  his  country  of
      origin or  to  exercise  reserve  in  the  expression  of  his  sexual
      orientation."



  64. We begin by noting that both parties accept that there  have  been  no
      prosecutions of lesbians  under  section  377  at  all,  and  that  in
      practice, section 377 is perceived in Indian law  as  inapplicable  to
      lesbians. In February 2014, when MD was decided, the effect of the Naz
      Foundation judgment handed down by the  Indian  Supreme  Court  on  11
      December 2013 was too recent for any long-term effects to be  reliably
      established. We recall that the legal position  set  out  in  the  Naz
      Foundation judgment went no further than finding that section 377  was
      not unconstitutional.



  65. The Supreme Court's reasoning in the Naz Foundation judgment is  based
      upon section 377 as it stood when the case was  heard,  some  2  years
      before the judgment was handed down.  Amendments to the law of rape in
      sections 375-376 made by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2013 did not
      include promised amendments to section 377, which was considered to be
      sub judice pending the outcome of the Naz  Foundation  appeal  in  the
      Supreme Court.



  66. The Naz Foundation  decision  remains  under  challenge:   although  a
      number of review petitions filed against the decision  were  dismissed
      by the Supreme Court on 28  January  2014,  in  March  2014,  the  Naz
      Foundation filed a curative petition against the judgment,  which,  if
      successful, would result in the December 2013 Supreme  Court  judgment
      being set aside and remade by a different constitution of  the  Court.
      On 23 April 2014, a four-judge bench of the Court gave permission  for
      the curative petition to proceed to oral argument.  No  indication  of
      the outcome is before us.



  67. The curative petition relies on the failure to  take  account  of  the
      changes wrought by the  Criminal  Law  (Amendment)  Act  2013  to  the
      definition of rape in section 375, which was amended to include penile
      penetration, by any means, of  women  as  well  as  men,  and  on  the
      perceived incompatibility of the Naz Foundation judgment with the more
      human rights-based approach in the  judgment  of  the  Indian  Supreme
      Court on 15 April 2014 in National Legal Services Authority v Union of
      India and others, Writ Petition  (Civil)  no.400  of  2012  (the  NLSA
      judgment) which is referred to in the 2014 US State Department  Report
      published on June 24 2015.



  68. We are entitled to have regard to the NLSA judgment as  indicative  of
      the legal approach which the Indian Supreme Court may adopt in future,
      if the curative petition succeeds.  The NLSA judgment is supportive of
      the position taken by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  its  existing  country
      guidance and adopts  a  rights-based  international  approach  to  the
      position of transgender persons (TGs) in India, directing that they be
      given legal and human rights as a  'third  sex'  in  Indian  law.   In
      contrast to the lukewarm support for section 377 in the Naz Foundation
      judgment, Justice K.S. Radhakrishnan in  his  judgment  in  NLSA  said
      this:

      "119.       The role of the Court is to understand the central purpose
      and theme of the Constitution for the  welfare  of  the  society.  Our
      Constitution, like the law of the society, is a living organism. It is
      based on a factual and social reality  that  is  constantly  changing.
      Sometimes a change in the law precedes societal  change  and  is  even
      intended to stimulate it. Sometimes, a change in the law is the result
      in the social reality. ...It is the denial of social justice which  in
      turn has the effect of denying political and economic justice. ...

      122. It is now very well recognized that the Constitution is a  living
      character; its interpretation must be dynamic. It must  be  understood
      in a way that intricate and advances modern reality. The judiciary  is
      the guardian of the Constitution and by ensuring to  grant  legitimate
      right that is due to TGs, we are simply  protecting  the  Constitution
      and the democracy inasmuch as judicial  protection  and  democracy  in
      general and of human rights in particular is a characteristic  of  our
      vibrant democracy."
  69. We have regard to the evidence  of  Professor  Shahani.   In  his  own
      evidence, both written and oral, he accepted that there were places in
      India where lesbians could live in  open  relationships,  particularly
      where they are what she described as 'middle class' and have financial
      independence.  We  note  the  evidence  he  gave  about  the  problems
      experienced by a number of  lesbian  couples  over  the  years,  which
      strikingly (given the lack of any recognition of same-sex marriage  in
      India) often arose after the couple had eloped and tried to marry,  in
      a variety of ceremonies both civil and religious. In most, but not all
      the cases cited, the problems had come from the women's families.

  70. We also note Professor Shahani's evidence about the  range  of  social
      networks within India, but that will of course be a question  of  fact
      in each case.   He  was  unaware  of  many  recent  examples  and  the
      instances in his report were many years old, in most cases.  Professor
      Shahani's personal knowledge  of  life  for  LGBTI  persons  in  India
      appeared to be limited to the position,  particularly  for  male  non-
      heterosexuals, in his home city, Mumbai.  Professor  Shahani  conceded
      that the evidence before the  Tribunal  did  not  amount  to  reliable
      evidence of a pattern of police misconduct to lesbians.  We note  that
      same-sex couples have difficulty in  legally  adopting  children,  but
      given that single women may adopt or undergo IVF, such couples do  not
      need to be childless and we do not consider that legal restriction  to
      be capable of reaching the persecution threshold.


  71. We have considered the Fernandez-Gomathy case  study.   The  width  of
      their definition of 'violence' includes  many  circumstances  normally
      considered to be harassment or discrimination, rather  than  violence,
      which makes the study less helpful, but  it  is  the  only  systematic
      study available concerning the circumstances  of  lesbians  in  India.
      The Fernandez-Gomathy case study is not new: it was finalised in 2003,
      long before the liberalisation which the Delhi High Court judgment  in
      Naz Foundation began.  The principal  risk  identified  by  the  women
      studied came from their family members, and from silent shame,  social
      stigma, and ostracism in their home areas.


  72. The press reports before us are striking:  they speak of  difficulties
      for lesbian couples who eloped or married  each  other  without  their
      family members' approval.  We note,  in  particular,  that  a  lesbian
      couple who fled Mumbai for Delhi in 2011 received protection from  the
      Delhi Police from overzealous officers of  the  Mumbai  police,  after
      theft charges were laid by family members in Mumbai.  In May  2012,  a
      police post in Ambala arranged protection and the family dispute  went
      before the Civil Court for a  decision  as  to  whether  the  families
      should be made to accept their daughters' sexuality.  Another  report,
      which  may  concern  the  same  lesbian  marriage,   reflects   police
      protection ordered by the Punjab and Haryana  High  Court  and  formal
      disinheriting of one of the women by her family.



  73. Reports after the Naz Foundation judgment reflect public  pressure  on
      both sides of the argument and political manoeuvring as the new Indian
      BJP government decides how to approach the question. We do not  accept
      the submission of Ms Hashmi that the  evidence  is  that  the  BJP  is
      implacably opposed to LGBTI rights. We note that immediately after the
      Indian Supreme Court's decision in December 2013 in the Naz Foundation
      case, a BJP spokesman said in a live interview that homosexuality  was
      unnatural and that the party supported section 377.   In  March  2014,
      members of the BJP's ideological fount,  Rashtriya  Swayamsevak  Sangh
      (RSS) expressed a firm anti-LGBTI stance  ahead  of  the  election  in
      which the BJP won power.  Since that election, other BJP leaders  such
      as  Arun  Jaitley  and  Harsh  Vardhan  have  spoken  in   favour   of
      decriminalising homosexuality.  We do not consider that  the  evidence
      demonstrates that there is a fixed overall BJP position on the issue.


  74.  The Indian  government  has  begun  collecting  statistical  data  on
      arrests of homosexuals in many,  but  not  all,  Indian  states.   The
      population of India was last recorded in  2014  at  over  1.2  billion
      people.  The records in the bundle before us  indicate  that  in  2014
      there were 778 arrests of homosexuals nationally, but not whether  the
      arrests were followed by a prosecution,  nor  whether  those  arrested
      were non-heterosexual men or lesbians.  We do not consider  that  this
      amounts  to  reliable  evidence  of  arrests  of  lesbian   women   or
      prosecution of lesbian women, at a level capable  of  amounting  to  a
      real risk of persecution or serious harm.


  75. We remind ourselves of the guidance  on  transgender  or  'third  sex'
      persons given by the Supreme Court in the NLSA case, just a few months
      after the Naz Foundation judgment, and the ongoing challenges  to  the
      Naz Foundation decision.  We also recall that the Indian government is
      to bring in legislation in the next Parliament, following the  success
      of the private members' bill.  We cannot  on  that  basis  regard  the
      effect of the Naz  Foundation  judgment  as  a  re-criminalisation  of
      homosexual activity, still less of lesbian sexual activity.



  76. Since there have been no prosecutions of lesbians in India,  we  agree
      with Ms Hashmi that the real issue is the risk to lesbians arising out
      of the activities of non-state actors.  Ms  Hashmi  conceded,  as  did
      Professor Shahani, that the evidence does not  support  a  finding  of
      endemic police complicity in  harassment  or  other  ill-treatment  of
      lesbian couples or individuals.


  77. Even if there were an individual risk of persecution or  serious  harm
      in a lesbian woman's home area, given the size and enormous population
      of India, in many cases there will be an internal  relocation  option.
      We remind ourselves of the guidance given by the  House  of  Lords  in
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appellant) v.  AH  (Sudan)
      and others (FC) [2007] UKHL 49, at [5] in the opinion of Lord  Bingham
      of Cornhill and [20] in the opinion of Baroness Hale),  approving  the
      approach of Lord Bingham in Januzi and others v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2  AC  426,  at  [21].   The
      House of Lords' position is summarised in the opinion of Baroness Hale
      in AH (Sudan):
      "20.  We are all agreed that the correct approach to the question  of
      internal relocation under the Refugee Convention is that  set  out  so
      clearly by my noble and learned friend, Lord Bingham of  Cornhill,  in
      Januzi and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]
      UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, at para 21:
           "The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to do so."
      As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this case,
           " . . . the correct approach when considering the reasonableness
           of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is to  assess  all  the
           circumstances of the individual's  case  holistically  and  with
           specific reference to the  individual's  personal  circumstances
           (including past persecution or fear thereof,  psychological  and
           health condition, family  and  social  situation,  and  survival
           capacities). This assessment is to be made in the context of the
           conditions in the place of  relocation  (including  basic  human
           rights,   security   conditions,   socio-economic    conditions,
           accommodation, access to health care facilities),  in  order  to
           determine the impact on  that  individual  of  settling  in  the
           proposed place of relocation and whether  the  individual  could
           live a relatively normal life without undue hardship."
      I do not understand there to be any difference between  this  approach
      and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5 of his opinion. Very
      little, apart from the conditions in the country to which the claimant
      has fled, is ruled out."
The question of internal relocation will be one of  fact  for  the  decision
maker in each individual case  where  in  the  home  area  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm is found to exist.

  78. We bear in mind all of  the  evidence  before  us,  and  we  give  the
      following country guidance:



    7) The guidance in MD (same-sex oriented males) India CG [2014] UKUT 65
       (IAC) stands.  The guidance at (a)  -  (f)  in  MD  (India)  applies
       equally to lesbians.



    8) A risk of persecution or serious harm for a lesbian woman in  India,
       where it exists, arises from her family members, and the  extent  of
       such risk, and whether  it  extends  beyond  the  home  area,  is  a
       question of fact in each case.



    9) The risk of persecution or serious harm  is  higher  for  uneducated
       lower class lesbian women in  rural  areas,  who  remain  under  the
       control of their family members and may not be  permitted  to  leave
       the home to continue meeting their lesbian partners.




   10) Where family members are hostile to  a  lesbian  woman's  sexuality,
       they may reject her completely and sometimes formally  renounce  her
       as a member of that family.  In such a case, whether relocation to a
       city is unduly harsh will be a question of fact,  depending  on  the
       ability of such a lesbian woman to survive  economically  away  from
       her family and social networks.



   11) If a lesbian woman's family wishes to pursue and  harm  her  in  the
       place of internal relocation, their ability to do so will depend  on
       the reach of the family network, how persistent they  are,  and  how
       influential.   The  evidence  indicates  that  there   is   normally
       sufficient state protection for women whose families  seek  to  harm
       them in their place of internal relocation.



   12)  In general, where there is a risk of persecution or serious harm in
       a lesbian woman's home area, for  educated,  and  therefore  'middle
       class' women, an internal relocation option is available.  They  are
       likely to be able to relocate to one of the major  cities  in  India
       and are likely to be able to find employment and support themselves,
       albeit with difficulty, and to live  together  openly,  should  they
       choose to do so.  In general, such relocation  will  not  be  unduly
       harsh.

The individual appellants
  79.  Applying  the  principles  set  out  above,  we  now  turn   to   the
      circumstances of these appellants.  It is not disputed  that  lesbians
      in India are a particular social group. The  respondent  accepts  that
      the appellants are  lesbians  and  that  they  entered  into  a  civil
      partnership on 28 March 2013.  They are in  a  committed  relationship
      and have been so for some years.  They are at  least  'middle  class',
      and highly educated.

  80. We remind ourselves  of  the  preserved  findings  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision for the first  appellant.   The  appellants'  sexual
      orientation, and their relationship, now a civil partnership,  is  not
      doubted.


  81. From the evidence before us, we find that  both  appellants  are  both
      graduates in law and in the case  of  the  first  appellant,  also  in
      forensic science, who came to the United Kingdom as students for post-
      graduate business studies.  In the United  Kingdom,  they  have  lived
      with the first appellants' courtesy Uncle', who has daughters  of  his
      own.  With no inducement from the appellants'  families,  indeed  with
      their active disapproval,  he  has  housed,  clothed,  fed  and  given
      spending money to both appellants and there is  no  evidence  that  he
      will not continue to do so if they remain here.  He has also sought to
      intercede with their parents, without success.  No harm  has  come  to
      Uncle Raj from doing so.

  82. They have no family members in the  cities,  nor  indeed  outside  the
      Punjab and the hostility, and thus risk (if any), to them on the facts
      of both appeals is confined to the Punjab, where their family  members
      live. The appellants' parents  are  aware  of  their  orientation  and
      relationship.  Since the appellants changed their mobile telephones in
      January 2012 to block contact from their families, their  parents  and
      extended family members have not written to the appellants or to Uncle
      Raj, telephoned Uncle Raj's house, or come to the  United  Kingdom  to
      try to persuade these appellants  to  come  home.   They  have  simply
      detached themselves from the appellants. We do  not  find  that  their
      families have any interest in pursuing these appellants.  Our  primary
      finding therefore is that there is no risk to the appellants in  their
      home area of the Punjab, where all of their family live.




  83. It is not in dispute that  the  appellants  wish  to  continue  living
      together as a couple, if they are returned to India.  We  accept  that
      both of them have rejected, and been rejected by their  families.   We
      find that these appellants  have  an  internal  relocation  option  to
      cities in other states such as Mumbai, Delhi or Bangalore and that  it
      would not be unduly harsh to expect them to exercise that option.  The
      appellants are highly educated and both accepted in their evidence was
      that their qualifications would get them good jobs in an Indian  city,
      such that they would be able to live together and would be able to pay
      for accommodation, food and so on.



  84. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the appellants have family  life  together,
      which would be unaffected by their return  to  India.   Their  private
      life in the United Kingdom can be given little weight since it has all
      developed while their presence here was either precarious or  unlawful
      (see sections 117B(3) and 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)).  It has not  been  suggested  that  the
      appellants  could  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  and
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.



  85. Nor are there any Nagre exceptional circumstances  in  either  appeal.
      The absence of recognition for  their  civil  partnership  is  not  of
      itself sufficient to amount to a breach of Article 8 ECHR, still  less
      to persecutory treatment or serious harm (see  LH  and  IP  (gay  men:
      risk) Sri Lanka  (CG)  [2015]  UKUT  73  (IAC)  at  [120]-[122]).  The
      evidence of their private life, if any, in the United Kingdom  remains
      slender and is insufficient to outweigh the United Kingdom's right  to
      control immigration, as both First-tier Tribunal Judges found in their
      decisions.   We do not consider  that  removing  these  appellants  to
      India would be disproportionate on Article 8 grounds.

  86. In answer to the questions posed by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson on  12
      October 2012, and having regard to the decision of the  Supreme  Court
      in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2010] UKSC 31 we find as follows:




     1) The appellants are living openly as lesbians and civil partners  in
        the United Kingdom and are likely to continue to do  so  in  India.
        Their families have disowned them and have shown no inclination  to
        pursue them in the United Kingdom.  We do not consider  that  there
        is a real risk that they would seek to do so in India;  and




     2) If there is  any  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  to  the
        appellants from the local community in their home area,  they  have
        an internal relocation option to one of India's larger cities.   We
        do not consider that it is unduly harsh to expect them to  exercise
        such an option, having regard to their sex, their orientation,  and
        the committed nature of their relationship as civil partners  under
        United Kingdom law.


Remaking the decisions


  87. The making of the previous decisions involved the making of  an  error
      on a point of law.  The previous decisions have been set  aside.   Our
      decision is that these appeals are dismissed on all grounds.

Date:                                        Signed:     Judith AJC Gleeson
                                             Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson











                                 APPENDIX A

                          Summary of Oral Evidence

First appellant's evidence (AR)

1. The first appellant adopted her witness statement, which she  stated  was
   true to the best of her knowledge, information and belief.  She confirmed
   that she wished it to stand as her evidence-in-chief.



2. The  first  appellant  stated  that  she  informed  her  parents  of  her
   sexuality in early 2012 and they called repeatedly, threatening  to  kill
   her if she ever returned to India, because she had caused shame  to  them
   by being a lesbian.  She had changed her mobile telephone number and  had
   no contact with her family since then. Her Uncle Raj  had  visited  India
   twice since 2012: on the first  occasion  he  tried  to  resolve  matters
   between the first appellant and her parents, but  they  were  simply  not
   interested.  They told Uncle Raj that they would kill the first appellant
   if she returned.  During the second visit, Uncle Raj made no  attempt  to
   mediate further but her parents still spoke to him  of  their  anger  and
   repeated their threat to kill their daughter.



3. The first appellant said that she was afraid to return to  India  because
   her parents were not accepting the relationship and the couple could  not
   live with them.  Apart from her parents, Indian society  would  also  not
   accept them:  the couple's life would be in danger since women in general
   were not well treated in India, and lesbians even less  so.   They  would
   have nowhere to live and no source of income.



4.  In  cross-examination,  the   first   appellant   confirmed   that   the
   relationship continued and that she had heard  nothing  from  her  family
   since the angry telephone calls in 2012.  She explained that in India she
   still has her mother and father, and one  brother.   There  is  no  other
   family.  The first appellant has no blood or marital link to the man  she
   calls Uncle Raj:  it is a courtesy title because his nephew  is  a  close
   friend of the first appellant's brother.



5. The first appellant explained how the couple came to be living  in  Uncle
   Raj's house.  She said it had originally been a family arrangement, since
   the  first  appellant's  brother  knew  Uncle  Raj's  nephew.    However,
   relations between the families  had  cooled  after  Uncle  Raj  took  the
   appellants' side and refused to stop giving them practical and  financial
   support. Each time Uncle Raj went to India, every year, he would  try  to
   persuade the parents, normally by telephone, but they were immovable  and
   now they were not friendly to him either.  Uncle  Raj  had  last  visited
   India in 2014, she could not remember exactly when.



6. The family were not happy with the appellants  after  their  relationship
   was disclosed, but they had not come to the  United  Kingdom  to  try  to
   persuade them to come home.  They had not written,  or  telephoned  Uncle
   Raj, whose home telephone number they have.  They know the address of his
   place.  All the contact was from Uncle Raj's side, when he went to India.
    It would have been possible for the families to contact  the  appellants
   in the United Kingdom if they wanted  to.   There  had  been  no  written
   threat, but the threats in telephone calls with the uncle continued.



7. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, the first  appellant  explained
   that both their families had arranged for the  appellants  to  stay  with
   Uncle Raj during the 9-month Strategic Management Diploma  course,  which
   both women had pursued.  They had been given 1-year student  visas.   Her
   own father worked in a store in Dubai and travelled back once a  year  to
   see her mother.  The first appellant's mother was not an educated person.
    The first appellant's only brother, who was a year older than she, still
   lived with her mother in the Punjab.  He  had  a  Mechanical  Engineering
   diploma.



8. The appellants had shared a room in Uncle  Raj's  house  from  the  first
   day, on the basis that they were friends who would like to share a  room.
   They had explained that they were  a  couple  'after  some  time':   when
   pressed, the first appellant thought it  had  been  when  they  told  the
   parents, in 2012, and they telephoned to tell him to stop supporting  the
   appellants.  Uncle Raj was more westernised in his views,  since  he  had
   been living a long time in the United Kingdom, and he was  supportive  of
   the appellants' relationship.  He was a kind hearted man  and  gave  them
   moral  support,  looking  after  the  appellants  without   any   further
   contribution from their parents.



9. The families had paid about �5000 for the visa, fees,  air  fare  and  so
   forth.  However, they had not spent  the  money  to  come  and  find  the
   appellants and bring them home.



10. In re-examination by Mr Nath, the first appellant confirmed  that  Uncle
   Raj provided the appellants with food, accommodation, and �40  each  when
   they needed money.  He had four daughters so they simply  shared  clothes
   and so on with his daughters.



11. The first appellant has  sixteen  uncles  and  aunts,  eight  from  each
   parent, all of whom live in the Punjab.   There  are  no  family  members
   outside the Punjab.

Second appellant's evidence (NH)
12. The second appellant confirmed her name  and  address  and  adopted  her
   witness statement,  which  she  stated  was  true  to  the  best  of  her
   knowledge, information and belief and that she wished  to  stand  as  her
   evidence-in-chief.



13. In her witness statement, the second appellant said that she had had  no
   contact with  her  parents  since  early  to  mid-2012,  when  the  first
   appellant's parents told her own parents about their  relationship.   She
   had been obliged to  change  her  mobile  telephone  number  because  her
   parents called her repeatedly, saying that if she ever returned to  India
   they would kill her, as she had caused them shame, and had not considered
   the effect her sexuality would have on  her  younger  brother's  marriage
   prospects, and amongst the community generally.




14. She gave an account of the visit of the first appellant's Uncle  Raj  to
   India, in which he had visited her family and sought to resolve  matters.
   The second appellant's parents were angry and  told  Uncle  Raj  to  stop
   supporting the appellant financially, so that she would  have  no  choice
   but to return home and resume a 'normal' heterosexual orientation.   They
   told Uncle Raj that if she did not return to 'normality' they would  kill
   her.




15. The second appellant said that she was afraid to return to India as  her
   parents were not accepting her relationship with the first appellant  and
   thus the couple could not live  with  them.   Indian  society  would  not
   accept the relationship and women generally in  India  were  not  treated
   well.  Lesbians were treated worse: their lives would be in danger.   The
   appellants would have nowhere to live and no source of income.




16. In cross-examination by Ms Hashmi, the second appellant said  that  when
   the  first  appellants  told  her  parents  of  the  second   appellant's
   orientation, they said bad things, and both women  changed  their  mobile
   telephone numbers.  Her parents would become aware  of  their  return  if
   they went to the Punjab, and  would  find  out  that  they  had  returned
   anywhere, 'by here or there'.




17. She had heard nothing from her parents or her family  since  2012,  save
   what her Uncle Raj had told her.  The  second  appellant  said  that  her
   family in India consisted of a sister, a brother,  her  parents  and  her
   paternal uncle, all of whom lived in  the  Punjab.   They  had  no  other
   family members, and none outside the Punjab. There was no re-examination.






18.  In  answer  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  the  second  appellant
   explained further about her family.  Her father had died in 2005 and  her
   paternal uncle, who has a taxi business, is  head  of  the  family.   Her
   brother and  sister  are  both  significantly  younger  than  the  second
   appellant, and were still at school when she was in  India.   They  might
   have gone on to university but she could not say for certain, because  of
   the family rift.  She had heard no family news  since  2012.  Uncle  Raj,
   with whom they live in the United Kingdom, is in business here:   he  has
   an off-licence.




19. The second appellant explained her educational achievements.  In  India,
   she had studied at Punjab University Patiala, and in 5 years of study had
   obtained a Bachelor of Law and then an LlB.  That was where she  met  the
   first appellant, who was a year behind her,  on  the  same  course.   The
   second appellant finished her law studies in 2010 and then took a diploma
   in Forensic Science while the first appellant caught up with her and also
   completed her 5-year Bachelor of Law/LLB qualification.




20. In June or July 2011 they had both  completed  their  degrees  and  were
   ready to move on with their adult lives together.  While  at  university,
   the  two  women  had  lived  together  in  student  hostel   and   rented
   accommodation: it was not unusual for young women to do so and they  were
   not 'out' to their parents or the community.  They now decided to come to
   the United Kingdom and live together here, where they could do so openly.
    They had not returned to India since then.




21. In the United Kingdom,  she  had  studied  for  a  Strategic  Management
   Diploma from SciTech, Park Royal. She had completed it in  January  2012,
   but had been unable to obtain the certificate she had earned because  her
   parents would not pay the remaining fees.  Her leave to remain expired on
   24 June 2012.  The appellants were not working, as they had no permission
   to do so.  The first appellant's uncle, Uncle Raj, provided for them.




22. The second appellant accepted that, contrary to  the  assertion  in  her
   witness statement, she was highly qualified and would be able  to  get  a
   decent job in India with her qualifications.  She said that if  employers
   were aware that she was lesbian, she would not be employed by them.




23. There were no further questions from either of the representatives.












                                 APPENDIX B

                   SUMMARY OF COUNTRY BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

A:    Professor Shahani's evidence

1. Professor  Shahani  is  an  Associate  Professor  at  the  Department  of
Critical Culture, Gender and Race Studies Graduate  Program  (formerly  the
Women's Studies Department) at Washington State  University.  He  has  been
associated with that Department, first as an Assistant Professor, and later
as an Associate Professor, since 2006.       His academic career began with
a BA, later an MA, in English from the University of Bombay, in  1997-1999,
followed by an MA in English at the University of Florida in  2001  on  the
subject 'Queering India: Towards a Post-Colonial  Queer  Methodology',  and
finally, a PhD from the same university  in  Spring  2006  on  the  subject
'Queer Pedagogy and American Studies: a Reparative  Re-thinking'.   He  has
published and lectured extensively on what he described as 'queer  politics
and sexuality in  India'  and  in  particular,  on  reparative  return  and
reparative performance.


2. Professor Shahani returns  regularly  to  Mumbai  every  summer  and  his
evidence is based on the He relied in his report on critical scholarship on
LGBTI identities in India and recent historical developments,  and  on  his
personal interactions with LGBTI communities and activists on the ground.

3. The core of Professor Shahani's argument is that the  majority  of  women
in India with same-sex desires are forced into heterosexual marriages,  and
into secrecy.  For those who resist, physical threats result in a  form  of
domestic imprisonment, particularly in smaller towns, where moral character
is vital and most families know one another.  Cosmopolitan centres such  as
Mumbai, Delhi  and  Bangalore  allow  more  economic  independence  and  an
opportunity to break away from family constraints, but those  opportunities
are more easily available to men than women, due to  the  lower  status  of
women in India.  In Professor Shahani's experience, women who live  without
a  husband,  family,  or  identifiable  origin,  even  in  cities,  attract
suspicion of being 'loose women' or prostitutes and,  apart  from  students
living in student hostels, women living together is quite uncommon.



4. Professor Shahani recognises that section  377  and  other  Indian  Penal
Code (IPC) provisions do not expressly reference lesbianism;  the  risk  to
lesbians in her opinion is from non-state actors, using the legislation  as
a threat to enforce certain conduct,  rather  than  using  it  through  the
Courts in the normal way. Section 368, which deals with kidnapping, is also
used to force younger women to return home after leaving  to  join  lesbian
groups and enter into lesbian relationships. Mere cohabitation with another
woman could be seen as evidence  of  sexual  activity.   Professor  Shahani
noted that there had been no prosecutions whatsoever under  either  section
368 or 377 of the IPC and that  the  right  to  privacy  is  guaranteed  by
Article 21 of the Indian Constitution.



5. Examples were given of the persecutory acts upon which Professor  Shahani
relied:




     a) In or before 1993, two police women named Urmilla  and  Leela  went
        through a form of marriage at their local Hindu  temple  in  Madhya
        Pradesh.  They were interrogated, when  they  went  back  to  work,
        arrested and secluded, and forced to sign documents  they  did  not
        comprehend.  They were then dismissed from  the  police  force,  on
        'policy'  grounds  for  'violating  the  force's  discipline'   and
        bringing it into disrepute.

     b) In April 1990, India Today reported the case of Lila and Tarunlata,
        who eloped and married.  Lila's  father  had  found  out  what  was
        occurring between them  and  begun  beating  Lila.   Tarunlata  had
        undergone gender reassignment surgery  and  was  identifying  as  a
        male, Tarunkumar. Lila's father went to the Gujarat High  Court  to
        annul the marriage, and prevent any dowry being payable. The events
        the subject of that  report  had  occurred  between  1985-1987  and
        although the couple lost the  case,  they  thereafter  successfully
        lived as a couple in the home of Tarunkumar, albeit without benefit
        of any dowry from Lila to Tarunkumar's family.




     c) In April 1993, in a small town in the Nagpur area,  two  women  who
        had grown up in neighbouring villages eloped and tried to marry  in
        a civil ceremony. The registrar told their parents,  who  broke  up
        the couple and prevented the relationship continuing.




     d) In 1994, in a comment reported by Pioneer on 1 November 1994, Vimla
        Faroqui of the National Federation of Indian  Women,  described  as
        the 'women's wing of the leftist party' is said to have described a
        move towards LGBTI and, in particular, lesbian rights as likely  to
        start a move of sexual permissiveness among urban  youth  who  have
        become vulnerable to  the  vulgarity  of  Western  culture  and  as
        symptomatic of 'the moral decadence of the West'.




     e) In 2004, four AIDS activists working for  the  Naz  Foundation  and
        Bharosa Trust were  arrested  at  their  offices  following  police
        raids, charged with intention to commit sodomy  and  possession  of
        obscene materials.  They were detained for  6  weeks  before  being
        released on bail.


     f) On or before 2011, two women in Jalgaon, Mumbai, were  forced  into
        heterosexual marriages although  they  were  each  other's  lovers.
        Their attempts to approach  the  police  resulted  in  their  being
        detained and examined by tests for fingerprints inside the  vagina,
        to prove lesbian sexual activity.  That was a test  sometimes  used
        to establish rape, and this was the only documented example of  its
        being used on lesbians.  The  appellants  were  also  subjected  to
        verbal abuse by the police. (Sourced to 'Queer Women and the Law in
        India' by Thangarajah and Arasu, published in Law Like Love:  Queer
        perspectives on love, Yoda Press, India [2011])




     g) In 2013, a 22 year old  girl  from  Shoranur  left  home  with  her
        lesbian girlfriend, to join a  lesbian  organisation,  Sangama,  in
        Bangalore.  The father petitioned the  Kerala  High  Court  and  it
        issued a notice to the State  government  and  police  authorities,
        'seeking their stance' (sourced to a report in the Times  of  India
        on July 23 2013 entitled 'Girl 'abducted' by lesbian group: Dad  in
        High Court'. In response to questions from the Tribunal,  Professor
        Shahani  said  that  she  had  sourced  this  information  from   a
        documentation centre and had no further detail to offer as  to  the
        circumstances of this case.  She no longer had  the  internet  link
        available.



6. The report describes actions of this kind  as  'privatised  persecution',
   controlled by the invocation of section  377.   However,  as  the  author
   recognises,  since  the  Naz  Foundation  case  in  December  2013,   the
   visibility of LGBTI issues had increased significantly, and several LGBTI
   organisations emerged, including Caleri,  Lawyers  Collective,  Organised
   Lesbian Alliance for Visibility and Action  (OLAVA),  Sakhi,  and  Voices
   Against 377.  The organisations were all precariously funded and led, but
   assisted lesbian couples and provided refuge to women whose families 'had
   not tolerated their decision to build a life with other women'.

7. A separate issue was that lesbian couples in India were not  yet  allowed
   to adopt children, although single women could and did do so, and  Indian
   law recognised single parenthood.  There were age restrictions:  children
   could not be adopted by women under 30 or  over  50,  and  children  aged
   between 0-3 years could not  be  adopted  by  women  over  45.  Proof  of
   financial and mental stability were required, and if the  adopting  woman
   was one of a couple, no parental rights accrued  to  the  other  partner.
   Amendments to the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
   2000 proposed in 2014 included the potential to bar adoption by  same-sex
   couples but there was no confirmation whether the Indian  Parliament  had
   in fact approved such an amendment, or in what terms.


8. The position taken by Indian politicians was contradictory: some  refused
   to contemplate lesbians as Indians and asserted that the whole issue  was
   one of Westernisation, on which India could not compromise.   In  a  live
   interview on India's IBN Live, on 14 December 2013, just days  after  the
   Naz Foundation decision in the Supreme Court, a BJP spokesman  said  that
   homosexuality was unnatural and that the  party  supported  section  377.
   Members of the  BJP's  ideological  fount,  Rashtriya  Swayamsevak  Sangh
   (RSS), expressed a firm  anti-LGBTI  stance  in  a  report  entitled  'No
   compromise with live-ins or gay rights, moral values  supreme'  published
   by the Indian Express on March 8 2014, before the election of  BJP  Prime
   Minister Narendra Modi later in the year. However, some BJP leaders  such
   as  Arun  Jaitley  and  Harsh  Vardhan  spoke  publicly  in   favour   of
   decriminalising homosexuality.


9. Professor Shahani's opinion is that lesbianism has not been  criminalised
   'in the strict sense of the term' but that the BJP's  insistence  on  the
   maintenance of traditional family structures has devastating  impacts  on
   the lives of lesbian women.




10. On the  internet  news  source,  FourTwoNine,  on  April  18  2014,  the
   increasing debate about homosexuality and LGBTI rights was shown to  have
   become politically significant. Professor Shahani considered that  debate
   and national conversation was a step  in  the  right  direction  but  any
   narrative of triumphant progress in  LGBTI  rights  should  be  tempered,
   especially  for  middle-class  and  lower-class  women  who  'lacked  the
   material or cultural capital to join activist  groups  or  seek  out  the
   burgeoning  underground  community  space  for   LGBT   people'.    Those
   possessing 'a certain kind of upward class mobility and cultural capital'
   were better able to detach themselves from the sacrosanct familial  ties,
   but  separation  from  family  structures   could   have   'devastatingly
   oppressive implications'.  He considered Vimla Farouqui's  1994  reported
   comments at 5(d) above to be symptomatic of the  economic  disempowerment
   at the root of the difficulty for lesbian  women  in  India  to  separate
   themselves from their family unit.




11. She considered that economic dependence and the imperative to  procreate
   made it extremely difficult for 'most middle-class  and  poor  women...to
   create the material and social conditions that allow them to organise and
   sustain a life around erotic and personal  attractions'.   Many  thwarted
   lesbian couples committed suicide, due to 'a profound sense of  isolation
   and alienation'.




12. Professor Shahani considered that the social improvements  and  the  new
   cultural spaces for LGBTI individuals  created  in  the  previous  decade
   (2005-2015) had benefited  principally  'middle  class'  non-heterosexual
   men.



           "India, of course, is a highly diverse country that is  mediated
           by class, linguistic and religious lines. While homophobia might
           manifest itself in different  formulations  and  look  different
           depending on  these  multiple  vectors  of  identity,  prejudice
           against same-sex cuts across these different modalities"

13. Prof Shahani concluded his report with  the  following  summary  of  his
   concerns about the position of lesbians in India:


           "There are cosmopolitan urban centres such as Mumbai  and  Delhi
           where lesbian couples can live in  open  relationships  but,  as
           pointed out in my report, this depends on class status  and  the
           ability to live financially  independent  lives.   It  would  be
           quite na�ve to suggest that [the appellants] would  have  little
           or no problems even  in  big  cities  if  they  live  openly  as
           lesbians.  They will certainly face  much  pressure  from  their
           respective families and the question of safety  will  depend  on
           their ability to forge a life as separate from their families as
           possible - both in familial and economic terms.  In  considering
           the case of [these appellants], it is important  not  simply  to
           think about their ability to survive in India.  We also need  to
           ask whether returning to India can offer them  more  affirmative
           possibilities of citizenship in which they can  have  access  to
           independent, to adopt children if desired, to have  custody,  to
           marry.   At  this  moment  in  time,  in   my   opinion,   these
           possibilities unfortunately do not seem realistic."


Oral evidence



14. We had the advantage of hearing oral  evidence,  taken  by  Skype  on  a
   voice-only basis, at the hearing. Professor Shahani confirmed that he was
   jointly instructed by both parties.



15. In cross-examination, Mr Nath asked Professor  Shahani  to  explain  the
   difference for lesbians between urban and rural environments.   Professor
   Shahani said that that in a small town,  for  example  in  North  Punjab,
   where he understood the appellants to originate, it was very hard to live
   as a lesbian woman.   Women were in general more dependent on the  family
   unit,  while  non-heterosexual  men  had  more  economic  autonomy.   The
   institution of marriage was so ingrained and  so  generally  enforced  in
   India, that if lesbian women remained involved with their families,  they
   would have to grapple with social enforcement mechanisms.




16. The situation  might  be  different  for  lesbians  whose  families  had
   formally or informally renounced them, leaving them free to relocate  and
   try to survive economically in a metropolis such as Mumbai, Bangalore, or
   Delhi.  In the metropolis cities, there were many LGBTI  non-governmental
   organisations to provide support for those  living  there  and  Professor
   Shahani considered that it was possible for lesbians to  live  openly  as
   such, if they were sufficiently economically mobile. Women  did  work  in
   the cities, but they experienced gender-based discrimination at work.  In
   the case of these appellants, their success in  living  in  a  metropolis
   without family support  would  depend  what  jobs  they  could  get.   He
   considered that it would be important to know whether they would be  able
   to adopt children, either as single women or as a couple,  or  to  become
   parents by in-vitro fertilisation (IVF).



17. Professor Shahani noted that since  the  Naz  Foundation  Supreme  Court
   judgment in December 2013, there had been increased  media  coverage  and
   public dialogue in India  as  to  LGBTI  rights.   Problems  nevertheless
   remained. Lesbians  were  more  visible  publicly  now,  but  they  still
   experienced discrimination.  He  was  aware  of  a  number  of  cases  of
   historic police harassment of lesbians but the Indian Supreme  Court  Act
   of 2013 prohibited police misconduct, and Professor Shahani  was  unaware
   of any police misconduct thereafter.




18. On the evidence before the Upper Tribunal,  Professor  Shahani  conceded
   that there was no overall evidence of  a  pattern  of  police  misconduct
   against lesbian women. He considered, however, that the law, and  section
   377 of the IPC in particular, was used and mobilised symbolically by non-
   state actors to threaten and oppress sexual minorities.




19. In answer to re-examination questions from Ms Hashmi, Professor  Shahani
   repeated that there was great emphasis  in  India  on  the  role  of  the
   family.  He noted an example of  male  university  professors  who  self-
   identified as LGBTI, or  dropped  LGBTI  (particularly  male  homosexual)
   literature, and who had been harassed and/or blackmailed by the police.




20. Asked whether social  status,  class  or  economic  independence  had  a
   bearing on workplace and/or police  harassment,  Professor  Shahani  said
   that it was a difficult question to answer.   Certainly,  a  lower  class
   person with an accent might be more at risk, but that did not mean  there
   was no risk to a middle-class person: a middle-class person might be able
   to mediate the situation but would not be exempt.  Even in urban centres,
   there remained some risk of harassment of women identified as living in a
   lesbian relationship.




21. In answer to questions from Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern  as  to  the
   risk, if any, if the appellants returned but did not tell their  families
   they had  done  so,  Professor  Shahani  said  that  anonymity  was  very
   difficult in India because of the breadth  of  social  networks.  It  was
   normal in India to have a large network of extended family members  right
   across the country: for women who  had  an  extensive  pan-Indian  family
   network of that type, there was a risk that their return to a  metropolis
   could be discovered by chance and relayed to family members who wished to
   harm or confine them.




22. Professor Shahani said  that  his  instructions  had  not  included  any
   information as to the size of the appellants' family networks or  whether
   they extended  across  India,  nor  their  social  class  or  educational
   achievements.   He accepted that  his  evidence  that  these  appellants'
   families would be spread across India and could find and pursue them in a
   metropolis  outside  the  Punjab  was  no  more  than   a   'hypothetical
   conjecture'. He had  approached  his  report  on  the  basis  that  these
   appellants were working class women from a rural village or  small  town:
   he accepted that his evidence as to the risk to them was hypothetical.




23. Professor  Shahani's  evidence  was  that  generally,  educated  'middle
   class' women had greater access to the public sphere.  Asked whether  his
   assessment of the risk to these appellants would  be  different  if  they
   were educated middle-class women,  Professor  Shahani  insisted  that  it
   would not make much difference. He had heard of several  instances  where
   access to upward mobility was  severely  hampered,  and  separation  from
   their families would remain a serious impediment.




24. Judge Southern  asked  Professor  Shahani  about  the  examples  he  had
   provided  of  harassment,  none  of  which  were  recent,   or   post-Naz
   Foundation.  Judge Southern asked whether Professor Shahani was aware  of
   any more up to date examples.  Professor Shahani said no: the majority of
   the information to which he had access was in the report and he  knew  of
   no examples than those cited.




25. As regards the LGBTI NGOs listed in his report, Professor  Shahani  said
   that the biggest challenge to  their  continued  existence  was  not  the
   Indian state, or local prejudice,  but  lack  of  funding.  If  they  had
   funding, they were able to continue their work.  The list of  NGOs  which
   the witness had provided was  incomplete:   when  asked  to  comment,  he
   stated that his instructions had not  included  providing  an  exhaustive
   list, and that these were simply the groups with which he was  personally
   familiar.




26. Judge Southern then asked Professor Shahani to clarify  a  reference  in
   his report to gains for LGBTI individuals in  India,  during  the  period
   2005-2015, in respect of which Professor Shahani in  his  report  advised
   caution.   Professor  Shahani  responded  that  in   the   past,   sexual
   citizenship had been 'extremely taboo  'and  there  had  been  no  public
   discussion about it.  Now, it was a  question  of  increased  visibility;
   there were conversations on the news about LGBTI rights and the BJP  Modi
   government had been speaking after  the  election  about  decriminalising
   homosexuality.




27. There had been a Pride March in Mumbai in December 2013 in  response  to
   the Naz Foundation decision, but Professor  Shahani's  understanding  was
   that such a March was not an annual  event  as  occurred  in  the  United
   States. Mumbai also had a  gay  club,  but  it  was  unofficial  and  not
   advertised on that basis.  Non-heterosexual men met there, and there  was
   a circuit for non-heterosexual men in Delhi also.   There  was  always  a
   possibility that the police could turn up: Professor Shahani was  not  in
   the "gay club" scene so he could not say how often such raids occurred.




28. One effect of the Naz Foundation  case  was  that  it  had  become  more
   difficult for  the  Foundation  to  continue  its  HIV  activism  and  to
   distribute safe sex materials.  There was  now  a  certain  hesitancy  in
   creating spaces for open dialogue on safe sex education.  The effects  of
   the decision were symbolic rather than tangible: LGBTI sexuality remained
   taboo, and a sexual stigma now attached to expressions of sexuality  that
   certain activists thought  were  changing.  The  witness  was  unable  to
   elaborate on any of the examples he had provided in his report:  the only
   available information was that given to the media by the  police.   Other
   than that, there was little or no documentation of instances where  LGBTI
   people experienced harassment, or worse.



29. There was no re-examination.

OTHER COUNTRY EVIDENCE

B:  "The nature of violence  faced  by  lesbian  women  in  India:  A  study
conducted by Bina Fernandez and Gomathy N.B" (Research  Centre  on  Violence
Against Women,  Tata  Institute  of  Social  Sciences,  Mumbai  2003)  ("the
Fernandez-Gomathy case study")

30. In 2003, the Research Centre on Violence against Women,  Tata  Institute
   of Social Sciences, in Mumbai, published a paper, entitled "The nature of
   violence faced by lesbian women in India" (the Fernandez-Gomathy report).
    The researchers, who  described  themselves  as  lesbians  and  bisexual
   activists, were members of Street Sangam, a collective for women who love
   women, and had been in contact with a network of lesbian organisations in
   Pune, Delhi and Calcutta in order to obtain  the  information  for  their
   research.




31. The  Fernandez-Gomathy  report's  research  material  comprised  several
   types of information:  semi structured interviews  of  22  mental  health
   practitioners as to their knowledge and intervention  with  70  of  their
   lesbian  clients;  quantitative  data  from  a  structured  questionnaire
   completed by 50 women identified through city-based lesbian networks; and
   in-depth personal narratives for 8 women, all of whom  were  economically
   independent.   The  structured  questionnaire  group  and  the   in-depth
   personal narratives group comprised economically independent,  city-based
   lesbian women.   The lesbian women who responded to these  parts  of  the
   study were not rural or small town lesbians, illiterate  or  impoverished
   lesbians, nor did they have the reduced mobility  of  other  marginalised
   groups of women.  They were all urban, literate and English-speaking.




32. At section 1.4, the  Fernandez-Gomathy  report  stated  that  homosexual
   behaviour has 'generally received tacit  acceptance  in  a  predominantly
   gender-segregated  society'.   LGBTI  organisations,  and  human   rights
   organisations,  are   said   to   be   actively   campaigning   for   the
   decriminalisation of homosexuality  by  the  repeal  or  modification  of
   section 377 so that it provides legal protection against coercive  sexual
   behaviour regardless of gender, but 'takes the state out of the bedrooms'
   of adults involved in consensual sexual acts.




33. The authors of the Fernandez-Gomathy report  adopted  a  very  extensive
   definition of 'violence' (section 7.4.8), comprising  physical  violence,
   emotional reactions, lost relationships with family and  friends,  public
   stigma and ridicule, social censure, job loss, home loss and so on.   The
   scope of that definition is too wide to equate to the natural meaning  of
   the word 'violence', nor is it necessarily probative  of  persecution  or
   serious harm.




34. The Fernandez-Gomathy data must therefore be treated with caution  where
   statistics for 'violence' are advanced.   The authors noted that  all  of
   the women  in  the  sample  were  'persistent  in  their  resistance'  to
   'violence' as the report defined  it,  and  in  their  attempts  to  seek
   support and validation.  None of them were seeking to change their desire
   for women.




35. In the mental health professional sample,  mental  health  professionals
   interviewed typically had 1-5 lesbian clients.  21% of the  total  sample
   of clients were depressed; 7% were seeking gender  reassignment  surgery,
   mainly to enable them to live as men and have a  female  partner  without
   difficulty.    All  the  mental  health  professionals  were  aware  that
   homosexuality was no longer considered a mental or  sexual  disorder  and
   almost all of  them  accepted  that  it  was  'normal'.   Those  who  had
   reservations had the longest service (over 20 years) and the  researchers
   considered that they  might  simply  be  old  fashioned.   Four  of  them
   considered that there needed to be greater awareness  and  acceptance  of
   homosexuality in Indian society. There was  comparatively  less  physical
   abuse  reported,  but  high  levels  of  what  the  authors  describe  as
   'emotional violence': silent shame,  social  stigma,  and  ostracism.   A
   couple of the mental  health  professionals  had  facilitated  acceptance
   through family  counselling  to  help  parents  accept  their  daughter's
   lesbian identity.




36. The responders to the quantitative questionnaire were 50  urban,  highly
   educated and employed women who  were  in  contact  with  the  city-based
   lesbian social networks. In many cases, their friends had  been  told  of
   their orientation, and often also their mothers,  both  of  which  groups
   were supportive.  Fathers were told less often and only  one  father  was
   described as supportive.  11  women  had  told  very  few  people  (3  on
   average) and experienced little 'violence'; of those who had  experienced
   it, they averaged disclosure to 6 people.  Physical and sexual abuse  was
   accompanied by emotional abuse: acts  of  denial,  silent  hostility  and
   neglect, control over resources. Open confrontation such as  deprivation,
   eviction and imprisonment was avoided and physical  battering  relatively
   rare.   11 women were told by family members that they were mentally ill,
   but only 5 were forced to seek treatment.  Sexual violence and  battering
   was mostly in the context of male.  The  evidence  showed  that  violence
   and/or abuse would continue until the woman either  denied  their  sexual
   identity or broke their family links and left home, but in 3 cases, abuse
   ceased because the woman's family accepted her orientation.




37. The 8 individual narratives included as a major factor silent  hostility
   and ignoring the expression of a woman's lesbian  identity,  particularly
   where the person in question did not wish to sever ties with her  due  to
   economic or emotional dependence on  the  lesbian  woman,  or  where  the
   person was unable to influence the lesbian relative or  friend.   Silence
   in the family and denial of the person's sexuality was the main reaction,
   causing  internal  conflicts,  loss   of   self-esteem,   and   loss   of
   relationships. The research was not designed to probe  suicidal  ideation
   and the case study is not authoritative on that, one way  or  the  other.
   In four of the 8 narratives, the police became involved at  the  family's
   behest, attempting to separate the  woman  from  her  partner  by  public
   ridicule, threats, taunts, and  even  fabricating  a  section  377  case,
   although the proscription therein is  clearly  seen  as  inapplicable  to
   lesbians.




38. 50% of the women who were in employment  were  self-employed  and  this,
   the authors considered, might  support  a  correlation  between  economic
   autonomy and sexual autonomy.




39. The case study gives two examples of lesbian  couple  suicides,  one  of
   two young college girls in 1998, and the second a young couple  who  died
   together in  November  2000.  It  notes  that  section  377  of  the  IPC
   criminalises anal penetration not lesbian sexual orientation.   It  notes
   that there is ostracism and discrimination in society,  and  states  that
   'there have been instances of lesbians being thrown out of  their  rental
   accommodation, or out of their jobs, when  landlords  or  employers  have
   found out about their sexual orientation'.  No indication of the scale of
   that issue is provided.




40. The 7 women who wanted gender reassignment surgery were denied it:  they
   did not meet the Gender Identity Disorder criteria.




Press reports




41. The oldest report in the bundle is from the Times of  India  on  January
   11 2006, entitled "Girl Attempts Suicide  over  Lesbian  Marriage".   Two
   girls age 18 and 20 had been 'living as husband and wife' for the last  5
   years.  They married at a Shiva temple in  Kankerkhera  and  the  'groom'
   brought the 'bride' to live in her home in Jawarphuri.   Her  family  did
   not accept the 'bride' and sent her back to her own family.  The  'groom'
   took insecticide and said from her nursing home that the couple had  made
   a choice and would continue  to  live  together.   The  local  magistrate
   ordered a police probe into the incident, but no  charges  had  yet  been
   filed: legal opinion was  being  sought.  VHP  and  Shiv  Sena  activists
   demonstrated against lesbian marriage in  front  of  the  office  of  the
   Deputy Commissioner of Police.




42. On March 8 2009, the Times of India reported  on  13  cases  of  lesbian
   suicide in the city of Hyderabad, information on which had been  sent  to
   the city's Women Development and Child  Welfare  Department  in  February
   2009, without sparking any investigation.  The  article  is  based  on  a
   report by The Lesbian Society, and speaks of  'continuous  ostracism  and
   torture' of the  women  concerned.  The  founding  Director  of  Shaheen,
   Jameela Nishat, said that most of Hyderabad's women's organisations would
   'stand for the lesbian cause this International Women's Day'.




43. On 2 July 2009, a BBC News report reflected the decision  of  the  Delhi
   High Court, striking down as unconstitutional section 377 of the IPC.




44. On 24 January 2011, two teenage girls in a village in Boral took  poison
   and died together: one had cut her hair short and dressed as a man.  They
   were very close, even outside the home, eating their lunch together  from
   the same plate, and displaying their affections very publicly.  They  had
   the support of their families, who  got  on  cordially  together  despite
   criticism from the neighbours for the  girls'  'unusual  behaviour':  the
   families did reprimand them for public displays of affection.  The  girls
   became uncertain of their future together after  watching  a  2010  film,
   "Aar Ekti Premer Golpo" (Just  Another  Love  Story),  dealing  with  the
   uncertainty  of  a  LGBTI  relationship.   The  film  was  the  first  on
   homosexuality to be shot after the decision of the Delhi  High  Court  on
   section 377 and dealt with the lifestyle and problems  of  a  Delhi-based
   transgender filmmaker and his bisexual lover.




45. On 19 February  2011,  the  Indo-Asian  News  Service  reported  that  a
   lesbian couple, ostracised in Mumbai, fled to Delhi 'to live  a  life  of
   their own free will'.  An NGO  member  alleged  that  the  Mumbai  police
   turned up in Delhi, following an allegation of theft (stealing  valuables
   and ornaments) made against one of the women by  a  family  member.   The
   Mumbai police attended their home with gas-cutters and hammers, to  break
   down the door, and threatened to arrest an NGO member for  insulting  the
   police, although on her account, they were only trying to stop the Mumbai
   police breaking down the door.  The Delhi Police intervened, after  being
   alerted by an NGO, and the woman in question agreed  to  attend  a  local
   Delhi police station the next day.  The Delhi Police said that they  were
   present to see that no untoward incident occurred.




46. Another report of the same incident appeared in the Times of  India  the
   following day.  The NGO is identified as Sangini,  and  the  report  adds
   that the couple appeared in New Delhi before the National Commission  for
   Women (NCW), the apex national  level  organization  of  India  with  the
   mandate of protecting and promoting the interests of women[2].  They made
   statements saying they did not wish to return and desired to  live  their
   life as adults.




47. One of them, before  leaving  Mumbai,  claimed  to  have  registered  an
   affidavit to the effect that she was leaving the house of  her  own  free
   will and that nobody could stop her from leading  her  life  on  her  own
   terms.  That was the young woman whose family had registered a  complaint
   of robbery.  The director of the Naz Foundation, Anjali Gopalan, was also
   present.




48. On 16 May  2012,  a  police  post  in  Ambala  received  a  request  for
   protection by a lesbian couple who had married  against  their  families'
   wishes.  The couple were educated up to year 10 and intended to  adopt  a
   child and live 'like a normal couple', according to an  anonymous  police
   officer.  The police sent them to the only domestic violence shelter  and
   care centre in Haryana.  The matter was before  the  civil  Court  for  a
   decision as to whether the  families  should  be  made  to  accept  their
   daughters' sexuality.




49. On 23 May 2012, Btanna Leach of Gay Star News reported  that  a  lesbian
   couple from a village in the Punjab, in  northern  India,  who  had  been
   living together for the  previous  month  in  a  police  residence,  were
   ejected from their home village and disinherited by their  parents.   One
   of the parents said, "My daughter is  out  of  control.   We  don't  have
   anything to do with her and have decided to disinherit her."  The  Punjab
   and Haryana High Court ordered the police to protect the couple,  one  of
   whom was a police officer.  Another report from Punjab Newsline  reflects
   the same account.




50. On June 4 2012, a report entitled Violence against Women: the  State  of
   Punjab - Part V by Gunisha Kaur, a human rights activist and a  physician
   at Cornell University, New York  City,  noted  severe  underreporting  of
   violence against women in that state, fuelled by rising  levels  of  drug
   and alcohol abuse and a sharp decline in the role  of  women  in  Punjabi
   society and in their  earning  potential.   Sikh  principles  called  for
   gender equality and no dowry, but Indian cultural  norms  had  overridden
   them: extortion of money by torturing the bride  continued  often  beyond
   the wedding ceremony.




51. Female  foeticide  and  torture  were  serious  problems,  and  domestic
   violence shelters were rare and overcrowded. The report recommended  that
   over the longer term, the province should begin to recognise the  failure
   of women and 'work towards honouring and protecting our mothers, sisters,
   and daughters'.




52. An article dated 22 August 2012 records the murder of a young woman  who
   married against her family wishes, and  the  subsequent  release  of  her
   assailant after payment of a bribe.   Another report (which is not dated)
   entitled 'Honour Killing Cases Surge in Number' records details of honour
   killings of a number of women who entered  into  relationships  with  men
   against their families' wishes. There is no  lesbian  element  in  either
   account.




53. On 15 December 2013,  immediately  after  the  decision  by  the  Indian
   Supreme Court in the Naz Foundation case, the opposition Bharatiya Janata
   Party (BJP) supported the decision, as reported in IBN Live.  The  report
   notes that protests were planned in Delhi against the judgment, and  that
   the government was 'mulling at all the options' including filing a review
   petition against the judgments or taking up  the  matter  in  the  Indian
   Parliament.  The BJP  declared  its  intention  to  oppose  any  Bill  to
   legalise homosexuality.  In another article in the Times of India on  the
   same day, its leader, Rajnath Singh, said this:



      ""Gay sex is not natural and we  cannot  support  something  which  is
      unnatural," said BJP chief  Rajnath  Singh,  putting  an  end  to  his
      party's equivocation over the issue which had held out the  hope  that
      the principal opposition may not hinder government's plan to  organise
      relief for the  LGBT  community  in  the  aftermath  of  [the  Supreme
      Court's] controversial  order  last  Wednesday.   Elaborating  on  his
      opposition  to  the  government's  plan  to  render  the  SC   verdict
      ineffective, Singh said, "Usually we would not take a stand against SC
      verdicts and so we don't  want  to  oppose  the  SC  verdict  in  this
      instance either.  It is for the government to come up with a  proposal
      in case they want to challenge the order.""




54. On 8 March 2014, writing in the Indian Express,  T  A  Johnson  recorded
   that during its annual report of activities in 2013-2014,  the  Rashtriya
   Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the ideological fount of the BJP, had emphasised
   that it would not 'compromise moral values, social system  and  tradition
   in  the  name  of  individual  freedoms',  when  it   came   to   live-in
   relationships and homosexuality. The General Secretary of the RSS, Suresh
   Bhaiyyaji Joshi said this:




      ""...in the past year, two issues have come up for  discussion  before
      society - live-in relationships  and  homosexuality  -  which  led  to
      arguments, both in favour and against, on according legal sanction  to
      such relationships.  Before extending legality to such things, we have
      to keep in mind the deleterious effect it will have  upon  our  social
      life.  Law accords security to the  individual.   However,  a  society
      that goes by its traditions,  conventions,  culture  and  life-values,
      cannot be secured through law.  Only guidance  based  on  dharmic  and
      social thought can  ensure  security  to  social  life,"  the  General
      Secretary said."




55. On 23 April 2014, Andrew Potts, writing  for  Gay  Star  News,  recorded
   that an Indian non-heterosexual man had  succeeded  in  an  asylum  claim
   before the Refugee Review Tribunal in Australia. The man had last been in
   India in 2011, when his father locked him in his room, an Islamic  cleric
   threatened reprisals if he did not change his sexuality,  and  the  man's
   own cousins held a knife to his throat and demanded he stop being  'gay'.
   The Australian Judge in his decision stated that he accepted  "that  [the
   applicant] would not be able to live openly as a homosexual in  India  at
   any location, as if he did this would result in  ostracism  and  probably
   further significant harm".  We have not seen the original decision of the
   RRT which underlies the report.




56. On 1 January 2015, a report in the Deccan Herald by Shemin Joy,  writing
   from New Delhi, said that the government had  begun  collecting  data  on
   arrests under section 377, on a state by state basis.  Not all states had
   made returns:  778 cases had been registered nationally, with 587 arrests
   in the 10 months to October 2014.  The highest figure was for Delhi, with
   140 cases and 110 arrests up to September  2014;  Uttar  Pradesh  was  in
   second place, with 127 cases and 36 arrests up  to  June  2014.   Haryana
   state had 99 cases and 89 arrests;  Maharashtra  had  98  cases  and  100
   arrests.  Kerala (69 cases and 64 arrests) and Madhya Pradesh  (64  cases
   and 48 arrests) also had relatively high numbers. The LGBTI community was
   seeking repeal of section 377 but the signals from the Minister of  State
   for Home, Haribhai Parathibhai Chaudhary, were  discouraging:  there  was
   'no separate proposal to repeal or amend section 377'.




57. On 13 January 2015,  BBC News reported outrage  in  India  after  a  the
   Goan Sports and Youth Minister, Ramesh  Tawadkhar,   suggested  that  the
   Goan State Government proposed to offer treatment centres to 'cure' LGBTI
   people, in line with that available for alcoholics and drug users.   Many
   Indians took to social networking sites to express shock.   Ban  Ki-moon,
   Secretary-General of the United Nations, was visiting Delhi on  that  day
   and spoke out against criminalisation of homosexuality, even  where  such
   provisions were unenforced, because 'these laws breed intolerance'.




58. On June 10  2013,  the  Council  on  Foreign  Relations  in  a  document
   entitled Governance  in  India:  women's  rights,  reflected  the  gender
   discrimination and violence  in  India,  which  ranks  84th  out  of  113
   countries on the Economist's ranking of economic opportunity  for  women.
   The article does not deal specifically with the position of lesbians.



59. On July 23 2013, the Times of India reported an  action  in  the  Kerala
   High Court by a father, seeking to restrain the removal  by  Shambala,  a
   LGBTI organisation, of a 23 year old girl to be with a  lesbian  partner.
   The father argued that the police had failed  to  rescue  the  girl  from
   illegal detention and that although the girl was not married,  she  could
   not marry a woman, as marriage between women was illegal in  India.   The
   girl's lesbian partner was  not  legally  entitled  to  the  control  and
   custody of his day.  The Court ordered that notices be sent to the  state
   government and the police, seeking their stance.




-----------------------
[1] http://www.refworld.org/pdfid/5356279d4.pdf
[2]      The National Commission for Women was set up as  a  statutory  body
   in January 1992 under the National Commission  for  Women  Act,  1990  to
   review the constitutional  and  legal  safeguards  for  women;  recommend
   remedial legislative  measures;  facilitate  redress  of  grievances  and
   advise the national Indian government on  all  policy  matters  affecting
   women.


