
ar

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
 ES (Ashkaelians, mixed Ashkaelian ethnicity) Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo)
                                                                          CG
                                                          [2006] UKAIT 00071

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 May 2006                                   |On 18 September 2006       |
|                                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR Immigration Judge STOREY
                               Mr c p o'brian
                                Mr c thursby


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr R Roebuck, Counsel, instructed by Zelin & Zelin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

i)   Persons of Ashkaelian ethnicity or mixed Ashkaelian  ethnicity  do  not
      in general face a real risk of persecution or  treatment  contrary  to
      Article 3 on return to Kosovo.

ii)  This decision replaces as current guidance FM (IFA - Mixed  Marriage  -
      Albanian  -  Ashkaelian)  Kosovo  CG  [2004]  UKIAT   00081   and   AB
      (Ashkaelia) Serbia and Montenegro  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00188.  It  also
      replaces FD (Kosovo-Roma)  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00214  insofar  as  that
      decision has any ongoing bearing on the issue of risk to Ashkaelia and
      persons of mixed ethnicity generally.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, born on 22 August 1984, is  a  national  of  Serbia  and
      Montenegro from Kosovo. He is of mixed  ethnicity,  his  father  being
      Ashkaelian, his mother Albanian.  As  we  shall  see,  the  background
      evidence  contains  numerous  variations   in   how   "Ashkaeli"   and
      "Ashkaelian" are spelt,  but  we  adopt  the  spelling  most  commonly
      utilised by the Tribunal. The appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom
      on 21 July 1999 and applied for asylum. His application was refused on
      6 December 2001.  Being a minor he was  however,  granted  exceptional
      leave to remain for twelve months. He applied for this to be extended.
      On 20 May 2004 the respondent refused to vary his leave.  He  appealed
      on asylum and human rights grounds.   His  appeal  was  heard  by  the
      Adjudicator, Mr L.J.R. Lobo.    In  a  determination  notified  on  21
      December 2004 he allowed the appellant's appeal on  asylum  and  human
      rights         grounds         (including         Article          8).



2.   By  virtue  of  transitional  provisions  made  under  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004 the  permission  to
      appeal which was granted to the respondent took effect as an order for
      reconsideration.   On 13 March 2006 an AIT panel consisting of Mr P.S.
      Aujla, Immigration Judge, Mrs M.L. Roe and Mr D.R. Bremmer  JP,  found
      that there was a material error of law. Their reasons were as follows:

               1. The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (the
                  Respondent) applies with permission of  the  Tribunal  for
                  reconsideration of the determination of an Adjudicator (Mr
                  L J R Lobo) allowing the Appellant's appeal on both asylum
                  and human rights grounds against the Respondent's decision
                  of 20 May 2004 refusing to vary the Appellant's  leave  to
                  enter or remain.

               2. The Appellant, born on 22 August 1984,  is  a  citizen  of
                  Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo).  He arrived in the  United
                  Kingdom on 21 July 1999 and  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.
                  The Respondent refused his claim for the reasons  set  out
                  in his letters of 06 December 2001 and  20  of  May  2004.
                  However, he granted him exceptional leave to remain  until
                  21 August  2002.   The  Respondent  refused  to  vary  the
                  Appellant's leave to enter or remain on 20 May 2004.   The
                  Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision.  The
                  Adjudicator heard the  appeal  on  07  December  2004  and
                  allowed it in his determination promulgated on 21 December
                  2004.  The Respondent appealed against  the  Adjudicator's
                  decision.  The Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 07
                  February 2005.


               3. Permission to appeal was granted by the Immigration Appeal
                  Tribunal.   Following  the  commencement  of  the   appeal
                  provisions of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
                  Claimants, etc) Act 2004 and by virtue of article 5 of the
                  Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act
                  2004 (Commencement  No.  5  and  Transitional  Provisions)
                  Order 2005, the grant of permission  takes  effect  as  an
                  order  for  reconsideration  of  the  Appellant's   appeal
                  limited to the grounds upon which permission to appeal was
                  granted.


               4. The Appellant claimed to be a refugee.  He stated that  he
                  belonged to a mixed ethnicity.  His father was  Ashkaelian
                  and his mother was Albanian.  His family  were  persecuted
                  by the Serbian authorities due to the Albanian links.   In
                  August 1998 Serbian police officers came to  his  home  in
                  search  of  evidence  of  KLA  support.   They  beat   the
                  Appellant and his father and the house was ransacked.  The
                  same incident occurred in January 1999 and in March  1999.
                  The Appellant was ordered to  leave  Kosovo.   He  hid  in
                  neighbouring forest.  A month later  his  home  was  burnt
                  down and he  decided  to  flee  Kosovo  to  avoid  further
                  incidents.  The Appellant came to the United Kingdom  with
                  his  cousin.   He  feared  persecution  from  the  Serbian
                  authorities if returned.


               5.  The  Adjudicator  set  out  his  findings  on  asylum  in
                  paragraphs 19 and 20 of the determination.  He stated that
                  the Appellant would be easily recognised as  belonging  to
                  mixed ethnicity and he  therefore  would  be  at  risk  on
                  return.  He also considered article 8 and found  that  the
                  Appellant had an established family life with  his  cousin
                  and that he also had an  established  private  life.   His
                  removal would constitute an interference which  would  not
                  be proportionate.  He dealt with the proportionality issue
                  in paragraphs 28 and 29.  He allowed the  appeal  on  both
                  asylum and human rights grounds.


               6. Both representatives agreed  that  there  was  a  material
                  error of law on the part of the Adjudicator in respect  of
                  his asylum determination.  We agreed.  The Respondent  had
                  placed before the Adjudicator at the hearing a copy of the
                  country guidance decision of the Tribunal in FD (Kosovo  -
                  Roma) CG [2004] UKIAT 00214 in which the Tribunal  clearly
                  stated that the evidence as a whole did  not  justify  the
                  conclusion that the ethnic discrimination and violence  to
                  which Roma were at times subjected from other  groups  was
                  of a level or frequency to mean that it constituted a real
                  risk of persecution for a Convention reason.  They  agreed
                  that the Adjudicator had allowed the asylum appeal  whilst
                  ignoring the country guidance decision.  We were satisfied
                  that there was a material error of law on the part of  the
                  Adjudicator.


               7. There was no dispute between the parties before us  as  to
                  the need for this  matter  to  be  adjourned  for  further
                  reconsideration.  The sole issue was whether or  not  both
                  asylum and article 8 should be reconsidered.   Mr  Ouseley
                  stated that the appeal should be considered  as  a  whole,
                  including article 8.  Mr Richardson, however, stated  that
                  the ground of appeal which related to article 8  had  only
                  challenged the Adjudicator's approach  to  article  8  (in
                  view of DM Croatia) but had not challenged the substantive
                  disposal of the proportionality issue by the Adjudicator.


               8. Mr  Ouseley  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  ground  2
                  adequately covered the whole article 8 issue.  That ground
                  had adequately identified the error of law and  therefore,
                  since the Adjudicator's determination  of  the  article  8
                  claim by reference to his finding of family life  and  the
                  proportionality exercise was flawed, the whole  article  8
                  issue should be reconsidered.


               9. Mr Richardson submitted on the other hand  that  ground  2
                  did not identify an error of law in terms of attacking the
                  Adjudicator's substantive disposal of the article 8 issue.
                   It only challenged his approach in that  it  was  not  in
                  accordance with DM.  He submitted that it was not open  to
                  us to set aside the Adjudicator's disposal of the  article
                  8 claim, however erroneous it was, since ground 2 did  not
                  specifically attack the substantive disposal.   He  relied
                  on Miftari and the comments of Mr Justice Collins in  Wani
                  as to the extent of our jurisdiction.  He submitted  that,
                  on the basis of ground  2,  it  was  not  open  to  us  to
                  interfere with the Adjudicator's substantive  decision  on
                  article 8.


              10. We considered the matter and came to the  conclusion  that
                  Mr Richardson's submission made sense.  We were  satisfied
                  without doubt  that  the  Adjudicator's  determination  of
                  article 8, both in his finding  of  family  life  and  his
                  decision on  proportionately,  was  completely  erroneous.
                  However,  we  agreed   with   Mr   Richardson   that   the
                  Respondent's ground  2  only  attacked  the  Adjudicator's
                  decision to embark on considering article 8.  It  did  not
                  attack the substantive decision made by  the  Adjudicator.
                  If the Respondent were to  invite  us  to  set  aside  the
                  article 8 determination, the Respondent  had  to  plead  a
                  further ground identifying the  error  which  clearly  was
                  present in the determination.  In the absence of  that  we
                  concluded that it was not open to us to interfere with the
                  article 8 decision, although it was totally erroneous.


              11.  The   matter   is   therefore   adjourned   for   further
                  reconsideration which will take place at Field House  (not
                  at Taylor House as mentioned  at  the  hearing).   Further
                  reconsideration will be limited to the issue of asylum and
                  article 3 only.'


3.   The panels' directions to the parties stated:


             "(1) Only asylum and Article 3 to be reconsidered.


              (2)     The Adjudicator's Article 8 decision to stand."


4.   At the hearing before us we sought first to clarify  the  proper  ambit
      of the second-stage reconsideration. We explained to the parties  that
      we could not accept the direction of the previous panel in relation to
      either Article 3 or Article 8.  That was because, as a matter of  law,
      human rights arguments could not succeed in the context of  an  appeal
      such as this. This was an appeal against a refusal to vary  leave.  As
      such we were bound to follow and apply JM* (Rule 62(7)), human  rights
      unarguable) Liberia [2006] UKAIT 00009.  The  appellant's  grounds  of
      reconsideration reliant on Article 8  (and  Article  3)  grounds  were
      incapable of succeeding. The parties said they were in agreement  with
      us on this point.

5.   Accordingly this reconsideration  is  confined  solely  to  the  asylum
      grounds of appeal.

6.   Mr Walker  confirmed  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  not  in
      dispute in this reconsideration. We have already noted the summary  of
      his asylum  claim  as  given  by  Immigration  Judge  Aujla,  but  for
      convenience we restate it here in our own words. The appellant  is  of
      mixed ethnic  origin.  His  father  was  Ashkaelian.  His  mother  was
      Albanian. As a family they  were  persecuted  due  to  their  Albanian
      links. In August 1989 twenty-five  Service  police  officers  came  to
      their home in search of  evidence  of  KLA  support.   They  beat  the
      appellant and his father. They ransacked their home. This incident was
      repeated in January 1999 and March 1999.   The  appellant  and  family
      were ordered to leave Kosovo, but they hid in neighbouring forests.  A
      month later their home was burnt down. He subsequently decided to flee
      to avoid further incidents of persecution.  Reflecting  this  account,
      the original basis of his asylum application in the  UK  was  that  he
      feared persecution at the hands of the Federal Republic of  Yugoslavia
      authorities. To this he later added a claim that he  feared  he  would
      also suffer ill-treatment amounting to persecution  for  a  Convention
      reason from Albanian extremists who will want to take revenge  against
      any Ashkaelians and those of mixed ethnic origin. He claimed that  his
      Ashkaelian links will be discovered because of his accent and  because
      he will have to register with the authorities and  in  doing  so  give
      details of his background and family.

7.   Given the terms of the decision that there  was  a  material  error  of
      law, we are not concerned any more  with  the  Adjudicator  Mr  Lobo's
      findings on the appellant's claim. However, in submissions Mr  Roebuck
      drew our attention to various passages in  the April 2005 CIPU Country
      Report on Kosovo, which  confirmed, he  said  that  persons  of  mixed
      ethnic origin and Ashkaelians remained at risk in Kosovo. He urged  us
      not to accept that the appellant could achieve  safety  on  return  by
      settling in an Ashkaelian enclave. That would entail for him living in
      a ghetto in which he would be at risk of attack from hostile outsiders
      and would have to tolerate standards of living which fell below  basic
      international norms. UNHCR continued to emphasis the fragility of  the
      return process and the problems which would ensue from forced  returns
      for both Ashkaelians and persons of mixed ethnicity.

8.   Mr Walker disagreed on both counts. He said the relevant parts  of  the
      CIPU Report showed an improvement in the position of  Ashkaelians  and
      those of mixed ethnicity. He did not think that this  appellant  would
      be identified as of Ashkaelian or mixed ethnicity in any event.

Our decision
9.   It is common  ground  that  there  is  no  longer  anything  about  the
      appellant's circumstances that would lead to  him  being  targeted  by
      anyone with personal knowledge of him or his family. Put another  way,
      there are no specific factors relating  to  the  appellant's  personal
      history of relevance in this case beyond the  fact  that  he  will  be
      returning as a young man of mixed Ashkaelian/Albanian ethnicity on his
      own without any apparent family network of support.

10.  We can be short with the question of  whether the  appellant  would  be
      identified as of Ashkaelian or mixed ethnicity.  Mr  Walker  initially
      sought to argue that the appellant would  not be perceived as such. We
      find that he would.  We do not have any evidence before us to help  us
      with whether the appellant in physical terms looks  Ashkaelian  or  of
      mixed Ashkaelian ethnicity. However, we think there  is  force  in  Mr
      Roebuck's  submission,  based  on   the   appellant's   and   cousin's
      statements,  that his way of speaking and acting,  combined  with  the
      fact that  he  would  be  asked  on  return,  both  by  officials  and
      neighbours about his origins, would mean he would be,  or  would  soon
      come to be, perceived as of mixed Ashkaelian  ethnicity.  We  bear  in
      mind the approach taken to the issue of identification of mixed ethnic
      origin in the case of a person of mixed Roma ethnicity from Kosovo  in
      Hysi [2005] EWCA Civ 711 and the Court's observation at para 26 that:

             "We have serious reservations about whether it is realistic to
             conclude that the arrival in one part of  Kosovo  of  a  young
             man, albeit with an Albanian surname, aged 18 years,  who  has
             spent the past three years or so in England, would not,  by  a
             sequence of  perfectly  understandable  questions,  eventually
             lead to the discovery of the appellant's mixed ethnicity,  his
             flight to England from a different part of Kosovo, and if  so,
             too, the reasons for it..."

11.  All hinges in this appeal, therefore,  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
      appellant, as a person of Ashkaelian/Albanian mixed ethnicity would be
      at risk on return to Kosovo.

12.  We turn first to consider existing Tribunal case  law  on  this  issue.
      There are several cases which furnish guidance of  relevance  to  this
      case, in particular   RB (Risk - Ethnicity - Gorani - Sanxhali) Kosovo
      CG [2004]  UKIAT  00037,  FM  (IFA  -  Mixed  Marriage  -  Albanian  -
      Ashkaelian) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00081, AB  (Ashkaelia)  Serbia  and
      Montenegro CG [2004] UKIAT 00188 and FD (Kosovo -  Roma)  Serbian  and
      Montenegro CG [2004] UKIAT 00214.   However, since they build on  each
      other over time, it is sufficient to  focus  below  on  the  two  most
      recent cases.  The first is the Country Guideline case  of   FD.  This
      case concerned a Kosovan whose father was a Roma and whose mother  was
      a Serb.   Having analysed a considerable number of background  country
      materials the Tribunal concluded:

             '50. The picture which  we draw from the  various  reports  is
                  that there has been a decrease  in  violence  against  the
                  ethnic minorities including the Roma  over  the  last  few
                  years although incidents of  violence  continue  to  occur
                  with Roma amongst those targeted by other  groups.  It  is
                  of course  not  possible  for  any  system  to  provide  a
                  guarantee against violence and  it  does  not  suffice  in
                  order to show that there is a real risk of persecution  by
                  non-state agents against which the   state  is  unable  to
                  offer protection, to point out that such attacks do occur.
                  We have to bear in mind that the UNMIK police and the  KPS
                  together with the judicial system have been  effective  in
                  reducing the level of attack upon ethnic minorities. There
                  is evidence that they do investigate and prosecute  before
                  judges of improving quality,  independence and  diversity,
                  those who commit such  offences.  The  evidence  does  not
                  suggest that those incidents are so  widespread  that  the
                  forces now present in  Kosovo  are  unable  to  provide  a
                  system of physical protection to minorities,  even  though
                  it cannot  prevent a number  of  unpleasant  attacks.  The
                  reported incidence of attacks is hard to gauge   from  the
                  material when set against the fact  that  there  are  some
                  36,000  Roma  in Kosovo and 1,200  RAE  returned  in  2002
                  alone;  but it does not appear to be high.


             51.  Romas do not all live in Roma enclaves or  in  camps  and
                  those who live outside do not all face  persecution;   the
                  picture is somewhat variable depending on time and  place.
                  We assume however that the claimant would  not  return  to
                  his village but would instead go to a Roma enclave or to a
                  camp. We make that assumption  because  of  what  he  said
                  about being the only Roma family there and the  likelihood
                  that his  house  will  have  been  taken  over  by  ethnic
                  Albanians. The position in an enclave, however,  does  not
                  suggest that there is a real risk  of  persecution  there;
                  Roma concerned about the security situation can go to such
                  enclaves where there is a greater prospect  of  collective
                  protection than outside.


             52.   There is no  evidence  that  conditions  in  the  camps,
                  should the claimant go to one, breach  Article  3  of  the
                  ECHR.  They are overcrowded and conditions are  poor.  The
                  fact that they are overcrowded suggest that  the  security
                  situation, freedom of movement and  discrimination  are  a
                  long way from what is aimed for.  However,  the  threshold
                  for such a breach is very high.


             53.  The evidence shows that the general  conditions  of  life
                  for  many  Roma   involve   routine   and   quite   severe
                  discrimination in accessing public  services,  poverty,  a
                  high degree of dependancy on humanitarian  aid  and  fears
                  for their future and security. We do not consider that the
                  conditions as evidenced by the various  reports,  however,
                  show that there is a real risk that the claimant's Article
                  3 rights will be infringed if he  is  returned.  There  is
                  humanitarian  aid;   some  are  able  to   access   public
                  services; not all  are  subject  to  the  same  degree  of
                  discrimination. The  position  in  enclaves  or  camps  is
                  likely   to   afford   scope   for   greater    collective
                  opportunities  for  protection  and   the   provision   of
                  services.


             54.   The UNHCR is legitimately concerned about more than just
                  refugee status and addresses humanitarian  issues  without
                  necessarily drawing a distinction, let  alone  a  precise,
                  distinction between  Geneva Convention refugees and  those
                  whom  it  considers   should   still   have   humanitarian
                  protection. But it does not apply the  same  test  on  the
                  face  of  the  material  as  is  required  by  Article   3
                  jurisprudence, which may  explain  why  it  expresses  its
                  concerns and why  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  whether
                  someone can be returned can properly differ.


             55.   It is plain that the improving situation in  Kosovo  has
                  enabled  ethnic  minorities  to  return  in   increasingly
                  significant numbers although caution  is  exercised  about
                  their enforced  or  large  scale  return.  There  is  some
                  evidence that ethnic Albanians take violent or destructive
                  action to prevent those returning doing so to  the  multi-
                  ethnic areas where they once lived and that there has been
                  some secondary displacement. But  with  the  international
                  force in Kosovo, even if they are unable to  prevent  such
                  an unwelcome response to returns,  there  is  no  evidence
                  that those who returned have been persecuted and unable to
                  find state protection or alternative  areas  in  which  to
                  live, notwithstanding the discomfort and  poor  conditions
                  in which they may then have to live. None of the  evidence
                  suggests that there would be a breach of  Article  3.   In
                  all those circumstances even though we can understand  why
                  the UNHCR discourages the additional load which  would  be
                  placed upon welfare and aid resources  there,  we  do  not
                  consider that its views preclude this claimant's return.'

13.  The Tribunal also gave separate and specific consideration to  evidence
      about March 2004 outbreaks of inter-ethnic violence and to  the  UNHCR
      Position Paper of 30 March 2004.  It concluded neither  this  evidence
      nor this  UNHCR  paper  caused  it  to  change  its  analysis  of  the
      situation.

14.   The most recent case reported dealing with  ethnic  minorities  is  SK
      (Roma in Kosovo - update) Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]  UKIAT  00023.
      This case concerned a Roma from Kosovo. Although not designated  as  a
      country  guidance case, the panel did review the extent  to  which  FD
      remained valid as guidance. The panel looked  at  evidence  which  had
      come into existence since FD.  That evidence included the August  2004
      UNHCR Position Paper. At paragraph 16 it stated:

             '16. The   FD  case  was  heard  on  13  February  2004.   The
                  determination was promulgated on 14 July 2004.  Paragraphs
                  1 to 56 of  the  determination  were  written  before  the
                  outbreak of violence in mid-March  2004.   the  Tribunal's
                  conclusions, in summary, were:

               a) That Roma do not all live in  Roma enclaves  or  in  camps
                  and  that  those  who  live  outside   do  not  all   face
                  persecution; the picture is somewhat  variable,  depending
                  on time and place (para 51);


               b) Roma who are concerned about the security situation can go
                  to an enclave where the there is  a  greater  prospect  of
                  collective protection  than outside (paragraph 51);


             (c)   Conditions in camps are overcrowded and poor; freedom of
                  movement and discrimination (which, for many Roma, involve
                  routine  and  quite  severe  discrimination  in  accessing
                  public services) are a long way from what  is  aimed  for.
                  However,  they  do  not  reach  the  Article  3  threshold
                  (paragraphs 52 and 53);


             (d)  There is some evidence that ethnic Albanians take violent
                  or destructive action  to  prevent  those  returning  from
                  doing so to the mufti-ethnic areas where they  once  lived
                  and that  there  has  been  some  secondary  displacement.
                  However, there is no evidence that those who returned have
                  been persecuted or unable  to  find  state  protection  or
                  alternate areas in which to live (paragraph 55);


             Following the outbreak of inter-ethnic violence in  Kosovo  in
             mid-March 2004, the Tribunal  invited  submissions  from  both
             parties. Following the publication of the UNHCR Position Paper
             on 30 March 2004, the  Tribunal  invited  further  submissions
             explicitly addressing that paper  (see  paragraph  57  of  the
             determination in  the  FD  case).    Neither  party  made  any
             submission. After considering the UNHCR paper:


             (e)    the Tribunal saw no reason to revise the  view  it  had
                  earlier reached that  the  claimant  in  that  case  would
                  return to a Roma enclave or camp, neither of  which  would
                  involve a breach of Article 3 (paragraphs 59 and 64);


             (f)    that Serbs were the primary targets of the violence  in
                  mid-March, although Roma and Ashkaelia were also  attacked
                  (paragraph  60);  that  the  violence  of  mid-March  2004
                  represented an extreme but temporary expression  of  those
                  inter-ethnic hatreds which simmer  below  the  surface  of
                  daily life, with sporadic violent eruptions against  which
                  the UN authorities and KPS provided a sufficient degree of
                  protection. The violence is not of such a  scale  that  it
                  prevented an effective,  controlling  protection  response
                  from the authorities (paragraphs 64, 65 and 66).   It  was
                  of  the  order  of  a  week  before   NATO   forces   were
                  sufficiently reinforced to quell the violence  though  the
                  prospects  of  identification  and  prosecution   of   its
                  instigators are limited (paragraph 60).    The  events  of
                  mid-March  2004  are  a   clear   demonstration   of   the
                  promptitude and effectiveness of the protecting  responses
                  (paragraph 65);


             (g)   that there was nothing of substance before the  Tribunal
                  to show that the political or inter-ethnic  landscape  has
                  changed such that there is a real  risk  of  treatment  in
                  breach of Article 3 or of  persecution  under  the  Geneva
                  Convention for reasons of ethnicity.  Rather, the Tribunal
                  found that the mid-March incidents  demonstrate  that  the
                  tensions lead to sporadic and  unpleasant  violence  which
                  the authorities have the  will  and  ability  to  suppress
                  (paragraph 67).


15.  At paragraphs 23-27 the  Tribunal  turned  to  consider  the  principal
      points which it saw as emerging from the  CIPU Bulletin of July 2004:

             '23. There are two main points  which  emerge  from  the  CIPU
                  Bulletin of July  2004  concerning  freedom  of  movement.
                  Paragraph  3.9 of the  Bulletin  states  that  freedom  of
                  movement for ethnic minorities has practically  ceased  in
                  Kosovo. However, this  relates  in  particular  to  Kosovo
                  Serbs, although  Roma and Ashkaelia are also mentioned  as
                  being adversely affected  in  their  movement  in  Kosovo,
                  reducing their capacity to work as day labourers.   Whilst
                  this may affect those who need to travel on a daily  basis
                  to work, it is clear from  paragraphs K.6.63 to K.6.65  of
                  the CIPU  of October 2004 that returns  (both  forced  and
                  voluntary) are managed. We do not  therefore  consider  it
                  reasonably likely that a returnee would  not  be  able  to
                  travel safely to a Roma enclave or camp.


             24.  Paragraph 4.8 of the CIPU Bulletin of July 2004 refers to
                  the possibility of further violence in the future. This is
                  attributed by the April 2004 report  to  the  UN  Security
                  Council of the then SRSG, Harri Holderi.  However, we also
                  note that he also referred to the  fact that, in  view  of
                  this, the KFOR and UNMIK  police are  maintaining  a  high
                  level of visibility and presence particularly in  minority
                  areas.


             25.  We note, furthermore, that paragraphs K.6.87 of the  CIPU
                  October 2004 reports states that, according to  the  UNHCR
                  Update paper of June  2004  (which  has  not  been  placed
                  before us), the overall situation for the Roma,  Ashkaelia
                  and Egyptian communities since March 2004 in the main  has
                  been one of gradual resumption of the relative  levels  of
                  minority rights held  before  the  violence  of  mid-March
                  2004.


             26.  Mr Fripp drew our attention to the problems in  Vushtrri/
                  Vucitrn (see paragraph K.6.896 of the  CIPU  October  2004
                  report and paragraph 3 of the  UNHCR  Kosovo  August  2004
                  Paper).  The Ashkaelia community in  this  place  suffered
                  disproportionately  when  compared  with  other   minority
                  communities elsewhere in Kosovo. We do not  see  that  the
                  experience    of    the     Ashkaelia     community     in
                  Vushihtrri/Vucitrn in March 2004 has any real  bearing  on
                  the issue in the instant appeal.


             27.   On  the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  us,  we  have
                  concluded that the conclusion of the Tribunal in   the  FD
                  case remain  valid.  There  is  reference  to  freedom  of
                  movement for  Roma being adversely affected  (which  shows
                  some deterioration in their situation) but, on  the  other
                  hand,  there  is  reference  to  KFOR  and  UNMIK   police
                  maintaining  a  high  level  of  visibility  and  presence
                  particularly   in  minority  areas  (which  indicates   an
                  improvement in terms of protection).   On the  whole,  the
                  situation remains much the  same as it was on the evidence
                  before the Tribunal in the  FD case.'

16.  Before proceeding further, we note that although both FD  and  SK  were
      concerned with Roma or persons of mixed Roma ethnicity,  the  analysis
      in both cases appeared to regard Roma, Ashkaelis and Egyptians (RAEs),
      including persons of mixed Ashkaelian ethnicity, as in much  the  same
      position. In general terms they considered that KFOR  and  the  Kosovo
      Police Service (KPS) were together capable of affording protection  in
      the event of any outbreaks of inter-ethnic violence such as that which
      erupted in March 2004. However, we now have before us a number of more
      recent reports. These cover the position  of  Roma  as  well  as  RAEs
      (Ashkaelian included) and persons of mixed ethnicity. It is  important
      that any attempt to review the approach to risk categories adopted  in
      previous  Tribunal  cases,  takes  these  recent  reports  fully  into
      account.

The Background Evidence

17.  All the major reports seek to cover  the  position  of  the  Ashkaelia,
      partly under the general category of Roma, partly under  the  category
      of "RAEs" and partly in specific terms.

18.  The Home Office Country Information  and  Policy  Unit  (CIPU)  Report:
      Serbia and Montenegro (Including  Kosovo)  April  2005,  analyses  the
      relative situation of Roma and Ashkaelia as follows:

CIPU Report April 2005
    "K.6.86.     Roma are not a homogenous or cohesive  group  -  they  are
             made  up  of  various  groups   with   different   allegiances,
             linguistic and religious traditions,  according  to  the  ninth
             assessment of OSCE / UNHCR (May  2002);  most  have  a  settled
             rather than nomadic lifestyle.  [18c](p.58)   According  to  an
             article in Sociology, February 2003, the nomadic nature of Roma
             is held by many  academic  sociologists  to  be  misunderstood,
             particularly  within  the  asylum  /   trans-border   migration
             process: studies  of  this  misidentification  in  the  Italian
             system shows  that  policy  can  be  clouded  by  questions  of
             settlement, with perceived "nomads" needing to achieve a higher
             threshold in relation to the need of protection than  "settled"
             Roma. As nomadic Roma are few within the Kosovan scenario  this
             is held to be iniquitous. [87a]


    K.6.87.       Although usually categorized together, Roma are  distinct
             from the groups known as Ashkaelia or Egyptians.  The following
             explanation of these groups is taken from  the  ninth  UNHCR  /
             OSCE assessment  of  the  situation  of  ethnic  minorities  in
             Kosovo, dated May 2002. [18c] (p.58ff)


    K.6.88.  "Ethnic identification as Roma, Ashkaelia or Egyptian  is  not
             necessarily  determined  by  easily  discernible  or   distinct
             characteristics or cultural traits, but rather by a process  of
             self-identification.  It  is  not  uncommon   in   Kosovo   for
             individuals  to   change   their   ethnic   self-identification
             depending on the pressures of local  circumstances,  especially
             when it is necessary in order to distance themselves from other
             groups to avoid negative  associations.  In  general,  however,
             ethnic Roma clearly identify themselves as Roma and tend to use
             Romany as their mother tongue, although a large  percentage  of
             the Roma population can speak Serbian (and to a  lesser  extent
             Albanian)  languages."  (UNHCR   /   OSCE   assessment,   ninth
             assessment, May 2002)  [18c](p.58 - footnote)


      K.6.89.   Other sources, notably the Blue Guide to Albania and Kosovo,
             indicate that the Kosovo Roma group is small, and compared with
             Roma aligned with either Serb or other minorities.  It  concurs
             with the UNHCR / OSCE assessment that Kosovo  Roma  do  clearly
             indicate that they are Roma as distinct from other groups,  and
             that  not  all  groups  called  Maxhupet  (Albanian  term   for
             "Gypsies") (see below) call themselves Roma:


                  "Only one group identifies as ethnic  Roma,  while  other
                  groups have  a  variety  of  identity  affiliations.  The
                  former use Romani as their mother tongue, and also  speak
                  Albanian and Serbian." (Blue Guide) [84a](p.105)


      K.6.90. "The Ashkaelia are Albanian-speaking (although many  can  also
            communicate  in  Serbian  language)   and   have   historically
            associated themselves with  Albanians,  living  close  to  that
            community.  Nevertheless, Albanians treat them as separate from
            the Albanian community.   Like  the  Ashkaelia,  the  Egyptians
            speak  Albanian  language  but  differentiate  themselves  from
            Ashkaelia by claiming to have originated from Egypt." (UNHCR  /
            OSCE assessment, ninth  assessment,  May  2002)   [18c](p.58  -
            footnote)


19.  However, the report goes on to note that  these  points  of  difference
      are  not  always  recognized  by  members  of  the  Albanian  majority
      community in Kosovo:

      "K.6.91. "It should be noted  that,  on  the  local  community  level,
            Albanians do not generally perceive the differences between the
            three groups, more often viewing Roma, Ashkaelia and  Egyptians
            as one group. It should also be noted that the separations  and
            distinctions between Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptian vary  between
            regions, and in some regions (Peja/Pe?, for example), the  Roma
            and Egyptian populations live in  the  same  geographic  areas,
            without much distinction between them on a day-to-day basis. In
            other areas or regions, the  distinctions  between  the  groups
            (including the geographic locations where they tend to live  as
            well as their actual or perceived levels  of  integration  with
            either the Albanian  or  Serb  population)  may  be  much  more
            pronounced." (UNHCR / OSCE assessment,  ninth  assessment,  May
            2002)    [18c](p.58 - footnote)


      K.6.92.      Further information, from a  Germany-based  Roma  support
             group website, undated but circa 2003,  indicates  that  ethnic
             Albanians  see  all  RAE  as  'Madschup'  alt.  'Maxhupet',   a
             derogatory term which roughly equates to 'Gypsies'. The  source
             further  suggests  that  treatment  of  Roma  by  the  majority
             population depend on the state of Serb / Albanian  tensions  at
             that time and in that place." [85a]


20.  The CIPU report's specific section dealing with Ashkaelia states  inter
      alia that:



        "Ashkaelia



        S.6.88. The Helsinki group report, published  October  2004,  notes
        that:-


           "Firstly a new ethnic community, the Ashkalia, 'emerged' in  the
           period between the two  censuses  [1991  and  2002].  Being  the
           'youngest' minority in Serbia, Ashkalia are often  equated  with
           Roma or Albanians.  Bearing  in  mind  their  animosity  towards
           Albanians, such treatment is a  permanent  source  of  tension."
           [7a] (p.11)

21.  The principal problem in recent times for Kosovo  Roma,  following  the
      fall of Milosevic, has been the perception by Albanians Kosovans  that
      Roma  generally   collaborated  with  Serb  mistreatment   of   ethnic
      Albanians. The Home Office report notes at K.6.85 as follows:

      "K.6.85.     Kosovo Roma have been targeted as a  group  because  they
             are seen as  having  collaborated  with  Serb  mistreatment  of
             ethnic Albanians during the conflict.   Allegations  that  some
             Roma took  part  in  criminal  acts  with  Yugoslav  forces  or
             opportunistic  looting  have  blackened  the  name  of  others.
             According to UNHCR figures of 2002, quoted in the report  dated
             16 October 2002 published by the Council of  Europe  Office  of
             the Commissioner for Human Rights,  approximately  25,000  fled
             from Kosovo to Serbia, Montenegro or Macedonia  and  those  who
             remain tended to move to Roma enclaves." [82a](p30)

22.   Nevertheless,  the  report  recognizes  that  there  are   significant
      variations in the perceptions of the majority population depending  on
      the particular area, population and locality issues:


        "K.6.93. The security position for  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian
        (RAE) communities varies according to perceptions of  the  majority
        population, locality and language issues, according to the UNHCR  /
        OSCE ninth assessment of January 2003: "This [a then trend  towards
        greater security and freedom  for  Roma]  should  be  qualified  by
        underlining the fact that the trend is marked by variations between
        Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian  communities  depending  upon   the
        perceptions of the  majority  population,  locality,  and  language
        issues." [18c](p.58) UNHCR and OSCE (both in January 2003  reports)
        state that the ability to speak fluent Albanian is likely to  be  a
        factor in the degree to which RAE are able to  integrate  with  the
        majority community.  [17g](p.3) [18c](p.58) This  is  qualified  by
        the UNHCR / OSCE ninth report (January 2003): "Further, the ability
        to speak Albanian fluently may mitigate against random attacks, but
        even then only to a  degree,  as  it  will  not  safeguard  against
        committed assailants who want to cause harm for  reasons  based  on
        the person's ethnic background." [18c](p.58) The UNHCR also adds in
        its January 2003 report: "In addition to the general discrimination
        against the Roma and Ashkaelia, former or current links  to  Kosovo
        Serbs or Kosovo Albanians and their language  orientation  continue
        to influence their security and freedom of  movement,  particularly
        in Prishtine/Pristina and Gjilan/Gjilane regions." [17g](p.3)

23.  Although it does not set out its own treatment in chronological  order,
      the Report sees the situation of RAE  as properly being dealt with  in
      terms of pre-March 2004, March 2004 and post-2004 timeframes.

The situation for ethnic minorities including Ashkaelia prior to March 2004

24.  The report sums up the pre-March 2004 situation as follows:

        "K.6.61. According to the Europa Regional  Survey  of  Central  and
        South-eastern Europe, 5th edition, 2005, ethnic Albanians  make  up
        approximately 90% of the population of Kosovo.  The  remaining  10%
        are made up of various minorities  including  ethnic  Serbs,  Roma,
        Ashkaelia,  Egyptians,  Bosniaks,   Gorani,   Croats   and   Turks.
        Following the war, there was a very high level of violence directed
        at Serbs, Roma and other ethnic minorities, who were seen as having
        collaborated with the Yugoslav oppression. Most of the perpetrators
        were ethnic Albanians seeking revenge or  pursuing  the  aim  of  a
        wholly  Albanian  state.  Large  numbers  of  the  Serbs  and  Roma
        communities  fled  from  Kosovo.  Those  who  remained  are  mostly
        concentrated in mono-ethnic areas. [1a](p.

        K.6.62. Prior to the March 2004 riots, according to  the  US  State
        Department  Report  for  2003,  "Members   of   non-Serb   minority
        communities, including Bosniaks, Egyptians, Ashkaeli,  Gorani,  and
        some Roma, reported that their security situation  improved  during
        the year, although incidents of violence and  harassment  continued
        to occur and their freedom  of  movement  was  restricted  in  some
        areas." [2c](p.38,9)The UNHCR  however  maintained  their  position
        with regard to  the  situation  of  ethnic  minorities  in  Kosovo,
        principally in their update paper of January 2003.[17g]

              "UNHCR's  position  remains  that  members  of  all  minority
              groups, particularly Serbs,  Roma,  Ashkaelia,  Egyptians  as
              well as Bosniaks and Goranis should continue to benefit  from
              international protection in countries of asylum.  Induced  or
              forced return movements jeopardize the highly delicate ethnic
              balance and may contribute to increasing  the  potential  for
              new inter-ethnic clashes." [17n](p.3)

        K.6.64. The UNHCR were also of the  opinion  that,  over  2003  and
        early 2004, some ethnic minority groups were increasing their trust
        in the police agencies:

             "However, before the riots of 15-19 March 2004, an increase  in
             the level of confidence  towards  law  enforcement  authorities
             could  be  observed  among  minorities  compared   to   earlier
             reporting  periods,  varying  slightly   between   region   and
             ethnicity. Generally, Kosovo Bosniaks had greater trust in  the
             police  than  members  of  the  Roma,  Ashkaelia  or   Egyptian
             communities." [18f](p.7)

25.  The Report also recorded  UNHCR's  view  that  in  the  period  between
      January 2003 and March 2004 the overall number of  security  incidents
      targeting minorities decreased:

         "K.6.76.  Ethnic  Serbs  have  been  the  principal   targets   for
         ethnically  motivated  attacks.  As  the  UNHCR  June  2004  Update
         expresses the situation: "Kosovo Serbs remained the primary targets
         of inter-ethnic violence, not  only  in  terms  of  the  number  of
         incidents or victims, but also in terms of the severity and cruelty
         of the crime." [18f](p.5) The US State Department Report  for  2003
         recounts that of the 72 murders in Kosovo during 2003, 13  were  of
         Serbs, with 7 held to ethnically motivated. [2c] (p.38)  The  UNHCR
         Update of June 2004, published August 2004, adds:


             "Although the period between January 2003 and March  2004  saw
             further  decline  in  the   number   of   security   incidents
             victimizing Roma,  Ashkaelia,  Egyptian,  Bosniak  and  Gorani
             minorities in Kosovo, as compared to  the  previous  reporting
             period covering April to October 2002, this positive trend was
             shattered by several high profile  killings  of  Kosovo  Serbs
             during the second [half] of 2003 and at the beginning  of  the
             year 2004. Subsequently, while the overall number of  security
             incidents targeting minorities decreased, the reporting period
             saw an increase in violent/severe  crimes  victimizing  Kosovo
             Serbs, compared to 2002." [18f](p.5)


          "During 2002 only five Serbs were murdered, compared to  12  from
          January to November 2003.... As a comparison, while the number of
          killed Serbs more than doubled, the total number of [all persons]
          killed remained at the same level." [18f](p.5)(footnote 2)


26.  The report also touches on certain other  difficulties  faced  by  Roma
      and Ashkaelia in the pre March 2004 period:

        "K.5.100. The US State Department Report for 2003 mentions, (and as
        repeated in the USSD  report  for  2004  [2a](p.28)  ),  that  Roma
        Ashkaeli and Egyptian children attend  mixed  schools  with  ethnic
        Albanians but sometimes face intimidation or are expected  to  work
        for their families from  a  young  age  at  the  expense  of  their
        education.[2c](p.36) In their report of  activities  undertaken  in
        2002, the Expert Committee on Education and Youth of  the  Standing
        Technical Working Group of the European Centre for Minority  Issues
        (ECMI) expressed concern that students of these groups were  under-
        performing academically, and that further efforts should be made to
        address this imbalance. [46c] Bosniaks can obtain primary education
        in their language but there is a shortage of  Bosniak  teachers  at
        secondary level, according to the Humanitarian Law  Centre  (HLC)'s
        Shadow Report on the Implementation of the Framework Convention for
        the Protection of National Minorities in  Serbia,  Montenegro,  and
        Kosovo of 16 January 2003." [63b](p.30)



The Events of March 2004


27.  The CIPU report also gives details of how  the  events  of  March  2004
      affected the Ashkaelia in certain areas. It notes at K.4.17 that on 18
      March:


        "The morning was held to be  relatively  calm,  most  of  the  mobs
        having dissipated. Most mobs reassembled and  the  first  incidents
        reported around noon. Large scale  violence  occurred  in  Prizren.
        [69c](p.49.)  The  afternoon  and  evening  was   punctuated   with
        incidents of Albanian mobs on the rampage targeting Serb  property,
        and   in   violent   engagement   with   the    security    forces.
        [69c](p.49,50,51.)  In  the  late  afternoon,  two  Albanian   mobs
        converged in southern Mitrovica to attack the Ashkaelia  settlement
        of  Vushtri  (previously  evacuated)  and  destroyed   the   entire
        neighbourhood. [69c](p.51.) The ICG report notes only one  incident
        of a non-Albanian being directly threatened on Day 2  (a  Serb  nun
        held prisoner at Devic convent, Drenica); otherwise,  the  security
        forces  had  ensured  the  safe  evacuation  of  targeted  groups."
        [69c](pp.52.)

28.  At K.6.96 more detail is given as follows:

        "K.6.96. One of the main incidents involving RAE reported widely in
        the analyses of the March 2004 riots was the case of  the  Ashkaeli
        community in  Vushtrri/Vucitrn.  According  to  the  European  Roma
        Rights Center (ERRC), in their photo-report of 30  March  2004,  in
        Vushtrri/Vucitrn, 260 Ashkaelia were left homeless as two Ashkaelia
        neighbourhoods were burnt down by ethnic  Albanian  mobs.  [26e]The
        Roma  and  Serb  populations  of  Vucitrn  had  been  driven   away
        previously in 1999. [26e]The Ashkaelia  are  currently  under  KFOR
        protection in the French KFOR camp near Novo  Selo.  [26e]The  ERRC
        published  photographs  of  the  destruction  of  one  of  the  two
        Ashkaelia  neighbourhoods.  [26e]  The  UNHCR   were   particularly
        concerned in August  2004,  in  their  Position  Paper,  about  the
        Vucitrn attacks, as the Ashkaelia community  had  been  reassembled
        from  Ashkaeli  IDPs,  and  the  community  was  in  nature   part-
        integrated, part-returnee; concluding:


           "The March 2004 events demonstrate that, Vushtrri/Vucitrn  being
           a case in point, the  existence  of  return  movements  (whether
           spontaneous, facilitated or organized) does not  necessarily  or
           immediately reflect a substantial improvement in their  security
           situation in general. In view of  this,  all  three  communities
           continue  to  feel   threatened   for   well-founded   reasons."
           [18g](p.4,5)


The Position of Ashkaelia post-March 2004
29.  At K.5.72 the report goes on to describe  the  position  for  Ashkaelia
      several months later as follows:


        "K.5.72.  Regarding  the  Ashkaeli  community  in  Mitrovica,   the
        KosovaLive website  relayed  on  17  December  2004  the  following
        comments of Ali Ismajli, a member of the PDAK (Democratic Party  of
        Kosovo):

           "In Mitrovic [Mitrovica], there are currently  [December  2004]
           46 Ashkali families with 318 members.  In  2003,  nine  families
           returned to their homes, whereas this year, there was only  one.
           Return was voluntary and stable. We do not  have  problems  with
           Albanians.  We  move  freely  and  40  of  our  children  attend
           Mitrovic schools," Ismajli said. He said that the roads,  water
           supply and sewage system had been  repaired  in  the  Korriku  2
           neighbourhood, where the Ashkali community now lived.  This,  in
           his view, has improved the quality of life for  his  community."
           [83f]


30.  Elsewhere the report had noted the UNHCR's position as follows:

        "K.6.66. The UNHCR reiterated its position regarding the return  of
        members of ethnic minorities to Kosovo in an updated Position Paper
        'On the Continued International  Protection  Needs  of  Individuals
        from Kosovo', dated 13 August 2004, stating:


              "UNHCR therefore maintains its position that members  of  the
              Serb,  Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian   communities   should
              continue  to  benefit  from   international   protection   in
              countries of asylum. Return of these minorities  should  take
              place on a strictly  voluntary  basis,  deriving  from  fully
              informed individual decisions. Along  with  Kosovo  Albanians
              originating from areas where they are now are in  a  minority
              situation, they should not be forced or compelled  to  return
              to  Kosovo.  There  are  also  certain  categories   of   the
              population, whether belonging to  the  majority  or  minority
              communities,  who  may  face   serious   protection   related
              problems, including physical danger, were they to return home
              at this stage. This category also includes members of Bosniak
              and Gorani communities." [18g](p.2)


        ....


         K.6.97.  In the main, since March 2004, the overall situation  for
        the RAE communities, according to the UNHCR Update  paper  of  June
        2004, has been one of gradual resumption to the relative levels  of
        minority rights held before the Violence. [18f](p.41.)  The  report
        does however conclude: "Overall the Roma,  Ashkaelia  and  Egyptian
        communities  have   lost   confidence   towards   law   enforcement
        authorities while in some areas (for example  in   Pej/Pec),  they
        acknowledge the positive role played by  certain  local  (majority)
        authorities." [18f](p.41.)

31.   The  report  also  noted  the  latest  US  State  Department  report's
      findings:

        "K.6.67. The USSD report for 2004's summary is as follows:-

           "Although UNMIK regulations  and  the  Constitutional  Framework
           protect ethnic minorities, in practice,  Kosovo's  most  serious
           human rights problem was  pervasive  social  discrimination  and
           harassment against members of minority communities, particularly
           Serbs but also Roma, Ashkali, and  Egyptians,  with  respect  to
           employment, social services, language use, freedom of  movement,
           the right to  return,  and  other  basic  rights.  Violence  and
           property crime directed at Kosovo's minorities remained  serious
           problems." [2a](p.32)

US State Department Report 2005
32.  Turning to examine this latter report - the U.S.  Department  of  State
      Report 2005 (Country Reports on Human Rights Practices  (2005)  -  for
      ourselves, we note that it  deals,  inter  alia,  with  the  issue  of
      returnees to Kosovo from ethnic minorities (page 30).
        "The UNHCR reported that 2,048 minorities returned to Kosovo during
        the year, including ethnic Albanians who returned  to  areas  where
        they are a minority. Overall minority returns since 2000  stood  at
        14,433 at the end of the year. A slightly smaller number of  ethnic
        Serbs returned compared to 2004, when  more  Bosniaks  and  Goranis
        returned.  Ethnic  Serbs  made  up  approximately  35  percent   of
        returnees during the year, compared with 33 percent in  2004.  Roma
        (including Ashkalia and Egyptians) continued to return in  slightly
        greater numbers, making up 45 percent  of  the  overall  number  of
        returns. In Mitrovica ethnic Serbs in the north  of  the  city  and
        ethnic Albanians in the south continued to  illegally  occupy  each
        others' properties, hindering potential returnees."
33.  The report also describes chequered progress  in  the  construction  of
      relocation facilities affecting Roma,  Ashkaelian  and  Egyptian  RAEs
      (page 30):
        " During the year UNMIK began construction on a relocation facility
        to eventually accommodate  approximately  531  Roma,  Ashkali,  and
        Egyptian IDPs living  in  three  lead-polluted  camps  in  northern
        Kosovo; however, all the IDPs remained in  the  polluted  camps  at
        year's end. World Health Organization  testing  showed  dangerously
        high blood-lead levels  in  many  camp  residents.  UNMIK  began  a
        concurrent donor funding campaign to  rebuild  the  IDPs'  original
        neighborhood in south Mitrovica, which was  destroyed  in  1999  by
        ethnic Albanians, who accused Roma of being Serb collaborators, but
        completed only limited clearing of rubble by  year's  end.  Limited
        funding slowed the return project. On  September  2,  the  European
        Roma Rights Center filed  an  appeal  to  the  Kosovo  prosecutor's
        office to initiate a criminal investigation  into  the  matter;  no
        formal charges had been filed at year's end."
34.  On the subject of political representation it notes (page 31):
        "There were 21 ethnic minority members in  the  120-seat  Assembly,
        including 10 ethnic Serbs and 11 members of other groups, including
        ethnic Turks, Bosniaks, Gorani, Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians. There
        were two minority PISG ministers, one ethnic Serb and one  Bosniak,
        and three minority deputy ministers. One  Bosniak  and  one  ethnic
        Turk held a rotating seat on  the  Assembly  presidency;  the  Serb
        boycott left empty the set-aside  seat  for  one  ethnic  Serb.  At
        year's end ethnic Serbs in the largest Kosovo Serb political  party
        had not claimed their set-aside  cabinet  posts  and  continued  to
        boycott  the  Assembly;  however,  members  of  Slavisa  Petkovic's
        political party took  up  2  of  the  set-aside  seats  and  led  a
        ministry. The constitutional framework requires that  the  Assembly
        reserve 10 seats for ethnic Serbs  and  10  for  members  of  other
        ethnic groups, but ethnic minorities were underrepresented  at  the
        municipal level."
35.  On schooling it observes (page 33) :
        "UNMIK regulations require children between the ages of 6 and 15 to
        enrol in public school;  however,  a  few  children  from  minority
        (excluding ethnic Serb) communities did not attend PISG-run  public
        school  due  to  security  concerns.  Primary  education  is  free.
        According to UNICEF, 97.5 percent of ethnic Albanian and 99 percent
        of ethnic Serbian children were enrolled in primary  school,  while
        only 77 percent of children between the ages of 7 and 14 from  non-
        Serb  minority  communities  (Roma,  Ashkalia,  Egyptian,  Turkish,
        Bosniak, Gorani, and others) were in school. The UN Children's Fund
        (UNICEF) reported that less than 52 percent  of  the  children  who
        completed primary  education  continued  to  secondary  school;  43
        percent of these were female. There were lower rates  of  secondary
        school attendance and completion for ethnic Albanian girls than for
        ethnic Albanian boys or  ethnic  Serb  girls.  Some  children  were
        forced to leave school early to work (see section 6.d.).
         Romani, Ashkali, and Egyptian children attended mixed schools with
        ethnic Albanian children but reportedly faced intimidation in  some
        majority Albanian areas. Romani children tended to be disadvantaged
        by poverty, leading many to start work both  at  home  and  in  the
        streets at an early  age  to  contribute  to  family  income.  Some
        Bosniak children in predominantly Bosniak areas  were  occasionally
        able to obtain primary education in their language, but  those  few
        outside such areas received instruction in  the  majority  Albanian
        language."
36.  On official and societal discrimination and living conditions, it  says
      this (pages 37-38):
        "Official and societal discrimination with respect  to  employment,
        social services, language use, freedom of movement,  the  right  to
        return, and  other  basic  rights  and  harassment  of  members  of
        minorities improved over the previous year, although discrimination
        persisted, particularly against ethnic Serbs and Roma, Ashkali, and
        Egyptians.  Violence  and  crimes  against  property  directed   at
        minorities lessened, but remained a problem.
        ....
         During the year police and KFOR commenced  large-scale  operations
        to apprehend persons responsible for  the  March  2004  interethnic
        riots that resulted in the deaths of 8 ethnic Serbs and  12  ethnic
        Albanians, injury of  more  than  900  persons,  severe  damage  or
        destruction of more than  900  ethnic  Serb,  Romani,  and  Ashkali
        houses and 30 Orthodox churches or monasteries. In its July  report
        on follow-up  actions  after  the  riots,  UNMIK  stated  that  348
        individuals had been brought before  the  courts  for  riot-related
        offences. Of these, 179 cases  were  completed,  71  were  awaiting
        trial, and 98 were under investigation. At least 57  serious  cases
        were prosecuted by international lawyers and resulted in  sentences
        of up to 16 years in prison. Kosovo judges handed down more than 85
        convictions, with punishment  ranging  from  court  reprimands  and
        fines up to $240 (200 euros) to imprisonment  for  periods  ranging
        from two months to two years. On May 19, an international panel  of
        judges of the Gjilan/ Gnjilane district court convicted six  ethnic
        Albanians in connection with the killing of two ethnic Serbs during
        the riots and sentenced them to prison terms ranging from 3.5 to 16
        years."
Human Rights Watch Report 2005
37.  We next turn to the Human Rights Watch Report for 2005. In relation  to
      the pre-March 2004 situation it states (page 6) that:
        "Roma, Ashkali, and Egyptians (Roma who claim descent from  ancient
        Egypt)-referred  to  collectively  as  RAE  communities-also  faced
        violence, intimidation, and forcible expulsion in the aftermath  of
        the 1999 conflict. Some ethnic Albanians suspected  that  some  RAE
        had collaborated with the Serb and Yugoslav forces during the  1999
        conflict, and ethnic Albanians were not above the widespread  anti-
        RAE sentiments that prevail in Europe, where  RAE  communities  are
        derisively known as "Gypsies." In the immediate  aftermath  of  the
        1999 conflict, RAE homes were burned alongside Serb homes, and  RAE
        communities also faced deadly attacks, kidnappings, and other forms
        of violence."
Events of March 2004
38.  Most of the report, however, focusses on the events of March  2004  and
      their aftermath. At page 4 it states:
         "The March violence forced out the  entire  Serb  population  from
        dozens of  locations-including  the  capital  Pristina-and  equally
        affected Roma and Ashkali communities. After two days  of  rioting,
        at  least  550  homes  and  twenty-seven  Orthodox   churches   and
        monasteries were burned, leaving approximately 4,100  Serbs,  Roma,
        Ashkali, and other non-Albanian minorities  displaced.  Some  2,000
        persons still remain displaced months later, living in crowded  and
        unsanitary  conditions-including   in   unheated   and   unfinished
        apartments, crowded schools, tent camps on KFOR military bases, and
        even metal trucking containers. The future of minorities in  Kosovo
        has never looked bleaker."
39.  More detail is given at page 6:
        "On March 17, 2004, violent rioting by ethnic Albanian crowds broke
        out in Kosovo, a day after ethnic Albanian news agencies in  Kosovo
        reported sensational and ultimately inaccurate reports  that  three
        young children had drowned after being chased  into  the  river  by
        Serbs. [2] With lighting speed, the crowd violence spread all  over
        Kosovo, with the Kosovo  authorities  counting  thirty-three  major
        riots involving an estimated 51,000 participants over the next  two
        days. [3] Large ethnic Albanian crowds targeted Serb and other non-
        Albanian communities, burning at least 550 homes  and  twenty-seven
        Serbian   Orthodox   churches   and   monasteries,   and    leaving
        approximately 4,100 Serbs, Roma, Ashkali (Albanian-speaking  Roma),
        and other  non-Albanian  minorities  [4]  displaced.  [5]  Nineteen
        people-eight Kosovo Serbs and eleven Kosovo Albanians-were  killed,
        and over a thousand wounded-including more than 120  KFOR  soldiers
        and UNMIK police officers, and fifty-eight  Kosovo  Police  Service
        (KPS) officers."
40.  At page 15 it expresses the view  that  the  March  2004  violence  was
      organised by ethnic extremists:
        "The March violence in Kosovo involved more  than  50,000  rioters,
        and international  officials  quickly  described  the  violence  as
        organized by ethnic extremists. UNMIK spokesperson  Derek  Chappell
        described the acts of violence as having "a degree of  organization
        behind them." On March 23, during a visit to the  violence-affected
        city of Obilic, UNMIK  head  Harri  Holkeri  stated  that  Albanian
        extremists "had a ready-made plan" for the  violence.  [61]  During
        his March 22 visit to Kosovo, NATO Secretary-General Jaap  de  Hoop
        Scheffer described the "unacceptable" violence as "orchestrated and
        organized by extremist factions in the  Albanian  community."  [62]
        Visiting Kosovo just days after the March  violence,  the  European
        Union's foreign policy representative Javier Solana also  described
        the  violence  as  organized:  "It  may  have  been  a  moment   of
        spontaneity, but ... a lot  of  people  (were)  organized  to  take
        advantage of that moment  of  spontaneity."  [63]  Admiral  Gregory
        Johnson, the commander  of  NATO  forces  for  Southern  Europe,  a
        command which includes the NATO-led KFOR troops in  Kosovo,  stated
        that there was a "modicum of organization" behind the violence  and
        described  the  violence  as  "essentially  amount[ing]  to  ethnic
        cleansing." [64] In  his  report  to  the  U.N.  Security  Council,
        Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated  that  "the  onslaught  led  by
        Kosovo Albanian extremists  against  the  Serb,  Roma  and  Ashkali
        communities of Kosovo was an organized,  widespread,  and  targeted
        campaign." [65]"
41.  As well as highlighting the widespread attacks by ethnic  Albanians  on
      Serbs, Roma, Ashkaeli, Albanian-speaking Roma and  other  non-Albanian
      minorities, the report at page 12  expressed "equal concern"  about  "
      the near-collapse  of  the  international  security  organizations  in
      Kosovo when confronted by the violence and unrest of March  2004,  and
      the inability of KFOR, UNMIK international police, and the  local  KPS
      to provide  effective  protection  to  Kosovo's  minority  communities
      during the two days of violence". It noted that  "in  nearby  Vucitrn,
      located in between two main French KFOR camps, Albanian crowds  burned
      sixty-nine Ashkaeli homes without a response from either  French  KFOR
      or international UNMIK police".
42.  The overall role of the KPS was dealt with as follows:
        "In the absence of KFOR and UNMIK, the dire security situation  was
        often left in the hands of the recently trained and  under-equipped
        Kosovo Police Service (KPS), whose performance was mixed. Some  KPS
        officers performed with great courage  and  professionalism  during
        the crisis, working tirelessly to protect or  evacuate  Serbs  from
        their homes and doubtlessly saving lives. Many other  KPS  officers
        stood by passively, refusing to take steps to protect ethnic  Serbs
        and other minorities, or participate  in  their  evacuation.  In  a
        number of cases, KPS officers showed  a  bias  against  minorities,
        arresting Serbs or Ashkalis who tried to defend their  homes  while
        ignoring  the  criminal  actions  of  Albanian  rioters.  Some  KPS
        officers  took  an  active  part   in   the   violence,   allegedly
        participating in the burning  of  homes  in  Vucitrn,  Obilic,  and
        Kosovo Polje".
43.  The KPS role was also touched on at page 21:
        "Ethnic Serbs were not the only victims of the March  violence.  In
        many areas of Kosovo, Roma, Ashkali (Albanian-speaking  Roma),  and
        other non-Albanian minorities also faced violence. Among  the  most
        severe attacks was the burning of at least sixty-nine Ashkali homes
        together with a Serb  Orthodox  Church  in  Vucitrn.  The  town  of
        Vucitrn is located south of Mitrovica. Even though  Vucitrn  is  in
        close proximity to two major French KFOR bases-"Belvedere" and Novo
        Selo-KFOR or UNMIK did not take an active part in  the  defence  of
        the Ashkali community in Vucitrn.  The  only  security  force  that
        played a significant role during the violence in  Vucitrn  was  the
        predominantly ethnic Albanian Kosovo Police  Service  (KPS).  While
        some KPS officers assisted in the evacuation of Ashkali  residents,
        it appears that other KPS officers played an  active  part  in  the
        violence, arresting and abusing Ashkalis who  attempted  to  defend
        their  homes.  According  to  some  Ashkaeli,  some  KPS   officers
        participated in the burning of Ashkali homes. [...]"
The Situation Post-March 2004
44.  In evaluating the situation post-March 2004,  the  Human  Rights  Watch
      2005 report (at pages 34-35) expressed concerns about the displacement
      it had caused and the conditions being experienced  by  the  displaced
      persons affected:
        " More than 2,000 persons remained displaced at the time  of  Human
        Rights Watch's April research mission, and  were  often  living  in
        miserable and overcrowded conditions. Many of the  families  burned
        out of their homes in Svinjare and Obilic were living in  unheated,
        unfinished  apartment  buildings  without  access  to   water   and
        electricity in Mitrovica and Zvecan. [181] Human Rights Watch  also
        found displaced  Serbs  living  in  metal  trucking  containers  in
        Gracanica and Ugljare.  Hundreds  of  displaced  persons  are  also
        housed in school buildings in Gracanica and Mitrovica,  in  crowded
        conditions that  provide  no  privacy  and  inadequate  sanitation.
        Displaced Serbs from Prizren are located  at  a  gymnasium  on  the
        German KFOR base, displaced Serbs from Belo Polje  are  located  at
        the  Italian  "Villagio  Italio"  KFOR  base,  while  hundreds   of
        displaced Ashkali from Vucitrn are living in a  muddy  and  crowded
        tent camp inside  the  French  KFOR  base  at  Novo  Selo.  Several
        families are being housed in single tents. The historic monasteries
        of Gracanica and Decani are also housing displaced Serbs.
        ....
        Many of the  persons  affected  by  the  March  violence  had  only
        recently returned to Kosovo, some with the assistance of the United
        Nations  High   Commissioner   for   Refugees   (UNHCR)   and   the
        International Organization for Migration. Fedaim Kelmendi abandoned
        his application for asylum in Belgium in January 2004, and returned
        to his home in Vucitrn after IOM assured him it was safe to return.
        IOM provided him with free plane tickets to  Kosovo,  and  provided
        transportation to his home in Vucitrn. Njazi Pllavci,  an  Ashkali,
        returned to his home in Vucitrn in May 2003 with the assistance  of
        UNHCR, because he was no longer  able  to  support  his  family  in
        Serbia. The Serbs of Belo Polje returned after  receiving  security
        guarantees from KFOR and UNMIK, as well as rebuilding assistance."
UNHCR Position Paper, March 2005
  45.   That brings us to the UNHCR Position on the Continued  international
      Protection Needs of Individuals from Kosovo (UNHCR, March 2005).  This
      is the latest UNHCR report placed before us. Its contents represent  a
      modification of the position expressed in the August 2004 report. At D
      paragraphs 13 and 15 it gives the following summary:
   [pic]
      [pic]
46.  At paragraph 16, under the heading 'Other Groups at Risk', it stated:
             'In the current complex situation  of  Kosovo,  others  groups
             not detailed above may  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted  for  Convention  related  reasons.   Under   these
             categories may thus fall Kosovo  Albanians  belonging  to  the
             majority population and members of all ethnic minority groups,
             including those that UNHCR  has not mentioned under the  above
             'ethnic minorities at risk'.  Example for these categories may
             include but are not limited to the following:
                 . Persons in ethnically  mixed  marriages  and  persons  of
                   mixed ethnicity
                 . Persons perceived  to  have  been  associated   with  the
                   Serbian regime after 1990; and
                 . Victims of trafficking.'
European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) Report, June 2005
47.  Also before us was the European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC)  Report,  "In
      the Aftermath of Ethnic  Cleansing:  Continued  Persecution  of  Roma,
      Ashkaelis, Egyptians and  Others  Perceived  as  "Gypsies"  in  Kosovo
      (Memorandum of the European  Roma  Rights  Centre,  presented  to  the
      European Parliament on 27/06/05)". Its view is summarised at  page  12
      as follows:
        "Six years ago, after  the  end  of  the  NATO  bombing  of  former
        Yugoslavia,  Roma  Ashkalis,  Egyptians  and  others  regarded   as
        "Gypsies" ("RAE") were  violently  cleansed  from  their  homes  in
        Kosovo by means of arson, mass destruction of houses, killings  and
        rape. Today,  persecution  of  the  members  of  these  communities
        continues, manifested in their systematic exclusion from access  to
        fundamental  human  rights.  Racial  discrimination   against   RAE
        communities in Kosovo is pervasive,  depriving  tens  of  thousands
        from even a bare minimum of dignity. Anti-Gypsy sentiment among the
        majority is widespread, ranging from assaults on RAE individuals to
        verbal abuse and  dissemination  of  defamatory  images,  including
        images  stigmatising  RAE  as  perpetrators   of   crimes   against
        Albanians, in the media."
  48.   The report later summarises what it describes as "some  particularly
      extreme issues facing Roma, Ashkalis, Egyptians and others  considered
      as "Gypsies" in Kosovo" as follows:
         "Failure to Provide Just Remedy for Gross Violations of Fundamental
         Human Rights: RAE are denied the  right  to  compensation  for  the
         violent crimes committed against them immediately after the end  of
         the NATO bombing in June 1999  and  the  following  years.  In  the
         course of the ethnic cleansing campaign, ethnic Albanians kidnapped
         and severely physically abused  and  in  some  cases  killed  Roma,
         Ashkalis and Egyptians; raped  women  in  the  presence  of  family
         members; and seized, looted or destroyed property en  masse.  Whole
         Romani settlements were burned to the ground by  ethnic  Albanians,
         in many cases while NATO troops looked on. In the  following  years
         numerous RAE returnees were targeted for violent assaults  such  as
         the brutal killing of four Ashkali returnees in Dashevc/Do?evac  in
         November  2000,  the  numerous  explosions   causing   deaths   and
         destruction of newly rebuilt houses for returnees. The perpetrators
         of these crimes have not been  brought  to  justice  to  date.  The
         ethnic cleansing of the RAE remains totally unremedied.
         Continuing Violence, Intimidation, and  Harassment:  After  several
         years during which UN officials and others assured the public  that
         the worst violence in Kosovo was over; after Germany, Italy, Sweden
         and other states, considering Kosovo to  be  safe,  terminated  the
         international protection of many RAE  and  started  their  forceful
         repatriation to  Kosovo,  the  renewal  of  mass  violence  against
         minorities in Kosovo in March 2004,  demonstrated  that  forces  in
         Kosovo intent on  expelling  non-Albanian  minorities  continue  to
         control the course of events. Several hundreds of Roma and Ashkalis
         were targeted for violent attacks; at least 75 houses belonging  to
         Romani and Ashkali families were set on fire.  In  Vushtrri/Vucitrn
         alone, some  70  houses  belonging  to  Ashkalis  were  burned  and
         destroyed.
         Roma, Ashkalis, Egyptians and others  considered  as  "Gypsies"  in
         Kosovo today live in  a  state  of  pervasive  fear,  nourished  by
         routine  intimidation  and  verbal  harassment,  as  well   as   by
         occasional racist assaults  by  Kosovo  Albanians.  Most  of  these
         incidents remain unreported to the authorities due to lack of trust
         and fear of retaliation, reinforced and affirmed by  the  awareness
         among RAE that there has been no justice  delivered  in  connection
         with the massive wave of violent crimes committed against them, and
         indeed that the persons primarily responsible for these crimes  are
         the new powers in Kosovo.
         A Vacuum of  Protection  against  Discrimination:  Roma,  Ashkalis,
         Egyptians  and  others  considered  as  "Gypsies"  in  Kosovo   are
         subjected  to  exclusion  and  marginalisation  as  a   result   of
         systematic racial discrimination. RAE remain the  only  communities
         which still live in  camps  for  internally  displaced  in  inhuman
         conditions; levels of unemployment and  impoverishment  among  them
         are grossly disproportionate compared to the  rest  of  the  Kosovo
         population; housing conditions are  markedly  inferior;  access  to
         social and public services is seriously restricted. The  impact  of
         racial discrimination against RAE is particularly  visible  in  the
         exercise of:
         .  The Right to  Return  in  Safety  and  Dignity:  Numerous  Roma,
         Ashkalis and Egyptians remain in internal  displacement  throughout
         Kosovo and outside Kosovo unable to return due to  fear  for  their
         security; due to failure of the authorities to rebuild their houses
         and ensure other necessary conditions for a dignified  return;  due
         to failure of the authorities to ensure that the  legal  owners  of
         houses  can  reclaim  their  property  which  had  been   illegally
         occupied. Most poignantly, the failure of authorities in Kosovo  to
         ensure access to fundamental rights of RAE has been demonstrated by
         the continuing exposure in the last  six  years  of  some  700  RAE
         individuals in the IDP camps in Northern Mitrovica  and  Zvean  to
         lead poisoning.
         .  The Right to Work: Discrimination  against  Roma,  Ashkalis  and
         Egyptians in employment is massive: With the privatisation  of  the
         Kosovo enterprises, hundreds of RAE are excluded from  jobs;  other
         opportunities  for  access  to  income  sources  are  also  largely
         unavailable to them; RAE involvement in the civil service is token.
         Discrimination in employment  condemns  large  numbers  of  RAE  to
         degrading poverty. Severe impoverishment of RAE families is also  a
         major obstacle for access to education and health care.
                .  The Right to Adequate  Housing:  For  numerous  families
         housing is extremely substandard  in  marked  contrast  to  housing
         conditions of any other  ethnicities  currently  in  Kosovo.  In  a
         number of RAE neighbourhoods, located  on  the  margins  of  towns,
         individuals are exposed to serious health  risks  due  to  lack  of
         basic facilities and their  access  to  employment,  education  and
         public services is severely restricted.
     The conditions described above deter tens of thousands of  individuals
         from returning to their homeland.  Out  of  a  community  of  about
         150,000 individuals before 1999, the estimated  number  of  RAE  in
         Kosovo today is 30,000-35,000.  In  addition  to  the  hundreds  of
         thousands of individuals who fled persecution in 1999-2000, several
         dozens of  Ashkali  families  left  Kosovo  after  the  March  2004
         pogroms. A number of voluntary and forced returnees with  whom  the
         ERRC recently spoke were preparing to leave the province.  Many  of
         these  individuals  are  threatened  to  become  victims  of  human
         trafficking  and  other  gross  human  rights  violations.   Forced
         returnees in 2003 and 2004 have left Kosovo in a matter  of  months
         after their forced repatriation. For many RAE, the only  reason  to
         remain in Kosovo is reportedly  lack  of  money  to  arrange  their
         leaving the province. The underlying cause of these issues  is  the
         persecution of Roma, Ashkalis, Egyptians  and  others  regarded  as
         "Gypsies" in Kosovo, a persecution undertaken under the auspices of
         international administration in Kosovo."
49.  At page 8 the report describes the state of mind of RAE in Kosovo:
         "A sense that they live in a state  of  danger  and  precariousness
         remains very high among RAE in Kosovo. Many RAE told the ERRC  that
         it was hard to believe that ethnic violence would not erupt  again,
         particularly after the experiences of March 2004. In the  event  of
         such violence, RAE told the ERRC that they  did  not  believe  they
         would be effectively protected. The largest  non-Serbian  community
         which was subjected to a violent arson attack in March 2004 -  some
         70 Ashkali families from Vushtrri/Vu?itrn - is now  outside  Kosovo
         or in internal displacement inside and outside Kosovo. According to
         Hamid Zymeri, one of the few individuals who returned to  Vushtrri/
         Vu?itrn in April 2005, after the burned houses were  rebuilt,  only
         six Ashkali families returned.  Over  50  newly  built  houses  are
         reportedly currently empty. Mr Zymeri himself described his life in
         Vushtrri/ Vu?itrn after the pogroms as "home-prison".
50.  Pages 10-11 of  the  report  evaluate  the  recent  history  of  forced
    returns and make recommendations:
         "Forced returns of RAE in the past several years,  especially  from
         countries such as Germany, Sweden, and  Italy  have  never  ceased.
         Most recently, on April 26, 2005, the German state  and  the  UNMIK
         made the so called "Agreed Note" according to which between 300-500
         Ashkalis and Egyptians will be forcefully returned per  month  from
         Germany to Kosovo by the end of 2005. Regarding Romani communities,
         the Note says: "In view of expected improvements of  the  situation
         of Roma in Kosovo, UNMIK agrees to the possibility of allowing  the
         return of criminal offenders of the Roma community  who  have  been
         sentenced to imprisonment for at east 2 years or to several  prison
         sentences amounting to a total of at least 2 years and who are  not
         in need of protection."
         ....


          In  view  of  the  present  human  rights  situation  of  the  RAE
         communities in Kosovo, the ERRC urges the  representatives  of  the
         international community and the  Provisional  Institutions  of  the
         Kosovo government to act within the powers  available  to  them  to
         ensure that:
         .  Prompt and impartial investigations into all acts of violence to
         which Romani, Ashkali and Egyptian individuals  and  other  persons
         regarded as "Gypsies" in Kosovo have  been  subjected  are  carried
         out;  all  perpetrators  of  racially-motivated  acts   of   ethnic
         cleansing are brought swiftly to justice and victims or families of
         victims receive adequate compensation; justice is done and seen  to
         be done;


         .   Individuals  guilty  of  the  persecution  of  Roma,  Ashkalis,
         Egyptians and other persons regarded as  "Gypsies"  in  Kosovo  are
         swiftly brought to justice via the International Criminal  Tribunal
         for the Former Yugoslavia, or through other mechanisms;


         .  Sustained efforts are undertaken by all  authorities  in  Kosovo
         and involved in the administration of  Kosovo  to  ensure  that  no
         discussions of Kosovo's final status are embarked upon until such a
         time as all stakeholders achieve durable and lasting  consensus  in
         practice that Kosovo is  a  multi-cultural  society  in  which  all
         individuals  can  freely  exercise  in  practice   all   of   their
         fundamental human rights;
         .  Any  forced  returns  of  Kosovo  Romani,  Ashkali  or  Egyptian
         individuals to Kosovo, or to the rest of Serbia and Montenegro  are
         rendered  impossible  and  impermissible  until  such  a  time   as
         authorities in Kosovo are able to demonstrate durable  and  lasting
         security and freedom from racial  discrimination  for  all  in  all
         parts of the province. "
Our Assessment

51.  In view of the fact that the  latest  UNHCR  report  differentiates  in
      places between the position faced by Roma on the one hand and  (within
      the category of RAE)  Ashkaelia on the other, we have decided that  we
      should confine our assessment to the position of Ashkaelia  and  those
      of mixed Ashkaelian ethnicity. In this connection  we  should  mention
      that we have seen a copy of a recent draft  decision  by  a  different
      senior panel dealing with Roma and persons in  ethnically  mixed  Roma
      marriages. In our view, the issue of persons of mixed ethnicity on the
      one hand and persons of ethnically mixed marriages are distinct and it
      not our intention here to deal with the  latter.  We  deal  only  with
      Ashkaelia and persons of mixed Ashkaelian  ethnicity.

52.  In assessing the background evidence,  we  should  note  that  we  have
      taken a similar approach to UNHCR reports  as  have  previous  panels.
      That is to say, we consider that we should  attach  very  considerable
      weight to them, particularly bearing  in  mind  the  fact  that  these
      reports draw on the experiences  of  UNHCR  officers  working  on  the
      ground in Kosovo. Equally, however, we consider it important to repeat
      the same reservations as were stated in para 54 of  FD  regarding  the
      UNHCR's own formulation of risk categories. It  continues  to  be  the
      case that UNHCR reports and position  papers  on  Kosovo   frame  risk
      categories according to a  category  of  "(international)  protection"
      which is broader  in  scope  than  arises  under  either  the  Refugee
      Convention or the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   We  would
      accept that, in certain sentences, the advice  does  clearly  indicate
      when, by "international protection" if  it  means  Refugee  Convention
      protection and Article 3 ECHR (or Article 3 Convention Against Torture
      (CAT)) protection (see e.g. paragraph 14),  but  these  co-exist  with
      sentences which refer vaguely to "complementary  forms  of  protection
      depending on the circumstances of claims".

53.  As regards the June 2005 report of  the  European  Roma  Rights  Centre
      (ERRC) however,  we considered we could only attach limited weight  to
      it. There are a number of reasons for this. It is written in the style
      of a partisan organisation  which has a settled agenda. In places,  it
      unhelpfully  makes  no  distinction  between   the   situation   these
      minorities faced under Milosevic and the  situation  they  have  faced
      since. It describes incidents of human rights abuses  as  "generalised
      persecution", without any concern  for  considerations  regarding  the
      scale and frequency of such incidents: virtually everything  that  has
      befallen  the  Roma  and  the  Ashkaelia  is  described  in  terms  of
      "generalised or systematic" persecution. In  a  number  of  places  it
      makes generalised assertions, without giving the reader  any  idea  of
      their empirical basis. In assessing  the  role  of  the  international
      administration  in  Kosovo,  which  it  regards  as  having   condoned
      persecution of Roma and Ashkaelia, it gives no  indication  whatsoever
      that it  has  attempted  to  take  account  of  this  administration's
      protection successes, as  well  as  protection  failures,  which  have
      occurred. Whilst we take  the  report  into  account  nevertheless  as
      providing a perspective  from  a  leading  human  rights  organisation
      active on behalf of Roma and Ashkaelia, we prefer the more careful and
      evidence-based approach of the other reports, the latest UNHCR  report
      in particular.

54.  So far as the events of March 2004 and their aftermath  are  concerned,
      we note that the UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, has  described  the
      violence concerned as organised by extremist Albanian  groups  seeking
      to exploit  the  situation,  (see  e.g.   page  15  of  the  US  State
      Department report covering 2004) and that is a factor  which  was  not
      immediately evident at the time of these events.  The same report,  at
      page 12, tells us that Kofi Annan's report also  considered  that  the
      initial  reaction  of  international   security   organisations   when
      confronted by the violence and unrest in March 2004 was inadequate and
      neither the French KFOR nor the international UNMIK police  were  able
      to  provide  effective  protection  to  the  Ashkaelian  community  in
      Vucitrn. However, we do not think that these   initial  failings  were
      perpetuated; rather, the same US State Department  report  along  with
      other  major  reports  indicates  that  in  the  ensuing  period   the
      international authorities in  Kosovo  were  able  to  respond  to  the
      situation and take sufficient steps  to  afford  protection  to  those
      groups adversely affected by these events (we note, for example,  that
      the US State Department report covering 2004  records  at  pages  37-8
      that in its July report on  follow-up  actions  UNMIK  said  that  348
      individuals had  been  brought  before  the  courts  for  riot-related
      offences.).   In this regard we find that  the  preponderance  of  the
      latest evidence continues to  support   the   analysis  given  by  the
      Tribunal in  FD (paragraph 65) and  SK (paragraph 16(f)).

55.  However, whatever may be the position of Roma and those of  mixed  Roma
      ethnicity, we note that the UNHCR report of March 2005 considers that,
      whilst there continues to be  security  concerns  for  certain  ethnic
      minorities, the Ashkaelia are less likely to  face  difficulties  than
      Kosovo Serbs, Roma and Albanians in a minority situation. This  report
      does not identify Ashkaelia as a general risk category.  All  it  does
      is indicate that some  Ashkaeli may face targeting  on  an  individual
      basis. (The precise wording given in part D of the report's summary is
      that:  "In addition, Ashkaelia and Egyptians as well  as  Bosniak  and
      Goranis may be targeted, even if on a more individual  basis").   Also
      of particular note is what is said at para 15:

                                    [pic]

56.  Whilst this report goes on to reconfirm its view that   'Other  Persons
      at Risk' includes '[p]ersons in ethnically mixed marriages and persons
      of mixed ethnicity', it confines itself to stating that  such  persons
      "may have a well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  for  Convention
      related reasons".

57.  Before leaving the evidence from the UNHCR, we would  note  that  since
      the hearing we have had brought to our attention the publication of  a
      more  recent  UNHCR  report,   "UNHCR's  Position  on  the   Continued
      Protection Need of Individuals from Kosovo (June 2006).  We considered
      whether to  invite  submissions   from  the   parties  concerning  its
      relevance, but decided it was unnecessary, since it  contains  nothing
      to suggest that the UNHCR  is now taking a different  view  concerning
      the position of Ashkaelia generally. Indeed, if anything, its text  is
      now more emphatic that members of the  Ashkaeli community  do  not  in
      general have protection needs.  At paragraph 3 it is stated that:

             'Positive developments  within  the  inter-ethnic  environment
             have had a particular impact on members of the  Ashkaelia  and
             Egyptian communities in Kosovo.'

58.  At  paragraph 25 it is stated that:

               '...  UNHCR,   in   consideration   of   positive   security
             developments which have taken place in the past year in Kosovo
             no longer consider that the Ashkaelia and Egyptian  minorities
             in general, are in need of international protection. Therefore
             asylum claims originating from among those ethnic  communities
             should be assessed individually based on  Art.  1A(2)  of  the
             1951 Convention and the  1967 Protocol.'

      UNHCR goes on to say that its only continuing concerns in relation  to
      Ashkaelia and Egyptians relate to the  manner of returns (the need for
      phasing).  This is not a matter relevant to our assessment of risk.

59.  In our view the  evidence  before  us  at  the  hearing  overwhelmingly
      demonstrates that one  factor  significantly  reducing  the  level  of
      difficulties facing Ashkaelia is that they generally have  an  ability
      to speak fluent Albanian: see e.g. the latest CIPU report  at  K.6.93.
      We also find particularly striking the  emphasis  laid  in  the  major
      reports on the fact that, although Ashkaelia  in  certain  areas  face
      difficulties, the situation varies considerably from area to area: see
      e.g. the latest CIPU report at K.6.92-93.  That is an  indication,  in
      our view, that agencies on the ground in Kosovo are taking and will in
      future take steps to ensure that Ashkaelian returnees are steered away
      from any particularly difficult areas. We  are  satisfied,  therefore,
      that in general there is currently no real risk of  serious  harm  for
      returning  Ashkaelia  and   that,   except   in   unusual   individual
      circumstances, were any individual  Ashkaelia to face a real  risk  of
      serious harm (exceptionally), he or she  would  normally  be  able  to
      access adequate protection from the authorities in Kosovo.

60.  So far as living  conditions  are  concerned,  it  is  clear  that  the
      situation facing Ashkaelia is far from ideal and  that  there  remains
      discrimination of various kind as well as  harassment  and  occasional
      violence. However, we think that the comments made at paragraph 53  of
      FD as regards Roma generally:

                       "The evidence shows that the general  conditions  of
                  life for  many  Roma  involve  routine  and  quite  severe
                  discrimination in accessing public  services,  poverty,  a
                  high degree of dependancy on humanitarian  aid  and  fears
                  for their future and security. We do not consider that the
                  conditions as evidenced by the various  reports,  however,
                  show that there is a real risk that the claimant's Article
                  3 rights will be infringed if he  is  returned.  There  is
                  humanitarian aid; some are able to access public services;
                  not all are subject to the same degree of  discrimination.
                  The position in enclaves or  camps  is  likely  to  afford
                  scope for greater collective opportunities for  protection
                  and the provision of services."

      continue to represent a fair evaluation of the  likely  conditions  in
      which any returning Ashkaelia would have to live.  Certainly  none  of
      the major reports indicate that conditions for  Ashkaelians  generally
      are so dire as to violate basic non-derogable human rights.

61.  So far as persons of  mixed  Ashkaelian  ethnicity  are  concerned,  we
      acknowledge that there is a dearth of specific  information.  However,
      we have not seen anything to suggest that the  Ashkaelian  communities
      would reject persons who had an Ashkaelian parent,  particularly  when
      the person concerned is someone whose mode of behaviour  is  perceived
      generally as being Ashkaelian.

62.   We would add that the appellant in this case has argued that his  mode
      of behaviour would mark him out to other Kosovan Albanians as  someone
      of Ashkaelian ethnicity. He has not, however, submitted that he  would
      be at risk of being rejected by Ashkaelians by virtue  of  having  one
      parent who was Albanian. We reiterate the point that  in  general  the
      Ashkaelia are Albanian-speaking in any  event.    This  constitutes  a
      further reason, specific to the appellant's case, for  dismissing  the
      appeal.

63.  For the above reasons:

      The Adjudicator materially erred in law.


      The decision we substitute for that of the Adjudicator is  to  dismiss
      the appellant's appeal on all grounds, including the asylum and  human
      rights grounds of appeal.


Signed                                  Date

Dr H H Storey
Senior Immigration Judge






                                 APPENDIX A


                      BACKGROUND MATERIALS REFERRED TO



|DATE        |                                                    |
|May 2003    |UK Home Office Immigration & Nationality Directorate|
|            |- Operational guidance notes on Kosovo              |
|13.2.03     |Psychiatric report on the appellant prepared by Dr J|
|            |Hajioff                                             |
|01.01.04    |Human Rights Watch - Overview of human rights       |
|            |developments 2003 'Serbia and Montenegro'           |
|30.03.04    |UNHCR - Position on international protection needs  |
|            |of individuals from Kosovo in the light of recent   |
|            |inter-ethnic confrontations                         |
|31.03.04    |European Roma Rights Centre (ERRC) - Ethnic         |
|            |cleansing of 'gypsies' in Kosovo                    |
|26.05.04    |Amnesty International  report 2004 - Serbia &       |
|            |Montenegro                                          |
|June 2004   |UNHCR - Update on the Kosovo Roma, Ashkaelia,       |
|            |Egyptian, Serb, Bosniak, Gorani and Albanian        |
|            |communities in a minority situation                 |
|13.07.04    |FIDH - Serbia Montenegro - The failures of the      |
|            |transition                                          |
|20.07.2004  |UNHCR - Human rights committee considers report of  |
|            |Serbia & Montenegro                                 |
|06.08.04    |Amnesty International  - Fear of safety/forcible    |
|            |displacement                                        |
|August 2004 |UNHCR - The possibility of applying the internal    |
|            |flight or relocation alternative within  Serbia &   |
|            |Montenegro to certain persons originating from      |
|            |Kosovo and belonging to certain ethnic minorities   |
|            |there.                                              |
|August 2004 |UNHCR - Position on the continued international     |
|            |protection needs of individuals from  Kosovo        |
|August      |UNHCR - Kosovo minorities still need international  |
|            |protection                                          |
|06.12.04    |Medical report from Dr Jane Obasi MBChB DCH         |
|10.01.05    |UNMIK - Availability of adequate medical treatment  |
|            |for post-traumatic stress disorder in Kosovo        |
|17.03.05    |Amnesty International  - The March violence - one   |
|            |year on                                             |
|31.03.05    |UNHCR - Position on the continued international     |
|            |protection  needs of individual needs from Kosovo   |
|09.06.2005  |Refugees International - Kosovo 2005: Ashkaelia     |
|            |family with lead poisoning                          |
|15.6.2005   |Refugees International - Kosovo : Lead pollution    |
|            |requires immediate evacuation of Roma camps         |
|27.6.2005   |Refugees   International - Kosovo: Roma returns     |
|            |stalled by security concerns, politics and          |
|            |discrimination                                      |
|28.06.05    |European Roma Rights Centre - In the aftermath of   |
|            |ethnic cleansing continued persecution of Roma,     |
|            |Ashkaelis Egyptians and other perceived as 'gypsies'|
|            |in Kosovo                                           |
|            |European Roma Rights Centre - Everyone fiddles while|
|            |the Roma burn                                       |
|18.9.2005   |Refugees International - The  Roma: The Balkans'    |
|            |most vulnerable                                     |
|23.9.2005   |Refuges International - Kosovo : Roma returns       |
|            |stalled by security concerns, politics and          |
|            |discrimination                                      |
|02.02.06    |European Roma Rights Centre - Representative of the |
|            |UN  Secretary General for the Human  Rights of      |
|            |internally displaced persons expresses concern over |
|            |Romani IDPs and victims of lead poisoning           |
|02.02.06    |European Roma Rights Centre - Roma rights in Kosovo:|
|            |Joint statement to the  Organisation for Security   |
|            |and Cooperation in Europe                           |
|02.02.06    |European Rights Centre - Police violence            |
|03.04.06    |European Roma Rights Centre - European Court of     |
|            |Human Rights has no jurisdiction in Kosovo lead     |
|            |poisoning cases                                     |
|03.08.06    |US Department of State - Country report on human    |
|            |rights practices                                    |

