
GN (EEA Regulations: Five years' residence) Hungary [2007] UKAIT 00073

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
Date of Hearing: 26 June 2007
                                   Determination delivered orally at hearing



                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                     Senior Immigration Judge Pinkerton

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           In person
For the Respondent:          Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  The word "legally" in Article 16 of the Citizens  Directive  is  to  be
construed as a reference to requirements of European law: it does  not  mean
"in accordance with national law".  (2)  The requirement in reg 15(1)(a)  of
five years' residence in the UK "in accordance with  these  Regulations"  is
not contrary to any rights given by the Directive and  means  what  it  says
(as supplemented by the Transitional Provisions in  Schedule  4).   Thus,  a
period of residence by a person not exercising a right  under  the  2000  or
2006 Regulations at that time cannot count towards the five years.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Hungary.  He appealed to  an  Immigration
    Judge against the decision of the Secretary of State on 9 February 2007
    refusing his application for permanent  residence  as  an  EU  national
    residing  here.   The  Immigration  Judge  allowed  his  appeal.    The
    Secretary of State sought and obtained an  order  for  reconsideration.
    Thus the matter comes before us.

 2. The appellant was born in 1979.  He first came to the United Kingdom on
    31 August 1997 as  a  student.   He  completed  his  studies  here  and
    obtained a work permit under the Worker Registration Scheme.   Hungary,
    the country of which he is a national, became a Member of the  European
    Union on 1 May 2004.  On 26 January 2006 the appellant  applied  for  a
    residence permit as a qualified person.  That was granted  and  expires
    on 25 February 2011.  On 16 August 2006 he sought  permanent  residence
    and that resulted in the decision against which he now appeals.

 3. The basis of the Immigration Judge's decision was  that  the  appellant
    has been in the United Kingdom for more than five  years.   The  ground
    upon which reconsideration  was  sought  and  obtained,  and  which  Mr
    Ouseley has argued before us today, is that the matter is not as simple
    as that.

 4. The relevant regulations are the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003).  The regulation relating to  permanent
    residence is reg 15; and reg 15(1)(a) is as follows:

        "15.     - (1) The following persons shall  acquire  the  right  to
             reside in the United Kingdom permanently-
             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United  Kingdom  in
             accordance with these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of
             five years."

 5. There is no doubt that the appellant is, and is  for  the  purposes  of
    these regulations, an EEA national.  The fact that he has not  been  an
    EEA national for the whole of the period of time during  which  he  has
    resided in the United Kingdom is not  relevant  to  that  part  of  the
    regulation.  The question, however, as Mr Ouseley puts  it  is  whether
    his residence in the  United  Kingdom  has  been  for  five  years  "in
    accordance with these  regulations".   "These  regulations"  came  into
    force on 30 April 2006 and it follows  that  nobody  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with these regulations for over five years
    yet.  But there are transitional  provisions  and  in  paragraph  6  of
    Schedule 4 to the regulations we find this:

      "Periods of residence under the 2000 Regulations


      6(1)  Any period during which a person carried out an activity or was
             resident in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  2000
             Regulations shall be treated  as  a  period  during  which  the
             person carried out that activity or was resident in the  United
             Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations for the purpose of
             calculating periods  of  activity  and  residence  under  these
             Regulations."

    The reference to the 2000 Regulations is a reference to the predecessor
    regulations, the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2000.
     There are no other elements  of  the  2006  Regulations  which  enable
    residence before the coming into  force  of  those  regulations  to  be
    counted for the purposes of the regulations.

 6. On the basis  of  those  provisions  Mr  Ouseley  argues  that  as  the
    appellant, although lawfully present here, was not  present  under  the
    2000 Regulations until Hungary became a member of the EU on 1 May 2004,
    his period of residence for the purposes of reg 15(1)(a)  of  the  2006
    Regulations can only have commenced on that date.  He therefore  had  a
    period of two years' residence under the 2000 Regulations to  which  is
    to be added the period of residence under the 2006 Regulations from the
    coming into force of those regulations until the present,  which  is  a
    period of just over three years in total.  Therefore, says Mr  Ouseley,
    the  appellant  has  not  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    regulations for a period of more than five years and  it  follows  that
    the Immigration Judge was wrong to allow his appeal.

 7. The position under the regulations, we think, is clear and it  is  fair
    to say that the  appellant,  who  has  represented  himself,  does  not
    dispute that interpretation of the regulations themselves.  Instead  he
    points us  to  a  number  of  provisions  deriving  directly  from  the
    Directive itself and another interpretation of it.  He points first  to
    the  general  provisions  relating  to   non-discrimination,   and   in
    particular non-discrimination on grounds of  nationality  that  pervade
    European law and are the subject of specific reference in paragraph  31
    of the preamble to the Citizens Directive 2004/38/EC.  He then  reminds
    us that Article 37 of the same Directive allows Member States  to  make
    provisions that are more generous than those set out in the  Directive,
    but does not enable Member States to make provisions which are narrower
    than those set out in the Directive.   He  then  refers  to  a  letter,
    apparently written on behalf of a member of  the  European  Commission,
    giving a view which is specifically stated as not to  be  authoritative
    or binding that "since the Directive does not provide for the condition
    that the five year residence has to be ' on the basis of the Directive'
    this notion should cover also those persons who  have  recently  become
    Union citizens and have legally resided  in  the  UK  for  five  years,
    otherwise such persons would have to  wait  for  five  years  from  the
    acquisition of citizenship of the Union, which would be  an  additional
    condition not foreseen in the text."

 8. The appellant refers to Article 16 of the Directive which is, so far as
    relevant, in these terms:

      "16.  ...
            (1)  Union citizens who have resided legally for  a  continuous
                 period of five years in the host Member  State  shall  have
                 the right of permanent residence there."


    He also refers to paragraph 17 of the preamble to the Directive,  which
                 is as follows:


      "17.  Enjoyment of permanent residence by  Union  citizens  who  have
             chosen to settle long-term  in  the  host  Member  State  would
             strengthen the feeling  of  Union  citizenship  and  is  a  key
             element in promoting social  cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the
             fundamental objectives of the  Union.   A  right  of  permanent
             residence should therefore be laid down for all Union  citizens
             and their family members who have resided in  the  host  Member
             State in compliance with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
             Directive during a continuous  period  of  five  years  without
             becoming subject to an expulsion measure."

 9. On the basis of those points of European  law,  the  appellant  submits
    that his residence in the United  Kingdom,  lawful  as  it  was  before
    Hungary became a member of the European  Union,  should  count  towards
    residence for the purposes of Article 16 of the Directive and for  that
    reason should count for the purpose of enabling him to  have  permanent
    residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  whatever  the  United   Kingdom's
    regulations may say.

10. We are unpersuaded by the appellant's submissions.   Looking  first  at
    Article 16 of the Directive we find there, as we  have  indicated,  the
    word "legally".  The appellant's submission incorporates an implication
    that that word means "lawfully in accordance with  national  law".   We
    see no basis for reading  that  meaning  into  the  word  "legally"  in
    Article 16 of the Directive.  When one sees a word of that sort in  any
    legal instrument, one interprets it normally  within  the  instrument's
    own legal context.  The context of the Directive is European  law:  and
    for that reason we read  "legally"  in  Article  16(1)  as  meaning  in
    accordance with European law.  If there were any doubt  about  that  it
    would in our view be resolved by paragraph 17 of the preamble, to which
    the appellant has referred us, which indicates that the intention is to
    give a right of permanent residence to those "who have resided  in  the
    host Member State in compliance with the conditions laid down  in  this
    Directive" for five years.  That, it seems to us, is sufficient to show
    that the provisions of the Directive  are  properly  reflected  in  the
    regulations, which indicate that the period of five years  in  question
    is a period during which the applicant was exercising Treaty rights  or
    was a spouse or family member of someone doing so.  In the  appellant's
    case he was not exercising any direct Treaty rights before Hungary, the
    country of which he is a national, became  a  member  of  the  European
    Union.

11. So far as concerns the other matters to which the  appellant  referred,
    we note the interpretation posited by a member of the Commission on the
    words of Article 16, but note also  that  it  did  not  purport  to  be
    authoritative, and makes no reference to the preamble, which we  regard
    as a valuable aid to interpretation.

12. We also reject the appellant's submission that the application  of  the
    Directive and the regulation in this way amounts to  discrimination  on
    grounds of nationality.  The position simply is, as Mr Ouseley put  it,
    that the decision is made on the facts of the  case.   Of  course  from
    time to time there will be groups of people, the facts of  whose  cases
    are similar; but the position is that, like any  other  Union  citizen,
    the appellant will be able to apply for a right of permanent  residence
    when he has resided in a Member State in accordance with the provisions
    of the UK Regulations or in accordance with the terms of the  Directive
    for five years.

13. The parties told us that there were no additional facts for us to  take
    into account if we were substituting our own  determination.   For  the
    reasons we have given we find that  the  Immigration  Judge  materially
    erred in law in making her determination.  On the facts, which are that
    the appellant has been residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Union
    citizen or as a national of EEA state for a period of less
    than five years, we substitute a determination dismissing his appeal.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:


