
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Hetal Rajesh Patel  (AKA  Raval))  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 00077 (IAC)

                                                                 Field House


                                                             26 January 2015

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE o'connor

                                   Between

                             HETAL RAJESH PATEL
                                 (aka RAVAL)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr S Vokes, Counsel, instructed by Salam & Co Solicitors appeared on behalf
of the Applicant.

Ms C Patry, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

                     Delivered orally on 26 January 2015
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE o'connor: This is an application for judicial review brought with
    the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, such permission  having
    been granted on 2 October 2014. Section 3 of the claim form  identifies
    the decision that is under challenge as being that made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 8 August 2013. For reasons which I  will  identify
    later there are also two other decisions relevant to this  application,
    the first being a decision made by an Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  13
    September 2010 refusing the applicant entry clearance  and  the  second
    being a decision which was received by the applicant  on  26  September
    2013, but which has no date of authorship on it. This document  has  to
    be read together with the earlier decision of 8 August 2013 and it is a
    combination of these two decisions that in reality  together  form  the
    decision under challenge in these proceedings.

2.   It is prudent first to briefly traverse the  applicant's  history  that
    underpins her submissions as they are  now  made.   The  applicant  was
    refused leave to remain whilst living in the United  Kingdom  in  March
    2009 and was, as a consequence, required to leave the country  at  that
    time.  There is no dispute that she did so both in a  good  and  timely
    fashion and voluntarily.

3.   The applicant subsequently made an application for entry  clearance  as
    a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  pursuant  to  paragraph  245C  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  Although she was awarded  the  full  gamut  of  the
    points on offer under the Rules in relation to this application she was
    nevertheless refused entry clearance in a decision dated  13  September
    2010, this being ostensibly for the following reasons;

         "In your application you said under Section 6.7 that you have never
         been deported, removed or otherwise required to leave any  country,
         including the UK.  I am satisfied  that  this  statement  is  false
         because checks made by this office show that you have been removed.
          As false representations  have  been  made  in  relation  to  your
         application,  it  is  refused  under  paragraph  320(7A)   of   the
         Immigration Rules.  You should note that because  this  application
         for entry clearance has been refused under paragraph 320(7A) of the
         Immigration Rules, any future  applications  may  also  be  refused
         under paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules."

4.   The applicant had a right of appeal against this decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal, although such appeal could only  have  been  pursued  on
    Race Relations grounds or Human Rights Act grounds,  neither  of  which
    assisted this particular applicant.

5.   The applicant did seek to pursue an administrative review of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision.  Such review, according to  the  decision
    letter  itself,  should  have  been  a  full  reconsideration  of   the
    application.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  has  asserted,  during  the
    course of these proceedings, that this review was refused in a decision
    of the 22 October 2010.  The  applicant  maintains  that  she  did  not
    receive a copy of such decision and I observe that the Entry  Clearance
    Officer has been unable to produce a copy of it to this Tribunal.

6.   The next relevant event occurred in May 2012 when  the  applicant  made
    an application for entry clearance to visit the United  Kingdom.   This
    visit application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer on 13  June
    2012, reliance being placed on paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules - the Entry Clearance Officer  concluding  that  the  application
    must fail on the basis of  the  conclusions  reached  relating  to  the
    application of paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules  in  the  September  2010
    decision.

7.   The applicant appealed this refusal of entry clearance as a visitor  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and in a determination promulgated on 11  March
    2013 that appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers.  In
    relation to  paragraph  320(7B)  the  judge  concluded  as  follows  at
    paragraph 28 of his determination:

         "Overall, the respondent has not  established  that  the  appellant
         made a false statement in relation to her previous visa application
         [refused on 13  September  2010]  with  the  deliberate  intent  of
         securing advantage in immigration terms..."

8.   When one reads the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  a  whole  it
    is clear that this conclusion was reached ostensibly because the burden
    was on the Entry Clearance Officer to prove the deception in  September
    2010 and that such burden had not been met, primarily because the Entry
    Clearance Officer had failed to provide the entirety of the applicant's
    Visa Application Form from 2010 to the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   The applicant was,  as  a  consequence  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, granted entry clearance as a visitor to the United Kingdom.

10.  On 7 August 2013, approximately five months after the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, the applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Entry
    Clearance post in Mumbai as follows:

         "We write  on  behalf  of  our  above  client.   Our  client  seeks
         reconsideration of a decision made by the Mumbai visa section on  a
         previous application for entry clearance."

    Enclosed with this letter was a copy of the refusal decisions  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination to  which  I  have  made  reference
    earlier. I observe at this stage that the terms of this letter make  no
    reference to the issue of unfairness or conspicuous unfairness.

11.  An Entry Clearance Manager responded to this letter  on  the  8  August
    2013.  I do not need to set out the contents of this  decision  in  its
    entirety, only that which is said in its last paragraph:

         "I note that the initial application  was  made  3  years  ago  and
         whilst I accept that the Immigration Judge found that  the  refusal
         in the latter application under 320(7b)  was  unfounded  I  am  not
         prepared to overturn a previous decision to refuse  an  application
         made in 2010 that an Entry Clearance Manager at the time decided to
         uphold  and  it  would  be  for  your  client  to  submit  a  fresh
         application ensuring that they still meet the  criteria  for  entry
         clearance as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant and then  this  application
         will be assessed on its own merits."

12.  I  pause  once  again  to  note  that  this  letter  contains  a  clear
    misunderstanding of  the  position  because  by  this  time  the  entry
    clearance route as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant had been closed for  some
    years.

13.  Moving on, on 10 September  2013  the  applicant's  solicitors  made  a
    request for further reasons to be provided.  This received  a  response
    in an undated letter, which was received by the applicant's  solicitors
    on 26 September 2013.  This being one of  the  key  documents  in  this
    case, I shall read out the entirety of the two key paragraphs therein:

         "I have considered the findings of the  Immigration  Judge  as  set
         aside in the determination  and  I  agree  that  the  circumstances
         surrounding  this  case  are  exceptional.   I   have   noted   the
         Immigration Judge's findings  that  the  original  refusal  on  the
         grounds  of   false   representations   were   unfounded   however,
         unfortunately, the Tier 1 (General) Migrant route is now closed for
         all new applicants from outside the UK.  Even if I were  to  accept
         the fact that entry clearance should now be issued, it would not be
         possible to do so whilst this route remains  closed.   Furthermore,
         your client's own circumstances will no longer be the same as  they
         were at the time of  her  original  application  in  2010  and  her
         sponsorship would also no longer be valid for the purpose of  entry
         clearance.  Such material changes in her circumstances  would  mean
         it would not be possible to issue entry clearance at  such  a  late
         stage after the original decision was made.  The usual procedure in
         such a situation would  be  for  your  client  to  submit  a  fresh
         application now that her refusal under paragraph 320(7A)  has  been
         overturned at appeal.  Regrettably, she cannot do this as the  Tier
         1 (General) Migrant category is currently closed.

         Under the circumstances and whilst the  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
         route remains closed to entry clearance applicants, I  can't  offer
         any other alternative.  I can  however  confirm  that  the  refusal
         under paragraph 320(7A)  no  longer  stands  and  our  records  are
         accordingly noted of this.  Your  client  is  free  to  submit  any
         future  applications  without  prejudice  of  being  refused  under
         paragraph 320(7B).  In addition, she is  of  course  also  free  to
         apply under any of the other  entry  clearance  categories  without
         prejudice to her previous refusal under paragraph 320(7A)."

14.  The instant application for judicial review was subsequently lodged  on
    7 November 2013.

15.  The grounds as originally  pleaded  are  difficult  to  understand  and
    decipher.  However, in his skeleton argument drawn for the purposes  of
    this hearing Mr Vokes has marshalled the  challenges  into  effectively
    one issue, that being:

         "Whether, given the respondent appears to accept that the applicant
         in fact qualified for entry as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  and  was
         wrongly refused entry clearance on 13 September 2010, the lack of a
         present remedy is irrational or unfair."

16. Mr Vokes continues in his skeleton argument by broadly submitting  that
    fairness dictates that executive discretion should have been  exercised
    in the applicant's favour and that she should have been treated  as  if
    she were a qualifying Tier 1 (General) Migrant.

17. In support of this submission reliance is primarily placed on  what  is
    referred to as the line of authority in Rashid/S, this being  reference
    to two judgments of the Court of  Appeal,  the  first  being  Rashid  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 744 and  the
    second, R(S) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 546.

18. There was also  brief  mention  in  the  skeleton  argument,  and  more
    detailed reference in a supplementary skeleton argument handed to me in
    the morning of the hearing, to a further line of recent authority  from
    the President of this Tribunal, which  includes  the  decisions  in  MM
    (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  105  and  Miah  (interviewer's
    comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 515.

19. Dealing  with  these  latter  decisions  first,  these  all  relate  to
    procedural unfairness of one  type  or  another.   I  can  identify  no
    procedural unfairness in the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  treatment  of
    this applicant's case in 2013 or indeed at any time prior to that.   No
    particularised procedural unfairness has been pleaded  in  the  grounds
    and, in my conclusion, pursuing  this  line  of  argument  as  a  self-
    standing  submission,  if  that  is  what  is  intended,  is   entirely
    misconceived on the facts of this case.

20. I move on to the Rashid/S line of authority, which relates to  a  claim
    of conspicuous unfairness and/or irrationality in the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's final position.

21. At the hearing Ms Patry handed up a copy of a further decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal on this issue, S H Q  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  142.  In  this
    decision Goldring LJ helpfully summarises  both  the  facts  and  legal
    principles to be derived from the judgements in  Rashid  and  R(S).   I
    refer to and rely upon Goldring LJ's distillation of these  authorities
    below.

22. Mr Rashid was an Iraqi Kurd.  His claim for asylum was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State and on appeal, at a time when there existed  a  Home
    Office Policy to the effect that internal  relocation  in  the  Kurdish
    Autonomous Area of Iraq would not be relied upon as a reason to  refuse
    refugee status.  The policy was in force between December 2001  and  21
    March 2003.  On 12 March 2003  Mr  Rashid's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Secretary of State, both drawing attention to the policy and explaining
    how it had been applied by the Secretary of State in  two  other  cases
    procedurally linked to Mr Rashid's.  The Secretary of  State  responded
    in January 2004.  In the light of the policy's withdrawal the Secretary
    of State refused to grant asylum and ILR.

23. As Lord Justice Pill identified in Rashid itself,  the  facts  of  that
    case were striking. At paragraph 36 he said as follows:

         "I agree with the judge's conclusion that the degree of  unfairness
         was  such  as  to  amount  to  an  abuse  of  power  requiring  the
         intervention of the court.  The persistence  of  the  conduct,  and
         lack of explanation for it, contribute to  that  conclusion.   This
         was far from a single error  in  an  obscure  field.   A  state  of
         affairs was permitted to continue for a long time and  in  relation
         to a country which at the time would have been expected  to  be  at
         the forefront of the respondent's deliberations."

24. In his judgment in Rashid Lord Justice Dyson agreed that there had been
    flagrant and prolonged incompetence by the Secretary  of  State.   Lord
    Justice May agreed with the reasoning of Lord Justice Pill.

25. In R(S) the respondent was from  Afghanistan.   He  claimed  asylum  in
    1999, at a time when there existed a policy of granting 4 years ELR  to
    a category of person that S fell within.  In January 2001, in pursuance
    of a public service agreement with the Treasury, the Secretary of State
    put on hold all claims made prior to January 2001.  That was to meet  a
    target agreed with the Treasury of deciding 60% of all claims submitted
    after 1 January 2001 within 61 days. In January 2002 S  was  told  that
    his claim had been put on hold.  It was only considered in  March  2004
    by which time the policy had been withdrawn and his asylum  application
    was refused.  The policy was not applied  to  a  consideration  of  his
    application.  The Court of  Appeal  held  that  by  agreeing  with  the
    Treasury to put on hold all pre-January 2001 claims  the  Secretary  of
    State had unlawfully fettered his discretion  since  it  precluded  him
    from considering individual cases on their merits and allowed treatment
    of applications to be dictated by another government body.

26. The Court held that there had been conspicuous unfairness amounting  to
    abuse of power.  It was in this context that the court  considered  the
    scope for the judgment in Rashid.

27. In his judgment in R(S) Lord Justice Carnwath (as he then was) said  as
    follows 34:

         "In analysing the judgments in Rashid, it is important in  my  view
         to bear in mind that there were logically two distinct questions:

         i)   Were the decisions made between 2001 and 2003 legally  flawed,
             because of a failure to apply the correct policy?

         ii)  If so, what was the relevance (if any) of that finding to  the
             legality of, or the court's powers in  respect  of,  the  2004
             decisions, made when the policy was no longer in force?"

28.  He continued at paragraph 41:

         "The court's proper sphere is  illegality,  not  maladministration.
         If the earlier decisions were unlawful, it matters  little  whether
         that was the result of bad faith, bad luck, or sheer muddle.  It is
         the unlawfulness, not the cause of it, which justifies the  court's
         intervention and provides the basis for the remedy."

29. It is clear to me that I must first ask myself whether the decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer of 13 September 2010 was unlawful on public
    law grounds.  Although Mr Vokes sought to submit that this was not  the
    case and that the two  questions  identified  by  Carnwath  LJ  in  his
    decision in R(S) could be conflated, or "wrapped up" into one question,
    he quite candidly accepted that he could not draw my attention  to  any
    authority to support such proposition.

30. I am bound by the decision of Carnwath LJ in R(S). As identified above,
    in my conclusion  that  requires  me  to  first  consider  whether  the
    decision of 13 September 2010 can be impugned on public law grounds. Mr
    Vokes' submission is a step too  far  in  my  view,  and  is  not  only
    inconsistent with the decision in R(S), but also later decisions of the
    Court of  Appeal,  which  gave  approval  to  Lord  Justice  Carnwath's
    interpretation and application of the decision in Rashid.

31. Moving on to a determination of this core issue, I conclude that it has
    not been established  that  the  decision  of  13  September  2010  was
    unlawful on public law grounds.  The fact that a Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal has concluded in relation to a different application  and
    decision that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  not  proven,  in  the
    context of an appeal against this later decision,  that  the  applicant
    had acted with dishonesty  in  2010,  does  not  mean  that  the  ECO's
    conclusion in September 2010 was not one open to  her  on  all  of  the
    available evidence. Neither does it mean that  the  ECO  committed  any
    other public law error in coming to her conclusions in  such  decision.
    Indeed, during the course of his submissions  Mr  Vokes  accepted  that
    there was no self-standing public law  error  in  the  decision  of  13
    September 2010.

32. I find  that  this  conclusion  of  itself  entirely  disposes  of  the
    challenge brought in reliance on the Rashid/S line of authority.

33. However, if I am wrong about this and the applicant is not required  to
    establish that there is a public  law  error  in  the  decision  of  13
    September 2010 for it to be demonstrated  that  conspicuous  unfairness
    exists I, nevertheless, conclude - having taken into  account  all  the
    facts of this case  in  the  round  -  that  there  has  not  been  any
    conspicuous unfairness so as to call for a corrective  remedial  action
    on the Entry Clearance Officer's part.

34. I observe from the court's decision in S H Q, 47 & 48 that  (i)  it  is
    not for the court to dictate to the Secretary of State how  she  should
    administer her immigration system and (ii) that the court  should  only
    intervene in extreme cases where the Secretary of  State,  or  in  this
    case  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  could  only  have  reached   one
    conclusion having had proper regard to the facts i.e. a  conclusion  in
    the applicant's favour. That is plainly not the case here.

35. One of the relevant features in a consideration of  whether  there  has
    been a conspicuous unfairness is the promptness of applicant's  actions
    in this regard. That this is so  can  be  seen  from  paragraph  34  of
    Goldring LJ's decision in S H Q,  citing from the earlier  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in ZK (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 615.

36. In the instant matter the applicant's Tier 1  application  was  refused
    over four years ago. Whilst  the  applicant  sought  an  administrative
    review of that decision and although she has received no reply to  such
    request and the Entry Clearance Officer cannot  provide  evidence  that
    such reply was ever sent, on the evidence before me it  is  clear  that
    she has effectively sat on her hands for nearly three years, not having
    made any enquiries as to what had happened  to  such  review.  Had  the
    applicant made such enquiries she would undoubtedly have been told that
    her review had been refused and provided with her copy of the  relevant
    decision letter.

37. There was also, contrary to Mr Vokes' submission, a remedy open to  the
    applicant in 2010,  or  shortly  thereafter.  She  had  the  option  of
    bringing  an  application  for  judicial  review  against  either   the
    September 2010 decision or the failure of an Entry Clearance Manager to
    undertake a review of it.

38. Mr Vokes' submission that this was not an avenue open to the  applicant
    is difficult to understand - based as it was on the fact that  judicial
    review does not provide a merits-based challenge. This  I  accept  but,
    nevertheless, judicial review provides an effective remedy against  the
    unlawful actions of a public authority and  in  this  case  would  have
    provided an effective remedy against any unlawful decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer. Whilst an application for  Judicial  Review  is  not
    generally the correct place for the determination of factual  disputes,
    it is a place where, in limited circumstances, factual disputes can  be
    determined. An example of such a case is that of Beckett v SSHD  [2008]
    EWHC 2002 (Admin), in which Ouseley J heard numerous witnesses over a 4
    day period in order to resolve a factual dispute between the parties.

39. Both the delay of the applicant, and the failure  to  pursue  a  remedy
    that was available to her, are matters which weigh  against  a  finding
    that there has been conspicuous unfairness caused to her by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's/Manager's actions in this case.

40. Looking at the circumstances of this case as a whole, I  conclude  that
    even if the decision of September 2010  is  found  to  be  unlawful  on
    public law grounds or, alternatively that the applicant does  not  need
    to establish such unlawfulness, this is not a case where it can be said
    that there has been any conspicuous unfairness.

41. In any event, as I have already concluded above, it is clear to me that
    the applicant is required to  establish  a  public  law  error  in  the
    decision of September 2010 before I can conclude  there  has  been  any
    conspicuous unfairness caused by such decision. She has  failed  to  do
    so.

42. I further do not accept that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's/Manager's
    refusal to exercise  her  executive  discretion  so  as  to  grant  the
    applicant leave outside of the Immigration Rules in a form akin to that
    she would have been given as a Tier 1  Migrant  is  irrational  on  the
    facts of this case.  Just because the circumstances  of  the  case  are
    found to be exceptional by the Entry Clearance Manager  does  not  mean
    that it is irrational for her not to grant leave to remain.

43. For these reasons I refuse this application for judicial review.

44. Mr Vokes accepts that the Entry Clearance Officer is  entitled  to  her
    costs of these proceedings, in a sum to be assessed if not agreed.

45. No application to the Court of Appeal was made and I refuse  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal.~~~0~~~~

