
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) Rev
1

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 February 2019                        |.................................|
|                                           |..                               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                     JG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by SH Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal
Department

Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
requires a court or tribunal to hypothesise that the child in question
would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the case,
and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. SECTION 117B(6)

 1. Few if any statutory provisions of recent years can have  been  subject
    to more judicial analysis than those contained in Part 5A (Article 8 of
    the  ECHR:  Public  interest  considerations)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  primary  focus  in  the  present
    appeal is section 117B(6), which provides:-

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 2. Section 117B(6) lies within the section which sets out "public interest
    considerations applicable in all cases" where a court or  tribunal  has
    to determine  whether  a  decision  made  under  the  Immigration  Acts
    constitutes a disproportionate interference with a  person's  right  to
    respect for private and family  life  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Section 117A(2) states  that,  in  considering  this  "public  interest
    question", the court or tribunal must, in particular,  have  regard  in
    all cases to the considerations listed in section 117B.

 3. Section EX of Appendix FM (Family members)  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    contains exceptions to certain eligibility requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a partner or parent.  So far as relevant,  EX.1  provides  as
    follows:-

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if
         (a)(i)   the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                relationship with a child who -
                (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                    18 years when the applicant was first granted  leave  on
                    the basis that this paragraph applied;
                (bb)   is in the UK;
                (cc)    is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                    continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and
           (ii)   taking into account their best  interests  as  a  primary
                consideration, it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
                child to leave the UK; or
           ..."
B.  CASE LAW BEFORE KO (NIGERIA)
 4.  Amongst  the  problems  identified  with  section  117B(6)  were   its
    relationship with the other provisions of section 117B and whether,  in
    determining if it would  be  reasonable,  or  not,  for  the  child  in
    question to leave the United Kingdom,  regard  should  be  had  to  the
    immigration history of the person having  the  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with the child.

 5.  In MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the Court
    of Appeal held that section 117B(6) was free-standing  in  nature;  but
    that the Court was bound by the decision of that Court in MM (Uganda) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 to  hold
    that  the  immigration  history  of  the  person  having  the  parental
    relationship  was  relevant  in  determining  the   reasonableness   of
    expecting the child to leave the United Kingdom.

 6. So far as the first issue was concerned, Elias LJ, giving  judgment  in
    MA, held:-

         "17. Subsection (6) ... does not simply identify factors which bear
             upon the public interest question.  It resolves that  question
             in the context of article 8  applications  which  satisfy  the
             conditions  in  paragraphs  (a)  and  (b).   It  does  so   by
             stipulating that once  those  conditions  are  satisfied,  the
             public interest will  not  require  the  applicant's  removal.
             Since the interference with the right  to  private  or  family
             life under article 8(1) can only be justified where there is a
             sufficiently strong  countervailing  public  interest  falling
             within article 8(2), if the public interest does  not  require
             removal, there is no other basis on  which  removal  could  be
             justified. It follows, in my judgment, that there  can  be  no
             doubt that section 117B(6) must be read  as  a  self-contained
             provision in the sense that  Parliament  has  stipulated  that
             where  the  conditions  specified  in  the   sub-section   are
             satisfied, the public interest will not justify  removal.   It
             is  not  legitimate  to  have  regard   to   public   interest
             considerations unless that is permitted, either explicitly  or
             implicitly, by the subsection itself.

         18.  Ms Giovannetti QC, counsel for the Secretary of State,  argued
             otherwise.  She contended  that  there  may  be  circumstances
             where even though the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) are
             satisfied and the applicant is not liable for deportation, the
             Secretary of State may nonetheless refuse leave to  remain  on
             wider public interest grounds.  But as she had to accept, that
             analysis requires adding words to subsection (6) to the effect
             that where the conditions are satisfied, the  public  interest
             will not normally require removal, because  on  her  approach,
             sometimes it will.   I  see  no  warrant  for  distorting  the
             unambiguous language of the section in that way.

         19.  In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
             tribunals need to ask when applying section  117B(6)  are  the
             following:


             (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation?  If  so,  section
                  117B is inapplicable and instead the  relevant  code  will
                  usually be found in section 117C.

             (2)  Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with the child?

             (3)  Is the child a qualifying child  as  defined  in  section
                  117D?

             (4)  Is it unreasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
                  United Kingdom?


         20.  If the answer to the first question is no, and  to  the  other
             three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article  8
             is infringed."

 7. As for the scope of enquiry into "reasonableness" for the  purposes  of
    section 117B(6)(b), Elias LJ made it clear that, but for the  authority
    of MM (Uganda), he would have favoured an analysis that confines itself
    to the position of the child:-

         "36. Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority, I would favour
             the argument of the appellants.  The focus on paragraph (b) is
             solely on the child and I see no justification for reading the
             concept of reasonableness so as to include a consideration  of
             the conduct and immigration history of the parents as part  of
             an overall analysis of the public interest.   I  do  not  deny
             that this may result in some cases in  undeserving  applicants
             being allowed to remain, but that is not in my view  a  reason
             for distorting the language of the section.  Moreover,  in  an
             appropriate case the Secretary of State could  render  someone
             liable to deportation, and thereby render  him  ineligible  to
             rely on this provision, by certifying that his or her presence
             would not be conducive to the public good.

         37.  Ms  Giovannetti's  analysis  has  a  number  of  difficulties.
             First, as she accepts,  it  means  that  the  only  effect  of
             subsection 117B(6) would be to give some additional weight  to
             the fact that the child has been resident in the UK for  seven
             years.  (Similarly  it  would  require  the  court   to   give
             additional weight to the  fact  that  a  child  is  a  British
             citizen,  although  that  would  need   to   be   done   quite
             irrespective of the section, as ZH  makes  clear.)   Save  for
             that, the proportionality test is  applied  as  in  any  other
             article 8 case.  If that is right, section 117B(6)  is  in  my
             view drafted in an extremely  convoluted  way  to  achieve  so
             limited an aim.  The objective could have been  achieved  much
             more clearly and succinctly.

         38.  Second, Ms Giovannetti's construction makes subsection 117B(6)
             tautologous.  In effect it comes  down  to  saying  that  "the
             public interest does not require removal ... in  circumstances
             where the application of the  proportionality  test  does  not
             justify removal."  That would seem to be self-evident.

         39.  Third,  in  relation  to  rule  276ADE(1)  it  is  plain  that
             paragraphs (v) and (vi)  of  that  rule  do  not  warrant  any
             consideration of the wider public  interests  than  have  been
             specifically identified in paragraph (i).  It is  not  obvious
             why paragraph (iv) should do so.

         40.  It may be said that the wider approach can be justified  along
             the following lines. It will generally be in the child's  best
             interests to live with his or her parents and siblings as part
             of a family.  That is usually a given especially  for  younger
             children, absent domestic abuse  or  some  other  reasons  for
             believing the parents to be unsuitable.  The approach  of  the
             Secretary of State means that the stronger the public interest
             in removing the parents, the more reasonable  it  will  be  to
             expect the child to leave.  But  it  seems  to  me  that  this
             involves focusing on the position of the family  as  a  whole.
             In cases where the seven year rule  has  not  been  satisfied,
             that is plainly what has to be done. As McCloskey  J  observed
             in PD and others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) it  would  be  absurd  to  consider  the
             child's position entirely independently of, and  in  isolation
             from, the position of the parents given that the child's  best
             interests will usually require that he or she lives as part of
             the family unit.  But the focus on the  family  does  not  sit
             happily with the language of section 117B(6).  Had  Parliament
             intended to require considerations bearing  upon  the  conduct
             and immigration history of the applicant parent  to  be  taken
             into consideration,  I  would  have  expected  it  to  say  so
             expressly, not for the matter to have to be  inferred  from  a
             test which in terms  focuses  on  an  assessment  of  what  is
             reasonable for the child. This does not in my view  mean  that
             the wider public interests have been  ignored;  it  is  simply
             that Parliament has determined that where the seven year  rule
             is satisfied and the other conditions in the section have been
             met, those potentially conflicting public interests  will  not
             suffice to justify  refusal  of  leave  if,  focusing  on  the
             position of the child, it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to leave the UK.  When section 117A(2)(a) refers to  the
             need for  courts  and  tribunals  to  take  into  account  the
             considerations identified in section 117B in all  cases,  that
             would not in my view have been intended  to  include  specific
             circumstances where Parliament  must  be  taken  to  have  had
             regard to those matters."

C.  KO (NIGERIA)

 8. In October 2018, the Supreme Court gave judgment in KO (Nigeria) &  Ors
    v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.   The
    Court's judgment was given by Lord Carnwath.

 9.  The first thing to note is that there is nothing in the judgment  that
    overturns the conclusion of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    regarding the free-standing nature of section  117B(6),  in  the  sense
    that where the application of that  provision  results  in  the  public
    interest not requiring the removal of the person concerned, he  or  she
    must succeed under Article 8 on  the  basis  that  the  proportionality
    balance contains nothing on  the  Secretary  of  State's  side  of  the
    scales. The words "the public interest does not  require  the  person's
    removal" mean what they say.

(a) The "reasonableness enquiry"

10. The question, therefore, concerns the application  of  the  subsection.
    This involves determining the scope  of  the  "reasonableness  enquiry"
    that is demanded by section 117B(6).

11. Lord Carnwath traced the origins of the subsection  back  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules:-

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This Paragraph is directed solely to
             the position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor  DP5/96  it
             contains  no  requirement  to  consider  the  criminality   or
             misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing  factor.   It   is
             impossible  in  my  view  to  read  it  as  importing  such  a
             requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the same  effect.   The  question
             again is what is "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ  said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out a  number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. ..."

12. At paragraph  10  of  his  judgment,  Lord  Carnwath  quoted  from  the
    respondent's Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life
    (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes" published in
    August 2015. This:-

         "included at section "Would it be unreasonable  to  expect  a  non-
         British citizen child to leave the UK?", under which was set out  a
         number of "relevant considerations", such as risk  to  the  child's
         health, family ties in the UK and  the  likelihood  of  integration
         into life in another country and:-

             "(b) Whether the child would be  leaving  the  UK  with  their
             parent(s)?

                  It is generally the case that it is in  the  child's  best
                  interests to remain with their parent(s).  Unless  special
                  factors apply it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect
                  the  child  to  leave  the  UK   with   their   parent(s),
                  particularly if the parent(s) have no right to  remain  in
                  the UK.""




(b) The "real world"

13. Later in his judgment, however, Lord Carnwath  qualified  what  he  had
    said about the scope of the "reasonableness enquiry":-

         "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them.  To that extent the record of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It  is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain.  The point was well -expressed by  Lord  Boyd
             in  SA  (Bangladesh)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department 2017 SLT 1245:

                  "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                      whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave
                      the UK one has to address the  question,  'Why  would
                      the child be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom?'
                      In a case such as this there can only be one  answer:
                      'because the parents have no right to remain  in  the
                      UK'  .  To approach the question  in  any  other  way
                      strips away the context in which  the  assessment  of
                      reasonableness is being made..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the "best interests" of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


                  "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                      interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                      that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If
                      one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
                      parent does, that is the background against which the
                      assessment is conducted.  If neither parent  has  the
                      right to remain, then that is the background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate
                      question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
                      child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
                      the country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para  40,  I  would  respectfully  disagree.   There  is
         nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness"  is  to  be
         considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the  children
         find themselves."



14. What is the proper interpretation  of  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    judgment?  For  the  respondent,  Mr  Malik  submits  they  support   a
    construction  of  section  117B(6)(b),  whereby  the   application   of
    subsection (6) depends upon a tribunal finding, on the particular facts
    of the case, that the child  will  be  expected  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom if the person concerned is  removed.   For  the  appellant,  Mr
    Bazini submits that such a construction is not possible,  purely  as  a
    matter of statutory interpretation, and that paragraphs 18 and 19 of KO
    (Nigeria) do not permit the Tribunal to hold otherwise.



D. THE APPELLANT'S CASE IN OUTLINE

15. This  issue  is  of  crucial  significance,  given  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case.  The appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born in  1982.
    She first arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2001,  on  an  au  pair
    visa.  After the expiry of that visa, the  appellant  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom without leave.  She  commenced  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen in 2009.  Two children have been born to the  appellant
    and her partner, a boy and girl born  respectively  in  June  2010  and
    August 2011.

16. In April 2013, the appellant, her partner and the children travelled to
    Turkey, where they remained for some seventeen months.   Their  reasons
    for going and what transpired there we shall examine later.  After some
    seventeen months, the appellant and her partner decided  to  return  to
    the United Kingdom with the children.  The partner and children did  so
    but the appellant was refused two applications for visas, in  order  to
    return to the United Kingdom.

17.  Following  those  refusals,  the  appellant  fraudulently  obtained  a
    Schengen visa, with which she re-entered the United Kingdom  unlawfully
    in October 2014.

18. In July 2016, the appellant made a  human  rights  claim  in  order  to
    remain with her partner and  children  and  that  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in August 2017.

19. The appellant appealed against that refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.
     In a decision which followed the hearing in Birmingham in April  2018,
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal.

20. Following the grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the
    Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    January 2019, on the ground that there was a failure on the part of the
    First-tier Tribunal to give satisfactory reasons for its  decision;  in
    particular, the bare conclusion in paragraph 16 of the decision,  which
    did not address the written and oral evidence regarding the position of
    the family.

21. The reason why the respondent's  construction  of  section  117B(6)  is
    crucial in this case is that, having heard evidence from the  appellant
    and her partner, which we detail below, it is  apparent  that,  if  the
    appellant were to be removed from the  United  Kingdom,  it  is,  as  a
    matter of fact, very unlikely that her children would follow her.  Once
    outside the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant  would  apply  for  entry
    clearance, on the basis of Article 8, as she should have done  in  2014
    (instead of making dishonest  applications  to  enter  as  a  visitor).
    Accordingly, in the "real world" scenario, the children  would  not  be
    likely to leave the United Kingdom to join the  appellant,  whether  in
    Turkey or elsewhere,  whilst  she  went  through  the  entry  clearance
    process.  The children would, in reality, continue  living  with  their
    father and their paternal grandparents in the Midlands, where they  are
    both attending school.

22. Mr Bazini does not disagree with that  scenario.   Rather,  he  submits
    that it is irrrelevant.  Section 117B(6) does not, in  his  submission,
    depend upon what is likely to happen in the "real world".   Rather,  it
    requires the Tribunal to hypothesise that the children would leave  the
    United Kingdom and ask whether that would be reasonable.




E. ZH (TANZANIA) AND THE BEST INTERESTS OF CHILDREN

23. Although the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) to some  extent  traced  the
    origins of section 117B(6), reference needs to be made to  the  earlier
    judgment of that Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4  because  it  shows  how  the  subsection
    derives from the requirement in  immigration  decision-making  to  give
    primacy to the best interests of children. The following is taken  from
    the judgment of Lady Hale:

         "29. Applying, therefore, the approach in Wan to the assessment  of
             proportionality under article 8(2), together with the  factors
             identified in Strasbourg, what is  encompassed  in  the  "best
             interests of the child"?  As the UNHCR says, it broadly  means
             the well-being of the child.  Specifically,  as  Lord  Bingham
             indicated in EB (Kosovo), it will involve asking whether it is
             reasonable to expect the child to  live  in  another  country.
             Relevant to this will be the level of the child's  integration
             in this country and the  length  of  absence  from  the  other
             country; where and with whom the child  is  to  live  and  the
             arrangements for looking after the child in the other country;
             and the strength of the child's relationships with parents  or
             other family members which will be severed if the child has to
             move away.

         30.  Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
             importance in assessing the best interests of any child.   The
             UNCRC recognises the right of every child to be registered and
             acquire  a  nationality  (Article  7)  and  to  preserve   her
             identity, including her nationality (Article 8).  In Wan,  the
             Federal Court of Australia, pointed out at para 30 that,  when
             considering the possibility of the children accompanying their
             father to China, the tribunal had not considered  any  of  the
             following  matters,  which  the  Court  clearly  regarded   as
             important:



                  "(a) the fact that the children, as citizens of Australia,
                      would be deprived of the country  of  their  own  and
                      their mother's citizenship, 'and  of  its  protection
                      and support, socially, culturally and medically,  and
                      in many other ways evoked by, but  not  confined  to,
                      the broad concept of lifestyle' (Vaitaiki v  Minister
                      for Immigration and  Ethnic  Affairs  [1998]  FCA  5,
                      (1998) 150 ALR 608, 614);


                  (b)  the resultant social  and  linguistic  disruption  of
                      their  childhood  as  well  as  the  loss  of   their
                      homeland; (c) the loss of  educational  opportunities
                      available to the children in Australia; and (d) their
                      resultant  isolation  from  the  normal  contacts  of
                      children  with  their  mother  and   their   mother's
                      family."

         31.    Substituting   "father"   for   "mother",   all   of   these
             considerations apply to the children in this case.   They  are
             British children; they  are  British,  not  just  through  the
             "accident" of being born here, but by descent from  a  British
             parent; they have an unqualified right  of  abode  here;  they
             have lived here all their lives; they are being educated here;
             they have other social links with  the  community  here;  they
             have a good relationship with their father here.   It  is  not
             enough to say that a young child may readily adapt to life  in
             another country.  That may well be  so,  particularly  if  she
             moves with both her parents to a country which they know  well
             and where they can easily re-integrate in their own  community
             (as might have been the case, for example, in Poku,  para  20,
             above).  But it is very different in the case of children  who
             have lived here all their lives and are being expected to move
             to a county which they do not know and will be separated  from
             a parent whom they also know well.

         32.  Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down.  As citizens these children have rights which they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantages of growing up and being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come  back  as  adults.
             As  Jacqueline  Bhaba  (in  'The  "Mere  Fortuity  of  Birth"?
             Children, Mothers, Borders and the Meaning of Citizenship', in
             Migrations and Mobilities:  Citizenship,  Borders  and  Gender
             (2009), edited by Seyla Benhabib and Judith Resnik, at p  193)
             has put it:

                  'In  short,  the  fact   of   belonging   to   a   country
                  fundamentally affects the manner of exercise of a  child's
                  family and private life, during childhood and well beyond.
                   Yet children,  particularly  young  children,  are  often
                  considered parcels that are easily movable across  borders
                  with their parents and  without  particular  cost  to  the
                  children.'

         33.  We now have a much greater understanding of the importance  of
             these issues in assessing the overall well-being of the child.
              In making the proportionality assessment under article 8, the
             best interests of the child must be a  primary  consideration.
             This means that they must be considered first.  They  can,  of
             course, be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
             considerations.    In   this    case,    the    countervailing
             considerations  were  the  need  to  maintain  firm  and  fair
             immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's  appalling
             immigration history and the  precariousness  of  her  position
             when family life was created.  But, as  the  Tribunal  rightly
             pointed out, the children were not to be blamed for that.  And
             the inevitable result of removing their primary carer would be
             that they had to leave with her.  On the facts, it is as least
             as strong a case as Edore v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2003] 1 WLR 2979, where Simon Brown LJ  held  that
             "there really is only room for one view" (para 26).  In  those
             circumstances, the Secretary of State  was  clearly  right  to
             concede that there could be only one answer."



F. INTERPRETING SECTION 117B(6), FOLLOWING KO (NIGERIA)

24. Although the question of "whether it is reasonable to expect  a  child"
    to go to another country can be seen to come from paragraph  29  of  ZH
    (Tanzania), neither that case nor any other  authority  of  the  higher
    courts,  preceding  KO  (Nigeria),  sheds  light  on  the  question  of
    construction posed at paragraph 14 above.  We  must  therefore  address
    that question for ourselves, in the light of paragraphs 18 and 19 of KO
    (Nigeria).

25. "To expect" something is to regard that thing as likely to happen.   If
    we decide to wait at home on a particular day in order for a parcel  to
    be delivered, it is on the basis that we consider it  likely  the  Post
    Office or delivery company will deliver the parcel on that  day.   Many
    other such examples could be given.  The key  question,  therefore,  is
    whether the element of conditionality which is introduced by  the  word
    "would"  in  section  117B(6)(b)   governs   both   the   question   of
    reasonableness and that of expectation; in  other  words,  whether  one
    must hypothesise that the child leaves the United Kingdom,  whether  or
    not in the "real world" he or she is likely to do so.

26. We consider that,  purely  according  to  the  ordinary  principles  of
    statutory construction, the interpretation for which Mr Bazini contends
    is the correct one.  As a matter  of  ordinary  language  the  question
    "Would it be reasonable to do X?" presupposes the doing of  X.   It  is
    unlikely to be an appropriate or helpful response to such a question to
    refuse to answer it on the basis that one does not intend to do X.

27. We do not consider that paragraphs 18 and 19 of KO (Nigeria) mandate or
    even  lend  support  to  the  respondent's  interpretation.   In  those
    paragraphs, the point being made by Lord Carnwath and by the judges  in
    the cases he cited is merely that, in determining whether it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom,  one  must
    have regard to the fact that one or both of the child's parents will no
    longer be in the United Kingdom, because they will have been removed by
    the respondent under immigration powers.  That, we find, is the  extent
    of the "real world" envisaged by Lord Carnwath.

28. We find support for this conclusion by comparing section  117B(6)  with
    the provisions of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2016, which are  designed  to  give  effect  to  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under European law, as determined by the Court  of  Justice
    of the European Union in the line of cases beginning with Ruiz Zambrano
    v Office national de l'emploi (C-34/09) 8 March  2011  [2012]  QB  265.
    What is described in the Regulations as a derivative right  to  reside,
    as identified in those cases, depends  expressly,  in  closely  defined
    circumstances, upon a finding that the third party would be  unable  to
    reside, or would be prevented from residing, in the United Kingdom,  if
    the person asserting the derived right of residence were to leave.  The
    primacy of "compulsion" in this regard  has  been  made  plain  by  the
    judgment of Irwin LJ in Patel & Another v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2107]  EWCA  Civ  2028.   The  difference  in  wording
    between Regulation 16 and section 117D(6) is stark.

29. A comparison of section 117B(6) with the Immigration Rules relating  to
    criminal deportation is also instructive.  Paragraph  399,  so  far  as
    here relevant, provides as follows:-

         "399.    This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
             applies if -
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and
                  (i)   the child is a British Citizen; or
                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case
                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and
                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; ..."
30. In the world of criminal deportation, findings are  therefore  required
    to be made on the basis of hypotheses  that  do  not  depend  upon  the
    Tribunal having to establish, as a matter of fact,  what  is  the  most
    likely future scenario, if the person concerned were  to  be  deported.
    In the passage from paragraph 399 set out above, it can  be  seen  that
    what is required is an analysis of the facts, leading to the forming of
    a judgment, on the assumption (or hypothesis) both that the child would
    leave in order to go with the deportee and that the child would  remain
    in the United Kingdom without the  deportee.   Although  that  judgment
    will, of course, depend upon findings of fact and  involve  conclusions
    as to what is likely to happen in those scenarios, the Tribunal  cannot
    side-step either or both of them on the basis that  it  considers  they
    are unlikely to occur.

31. This approach to criminal deportation  is  of  long  standing.   In  VW
    (Uganda) & Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 5 Sedley LJ said:-

          1.  "Removal  and  deportation  cases  in  which  the  issue   of
             proportionality has to be determined under art. 8(2)  commonly
             raise but do not always address the question: on what  factual
             basis is the proportionality of removal to be  evaluated?  The
             case of VW poses the issue clearly. If  she  is  removed,  she
             will have the choice of leaving her child here or  taking  her
             with her; and her partner will have the  choice  of  remaining
             here or seeking to join her in Uganda.  Assuming that there is
             no insuperable  obstacle  to  either  of  these  courses  (for
             example, a refusal of entry  by  the  Ugandan  authorities,  a
             possibility unaddressed in the decision), the  question  still
             remains whether it will be taken.
          1. There will be many cases where, whatever the  appellant  says,
             it can safely be predicted that the child will go too  if  she
             or he is removed.  But VW's is not such a case: the child is a
             UK citizen and has a father who is now settled and has a right
             of abode here.  Many mothers faced with such  a  dilemma  (and
             the social worker's report convincingly suggests  that  VW  is
             among these) would break the  maternal  bond  in  the  child's
             interests and leave her with her father.   AB,  if  unable  to
             bring his family here, may elect to remain without them and so
             leave them fatherless in Ethiopia.
          1. In many such cases, nevertheless, it is too much to ask  of  a
             decision-maker that he or she should form a confident or  even
             a probabilistic view of what will follow a proposed removal or
             deportation in terms of family break-up  or  continuity.   The
             evidence may simply not make  it  possible.   Some  appellants
             will command belief when they say what they will do,  so  that
             the decision-maker can proceed to assess  the  proportionality
             of removal or deportation on a reasonably firm footing. Others
             may try to practise a  form  of  emotional  blackmail  on  the
             decision-maker, so that the latter does not know what in truth
             will happen if removal or deportation goes ahead. In yet other
             cases it may be clear that what  the  appellant  says  is  the
             reverse of what he or she would in the event do.  Many  others
             may truthfully say that they do not know what they will do; or
             the decision-maker may conclude, whatever they say, that  this
             is the case. In such cases it would be  risky  and  unfair  to
             demand that a decision-maker should treat what is at  best  an
             educated guess as a future fact.  Here, in my judgment, it  is
             the hardship of the dilemma itself which has to be  recognised
             and evaluated."
32. Notwithstanding that section 117B(6) is  not  concerned  with  criminal
    deportation it would, we consider, be odd if section 117B(6)  falls  to
    be interpreted in a different way.

33. We have seen how, in KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court had regard to  the
    respondent's IDI  in  its  examination  of  section  117B(6).   In  his
    submissions, Mr  Malik  drew  our  attention  to  the  latest  relevant
    publication of the respondent; namely "Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0b".  At page 36  of  104  of  this  document,  dealing  with
    EX.1.(a), the guidance says that:-

         "First, the decision maker  must  assess  whether  refusal  of  the
         application will mean that the child will have to leave the  UK  or
         is likely to have to do so.  Where the decision maker decides  that
         the answer to this first stage is yes, then  they  must  go  on  to
         consider  secondly,  whether,  taking  into  account   their   best
         interests as a primary consideration, it is  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to leave the UK."

34. Later, at page 68 of 104, under the heading "Is  the  child  a  British
    citizen or have they lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  at
    least 7 years?", we find this:-

         "If the departure of the parent or carer would not  result  in  the
         child being required to leave the UK, because the child will (or is
         likely to) remain living here with another parent or primary carer,
         then the question of whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child
         to leave the UK will not arise.  In these circumstances,  paragraph
         EX.1.(a) does not apply.

         However,  where  there  is  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship between the applicant and the child,  the  removal  of
         the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that child.
          For that reason, the decision maker will still  need  to  consider
         whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is  appropriate  in
         light of all the real-life circumstances of the case,  taking  into
         account the best interests of the child as a primary  consideration
         and the impact on the child of the applicant's departure  from  the
         UK, or them having to leave the UK with them.  If it is  considered
         that refusal would lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
         applicant, the child or their family, leave will fall to be granted
         on the basis of exceptional circumstances."

35. At page 69 of 104, specific reference is made to KO (Nigeria):-

         "In the caselaw of KO and Others  2018  UKSC  53,  with  particular
         reference to the case of NS (Sri Lanka), the  Supreme  Court  found
         that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real-world context
         in which the child  finds  themselves.   The  parents'  immigration
         status  is  a  relevant  fact  to  establish  that  context.    The
         determination sets out that if a child's parents are both  expected
         to leave the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them,
         unless there is evidence that that it would not be reasonable."

36. There are a number of things to say about this IDI.  First,  it  cannot
    override ordinary principles of statutory construction.   If,  applying
    those principles, a court  or  tribunal  determines  that  a  statutory
    provision falls to be interpreted in a particular way,  the  fact  that
    the IDI may take a different view is irrelevant.

37. Second,  the  IDI  does  not  cite  KO  (Nigeria)  in  support  of  the
    proposition that it is only where the child would be required to  leave
    the United Kingdom  that  EX.1.(b)  or  section  117B(6)  falls  to  be
    considered.  The citation of KO (Nigeria) merely  recognises  that,  in
    deciding what would be reasonable, one must have  regard  to  the  fact
    that one or both parents is liable to removal under immigration  powers
    (see paragraph 27 above).

38. Third (and relatedly), a previous version of  the  IDI,  pre-dating  KO
    (Nigeria), contained statements to the effect that if the departure  of
    a parent would not result in the child  being  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, the question of whether it was reasonable to expect the
    child to leave would not arise.  This was noted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Plimmer in SR (subsisting parental relationship  -  s117B(6))  Pakistan
    [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC).   At  paragraph  50  of  her  decision,  Judge
    Plimmer said that "This aspect of the 2018 IDI  provides  an  untenable
    construction of the plain and ordinary meaning  of  EX.1.  and  section
    117B(6)".  At paragraph 51,  she  held  that  "Self-evidently,  section
    117B(6) is engaged whether the child  will  or  will  not  in  fact  or
    practice leave the UK".  For the reasons we have given, nothing  in  KO
    (Nigeria) affects the correctness of her conclusion.

39. We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can be  affected
    by  the  respondent's  submission  that,  in  cases  where  -  on   his
    interpretation - the subsection does not have  purchase  (i.e.  because
    the child would not in practice leave the United Kingdom), there  would
    nevertheless  need  to  be  a  full-blown  proportionality  assessment,
    compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of the 2002  Act,  with
    the result that a person with parental  responsibility  who  could  not
    invoke section 117B(6) may, nevertheless, succeed  in  a  human  rights
    appeal.

40. Such an  assessment  would,  however,  have  to  take  account  of  the
    immigration history of the person subject to removal;  so  there  could
    well be a very real difference between the outcome  of  that  exercise,
    and one conducted under section 117B(6). But, the real  point  is  that
    this  submission  does  not  begin  to  affect  the  plain  meaning  of
    subsection (6).  If,  as  we  have  found,  Parliament  has  decreed  a
    particular outcome by enacting section 117B(6), then that is the end of
    the matter.

41. We accept that  this  interpretation  may  result  in  an  underserving
    individual or family remaining in the  United  Kingdom.   However,  the
    fact that Parliament has mandated such an outcome merely means that, in
    such cases, Parliament has decided to be more generous than is strictly
    required by the Human Rights  Act  1998.   It  can  be  regarded  as  a
    necessary consequence of  the  aim  of  Part  5A  of  imposing  greater
    consistency in decision-making in this area by  courts  and  tribunals.
    The fact that section 117B(6) has such an aim was expressly  recognised
    by Elias LJ at paragraph 44 of MA (Pakistan).

G. THE APPELLANT'S CASE IN DETAIL

42. Having reached that conclusion on the construction of section  117B(6),
    we must return to the evidence in the appellant's case.

(a) The evidence of the appellant

43. The appellant adopted her two witness statements.  In  the  first,  she
    explained how she had entered the United Kingdom in 2001 as an au  pair
    and overstayed, subsequently forming a relationship with her partner in
    2009, by whom she has had a son born in 2010 and a  daughter  in  2011.
    In her first statement, the appellant said that she felt  compelled  to
    return to Turkey in 2013, following her father's diagnosis  of  cancer.
    Subsequently, she was desperate to get back to the United Kingdom to be
    with her children, following their departure from Turkey, and she hoped
    that the Tribunal would accept "the difficult predicament I was in like
    any other mother would be in my circumstances".  The appellant said she
    deeply regretted entering the United Kingdom in a  clandestine  manner:
    "But I had to get back to my children".

44. In her second statement, she reiterated that the reason for  her  going
    to Turkey was her father's illness.  She had wanted to see  him  before
    he deteriorated any further.  Before their departure,  the  appellant's
    partner had sold his business and "wanted to get away from the UK for a
    holiday".  The family therefore decided to go to Turkey for  the  year.
    Since the children were young and had yet to start school,  the  couple
    thought it would be a good opportunity to  see  Turkey  and  visit  the
    appellant's parents.

45. The second statement continued by saying  that  whilst  in  Turkey  the
    appellant "spent a large amount of time caring [for] my father for  his
    everyday needs and assisting him to  ensure  that  he  was  comfortable
    during his treatment for cancer.  I confirm that we all stayed with our
    father".

46. The appellant's children did not know the Turkish language and "do  not
    even recollect going to that country due  to  their  young  age".   The
    appellant said that the family had no intention of permanently settling
    in Turkey.

47. Regarding her applications for visas to return to the  United  Kingdom,
    the appellant's  statement  contended  that  "the  respondent  unjustly
    refused  both  visa  applications  leaving  me  in  a  predicament.   I
    therefore had no other option but to re-enter the  UK  via  clandestine
    means".

48. The appellant's partner could not be expected to  live  permanently  in
    Turkey, according to the appellant.   Nor  could  the  children,  whose
    education would be disrupted if they were forced to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom on the appellant's account.

49. In oral evidence, the appellant said that both of her children were  in
    Year 3 at a Catholic Primary School.  Her partner and his parents  were
    Catholics and it had  been  decided  to  raise  the  children  in  that
    religion.  The children have both been baptised.

50. The appellant and her partner have been unable to marry in  the  United
    Kingdom, owing  to  the  appellant's  immigration  status.   Whilst  in
    Turkey, they had attempted to marry but her partner lacked the relevant
    documentation.

51. Under cross-examination, the appellant said that she had  not  informed
    her partner, when they met, of her lack of immigration  status  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He did not, in fact, find out about this  until  2012,
    after the children had been born.

52. The appellant's trip to Turkey in 2013 had been  possible  because  she
    had gone to  the  Turkish  Embassy  and  obtained  a  temporary  travel
    document.  Her husband had seen the trip to Turkey as more of a holiday
    than the appellant  had.   The  sale  of  the  partner's  business  had
    provided the family with funds.

53. Although the appellant said at first that she did not do anything while
    she was in Turkey, she then admitted that she had  worked  for  a  very
    brief period when additional funds had  been  required.   She  had  not
    mentioned this previously as she did not regard it  as  relevant.   She
    believed she had worked for six to eight months in  Turkey.   Mr  Malik
    put to the appellant that that was not a "very short time".

54. The appellant was asked questions about  her  visa  application  forms.
    The Tribunal had permitted Mr Malik to adduce  these,  given  that  the
    appellant's second witness statement asserted that the  respondent  had
    "unjustly refused" her applications.

55. The appellant was asked why, in the  applications,  she  had  contended
    that  she  was  working  full-time  and  had  a  monthly  income   from
    properties, rents, savings and investments of 1,100.  The  application
    documentation also asserted that the appellant intended to stay in  the
    United Kingdom only for two weeks.

56. The appellant replied that she  had  made  the  applications  with  the
    assistance of an agent, and had done what the agent said.

57. The appellant stated that she had  divided  her  time  roughly  equally
    between her father's flat in Ankara and his property in  Antalya.   Her
    father stayed with the family but also spent time in Ankara, away  from
    the family.

58. The decision to return to the United Kingdom was occasioned by the fact
    that the children were close to school  age  and  her  son  had  needed
    surgery for a breathing problem.   The  appellant  said  that  she  had
    asserted that she would come to the United Kingdom for only  two  weeks
    because, having overstayed, she  considered  it  would  not  have  been
    possible to get back and so she had to lie.  It was important  for  the
    children to start school and integrate in the United Kingdom.

59. Although she admitted lying in the past, the appellant  said  that  she
    was not lying now.  It was put to her by Mr Malik that  she  could  not
    possibly assert that the respondent's refusal of  the  entry  clearance
    applications was unjustified.  The appellant said that  she  understood
    and accepted she had made a "huge mistake".  She  was  not  seeking  to
    defend herself; she merely wanted a life for her children.

60. Her return to the United  Kingdom  was  facilitated  by  the  appellant
    obtaining a Schengen visa, with which she flew to  Rotterdam  and  then
    made arrangements for someone to drive her through the Channel  Tunnel.



61. The appellant said that her partner was not working  at  present.   The
    partner had been provided by his father  with  a  property,  which  the
    partner was developing with a view to  sale.   The  property  would  be
    finished in around two months.

62. The children of the appellant and her partner were very close to  their
    grandparents, with whom they lived, along with the  appellant  and  the
    partner, on a rent-free basis.  The grandparents were in good health.

63. Mr Malik put to the appellant that, contrary to the  assertion  in  her
    first witness statement, she could not be said to be a person of  "good
    character".  The appellant said that she felt  that  she  was  of  good
    character in her heart.  She was  a  good  person.   Her  reference  to
    "social standing" was intended to indicate that  she  had  friends  and
    family.  She tried to  be  a  "helpful  and  kind  person"  within  her
    community, including the church.

64. Asked whether she could  now  return  to  Turkey  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance in a lawful manner, the appellant said that she could not, as
    she was now needed to look after the children  on  a  full-time  basis.
    Asked whether the grandparents  could  look  after  the  children,  the
    appellant said that the grandparents were  Sicilian  and  spent  around
    half their time in Sicily.  Her partner, meanwhile, was "doing up"  the
    property to which she had earlier referred.

65. The appellant was asked why she, her partner and children could not  go
    and live permanently in Turkey.  She replied that the children were  in
    Year 3 and would be taking their SATs in two years' time.  Her daughter
    had scored the second highest marks in the  county,  in  a  SAT-related
    test.  The appellant did not consider it would be  reasonable  to  take
    the children away from their education and background and that, even if
    they stayed with her only temporarily  in  Turkey  while  she  obtained
    entry clearance, the children would find themselves  having  to  repeat
    their classes.

66. There was no re-examination.



(b) The evidence of the appellant's partner

67. The appellant's partner gave evidence.  He  adopted  as  true  his  two
    witness statements.  In  the  first,  the  partner  had  confirmed  his
    relationship with the appellant and the fact that the  couple  had  two
    children.  The family were living rent-free in his parents'  home,  and
    could do so for as long as they liked.  It would not be right to expect
    the children to have to go to Turkey,  where  standards  of  education,
    health and other benefits were not as high as in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The children were also accustomed to the way  of  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

68. In his second statement, the partner said that he had agreed to  go  to
    Turkey with the appellant and the children in  2013  as  he  "wanted  a
    change of scenery and the warmer weather  was  appealing".   Since  the
    children were not yet in school, he considered that this was  feasible.
    However, the "more important reason" why the family visited Turkey  was
    to be with the appellant's father, who had been diagnosed with  cancer.



69. Although the partner had visited Turkey for over a year, he did not see
    himself as living there on a permanent basis  and  there  had  been  no
    intention to do so.  He said, the intention had been to have a  holiday
    and spend time with the appellant's father.

70. The children could not even recollect going to Turkey.  They  were  now
    attending school in the United Kingdom and progressing well.

71. The partner confirmed that he had obtained a property from his  father,
    which he was developing with  a  view  to  selling  it.   The  children
    attended the local Catholic school.  His intention had always been  for
    his children to go there.  Thereafter, the  partner  had  intended  the
    children to go to the Catholic Secondary School which he had  attended.



72. The partner did not consider that there were any  English  or  Catholic
    schools in Turkey; merely state schools of poor quality, where teaching
    emphasised the Muslim faith.

73. Cross-examined, the partner said that he had  been  able  to  obtain  a
    visit visa, on arrival in Turkey, which he  had  renewed  at  a  police
    station every six months.  The renewal process was easy and he had  not
    been asked any questions when renewing.

74. He had sold his business after running it for some  ten  years  with  a
    business partner.  The witness later confirmed that  this  was  a  taxi
    business.

75. The partner denied that staying in Turkey for a year  and  a  half  had
    been anything more than a holiday.  The  appellant  had  not  done  any
    "real work to speak of" whilst  in  Turkey.   He  considered  that  the
    family had stayed in Antalya for about a couple of months  and  it  did
    not feel as if they had been there for nine  months.   Except  for  one
    visit of two to three weeks, the appellant's father had not lived  with
    the family in Antalya.  The appellant and her partner had not  gone  to
    Turkey to look after the father.  That had not been their intention.

76. The partner said he had no idea  how  much  the  appellant  had  earned
    whilst working in Turkey.  He could not remember the address  at  which
    they lived in Antalya.

77. The partner said that  he  did  not  find  out  about  the  appellant's
    immigration status until around 2011/2012.  The  partner  was  of  dual
    British and Italian nationality.  His parents owned several  properties
    in Italy, which were holiday residences.

78. The partner was asked why, in his witness statement, signed only a  few
    days earlier, he had not referred to the work he was undertaking on the
    development of the property.  He said he did not know.   His  solicitor
    had drawn up the statement.  It had been "an oversight".

79. The partner said that he was  not  suggesting  there  were  no  private
    schools in Turkey but did not know how it would be possible to fund his
    children's education in such an establishment.  In the  United  Kingdom
    he was in receipt of various child benefits.



(c) The Upper Tribunal's assessment of the evidence

80. Our assessment of the appellant is  that  she  is  both  dishonest  and
    unscrupulous, each to a high degree.  She has flagrantly defied the law
    of the United Kingdom by overstaying her leave for a  large  number  of
    years, without bothering to seek to regularise her  status;  by  making
    entry clearance applications that she knew full well were predicated on
    an entirely false basis; and in gaining access to the United Kingdom by
    employing dishonesty.

81. In the light  of  all  this,  it  is  astonishing  that  the  appellant
    complained that she was "unjustly refused" a visa and  that  she  is  a
    person "of good character".  On the contrary, she is a person who  will
    not scruple to break the law, if it serves her purposes.

82. There were inconsistencies in the evidence given by the  appellant  and
    her partner regarding their time in Turkey.   The  appellant  was  also
    untruthful in claiming that she did not do anything in Turkey and  then
    inconsistent as to the nature and extent of her employment there.   The
    appellant's assertion that she was looking after her father  in  Turkey
    was contradicted by her partner.

83. That said, we find it is more likely than not that the decision of  the
    appellant and her partner to spend over a year in Turkey  in  2013  was
    for the combination of reasons given by the partner; namely, to have an
    extended holiday and to  see  the  appellant's  father,  following  the
    latter's cancer diagnosis.  We do not find it likely  that  the  family
    went to Turkey with a view to settling there permanently.   The  timing
    of the return of the partner and the children  strongly  suggests  that
    the parents were, indeed, anxious for the children  to  commence  their
    schooling in the United Kingdom, which they have done.  Had there  been
    any intention of permanent settlement, then it is difficult to see  why
    the partner and the children would not have returned to Turkey, once it
    became apparent that the appellant was in difficulties getting back  to
    the United Kingdom.

84. Applying the "real world" analysis  of  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  KO
    (Nigeria), the assessment of whether it would be reasonable in terms of
    section 117B(6) to expect the children of the appellant and her partner
    to leave the United Kingdom falls to be determined on  the  basis  that
    there are powerful reasons why the appellant should be removed  by  the
    respondent under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

85.  In so concluding, we apply the law as set out by the House of Lords in
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40  and  in  subsequent  cases,  including
    Hayat v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1054.  Following the approach adopted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in R
    (on the application  of  Chen)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -   temporary   separation   -
    proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC), we acknowledge that where
    an application for entry clearance from abroad is likely to be  granted
    and where there would be significant interference with family  life  by
    temporary removal of the  person  making  that  application,  then  the
    weight to be accorded to the requirements of obtaining entry  clearance
    (that is to say, to that  aspect  of  immigration  control)  is  to  be
    reduced, particularly in cases involving children.

86. We entirely agree with Mr Malik that the present case  is,  however,  a
    paradigm instance of where, compatibly  with  the  so-called  Chikwamba
    principle, it would nevertheless be proportionate to  insist  upon  the
    appellant returning to Turkey in order to make, this  time,  an  honest
    application for entry  clearance.   If  ever  there  were  a  case  for
    insisting upon that requirement, this is it.  Public confidence in  the
    respondent's system of immigration control is likely  to  be  adversely
    affected if this appellant were to be absolved from the requirement  to
    obtain valid entry clearance.  Her removal for that purpose  would  not
    have a disproportionate effect upon her children or her  partner.   The
    family have, in the past, taken the decision to leave the appellant  in
    Turkey, whilst the partner and  the  children  have  returned  to  this
    country.  The partner's work on his development  project  will  shortly
    end and he  will  be  able  to  look  after  the  children  during  the
    appellant's absence.  He also has  the  ability  to  call  on  his  own
    parents (with whom he and the children live) to help  in  this  regard.
    We do not consider it likely  that  the  grandparents,  with  whom  the
    children are said  to  have  a  close  relationship,  would  put  their
    personal enjoyment ahead of the interests of  their  grandchildren,  by
    holidaying abroad during this time.



(d) Applying section 117B(6) to the appellant's case

87. Thus, if the respondent's construction of section 117B(6) were correct,
    the appellant's appeal would  fall  to  be  dismissed.   Requiring  the
    appellant to make an entry clearance application  from  abroad  (which,
    notwithstanding her immigration history, is likely  to  be  successful)
    would not be a disproportionate interference with her Article 8  rights
    or those of her children and her partner.

88. For the reasons we have  given,  however,  we  are  satisfied  that  Mr
    Bazini's construction of section 117B(6) is, in fact, the correct  one.
    Even though, on our findings, it is unlikely that  the  children  would
    leave the United  Kingdom,  if  the  appellant  were  removed,  on  the
    hypothesis (which section 117B(6)(b) demands) that they are expected to
    leave, we must determine whether it would be reasonable for them to  do
    so.

89.  Section 117B(6) concerns an assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of  a
    child's leaving the United Kingdom. It does  not  expressly  demand  an
    assessment of reasonableness by reference to the  length  of  time  the
    child is expected to be outside the United Kingdom.  In  the  light  of
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of  KO  (Nigeria),  the  child's  destination  and
    future are to be assumed to be with the person who is being removed. In
    a case where the respondent's position is that the person who is  being
    removed can be expected to make an entry  clearance  application,  does
    this require the Tribunal's assessment to take this  into  account,  in
    determining whether it would be reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave?
    There may, obviously, be a good deal  of  difference  between  a  child
    living outside the United Kingdom for a matter of months and facing  an
    indefinite period abroad.

90. We did not hear submissions on this specific  question.  Certainly,  Mr
    Malik did not advance it as  a  reason  why,  if  his  construction  of
    section 117B(6) were not adopted, it would nevertheless  be  reasonable
    for the children to leave.

91. In the circumstances, we do not consider it necessary  to  resolve  the
    question; at least,  in its stark  form.  The  Chikwamba  principle  is
    predicated on the assumption that, where there are children, it is  not
    envisaged that they would be expected to go and stay  with  the  parent
    concerned, whilst the latter makes an application for entry  clearance.
    To envisage otherwise would be almost to stand  the  principle  on  its
    head.

92. In any event,  in  determining  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for
    children to leave in these circumstances, the likely  temporary  nature
    of the absence from the United Kingdom may well  be  said  (as  in  the
    present case) to make it unreasonable to expect the children to  leave.
    Is it reasonable for children to have  their  education  disrupted,  so
    that they can be with a parent making an entry  clearance  application,
    which is predicated on the need (and, thus, Article 8 case) to be  with
    the children in the United Kingdom?

93.  The children are, we find, settled at school, where the  daughter,  in
    particular, is excelling academically.  The children are  being  raised
    in a Roman Catholic academic and social  environment.   Notwithstanding
    our concerns about the appellant's credibility, we are  satisfied  that
    it is likely to be  difficult  to  achieve  anything  similar  for  the
    children in Turkey.  Notwithstanding their time there, we are satisfied
    that  the  children  cannot  speak  Turkish  and   have   no   material
    understanding of what it is like to live there.

94. Even assuming the children were able to return to their United  Kingdom
    school, once their mother's immigration status have  been  regularised,
    their education will be likely to have suffered material disruption, in
    the meantime.  In all the circumstances, putting  the  children's  best
    interests as a primary consideration, we do not find that it  would  be
    reasonable to expect them to face this difficulty.

95. Mr Malik suggested  that  if  the  children  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to go to Turkey, then they could go to Italy, along  with  the
    appellant and her partner.  The disruption to the  children's  academic
    and social environment  would,  however,  be  the  same,  in  that  the
    progress of the children's education at  their  United  Kingdom  school
    would be disrupted, albeit  that  opportunities  for  English  language
    teaching in a Catholic environment would,  of  course,  be  greater  in
    Italy.




(e) Conclusions on the appeal

96. We therefore conclude that, on the facts of this case, it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the  appellant's  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, in the event of  her  removal.   This  means  the  appellant's
    appeal succeeds.  It does so because Parliament has stated,  in  terms,
    that the public  interest  does  not  require  her  removal,  in  these
    circumstances.  It does  so  despite  the  fact  that,  absent  section
    117B(6), the appellant's removal would be  proportionate  in  terms  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.


Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  We set that decision aside and  re-make  the
decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                           Signed                     Dated: 26 February
                           2019






                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber






TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no
fee  award   for  the  following  reason:  the  appellant's  behaviour,   as
described in the decision, makes it unconscionable for her to receive a  fee
award.



                           Signed                     Dated: 26 February
                           2019








                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber





