

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Neshanthan (cancellation or revocation of ILR) [2017] UKUT 00077 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On  1 December 2016                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |KULARATNA NESHANTHAN                              |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|           |                                                  |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|and                                                                         |
|           |IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW AIRPORT (TERMINAL 3)|             |
|           |                                                  |             |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Ahmed, of Counsel, instructed by Amirthan &
                    Suresh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Fletcher, of Counsel, instructed by the
                    Government Legal Department.


      i)    Article 13 of the Immigration (Leave to enter and Remain)  Order
        2000/1161 (the "2000 Order") applies to holders of indefinite leave
        to remain ("ILR") who travel to a country or territory outside  the
        common travel area so that their ILR does not lapse  but  continues
        if Article 13(2)-(4) are satisfied.

      ii)   If the  leave  of  such  an  individual  continues  pursuant  to
        Article 13(2)-(4) of the 2000 Order,  an  immigration  officer  has
        power to cancel their ILR upon their arrival in the United Kingdom.

      iii)  The grounds upon which such leave may be cancelled are  set  out
        at para 321A of the Immigration Rules.

      iv)   Section 76 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
        Act is an  alternative  and  additional  power,  available  to  the
        Secretary of State, to revoke indefinite leave to enter or  ILR  in
        the circumstances described at s.76(1)-(3) of the 2002 Act.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka  born  on  5  September  1984.
    Upper Tribunal Judge ("UTJ") Blum granted him permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, limited to the first issue  (as  described  below),
    against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Afako
    (hereafter the  "judge"  unless  otherwise  stated)  promulgated  on  1
    December 2015 dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 24 September 2014 cancelling his indefinite leave to remain  ("ILR")
    that had been granted to him by the Secretary of State on  21  February
    2014.

 2. Following the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom on 23 September
    2014, he  was  required  to  submit  to  further  examination  and  was
    interviewed. The respondent  decided  to  cancel  the  appellant's  ILR
    because he concluded that, in his previous  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a student made on 25 May 2012, the appellant had submitted an
    English language test certificate that the  respondent  considered  had
    been fraudulently obtained. The decision was made under  para  321A  of
    the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended)
    (hereafter referred to individually as a "Rule"  and  collectively  the
    "Rules"). It was not in dispute before me that, if  the  appellant  had
    fraudulently obtained the English language test  certificate  which  he
    used in his previous application of 25 May 2012,  this  amounted  to  a
    false representation under para 321A(2) in relation to his  application
    for ILR of 26 October 2013.

 3. This case raises two issues. The  first  issue  is  whether  the  judge
    materially erred in law in deciding that  an  immigration  officer  has
    power to cancel a person's ILR when the individual arrives at a port of
    entry after an absence abroad. The judge decided  that  the  respondent
    had power to cancel the appellant's ILR following his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom on 23 September 2014 after a short absence  abroad.  The
    appellant contends that only the Secretary of State has power to cancel
    ILR.

 4. If the first issue is decided in the appellant's favour, this would  be
    determinative of the appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  judge's
    decision would be set aside and  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision allowed on the ground that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law, a ground that was available to him  at  the
    time he lodged his appeal (on 2 October 2014) and which he did raise in
    his grounds of appeal. There would be no need to  consider  the  second
    issue.

 5. The second issue is whether permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    should be granted on the appellant's renewed application, made  at  the
    hearing before me, for permission to challenge the judge's finding that
    the appellant had  fraudulently  obtained  the  English  language  test
    certificate which he had used in the previous  application  of  25  May
    2012. If the  renewed  application  for  permission  is  granted,  then
    whether the judge materially erred in law in reaching his finding  that
    the appellant had  fraudulently  obtained  his  English  language  test
    certificate. UTJ Blum had refused permission on this ground.

 6. UTJ Blum also refused permission to appeal against the judge's decision
    to dismiss the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. This was not
    renewed before me.

 7. I heard submissions on the second issue de bene esse.

 8. I shall deal first with the first issue and then the second issue.  The
    relevant factual background can be briefly stated at this stage.

Relevant background

 9. The appellant arrived in the UK on 23 September 2014.  He  presented  a
    valid Sri Lankan passport and  a  United  Kingdom  Biometric  Residence
    Permit which showed  that he had been granted ILR on 21 February  2014.
    This was granted following his application for ILR on 26  October  2013
    on the basis of his length of residence. On his initial examination  on
    arrival on 23 September 2014, he said that he had been  away  from  the
    United Kingdom for three weeks and that he had qualified for his  grant
    of ILR on the basis of having been a student in the United Kingdom  for
    ten years. The appellant was required to submit to further  examination
    because UK Visas  &  Immigration  records  indicated  that  an  English
    language test certificate used by  the  appellant  in  support  of  his
    previous application of 25 May 2012 had been fraudulently obtained.

10. The English language certificate in question was a "Test of English for
    International Communication" (hereafter "TOEIC") certificate issued  by
    Educational Testing Services ("ETS") after a test was taken on 18 April
    2012 at Portsmouth International College. The appellant had  used  this
    certificate in support of his application on 25 May 2012 for  leave  to
    remain as a student which was  granted  from  11  June  2012  until  31
    December 2014.

The first issue

(i)   Relevant legal framework

11. The wording of the relevant provisions referred to below relate to  the
    versions in force as at the date of the decision in the  instant  case.
    Any amendments made since that date are indicated.

12. Section 3(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 (the "1971 Act") provides that
    a person who is not a British citizen may not enter the United  Kingdom
    unless given leave to do so (s.3(1)(a)). He may be given leave to enter
    the United Kingdom or, when already in the  United  Kingdom,  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, either for a limited  period  or  for  an
    indefinite period (s.3(1)(b)).  If limited leave to enter or remain  is
    given, conditions may be attached (s.3(1)(c)).

13. Section 3(3)(a) of the 1971 Act provides that, in the case  of  limited
    leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom, "a person's  leave  may
    be varied, whether by restricting, enlarging or removing the  limit  on
    its duration, or by adding or revoking conditions, but if the limit  on
    its duration is removed, any conditions attached to the leave cease  to
    apply".

14. Pursuant to s.4(1), the power under the 1971  Act  to  give  or  refuse
    leave to enter the United Kingdom "shall be  exercised  by  immigration
    officers" and "the power to give leave to remain in the United Kingdom,
    or to vary any leave  under  section  3(3)(a)[1]  (whether  as  regards
    duration or  conditions),  shall  be  exercised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State...".

15. Section 3(4) of the 1971 Act provides:

      (4)   A person's leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  shall
             lapse on his going to a country or territory outside the common
             travel area (whether or not he lands there), unless within  the
             period for which he had leave he returns to the United  Kingdom
             in circumstances in which he is not required to obtain leave to
             enter; but, if he does so return, his previous leave  (and  any
             limitation on it or conditions attached to it)  shall  continue
             to apply.

16. No authority is needed for the  proposition  that  leave  to  enter  or
    remain is  either  limited  as  to  duration  or  indefinite.  This  is
    supported by the definition of "limited leave" and  "indefinite  leave"
    in s.33(1) of the 1971 Act, the interpretation section in the 1971 Act,
    which defines "limited leave" and "indefinite leave" as follows:

            "limited leave" and "indefinite leave" means respectively  leave
        under this Act to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  which  is,
        and one which is not, limited as to duration;"

17. Indeed, s.3(1)(b) of the 1971 Act specifically provides that  leave  to
    enter or remain is  given  either  for  a  limited  period  or  for  an
    indefinite period.

18. Article 13(10) of the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and  Remain)  Order
    2000/1161 (the "2000 order") provides that s.3(4) of the 1971  Act  has
    effect subject to the provisions of Article 13. Article 13 provides  as
    follows.


        13.-
        (1)       In  this  [article][2]   [article  and  article   13A][3]
        [Part][4]  "leave" means-
           (a)   leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  (including  leave  to
                 enter conferred  by  means  of  an  entry  clearance  under
                 article 2); and
           (b)   leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


        (2)      Subject to paragraph (3), where a person has  leave  which
        is in force and which was:
           (a)   conferred by means of an entry  clearance  (other  than  a
        visit visa) under article 2; or
           (b)   given by an immigration officer or the Secretary of  State
                 for a period exceeding six months,
           such leave shall  not  lapse  on  his  going  to  a  country  or
             territory outside the common travel area.


        (3)      Paragraph (2) shall not apply:
           (a)   where a limited leave has been varied by the Secretary  of
        State; and
           (b)   following the variation the period of leave  remaining  is
        six months or less.


        (4)      Leave which does  not  lapse  under  paragraph  (2)  shall
             remain in force either indefinitely (if  it  is  unlimited)  or
             until the date on which it would  otherwise  have  expired  (if
             limited), but-


           (a)[5] & [6] where the holder  has  stayed  outside  the  United
                 Kingdom for a continuous period of more than two years, the
                 leave (where the leave is  unlimited)  or  any  leave  then
                 remaining (where the  leave  is  limited)  shall  thereupon
                 lapse; and
           (b)   any conditions to which the  leave  is  subject  shall  be
                 suspended for such time as the holder is outside the United
                 Kingdom.


        (5)      For the purposes of paragraphs 2 and 2A of Schedule  2  to
             the Act  (examination  by  immigration  officers,  and  medical
             examination), leave to remain which remains in force under this
             article shall be treated, upon  the  holder's  arrival  in  the
             United Kingdom, as leave to enter which has been granted to the
             holder before his arrival.


        (6)      Without prejudice to the provisions of section 4(1) of the
             Act, where the holder of leave which  remains  in  force  under
             this article is outside the United Kingdom,  the  Secretary  of
             State may vary that leave (including any conditions to which it
             is subject) in such form and manner as permitted by the Act  or
             this Order for the giving of leave to enter.


        (7)      Where a person is outside the United Kingdom and has leave
             which is in force by virtue of this article, that leave may  be
             cancelled:
           (a)   in the case of leave to enter, by an immigration  officer;
        or
           (b)   in the case of leave to remain, by the Secretary of State.


        (8)      In order to determine whether or not to vary (and, if  so,
             in what manner) or cancel leave which remains  in  force  under
             this article and which is held by a person who is  outside  the
             United Kingdom, an immigration officer or, as the case may  be,
             the Secretary of State  may  seek  such  information,  and  the
             production  of  such  documents  or  copy  documents,   as   an
             immigration  officer  would  be  entitled  to  obtain   in   an
             examination under paragraph 2 or 2A of Schedule 2  to  the  Act
             and may also require the holder of the leave to supply an up to
             date medical report.
        (9)       Failure  to  supply  any  information,  documents,   copy
             documents or medical report requested by an immigration officer
             or, as the case may be,  the  Secretary  of  State  under  this
             article shall be a  ground,  in  itself,  for  cancellation  of
             leave.
        (10)     Section 3(4) of the Act (lapsing of leave upon  travelling
             outside the common travel area) shall have  effect  subject  to
             this article.

19. It is not necessary to quote para 2 of Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act which
    makes provision for  the  examination  of  individuals  by  immigration
    officer and medical examinations.

20. It is necessary to quote para 2A of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act  which
    provides:


        2A.- Examination of persons who arrive with continuing leave


        (1)      This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived in  the
             United Kingdom with leave to enter which is in force but  which
             was given to him before his arrival.


        (2)      He may be examined  by  an  immigration  officer  for  the
        purpose of establishing-


           (a)   whether there has been such a change in the  circumstances
                 of his case, since that leave was given, that it should  be
                 cancelled;


           (b)   whether that leave was  obtained  as  a  result  of  false
                 information  given  by  him  or  his  failure  to  disclose
                 material facts; or


           (c)   whether there are medical  grounds  on  which  that  leave
        should be cancelled.


        (2A)     Where the person's leave to enter derives,  by  virtue  of
             section 3A(3), from an entry clearance, ....


        (3)      He may also be examined by an immigration officer for  the
             purpose of determining whether it would  be  conducive  to  the
             public good for that leave to be cancelled.


        (4)      He may also be examined by a medical inspector or  by  any
             qualified person carrying out a test or examination required by
             a medical inspector.


        (5)      A person examined under this paragraph may be required  by
             the officer or inspector to submit to further examination.


        (6)      ...


        (7)      An immigration  officer  examining  a  person  under  this
             paragraph may by notice suspend his leave to  enter  until  the
             examination is completed.


        (8)      An immigration officer  may,  on  the  completion  of  any
             examination of a person under this paragraph, cancel his  leave
             to enter.


        {(9)     Cancellation of a person's leave under  sub-paragraph  (8)
             is to be treated for the purposes of this Act and  [Part  5  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (immigration
             and  asylum  appeals)][7]   [Part   5   of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (appeals  in  respect   of
             protection and human rights  claims)][8]  as  if  he  had  been
             refused leave to enter at a time when he had  a  current  entry
             clearance}[9]


        (10)     A requirement imposed under sub-paragraph (5) and a notice
             given under sub-paragraph (7) must be in writing.


21. Para 321A of the Rules reads:


        Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in force  is  to
        be cancelled at port or while the  holder  is  outside  the  United
        Kingdom


        321A.    The following grounds for the cancellation of  a  person's
             leave to enter or remain which is in force on his arrival  in,
             or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;


           (1)   there has been such a change in the circumstances of  that
                 person's case since the  leave was given, that it should be
                 cancelled; or


           (2)   false representations were made or  false  documents  were
                 submitted (whether or not material to the application,  and
                 whether or not to  the  holder's  knowledge),  or  material
                 facts were not disclosed, in relation  to  the  application
                 for leave,  or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
                 Secretary of State or a third party required in support  of
                 the application; or


           (3)   save in relation to a person settled in the United Kingdom
                 or where the Immigration Officer or the Secretary of  State
                 is satisfied that there are  strong  compassionate  reasons
                 justifying  admission,  where  it  is  apparent  that,  for
                 medical reasons, it is undesirable to admit that person  to
                 the United Kingdom; or


           (4)   where the Secretary of State has personally directed  that
                 the exclusion of that person from  the  United  Kingdom  is
                 conducive to the public good; or


           (4A)  Grounds which would have led to a refusal under paragraphs
                 320(2), 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B) or 320(19) if the person
                 concerned were making a new application for leave to  enter
                 or remain  (except  where  this  sub-paragraph  applies  in
                 respect of leave to enter or remain granted under  Appendix
                 Armed Forces it is to be read as if for paragraphs  320(2),
                 320(6), 320(18A), 320(18B) or 320(19)" it  said  "paragraph
                 8(a), (b), (c) or (g) and paragraph 9(d)"); or


           (5)   The Immigration Officer or the Secretary  of  State  deems
                 the exclusion of the person from the United Kingdom  to  be
                 conducive to the public  good.  For  example,  because  the
                 person's conduct (including convictions which do  not  fall
                 within paragraph 320(2)), character, associations, or other
                 reasons, make it undesirable to grant them leave  to  enter
                 the United Kingdom; or


           (6)   where that person is outside the United  Kingdom,  failure
                 by that person to supply any information,  documents,  copy
                 documents or medical report  requested  by  an  Immigration
                 Officer or the Secretary of State.

22. Mr Ahmed relied upon the returning residents rule in  the  Rules,  i.e.
    para 18 of the Rules, which reads:


        Returning Residents


        18.      A person seeking leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
             returning resident may be admitted for settlement provided the
             Immigration Officer is satisfied that the person concerned:


           (i)   had indefinite leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom when he last left; and


           (ii)  has not been away from the United Kingdom for more than  2
        years; and


           (iii) did not receive assistance from public funds  towards  the
                 cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and


           (iv)  now seeks admission for the purpose of settlement.





(ii)  Discussion

23. Immigration officers are appointed pursuant to s.4 of the 1971 Act. The
    power of an immigration officer to examine persons who arrive in the UK
    with continuing leave is derived from para 2A of Schedule 2 of the 1971
    Act. Para 2A(1) provides that para 2A applies  to  a  "person  who  has
    arrived in the United Kingdom with leave to enter which is in force but
    which was given to him before his  arrival".  Under  para  2A,  such  a
    person may be examined by an immigration officer  for  the  purpose  of
    establishing whether there has been such a change in the  circumstances
    of his case since that leave was granted that it should be cancelled or
    whether that leave was obtained as a result of false information  given
    to him or his failure to disclose material facts or whether  there  are
    medical grounds on which that leave should be cancelled.

24. The Upper Tribunal's decision in Fiaz (cancellation of leave to  remain
    - fairness) [2012] UKUT 00057 (IAC) concerned a national  of  Pakistan.
    On 9 September 2011, the Secretary of State granted him leave to remain
    as a student valid until December 2011. Shortly after 26 February 2011,
    he travelled to Pakistan where he remained until  his  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom on or about 10 April 2011. He was questioned  about  his
    intentions. Following further  enquires,  his  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student was cancelled on 11 April 2011 on the  basis  of  a  change  of
    circumstances since it was granted.

25. The question arose in Fiaz whether an immigration officer has power  to
    cancel limited leave to remain that had been granted by  the  Secretary
    of State. A  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  comprising  of  the  then
    President, Blake J, and Upper Tribunal  Judge  King,  decided  that  an
    immigration officer does have power to cancel  leave  to  remain  which
    remains in force under Article 13(5) of the 2000  Order  (which  states
    that "leave to remain which remains in force under this  article  shall
    be treated, upon the holder's arrival in the United Kingdom,  as  leave
    to enter which has been granted to the holder before his  arrival",  my
    emphasis). The Upper Tribunal  also  decided  that  the  provisions  of
    Article 13(5) were not unlawful for being ultra vires.

26. The Upper Tribunal's decision in Fiaz was upheld on appeal by the Court
    of Appeal in MF (Pakistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  768.  The  Court  of
    Appeal decided that a person with limited leave to remain as a  student
    granted to him by the Secretary of State  in-country  and  who  travels
    outside the common travel area but who returns within the  currency  of
    that limited leave to remain was a person who fell within  para  2A  of
    Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act and thus a person who may be examined by  an
    immigration officer. The Court of Appeal concluded that an  immigration
    officer had the power to  cancel  his  limited  leave  to  remain  and,
    further, that Article 13(5) of the 2000 Order was not ultra vires.

27. The reasons for the Court of Appeal's conclusions (insofar as  material
    to the issues in the instant case) may be summarised as follows:

    i)      The Court of Appeal noted that, under s.3(4) of the 1971 Act, a
        person's leave  to  enter  or  leave  to  remain  lapses  upon  his
        travelling outside the common travel area "unless within the period
        for which he  had  leave  he  returns  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
        circumstances in which he is not required to obtain leave to enter;
        ..."

    ii)     Article 13 of the 2000 Order relaxed the effect  of  s.3(4)  so
        that:

            a)   Pursuant to Article 13(2) and Article 13(3), where such  a
             person has leave which is in force and which was  given  by  an
             immigration officer or the Secretary  of  State  for  a  period
             exceeding six months, such leave does not lapse on his going to
             a country or territory outside the common travel area except in
             cases where the person's limited leave to remain was varied  by
             the Secretary of State and the remaining period of  such  leave
             at the time the person leaves the United Kingdom is six  months
             or less.  In the case of a person whose leave is deemed not  to
             lapse pursuant to Article 13(3) and the  person  stays  outside
             the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of  more  than  2
             years, his leave lapses at the end of the period of  two  years
             pursuant to Article 13(4)(a).

            b)   Pursuant to Article 13(5), leave  that  remains  in  force
             under Article 13 is treated, upon the holder's arrival  in  the
             United Kingdom, as "leave to enter which had  been  granted  to
             the holder before his arrival" for the purposes of paras 2  and
             2A of Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act.

            c)   Accordingly, the holder of such leave may be  examined  by
             an immigration officer for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the
             matters set out at para 2A(2) of Schedule 2 of  the  1971  Act,
             which  include  whether  there  has  been  such  a   change  in
             circumstances such that leave to enter should be cancelled.

            d)   Para 10 of the Rules provides that  the  power  to  cancel
             leave to enter or remain which is  already  in  force  must  be
             exercised on the authority of the Chief Immigration Officer  or
             immigration inspector. The grounds upon which leave to enter or
             remain may be cancelled are stated at para 321A of  the  Rules.
             Those grounds include, at para 321A(1), the ground that  "there
             has been such a  change in the circumstances of  that  person's
             case since the leave was given that it should be cancelled..."

28. It has not been argued before me that, if I were to decide that Article
    13 did apply to the appellant so that his ILR did not  lapse  upon  his
    travelling to Sri Lanka, Article 13 is unlawful as being  ultra  vires.
    Nevertheless, it is relevant to  have  in  mind  the  reasoning  in  MF
    (Pakistan) on the issue of whether Article 13 was ultra  vires  insofar
    as it applied to someone with limited leave to remain whose leave  does
    not lapse upon his travelling outside the common travel area. Pitchford
    LJ agreed with the Upper Tribunal in Fiaz that Article 13 was not ultra
    vires and said, at paras 31 and 32 of the judgment, as follows:

      "31.  In my judgment Article 13(5) was incidental and supplemental  to
             the relaxation of the  effect  of  section  3(4)  of  the  Act
             achieved by Article 13(2)(b) under the  express  power  so  to
             order granted by section  3B(2)(c).  I  do  not  for  my  part
             consider that Article 13(5) amounted to an unlawful  extension
             of the power to examine arrivals. It was, in the view  of  the
             then Secretary of State,  a  necessary  qualification  to  the
             relaxation of section 3(4). All Article 13(5) does is to place
             in the same position those with advanced leave  to  enter  and
             those with limited but extant leave to remain  who  return  to
             the United Kingdom following a period abroad. The President of
             the Upper Tribunal, Blake J, and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King
             described the position at paragraph 26 of their  determination
             as follows:

                 "26.  In our judgment, therefore, the  Secretary  of  State
                   was not creating novel powers of cancelling  the  limited
                   leave that was outside the purpose of section 3B,  rather
                   her predecessor was creating a novel class of non-lapsing
                   leave to remain  that  would  justify  admission  to  the
                   United Kingdom after the trip abroad but needed to temper
                   this  new  provision  by  applying  the  same  powers  of
                   cancellation to it as if it had  been  a  form  of  entry
                   clearance or leave to enter. The  power  to  cancel  such
                   leave was needed as an ancillary  provision  to  the  new
                   class of non-lapsing leave "

            32.  I agree, with respect. Article 13(2)(b) was  introduced  to
             alleviate the draconian effects of section 3(4) of the Act.  At
             paragraph 4.6 of the eighth edition of MacDonald's  Immigration
             Law and Practice the editors drew attention to  those  unwanted
             effects of section 3(4).  Students might take a short break  in
             the middle of term and return to sit examinations.  They  would
             be refused leave to enter on their return. Appeals against that
             decision would have to be conducted out of country. However, if
             Mr Malik's argument is correct, the Act empowered the Secretary
             of State to remove the restriction  on  return  to  the  United
             Kingdom, but it did not  empower  the  Secretary  of  State  to
             provide  the  safeguard  to  that  relaxation  by  enabling  an
             immigration officer to examine the student on his return so  as
             to ensure that he intended to resume his period  of  study  and
             that his course of study remained open to him, as would be  the
             case with a student arriving with advanced leave  to  enter  to
             take up a course of study for the first time.  This  is  not  a
             construction of section 3D(2) of the Act which  I  am  able  to
             accept. The terms of Article 13(5) were in my  view  incidental
             to Article 13(2) because they had the effect  of  defining  the
             ambit of the relaxation intended from the  effects  of  section
             3(4) of the Act."

29. In short, a person who arrives in the United Kingdom  with  leave  that
    remains in force under Article 13 is treated as having leave  to  enter
    with the result that he or  she  may  be  examined  by  an  immigration
    officer pursuant to paras 2 and 2A of Schedule 2 of the  1971  Act  for
    the purpose of  establishing  the  matters  set  out  at  para  2A(2)of
    Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act.

30. Whereas Fiaz concerned a person who has been granted limited  leave  to
    remain as a student, the appellant in the instant case had ILR  granted
    to him by the Secretary of State by way of variation  of  his  previous
    limited leave to remain. As with the instant case, Fiaz concerned  para
    321A of the Rules.

31. I turn to the instant case. It was not in dispute between  the  parties
    that the appellant's ILR did not lapse when he travelled to  Sri  Lanka
    in September 2014. Given that:

    i)      s.3(4) of the 1971 Act provides that leave  shall  lapse  if  a
        person travels to a country or territory outside the common  travel
        area; however,

    ii)     Article 13(10) of the 2000 Order provides that  s.3(4)  of  the
        1971 Act shall have effect subject to the provisions of Article 13;

    iii)    pursuant to Article 13(2) and Article 13(3) of the 2000  Order,
        where a person has limited leave  which  has  been  varied  by  the
        Secretary of State and, following  the  variation,  the  period  of
        leave remaining exceeds six months and  is  in  force,  such  leave
        shall not lapse on his going to a country or territory outside  the
        common travel area;

    iv)     Article 13(4) of the 2000  Order  provides,  inter  alia,  that
        leave which does not lapse under  Article  13(2)  shall  remain  in
        force indefinitely if it is unlimited;

    v)      the Court of Appeal's reasoning in MF (Pakistan)

    I formed the preliminary view that the appellant's ILR had  not  lapsed
    under Article 13 when he arrived in the United Kingdom on 23  September
    2014 and therefore that Article 13(5) applied so that his leave fell to
    be treated as leave to enter upon his arrival in the United Kingdom  on
    23 September 2014. I therefore asked Mr Ahmed to direct my attention to
    the provision(s) other than Article 13 which  could  have  led  to  the
    appellant's ILR not lapsing.

32. Mr Ahmed advanced four principal arguments, the first two of which were
    about the appellant's ILR lapsing or not  lapsing.  The  remaining  two
    were  not.  I  shall  with  these  arguments  in  turn,  although   not
    necessarily in the order in which they were advanced. However, I should
    say  at  this  stage  that,  whilst  the  arguments  advanced  on   the
    appellant's behalf are complex, the correct analysis and answer to  the
    first issue are in fact relatively simple,  as  explained  at  para  31
    above and 57-69 below.

33. In relation to the first argument, Mr Ahmed submitted  that  the  words
    "within the period for which he had leave" in s.3(4) of the 1971 Act do
    not apply to persons with ILR because their leave  is  not  limited  in
    duration. This argument does not help the appellant in any way for  the
    following reasons:

    i)      This submission is an attempt to argue that the general rule in
        the first part of s.3(4) - i.e. that a person's leave to  enter  or
        remain in the United Kingdom "shall lapse on his going to a country
        or territory outside the common travel  area  (whether  or  not  he
        lands there)" - does not apply to someone who has ILR  even  if  he
        travels  outside  the  common  travel  area.  If  this  attempt  is
        successful, it would not be necessary to have recourse  to  Article
        13(2) of the 2000 Order to relax the effect of s.3(4) of  the  1971
        Act, with the  result  that  Article  13(5)  would  not  apply  and
        therefore the reasoning in Fiaz and MF (Pakistan) would not apply.

    ii)     The difficulty is that this submission is directed not  at  the
        first part of s.3(4) which provides for the general rule that leave
        shall lapse if a person goes to a country or territory outside  the
        common travel area but  the  second  part  of  s.3(4)  which  makes
        provision for the exception to that general rule. Thus, if Mr Ahmed
        is correct, that the words "within the  period  for  which  he  had
        leave" in s.3(4) of the 1971 Act and  Article  13(2)  of  the  2000
        Order do not apply to persons  with  ILR,  this  would  mean  that,
        whenever a person with  ILR  travels  to  a  country  or  territory
        outside the common travel  area,  his  or  her  leave  would  lapse
        however brief their absence abroad, with the result that they would
        have to apply for, and obtain, leave to enter if they return to the
        United Kingdom. This achieves the opposite of what Mr  Ahmed  hoped
        to achieve, i.e. that the  respondent  should  have  permitted  the
        appellant to re-enter the United Kingdom with his ILR and leave  it
        to the Secretary of State to cancel his ILR after entry.

    iii)    Furthermore, this submission is misconceived because  the  fact
        is that a person  with  indefinite  leave  who  leaves  the  United
        Kingdom and travels outside the common travel  area  and  who  then
        returns is someone who is returning "within the period for which he
        had leave" precisely because there is no limit to the  duration  of
        his leave.

    iv)     As stated  above  (at  paras  16-17  above),  leave  is  either
        "limited leave" or "indefinite leave". There is nothing  in  s.3(4)
        of the 1971 Act which limits its operation to persons with  limited
        leave to enter or remain and no basis at all to  read  into  s.3(4)
        the word "limited" before the words "leave to enter or  remain"  in
        the opening words of s.3(4).

34. The second argument relies upon the returning residents' rule  in  para
    18 of the Rules. Mr Ahmed submitted that the provision under which  the
    ILR of a person who leaves the United Kingdom and travels  outside  the
    common travel area remains in force is the returning residents rule  in
    para 18 of the Rules. However, it is plain  that  there  is  absolutely
    nothing in para 18 of the Rules which states that the leave of  such  a
    person continues to remain in  force  when  the  person  travels  to  a
    country or territory outside the common travel area. Nor can it do  so,
    given that para 18 is in the Rules whereas  the  provision  that  would
    otherwise  result  in  such  leave  lapsing  is  contained  in  primary
    legislation, i.e. s.3(4) of the 1971 Act. It is plain from the ordinary
    language of para 18 of the Rules that the Rule is concerned with when a
    returning resident may be admitted  for  settlement:  it  says  nothing
    about the person's ILR continuing and not lapsing when  the  individual
    leaves the United Kingdom and travels to a country or territory outside
    the common travel area. Indeed, para 18  of  the  Rules  fits  in  with
    Article 13  of  the  2000  Order  and  the  correct  interpretation  as
    explained below. I therefore reject the second argument.

35. The third argument  relies  upon  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance
    entitled: "Home Office, General grounds for refusal, section 3 of  5  -
    Considering  entry  at  UK  port,  v26.0,  Published  for  UK  Visas  &
    Immigration staff on 19 April  2016"  (hereafter  the  "Guidance").  Mr
    Ahmed relied upon pages 65 and 66 of this Guidance which read:


        "General grounds for refusal
        Cancelling when the passenger has  continuing  leave  to  enter  or
        remain:
        false representations or material facts not disclosed


        This page explains  what  to  consider  when  you  need  to  cancel
        continuing leave to enter or remain  because  a  passenger  seeking
        entry has used deception to get entry clearance that has effect  as
        leave to enter. This relates to general grounds for  refusal  under
        paragraph 321A(2) of the rules. For visitors, this relates to V 9.4
        of Appendix V. When a passenger has used  deception,  for  example,
        made  false  representations,  submitted  false  documents  or  not
        disclosed material facts, you must  cancel  leave  to  enter  under
        paragraph 321A(2). For cases  involving  false  representations  or
        false documents,  you  must  consider  cancelling  leave  to  enter
        whether or not they were material (relevant) to the application and
        whether or not the passenger was aware that  their  representations
        or documents were false.


        False representations
        False representations can have been made  by  the  applicant  or  a
        third party and may include:
        ( spoken or written statements
        ( statements written on  the  application  form  or  in  supporting
        documents


        When a passenger has lied to get  entry  clearance,  you  must  not
        consider whether the false representations played  a  part  in  the
        entry clearance officer granting that entry clearance.


        To justify cancelling leave to enter under paragraph  321A(2),  you
        will need to show that false (inaccurate) representations were made
        for the purpose of getting the entry clearance. You  must  consider
        the proportionality of your decision. Minor  representations  which
        have no bearing on the case can be ignored as long as the passenger
        is generally acceptable for their purpose of entry.


        False documents
        When a passenger's passport or entry clearance  is  forged  or  was
        fraudulently obtained you must cancel their leave to enter if:
        ( they admit the document is not genuine
        ( they admit they are not the rightful holder of  the  passport  or
        entry clearance
        ( you have confirmation from a  report  from  a  qualified  forgery
        officer
        ( you have confirmation from a fingerprint check
        ( you have confirmation from a facial photographic comparison


        When you cancel leave to enter, the entry clearance will stop being
        valid.


        Failure to disclose material facts
        You can refuse leave to  enter  when  a  passenger  has  failed  to
        disclose a fact to the entry clearance officer that would have been
        material to the decision to grant  entry  clearance.  However,  you
        cannot cancel a passenger's leave on these  grounds  if  the  entry
        clearance  officer  did  not  tell  the  passenger  what  kind   of
        information was needed to consider their application.

            (Mr Ahmed's emphasis)

36. Mr Ahmed submitted  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  follow  the
    Secretary of State's guidance at pages 65-66  of  the  Guidance,  which
    applies to para 321A(2) of the Rules and which he asked me to note does
    not mention ILR at all. He submitted that the Guidance  is  an  aid  to
    understanding and applying para 321A. He submitted that pages 65-66  of
    the Guidance as a whole and in particular  the  text  underlined  above
    show that para 321A applies only to those who have  "entry  clearance".
    He submitted that the reference to "continuing leave" in the heading of
    para 321A means, on an ordinary meaning, limited leave which is derived
    from entry clearance. He submitted that para 321A as a whole  does  not
    apply to anyone who has  indefinite  leave,  whether  their  indefinite
    leave is indefinite leave to enter  or  ILR.  Para  18  of  Mr  Ahmed's
    skeleton argument contends that the  guidance  "is  a  statement  which
    identifies the circumstances in  which  the  broad  statutory  criteria
    (namely para.321A) would be exercised. That criteria plainly refers  to
    continuing leave  being  cancelled  arising  from  an  entry  clearance
    application...... the guidance reflects the intention of the  Secretary
    of State, and must be construed as being consistent with the  intention
    behind [para 321A]".

37. I reject these submissions for the following reasons:

38. The submissions  ignore  the  fact  that  para  321A(3)  plainly  makes
    provision to exempt settled persons from having their  leave  cancelled
    "where it is apparent that, for medical reasons, it is  undesirable  to
    admit that person to the United Kingdom".  The  reference  to  "settled
    persons" in para 321A(3) plainly shows para  321A  is  not  limited  to
    those who have been granted entry clearance.

39.  Importantly,  Mr  Ahmed's  approach,  in  deploying  the  respondent's
    Guidance  as  an  aid  to  interpreting  para  321A  is   fundamentally
    misconceived. The leading authorities  on  the  interpretation  of  IRs
    include Mahad (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance Officer  [2010]  1  WLR  48,
    [2009] UKSC 16 and Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2009] 1 WLR 1230. Para 25 of Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f))  [2013]
    UKUT 00088 (IAC) sets out the relevant passages from Mahad and Odelola,
    as follows (the emphasis is mine):


        "25.     The law is settled  as  to  the  proper  approach  to  the
              construction of the Rules.  As  observed  by  Lord  Brown  in
              Ahmed Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16 at paragraph [10]:


                             "There is really no dispute  about  the  proper
                 approach to the construction of the Rules.  As Lord Hoffman
                 said  in  Odelola  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
                 Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230, 1233 (paragraph 4):


                       'Further, like any other  question  of  construction,
                       this  [whether  a  Rule   change   applies   to   all
                       undetermined  applications  or  only  to   subsequent
                       applications] depends upon the language of the  Rule,
                       construed  against  the  relevant  background.   That
                       involves a consideration of the Immigration Rules  as
                       a whole and the function  which  they  serve  in  the
                       administration of immigration policy.'


                  That  is  entirely  consistent  with   what   Buxton   LJ
                 (collecting together a number  of  dicta  from  past  cases
                 concerning the status of the Rules) had said in Odelola  in
                 the Court of Appeal [2009] 1WLR 126 and indeed,  with  what
                 Laws LJ  said  (before  the  House  of  Lords  decision  in
                 Odelola) in the present  case.   Essentially  it  comes  to
                 this.  The Rules are not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
                 strictness applicable to the construction of a  statute  or
                 statutory instrument but, instead sensibly according to the
                 natural and ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising
                 that they  are  statements  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 administrative policy.  The  respondent's  Counsel  readily
                 accepted that what she meant in her  written  case  by  the
                 proposition 'the question of interpretation is ... what the
                 Secretary of State intended his policy to be' was that  the
                 court's task is to discover from  the  words  used  in  the
                 Rules what the Secretary of State must  be  taken  to  have
                 intended.  After all, under s.3(2) of the  Immigration  Act
                 1971, the Secretary of State has to lay  the  Rules  before
                 Parliament, which then has the  opportunity  to  disapprove
                 them.  True, as I observed in Odelola (paragraph 33):  'The
                 question is what the  Secretary  of  State  intended.   The
                 Rules  are  her  Rules'.   But  that  intention  is  to  be
                 discerned objectively from the language used,  not  divined
                 by reference to supposed policy considerations. Still  less
                 is the Secretary of State's intention to be discovered from
                 the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions  (IDIs)  issued
                 intermittently  to  guide  immigration  officers  in  their
                 application of  the  rules.  IDIs  are  given  pursuant  to
                 paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act which provides
                 that:


                                  'In the exercise of their functions  under
                       this Act immigration officers shall act in accordance
                       with such instructions  (not  inconsistent  with  the
                       immigration rules)  as  may  be  given  them  by  the
                       Secretary of State ...' (emphasis added)."

40. It can therefore be seen that Mr Ahmed's approach of using the Guidance
    to interpret the ambit of para 321A is inconsistent with Mahad.

41. There were two further submissions that Mr Ahmed made  in  relation  to
    the Guidance.

42. Firstly, that the guidance had to be given weight. In this respect,  Mr
    Ahmed relied upon Walumba Lumba (previously referred to as WL)  (Congo)
    1 and 2 (appellant) v  SSHD  (respondent)  [2011]  UKSC  12  where  the
    Supreme Court said at [34]:


           "The rule of law  calls  for  a  transparent  statement  by  the
           executive of the circumstances  in  which  the  broad  statutory
           criteria will be exercised.  Just  as  arrest  and  surveillance
           powers need to be  transparently  identified  through  codes  of
           practice  and  immigration  powers  need  to  be   transparently
           identified through the immigration rules, so too the immigration
           detention powers need to  be  transparently  identified  through
           formulated policy statements."

43. However, Lumba concerned an unlawful detention claim.  In  the  passage
    quoted above, the Supreme Court mentioned  the  fact  that  immigration
    powers are required to be transparently identified through  immigration
    rules as one of the reasons for the conclusion  that  detention  powers
    need  to  be  transparently  identified   through   formulated   policy
    statements. However, the immigration power in question in  the  instant
    case - the power to examine someone  who  arrives  at  a  border  -  is
    transparently identified through a Rule, i.e. para 321A.

44. Furthermore, the passage from Lumba quoted above and relied upon by  Mr
    Ahmed does not assist with identifying the source of the provision that
    ameliorates the effect of s.3(4) of the 1971 Act,  in  the  absence  of
    which the appellant is in the position of someone with no leave and who
    required leave to enter when he arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  23
    September 2014.

45. Secondly, Mr Ahmed relied upon the following comments of Jackson LJ  in
    Pokhriyal [2013] EWCA Civ 1568 at [34]:

            "I respectfully agree with paragraph 70 of Rix LJ's judgment  in
             Adedoyin. I would, however, add this comment. I do not think it
             is possible for the Secretary of State to rely upon  extraneous
             material in order to persuade a court or tribunal  to  construe
             the rules more harshly  or  to  resolve  an  ambiguity  in  the
             Government's favour. The  Secretary  of  State  holds  all  the
             cards. The Secretary of State drafts the Immigration Rules; the
             Secretary of State issues IDIs  and  guidance  statements;  the
             Secretary of State authorises the  public  statements  made  by
             his/her officials. The Secretary of State cannot toughen up the
             rules otherwise than by making  formal  amendments  and  laying
             them before Parliament. That follows from the  Supreme  Court's
             reasoning in R  (Alvi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2012] UKSC 33; [2012] 1 WLR 2208."

46. This submission is  also  misconceived.  The  passage  relied  upon  in
    Pokhriyal plainly relates to the principle in R (Alvi)  v  SSHD  [2012]
    UKSC 33. In Alvi, the Supreme Court considered s.3(2) of the  1971  Act
    and held (in summary) that any requirement that must be  satisfied  for
    leave to enter or remain to be granted that is in the nature of a  rule
    as to the practice to be followed in the administration of the 1971 Act
    must be laid before Parliament and that it is  not  permissible  for  a
    rule to refer to a document  outside  the  Rules  which  sets  out  the
    requirement to be satisfied. Mr Ahmed, on the other hand, seeks  to  do
    that which is not permitted pursuant to Alvi: he seeks to rely upon the
    Guidance to effectively re-write para 321A. I use the  word  "re-write"
    because, if his submission is accepted, it would mean  that  para  321A
    must be read as if para 321A(3) did not exist.

47. For all of these reasons,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Guidance  which
    assists the appellant. It is of no relevance in deciding the issues  in
    this case, in my judgement.

48. Mr Ahmed's fourth and final argument concerned s.76 of the 2002 Act.

49. I shall first set out s.76 of the 2002 Act. Effective from  20  October
    2014, the provisions of s.76 that are underlined below were repealed by
    the  Immigration  Act  2014[10]  subject   to   certain   savings   and
    transitional provisions[11] which do not apply in this case because the
    decision in the instant case was made on  24  September  2014  and  the
    appellant lodged his appeal on 2 October 2014. Accordingly, the version
    of s.76 that falls for consideration in the instant case is the version
    that was in force prior to the deletion  of  the  provisions  that  are
    underlined below:


        76 Revocation of leave to enter or remain


        (1)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the person-


           (a)   is liable to deportation, but
           (b)   cannot be deported for legal reasons.


        (2)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if-


           (a)   the leave was obtained by deception.,
           (b)   the person would be  liable  to  removal  because  of  the
        deception, but
           (c)   the person  cannot  be  removed  for  legal  or  practical
        reasons.


        (3)      The Secretary of State may revoke  a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the  person,
             or someone of whom he is a dependant, ceases to be  a  refugee
             as a result of-


           (a)   voluntarily availing himself  of  the  protection  of  his
        country of nationality,
           (b)   voluntarily re-acquiring a lost nationality,
           (c)   acquiring the nationality of  a  country  other  than  the
                 United Kingdom and availing himself of its protection, or
           (d)   voluntarily establishing himself in a country  in  respect
        of which he was a refugee.


        (4)      In this section-
           "indefinite leave" has the meaning given by section 33(1) of the
             Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77) (interpretation),
           "liable to deportation" has the meaning given  by  section  3(5)
             and (6) of that Act (deportation), [and]
           "refugee" has the meaning given by the  Convention  relating  to
             the Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28th  July  1951  and
             its Protocol., and
           "removed" means removed from the United Kingdom under-
           (a)   paragraph 9 or 10 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration  Act
                 1971 (control of entry: directions for removal), or
           (b)   section 10(1)(b) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999
             (c. 33) (removal of  persons  unlawfully  in  United  Kingdom:
             deception).


        (5)      A power under subsection (1) or (2) to revoke leave may be
        exercised-


           (a)   in respect of leave granted before this section comes into
        force;
           (b)   in reliance on anything done  before  this  section  comes
        into force.


        (6)      A power under  subsection  (3)  to  revoke  leave  may  be
        exercised-


           (a)   in respect of leave granted before this section comes into
        force, but
           (b)   only in reliance on action taken after this section  comes
        into force.


        (7)      In section 10(1) of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999
             (removal  of  persons  unlawfully  in  United  Kingdom)  after
             paragraph (b) (and  before  the  word  "or")  there  shall  be
             inserted-
           "(ba) his indefinite leave to enter or remain has  been  revoked
             under section 76(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
             Act 2002 (person ceasing to be refugee);".

50. As can be seen, s.76 confers on the Secretary of  State  discretion  to
    revoke a person's indefinite leave to enter or ILR in the circumstances
    listed in s.76(1)-(3).

51. Mr Ahmed submitted that,  given  that  s.76  makes  provision  for  the
    Secretary of State to revoke a person's indefinite leave  to  enter  or
    ILR, para 321A must be interpreted so that it is limited to apply  only
    to those who have limited leave to enter or remain. He submitted  that,
    by enacting s.76 of the 2002 Act, Parliament prescribed  the  procedure
    by which the ILR of a person who arrives at a  port  of  entry  may  be
    cancelled, i.e. the immigration officer must permit the  individual  to
    re-enter the United Kingdom on his or her existing ILR and leave it  to
    the Secretary of State to  subsequently  revoke  the  individual's  ILR
    under s.76. He submitted that any  risk  of  the  appellant  absconding
    could have been dealt with by detaining him. Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that
    not only was it inappropriate for the respondent to use  para  321A  to
    cancel the appellant's ILR, he  had  no  power  to  do  so  given  that
    Parliament has prescribed a different procedure in the form of s.76  of
    the NIAA 2002. Mr Ahmed submitted that there were very good reasons for
    limiting the ambit of para 321A in the case of an  individual  arriving
    at a UK port of entry with ILR to give preference to the  use  of  s.76
    after re-entry, as follows:

    i)      Those who have ILR enjoy certain rights. They are on a path  to
        naturalisation. Their children would qualify  for  registration  as
        British citizens, unlike the children of those with  limited  leave
        to remain. A person who has ILR has the status of a person  who  is
        "present and settled" whereas a person who  has  limited  leave  to
        remain is "subject to immigration control". He submitted that these
        differences  were  recognised  by  Parliament  which  is  why   the
        Secretary of State was conferred a discretionary  power  to  revoke
        ILR.

    ii)     In contrast, para 321A makes it mandatory  for  an  immigration
        officer to cancel leave if any of  the  grounds  set  out  at  para
        321A(1)-(6) are satisfied. Revocation of  leave  under  s.76  would
        permit the  individual  concerned  to  challenge  the  exercise  of
        discretion.

52. I can see some force in Mr Ahmed's submission that someone who has  ILR
    has rights which are distinct from the rights of someone  with  limited
    leave.  Rights are also conferred on persons who may be innocent of any
    wrongdoing that triggers revocation or cancellation of leave.

53. However, the fact is that the version of s.76 that was in force  as  at
    the date of the decision in the instant case (24  September  2014)  and
    the date that the appellant lodged his appeal (2  October  2014)  could
    not have been applied to the appellant. This is because he  was  not  a
    person who "cannot be deported for  legal  reasons"  (s.76(1))  or  who
    "cannot be removed for legal or practical reasons" (s.76(2)).  Further,
    and in any event, since he was a person who had not entered the  United
    Kingdom, he could not be removed under s.76.

54. Furthermore, Mr Ahmed's interpretation of para 321A  of  the  Rules  by
    having recourse of s.76 as the only power available or that should have
    been used - as opposed to  an  additional  power,  as  advanced  by  Mr
    Fletcher - does violence to the language of para 321A of the Rules  and
    Article 13(4) of the 2000 Order, in that, it  requires  one  to  either
    completely ignore the existence of para 321A(3) entirely and  the  fact
    that Article 13(4) refers in terms to leave which does not lapse  under
    Article 13(2)  remaining  in  force  "either  indefinitely  (if  it  is
    unlimited) or ...".

55. The application of s.76 as advanced by Mr Fletcher does not require one
    to ignore the existence of para 321A(3) of the Rules and the wording in
    Article 13(4) of the 2000 Order. I consider  this  to  be  the  correct
    application. That is, that it is an alternative and  additional  power,
    available to the Secretary of State,  to  revoke  indefinite  leave  to
    enter or ILR in the circumstances that are governed by  s.76(1)-(3)  of
    the 2002 Act. I do not accept that the mere existence of the  power  in
    s.76 can justify or warrant ignoring the existence of para  321A(3)  of
    the Rules and the wording in Article 13(4) of the 2000 Order as I  have
    explained above.

56. Mr Ahmed contended  that,  given  that  para  321A  of  the  Rules  was
    mandatory whereas s.76 of the 2002  Act  conferred  a  discretion,  the
    Upper Tribunal should be slow to permit the  mandatory  power  in  para
    321A to be used where the discretionary power in  s.76  was  available.
    However, this argument cannot have any  utility  in  the  instant  case
    given that s.76 was not available, as I have explained above.

57. I have concluded that the correct position is that s.3(4) of  the  1971
    Act, Article 13 of the 2000 Order and para 2A of Schedule 2 of the 1971
    Act, taken together, apply in the case of someone who has been  granted
    ILR by the Secretary of State and who travels to a country or territory
    outside the common travel area so that, if they return  to  the  United
    Kingdom in circumstances where their leave remains in force pursuant to
    Article 13(2)-(4), Article 13(5) applies so that their "leave to remain
    which remains in force" under Article 13 "shall be  treated,  upon  the
    holder's arrival in the United Kingdom, as leave  to  enter  which  has
    been granted to the holder before  his  arrival"  (Article  13(5)).  My
    reasons are given at paras 58-69 as follows:

58. When the appellant left the United Kingdom and travelled to  Sri  Lanka
    in the beginning of September 2014, his leave either lapsed pursuant to
    the first part of s.3(4) of the 1971 Act (the words: "a person's  leave
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom shall lapse") or  it  did  not
    lapse as a result of a combination of the exception in the second  part
    of s.3(4) and some  other  provision.  If  I  decide  that  that  other
    provision is Article 13(10) read together with Article 13(2) and  13(4)
    Article 13(2) of the 2000 Order, then  it  must  follow,  from  Article
    13(5) and the Court of Appeal's judgment in MF  (Pakistan),  that  such
    leave is treated as leave to enter upon the  person's  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom. It must further follow that, if such leave  is  treated
    as  leave  to  enter  upon  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom,  an
    immigration officer has power to cancel the leave pursuant  to  Article
    13(7) and para 321A of the Rules.

59. In my judgement, that other provision is  Article  13(2)  of  the  2000
    Order. Firstly, because I have rejected Mr  Ahmed's  first  and  second
    arguments by which means he sought to argue that Article 13(2) did  not
    apply. His remaining arguments - concerning the Guidance  and  s.76  of
    the 2002 Act - are irrelevant to  this  issue  for  the  reasons  given
    above.

60. Secondly, and more importantly, as a matter  of  construction,  section
    3(1)(b) of the 1971 Act  is  relevant  in  construing  s.3(4).  Section
    3(1)(b) makes it clear that leave may be granted either for  a  limited
    period or an indefinite period. If s.3(4) was intended to apply only to
    those with limited leave, one would have expected  that  to  have  been
    made clear. Not only does s.3(4) follow on from s.3(1)(b)  which  makes
    the distinction between limited leave and indefinite  leave  clear,  it
    also follows on from s.3(3) which applies in terms only to  those  with
    limited leave and makes reference to the removal of the  limit  to  the
    duration of leave. Yet, s.3(4), following on as it does ss.3(1)(b)  and
    3(3), does not make any reference in terms  to  its  application  being
    confined only to those with limited leave.

61. Article 13(10) of the 2000 Order provides that s.3(4) of the  1971  has
    effect subject to the provisions of Article 13. Since  I  have  decided
    that s.3(4) of the 1971 is not confined  only  to  those  with  limited
    leave, it follows that, pursuant to Article 13(10), the application  of
    Article 13(1)-(9) is not confined to those with limited leave.

62. Article 13(1) provides that, for the purposes of  Article  13,  "leave"
    means "leave to enter the United Kingdom ... and leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom".

63. Thus, Article 13  applies  to  those  with  indefinite  leave,  whether
    indefinite leave to enter or ILR. Indeed,  Article  13(4)  specifically
    refers to "indefinitely".

64. ILR which is in force at the date of the  individual's  departure  from
    the United Kingdom is therefore leave "given by an immigration  officer
    or the Secretary of State for a period exceeding six months" -  because
    it is leave which is not limited by duration (s.33(1)of the 1971 Act) -
    within the meaning of Article 13(2) and therefore such leave  does  not
    lapse upon the individual travelling outside  the  common  travel  area
    pursuant to Article 13(2).

65. This interpretation - that Article 13 applies to those with  indefinite
    leave, whether indefinite leave to enter or ILR -  is  consistent  with
    the fact that Article 13(4) is plainly intended to apply to those  with
    indefinite leave as  well  as  those  with  limited  leave.  To  decide
    otherwise would be to ignore the words: "either indefinitely (if it  is
    unlimited)" in Article 13(4).

66. Given that the provision under which the ILR of such a  person  remains
    in force and not lapsing is Article  13(2),  it  follows  that  Article
    13(5) must apply to such a  person  upon  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It further follows that such a person is someone  who  may  be
    examined by an immigration officer pursuant to para 2A(2) of Schedule 2
    of the 1971 Act.

67. Accordingly, the respondent did have power to  cancel  the  appellant's
    ILR.

68. This conclusion  is  not  only  consistent  with  the  analysis  in  MF
    (Pakistan) but also consistent with the judgment of Dobbs J in Ogilvy v
    SSHD [2007] EWHC 2301 (Admin) where, at [17], Dobbs J held, inter alia,
    that "  "indefinite  leave  to  remain"  under  Article  13(5)  in  the
    circumstances in which we find ourselves, is to be read  as  "leave  to
    enter" ".

69. There is nothing in Article 13 (7) of the 2000  Order  which  justifies
    taking a different view. I agree with Mr Fletcher that,  Article  13(5)
    and (7) read together, lead to the result that it  is  the  immigration
    officer who has power to cancel whenever a person has leave  -  whether
    such leave when granted was leave to enter or  remain  -  which  is  in
    force by virtue of Article 13 upon the person's arrival in  the  United
    Kingdom and it is the Secretary of State who has power to cancel  leave
    to remain in other cases.

70. I have therefore concluded that the judge did not err in  law  when  he
    rejected the submission advanced on behalf of the  appellant  that  the
    respondent did not have power to cancel the applicant's ILR. It has not
    been necessary to explain  the  judge's  reasons  since  the  arguments
    before me were not the same.  I  have  nevertheless  reached  the  same
    conclusion.

71. To summarise my conclusions on the first issue:

      i)    Article 13 of the 2000 Order  applies  to  holders  of  ILR  who
        travel to a country or territory outside the common travel area  so
        that their ILR does not lapse but continues  if  Article  13(2)-(4)
        are satisfied.

      ii)   If the  leave  of  such  an  individual  continues  pursuant  to
        Article 13(2)-(4) of the 2000 Order,  an  immigration  officer  has
        power to cancel their ILR upon their arrival in the United Kingdom.

      iii)  The grounds upon which such leave may be cancelled are  set  out
        at para 321A of the Rules.

      iv)   Section 76 of the 2002 Act  is  an  alternative  and  additional
        power, available to the Secretary of State,  to  revoke  indefinite
        leave to enter or ILR in the circumstances described at s.76(1)-(3)
        of the 2002 Act.

The second issue

(i)   The appellant's interview

72.  As  part  of  his  further  examination,  the  appellant  attended  an
    interview.  At  the  commencement  of  the  interview,  the   appellant
    confirmed that he was fit and well and happy to be interviewed. At  the
    end of his interview, he again confirmed that he was fit and  well.  In
    the course of his interview, he admitted that he had not taken the test
    on 18 April 2012 at Portsmouth International College.

73. The following is an extract from the interview record:


        Qn 24:   The testing centre that administered  the  test  has  used
                 voice recognition software to determine your test was taken
                 by a proxy. Can you explain why that is
        Ans:           I written the exam.


        Qn 25:   The results  of  your  English  test  have  been  declared
                 invalid because ETS, the organisation that administered the
                 test, are satisfied that you did not sit the test yourself.
                 Do you still maintain you sat the test yourself?
        Ans:           I took the exam


        Qn 33:   Are you sure you wish to maintain you took the test.
        Ans:           No I didn't take the test.


        Qn 34:   Who took the test for you.
        Ans:           I don't know


        Qn 35:   Who did you pay in order for someone to take the test  for
                 you.
        Ans:           I don't know the person.


        Qn 36:   Can you explain to me how someone  else  ended  up  taking
                 your English test for you, the TOEIC English test for you.
        Ans:           I don't know  who  sat  the  exam.  Someone  I  know
                 arranged it.

(ii)  The judge's decision

74. Having concluded that an immigration officer  has  power  to  cancel  a
    person's ILR, the judge considered whether the respondent  was  correct
    to cancel the appellant's ILR. He concluded  that  the  respondent  was
    correct to cancel the appellant's ILR. He gave his reasons at paras 20-
    29, which read:


        Grounds for cancellation of leave


        20.      The next question is  therefore  whether  the  immigration
             officer was in fact right to cancel the leave of the appellant.
             It should be noted that the decision was (as it  should  be)  a
             collective one, having been taken by Officer  Bistro  and  then
             confirmed by Higher Officer Ricketts.


        21.      In this case, the appellant was interviewed  at  the  port
             and in the course of his interview he  accepted  that  a  third
             party had sat the test  for  him.  The  interview  unfolded  as
             follows: At Question 33 of the interview he is asked: "Are  you
             sure you wish to maintain you took the test? A33 "No  I  didn't
             take the test"; Q34: Who took the test for you?  A34:  I  don't
             know; Q36 Can you explain to  me  how  someone  else  ended  up
             taking the TOEIC English test for you? A36 I don't know who sit
             the exam. Someone I  know  arranged  it."  The  appellant  then
             confirmed that he was still fit and  well.  He  signed  at  the
             bottom of each of the four pages of the interview.


        22.      However, the appellant's now argues that he was jet-lagged
             at the time he was  questioned  and  that  the  record  of  the
             interview is therefore unreliable. Effectively, he recants  his
             evidence. In his statement has now sought to provide  the  true
             answers to those questions.


        23.      Having regard to the material  before  me,  including  the
             full record of the interview and particularly the  steps  taken
             to confirm that the  appellant  was  well  and  willing  to  be
             interviewed, I am satisfied that the interview is reliable.   I
             further note  that  the  interview  was  countersigned  by  the
             appellant. There is nothing in the content of the interview, or
             in the surrounding circumstances to suggest that he  was  under
             pressure or that he  was  so  exhausted  or  jet-lagged  to  be
             interviewed. I shall deal with  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
             suffering from illness shortly.


        24.      If the appellant  had  fundamentally  disagreed  with  its
             contents, one would have expected a more immediate  and  robust
             repudiation of its contents.


        25.      To support his case, the appellant has  now  produced  for
             the first time a medical certificate (in  his  bundle)  from  a
             Colombo clinic; the Wellawata Medicare, where the appellant was
             purportedly  treated  by   the   doctor,   according   to   the
             certificate, between 22 September 2014 and 6 October  2014.  It
             is said he was suffering from a viral flu with severe  vomiting
             and loose motion (the  writing  is  not  very  legible).  In  a
             certificate, countersigned by the appellant, by the doctor  (G.
             Katheeswaranathan?) indicates that he  needs  a  fortnight  off
             work.


        26.      The problem is that the appellant was at  Heathrow  on  24
             September 2014, and could not have been in  Colombo  under  the
             care of the doctor until 6 October 2014. The appellant told  me
             at the hearing that the certificate was in his bag at the  time
             but that he did not think to  provide  it  to  the  immigration
             officer as he was not asked for it. This  report  is  an  inept
             forgery. The appellant was asked more than once he was fit  and
             well and happy to interviewed, he said nothing of being ill  or
             under the recent care of a doctor.


        27.      If, as  I  have  found,  the  interview  was  an  accurate
             representation of what the  told  the  immigration  officer  on
             arrival, then  there  are  no  good  grounds  for  not  placing
             reliance of its contents. In these  circumstances,  it  is  not
             necessary for me to undertake any  detailed  appraisal  of  the
             reliability of the ETS forensic assessments of his  TOEIC  test
             results. The appellant's admission  is  clear,  compelling  and
             conclusive.


        28.      This is a person who is willing to mislead the authorities
             with false information in order to remain in this country.  The
             appellant knew that he did not sit his TOEIC test,  and  should
             not have relied on that certificate to obtain a CAS or  further
             leave to remain. When applying for indefinite leave to  remain,
             he failed to disclose,  what  he  would  have  known  to  be  a
             material matter, that he had not in fact sat his language  test
             and had thus obtained previous leave fraudulently.


        29.      In these circumstances, the respondent was right to cancel
             the appellant's leave to remain.

75. In summary, the judge considered the appellant's evidence to the effect
    that his interview was  not  reliable  and,  in  particular,  that  his
    admission at his interview that he had  not  taken  the  test  was  not
    reliable. He rejected the appellant's explanation that he was jetlagged
    at the time of his interview and also that he was not well. He rejected
    a medical report produced by the appellant in support of  his  evidence
    that he was unwell at his interview as "an  inept  forgery".  This  was
    because the  appellant  was  at  Heathrow  on  24  September  2014  and
    therefore could not have been in Colombo under the care of  the  doctor
    until 6 October 2014. He found that the interview was reliable. In  the
    circumstances, he  decided  that  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to
    undertake a full assessment of the reliability of the ETS evidence.  He
    relied instead on the appellant's admission  which  he  considered  was
    "clear, compelling and conclusive". He concluded  that  the  respondent
    was right to cancel the appellant's ILR.

(iii) The written grounds, refused by UTJ Blum

76. Paras d.-f. of the written grounds contend, in summary, as follows:

    d)      The judge's finding that  the  medical  report  was  an  "inept
        forgery" was perverse,  given  that  the  appellant's  evidence  in
        respect  of  the  medical  evidence   was  not  challenged  by  the
        respondent.

    e)      The judge failed to deal with the appellant's evidence that  he
        had attended the test. He focused principally upon the respondent's
        evidence and did not address the appellant's evidence. He  accepted
        the evidence of the  respondent  in  its  entirety  and  failed  to
        consider  the  shortcomings  in  the  respondent's   evidence,   as
        disclosed by the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir.

    f)      The judge's finding at  para  23  of  his  decision,  that  the
        interview was reliable, "missed the point".  The  interview  record
        was a written document which could not display  how  the  appellant
        had felt at his interview. The evidence provided by  the  appellant
        was conclusive that he was unwell. In the absence of a challenge to
        the appellant's evidence, the judge was wrong to attach  weight  to
        the interview record.

    g)      The judge had failed to assess the evidence in the round.

(iv)  The renewed application for permission

77. Mr Ahmed accepted that an  application  for  permission  to  renew  the
    application for permission on the ground that had been refused had  not
    been made. He was unable to assist with the explanation for the failure
    to make such an application. Nevertheless, he wished to pursue an  oral
    application for permission to renew the application for  permission  on
    the grounds refused by UTJ Blum and which related to paras 3-6  of  his
    skeleton argument. Paras 3-6 of the skeleton argument relate  to  paras
    d.-f. of the written grounds, summarised above.

78. I did not  hear  submissions  whether  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "UT Rules") make provision for  an  appellant
    to renew his or her application for permission  on  grounds  that  have
    been refused by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  an  application  to  it  for
    permission. Neither party was ready to deal with the issue, as it  only
    arose at the hearing. This is why I heard  submissions  on  the  second
    issue de bene esse, as an adjournment would not have  been  in  keeping
    with the overriding interest given that the parties were ready to  deal
    with the first issue and Counsel on both sides had been instructed.

79. However, I am aware that, in an unreported but  published  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal (Holgate J and Upper Tribunal Judge Martin) in Hamza
    Zeyadi v  SSHD  (appeal  number:  DA/01744/2014),  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded (para 13), having considered the UT Rules,  that  "the  clear
    implication" was that the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of  the  Upper
    Tribunal does not have power to reconsider a paper decision refusing or
    limiting permission to appeal made by it. Para 13 reads:

      "13.  We have not been shown anything in the 2008  Rules  which  would
             enable us to entertain an application to pursue ground 1.   The
             Appellant relied upon Rule 5 which is  concerned  with  general
             case management powers. But rule 5 has  to  be  read  alongside
             Rule 22. Where the Upper Tribunal  makes  a  decision  "on  the
             papers" to refuse permission to appeal or to  grant  permission
             on limited grounds, Rule 22(3) and (4) enable an  Appellant  to
             apply for the reconsideration of  permission  to  appeal  at  a
             hearing before the Upper Tribunal. This provision only  applies
             to appeals from the  Tribunals  listed  in  sub-paragraph  (3),
             which do not include the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber.   The
             clear implication is that this Chamber in  the  Upper  Tribunal
             does not have the power to reconsider a paper decision refusing
             or limiting permission to appeal made at that level."

80. However, even if the Upper Tribunal has power to reconsider a  decision
    which refuses permission on certain grounds, I would have  refused  the
    application. Before giving my reasons, I  shall  summarise  Mr  Ahmed's
    submissions on the second issue.

81. Mr Ahmed relied upon R (Opoku) v (1) The Principal of Southwark College
    and (2) the Governors of  Southwark  College  (QBD)  [2002]  EWHC  2092
    (Admin).  Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  there  had  been  a   change   of
    circumstances since UTJ Blum refused permission on  paras  3-6  of  the
    grounds. As at the date of UTJ Blum's  decision  on  23  June  2016  to
    refuse permission, the Upper Tribunal had delivered its decision in  SM
    and Qadir  v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of proof) [2016] UKUT  00229
    (IAC) which was delivered on 13 May 2016.  Mr Ahmed submitted that  the
    circumstances have changed since then, in that,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    resolved the matter in its judgment in Sharif Ahmed  Majumber  &  Ihsan
    Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167, by affirming  the  approach  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir.

82. Mr Ahmed acknowledged that the appellant's grounds before UTJ Blum were
    not comprehensive enough. In the light of those  grounds,  he  accepted
    that the decision of UTJ Blum was correct.

83. However, he submitted that, in the light of the decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal in Majumber & Qadir,  the  judge  had  erred  by  taking  the
    approach he took, i.e. that he considered that it was  unnecessary  for
    him to consider the Secretary of State's evidence  as  to  the  alleged
    deception because he was satisfied that the appellant's admission  that
    he had not sat for the test on 18 April 2012  was  reliable.  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that this approach was incorrect. He submitted that the judge
    should have considered the Secretary of  State's  evidence  as  to  the
    alleged deception. He submitted that  the  judge  should  have  decided
    whether it  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  to
    establish the alleged deception. He should then have considered whether
    there was an innocent explanation advanced by the appellant and whether
    the Secretary of State had discharged the overall legal burden of proof
    upon her to establish the alleged deception.

84. Furthermore, the judge had incorrectly placed the burden of proof  upon
    the appellant by relying upon his admission.  The  respondent  was  not
    represented at the hearing before the judge.  There  was  therefore  no
    cross-examination of the appellant's evidence. Nevertheless,  Mr  Ahmed
    accepted that it was for the judge to decide the contradiction  in  the
    appellant's evidence, as between the admission in his interview and his
    witness statement where he said that he had been feeling  jetlagged  at
    his interview. He submitted  that  the  judge  should  have  considered
    whether the Secretary of State's generic evidence taken  together  with
    the appellant's interview record and his  witness  statement  was  such
    that the respondent discharged the overall legal  burden  of  proof  to
    establish deception.

85. Mr Ahmed submitted that, given that the evidence relating to  the  "ETS
    Look up Tool" was incomplete, that the TOEIC certificate had  not  been
    submitted and that there were no  witness  statements  from  Mr.  Peter
    Millington or Ms Rebecca Collings before the judge to explain  how  the
    ETS results were connected to the  appellant,  there  was  insufficient
    evidence  to  discharge  the  initial  evidential   burden   upon   the
    respondent.

(v)   Discussion

86. Opoku was a decision of Lightman J in the Administrative Court. In that
    case, two grounds were advanced in the application  for  permission  to
    apply for judicial review, to which I shall refer as  grounds  (a)  and
    (b). Permission was  refused  on  the  application  on  paper  on  both
    grounds. At a renewed oral hearing, permission was  granted  on  ground
    (a) but refused on ground (b). At the substantive  hearing  and  having
    heard  oral  argument  on  ground  (a),  Lightman   J   dismissed   the
    application. The claimant thereupon applied for  permission  on  ground
    (b) notwithstanding that permission to challenge on ground (b) had been
    refused both on paper and at the renewed oral hearing.

87. Lightman J considered the approach that the Court  should  follow  when
    dealing with a renewed application for permission on grounds  that  had
    been refused by another judge in the same proceedings. A decision which
    grants permission on limited grounds is an interlocutory  decision.  It
    does not bring into play the doctrine of res judicata.  Accordingly,  a
    renewal of the application for permission on the grounds refused is not
    precluded. Nevertheless, a repeat application may be  dismissed  as  an
    abuse of process (para 9 of Opoku).

88. Paras 14 and 16 of the judgment in Opoku are helpful,  although  it  is
    necessary to  bear  in  mind  that  in  Opoku,  the  decision  refusing
    permission on ground (b) was made at an oral  hearing  of  the  renewed
    application  for  permission,  whereas  UTJ  Blum's  decision  refusing
    permission on certain grounds was made on the papers. Paras 14  and  16
    of Opoku, which are self-explanatory, read as follows:

            "14. It is important that there should be read  into  the  [CPR]
             no limitation on the jurisdiction of the High  Court  to  grant
             permission on a fresh application.  There may be  circumstances
             where notwithstanding the  previous  refusal  of  permission  a
             second  application  may  be  appropriate  or  necessary.   The
             previous decision  may  have  been  correct  and  not  open  to
             challenge at the time the decision was made, but  circumstances
             may have materially altered, new  evidence  may  have  come  to
             light or the law may have  significantly  changed  (e.g.  by  a
             reversal of a decision of the Court of Appeal by the  House  of
             Lords).  It would be  calculated  to  cause  inconvenience  and
             injustice if  the  High  Court  were  precluded  from  granting
             permission  in  such  circumstances  (consider  Spencer  Bower,
             Turner and Handley on Res Judicata 3rd edition paragraph  172).
             Rather than reading any such limitation into the  Rules  it  is
             appropriate to reflect the need for caution in the exercise  of
             the jurisdiction and the need for respect  for  the  legitimate
             expectations  of  previously  successful  defendants   in   the
             principles  governing  the  exercise   of   the   discretionary
             jurisdiction.

            15.  ...

            16.  Following the guidance afforded by Buckley LJ [in Revlon  v
             Cripps [1980] FSR 185], the relevant principle must be that the
             court should give proper respect to the provisions of CPR 52.15
             which lays down the normal appropriate  route  to  be  followed
             where an application for permission has been refused and to the
             legitimate expectation of the defendant that in the absence  of
             an appeal to the Court of Appeal the threat of litigation is at
             an end.  The court should only exercise its discretion to grant
             permission where the claimant establishes that there has been a
             significant change of circumstances or that he has become aware
             of significant new facts which he  could  not  reasonably  have
             known or found out on the previous unsuccessful application  or
             that a proposition of law is now  maintainable  which  was  not
             previously open to him.  If the fresh application merely relies
             on evidence which was available and  on   propositions  of  law
             which were reasonably maintainable on the previous unsuccessful
             application, permission  should  be  refused  as  an  abuse  of
             process."

89. However, in Smith v Parole Board [2003] EWCA Civ  1014,  the  Court  of
    Appeal agreed with para 14 of Opoku but considered that para 16 was too
    restrictive. The important passages of Smith  v  Parole  Board  are  at
    paras 16-18 of the judgment, which read:


            "16.  Mr Scrivener did not criticise the approach of Lightman  J
             in relation to paragraph 14, but did not accept his approach in
             relation to paragraph 16. This court is concerned as to whether
             Lightman J's approach is an appropriate  one.  I  have  already
             indicated that I approve of the broad discretion  to  which  he
             referred in paragraph 14 of his judgment, but I have very  real
             reservations as to the limitations upon that  discretion  which
             he inserts in paragraph 16. Certainly the matters to  which  he
             refers in paragraphs 16 are ones  which,  if  satisfied,  could
             cause a judge to grant permission for a further argument to  be
             advanced in relation to an additional ground.  However,  in  my
             view what is referred to by Lightman J is not  exhaustive.  The
             discretion of a  judge  hearing  an  application  for  judicial
             review is wider than that indicated in paragraph 16. Of course,
             where, as here, a judge has heard detailed argument, any  judge
             who is conducting the hearing of the main application is  going
             to  be  require  significant  justification  before  taking   a
             different view from the judge who granted permission.  However,
             if he comes to the conclusion that  there  is  good  reason  to
             allow argument on an additional ground,  bearing  in  mind  the
             interests of the defendant, the judge can give  permission  for
             that to happen. It is not unusual for  a  situation  to  arise,
             even in the course of a hearing, where it becomes  apparent  to
             the judge conducting that hearing that the interests of justice
             would be  best  served  by  the  hearing  taking  into  account
             arguments on matters which relate to a  ground  in  respect  of
             which permission has been refused. There obviously  has  to  be
             real justification for permitting that to  happen;  but  judges
             can be relied  upon  to  ensure  that  the  discretion  is  not
             misused. It is the obligation of parties  to  applications  for
             judicial review, as in the case of oral litigation, to give  as
             much notice as possible of their full case and to bring forward
             their full case at the start. However,  quite  apart  from  the
             specific circumstances indicated in paragraph  16  of  Lightman
             J's judgment, there are going to be other situations where good
             sense makes it clear that the argument should be wider than  it
             would otherwise be if it was  confined  to  the  grounds  where
             permission has been granted. I would not seek to anticipate all
             the situations where that could happen.  As  long  as  a  judge
             recognises the need for there to be good  reason  for  altering
             the view of the single judge taken at the permission stage,  no
             further sensible guidance can be  provided.  The  circumstances
             which can occur are capable of varying  almost  without  limit,
             and so each case  must  be  considered  having  regard  to  its
             circumstances. The idea that there has to be  a  new  situation
             for the permission to be extended is one which I  would  regard
             as wrong.


            17.   In exercising discretion it is sometimes necessary to bear
             in  mind  that  if  permission  is  refused  in  respect  of  a
             particular ground, the Court of Appeal on an  appeal  from  the
             hearing at first instance will not be  able  to  consider  that
             matter  where  it  is  clearly  desirable  that  it  should  be
             considered.


      18.   Turning to the facts of the present case, and  bearing  in  mind
             the discretion which Goldring J in fact had, I have come to the
             conclusion that if he had not applied  the  guidance  given  by
             Lightman J in Opoku, the right conclusion for him to have  come
             to is that the argument upon which Mr Scrivener wished to  rely
             in relation to Article 5 was so closely related to the argument
             in regard to Article 6 that it was  preferable  in  everybody's
             interests that the full argument was  heard.  Mr  Crow  submits
             that the argument in regard to Article 5 is hopeless, not least
             because it had been dealt with by Turner J in The Queen on  the
             application of West v the Parole Board (CO/350/01, 26.4.92). Mr
             Crow is right that Turner J had dealt with the  point.  If  his
             judgment is correct, that may  well  mark  the  demise  of  the
             Article 5 point. However, the Article 5 point and the Article 6
             point  are  very  closely  interrelated.  It  would  be  highly
             undesirable, in my judgment, for the  Article  6  point  to  be
             considered without also considering the Article  5  point.  The
             desirability of the points relating to Articles 5 and  6  being
             heard together is emphasised by Regina (Giles) v  Parole  Board
             and another [2003] 2 WLR 196. That case has been the subject of
             appeal to the House of Lords where argument has been heard  but
             the opinion of their Lordships as to the outcome  has  not  yet
             been given. Giles is again a case which  is  capable  of  being
             distinguished from the present case. The decision in  Giles  is
             not likely to be finally determinative of the  outcome  of  the
             present case, but it could be influential. It is difficult  for
             this court today to forecast what will be the relevance of  the
             decisions of their Lordships' House in relation to Giles on the
             outcome here. Accordingly it would be preferable to know  their
             Lordships'  views  before  reaching  a  conclusion  as  to  the
             argument Mr Scrivener wishes to raise under Articles 5 and 6."

90. If there is power to reconsider a  decision  to  refuse  permission  on
    certain grounds, the key points which emerge from Smith v Parole  Board
    are as follows. There is a wide discretion.  A  judge  should  consider
    factors such as whether there was full oral  argument  when  permission
    was refused on some grounds and whether any circumstances have  changed
    materially. If there was full oral argument and the circumstances  have
    not changed, the judge hearing the renewed application  should  require
    significant justification before taking a different view from the judge
    who granted permission on limited grounds. However, the Court of Appeal
    considered that the idea that there has to be  a  new  situation,  i.e.
    that the circumstances must be shown to be  materially  different,  was
    wrong and that the only guidance that could be given is that each  case
    is to be decided on its own circumstances and that it is necessary  for
    there to be good reasons for taking a different view from the  view  of
    the single judge who granted permission on limited grounds.

91. However, the judgment of Lightman J in Opoku  has  more  recently  been
    referred to or cited without any adverse observations in, for  example,
    R (Ewing) v Secretary of State for Justice [2008] EWHC 3417 (Admin) (at
    para 22) and BA & Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 944 (at para 27 (f)).

92. If there is power to reconsider a  decision  to  refuse  permission  on
    certain grounds, I draw the inference that the issue is not settled  as
    to whether a material change in  circumstances  is  necessary.  On  the
    assumption that it is necessary, I reject Mr  Ahmed's  submission  that
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Majumder and Qadir represents  a
    material change in circumstances since UTJ Blum's  decision  was  made,
    given that the Court  of  Appeal  upheld  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in SM and Qadir and that UTJ  Blum  had  the  benefit  of  the
    decision  in  SM  and  Qadir  when  he  made  his  decision  to  refuse
    permission.

93. However, even if there is power to  reconsider  a  decision  to  refuse
    permission on certain grounds and even if it is unnecessary to  require
    a material change of circumstances since permission was refused by  UTJ
    Blum, I would still have reached the same decision  for  the  following
    reasons:

94. Paras d.-f. of the appellant's written grounds are  entirely  hopeless,
    as are  paras  3-6  of  his  skeleton  argument  before  me.  Both  are
    predicated on the incorrect assumption that, as the respondent was  not
    represented at the hearing  and  thus  the  appellant  was  not  cross-
    examined, the judge should have accepted his explanation  that  he  was
    not feeling well at his interview and that he had attended his test and
    that the medical report he relied upon had probative  value.  Both  are
    predicated on the incorrect assumption that, as the appellant  was  not
    cross-examined at the hearing, all such evidence was unchallenged.

95. This assumption is simply wrong. The respondent's position  was  clear.
    He relied, inter alia, on the appellant's admission at  his  interview,
    that he had not attended the test on 18 April 2012 and that someone  he
    knew had arranged for someone else to  attend  that  interview  on  his
    behalf, to reach  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  practised
    deception,  in  that,  he  had  obtained  the  English  language   test
    certificate fraudulently. The mere  fact  that  the  respondent's  non-
    attendance at the hearing led to the appellant not being cross-examined
    did not mean that there was no challenge to the medical report  or  the
    appellant's explanation that he had not felt well at his  interview  or
    his evidence in his witness statement that he had attended the test  on
    18 April 2012.

96. The argument at para f. of the written grounds,  that  the  appellant's
    medical report was conclusive,  is  simply  hopeless  and  ignores  the
    judge's reasoning, that the appellant could not  have  been  under  the
    care of the doctor in October 2014 because the  appellant  was  in  the
    United Kingdom on 24 September 2014. It was for this  reason  that  the
    judge rejected the contents of the medical report as unreliable and "an
    inept forgery".

97. There is no substance in the contention  at  para  f.  of  the  written
    grounds, that, as the interview record was a written document, it could
    not display how the appellant had felt at his interview. Judges of  the
    First-tier Tribunal are frequently called upon to decide the weight  to
    be given to answers given at interview even in circumstances where  the
    interviewee states that he or she was not feeling well.

98. Contrary to para e. of the written grounds, the judge  did  not  simply
    focus on the respondent's evidence and ignore the appellant's evidence.
    To the contrary, he focused only on the appellant's  evidence  and  did
    not take into account the respondent's evidence because  he  considered
    that, if as he had found, the interview was an accurate  representation
    of what the appellant had told  the  immigration  officer  on  arrival,
    there were no good grounds for not placing reliance on its contents. He
    had earlier considered the appellant's answers at  his  interview,  his
    explanation that he had not been feeling well  at  his  interview,  the
    medical report and concluded that the interview was  reliable  and  the
    medical report an "inept forgery".

99. Para 6 d. of Mr Ahmed's skeleton argument states that the appellant has
    completed a BSc in Computing and Information Systems along  with  other
    qualifications obtained in the United Kingdom and that he is  a  highly
    educated person who has no reason to use a  proxy.  In  the  particular
    circumstances of this case - i.e.  the  appellant's  admission  at  his
    interview that he had not  attended  his  test  and  someone  else  had
    instead - and the judge's finding that the interview was reliable, para
    6. d of the skeleton argument amounts to no more than an attempt to re-
    argue the evidence and the judge's finding.

100. The instant case is an exceptional  one,  in  that,  if  the  interview
    record was reliable as found by the judge, the appellant's admission at
    his interview that he had not attended the test on 18  April  2012  and
    that someone had arranged someone else to attend the test on his behalf
    is,  as  the  judge   said:   "clear,   compelling   and   conclusive".
    Notwithstanding that it is evidence that emanates from  the  appellant,
    it is nevertheless evidence  that  the  respondent  can  rely  upon  to
    discharge the initial burden as well as the  overall  legal  burden  to
    establish deception on the part of the appellant to the standard of the
    balance of probabilities, whatever  the  shortcomings  in  the  generic
    evidence in the instant case and the "ETS Look up Tool" at  Appendix  E
    to the respondent's Explanatory Statement, although I should  say  that
    my copy of the respondent's  bundle  did  in  fact  contain  a  witness
    statement from Mr Millington and a witness statement from Ms Collings.

101. The mere fact that the judge had relied upon the appellant's  admission
    does not mean that he placed the burden of proof  upon  the  appellant.
    This submission, advanced by Mr Ahmed, is simply wrong.

102. I have therefore concluded that paras d-f. of the written  grounds  and
    paras 3-6 of the appellant's skeleton argument are entirely hopeless.

103. On the basis of the appellant's own admission and the  judge's  finding
    that the interview was reliable, it is wholly unarguable that the judge
    erred in law  in  reaching  his  conclusion  that  the  respondent  had
    established that the applicant had practised deception.

104. I therefore reject the renewed application for permission.  Even  if  I
    have power to reconsider UTJ Blum's refusal of permission on paras  d-f
    of the written grounds, paras d-f of the written grounds and paras  3-6
    of the skeleton argument are wholly unarguable.

      Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.



[pic]


Signed                                  Date: 16 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
-----------------------
[1] With effect from 1 December 2016, the following words inserted by
Immigration Act 2016 c.19 Pt 3 s.62(2): "or to cancel any leave under
3C(3A)"
[2] version in force from 30 July 2000 to 17 March 2015
[3] version in force from 18 March 2015 to 22 November 2016
[4] version in force from 23 November 2016 to present
[5] From 18 March 2015 to 22 November 2016, the following words inserted  by
art.2(4)(b) of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain)  Amendment  Order
2015/434: "subject to article 13A". Article 13A concerns  persons  who  have
leave as partners and children of members of HM Forces.
[6] From 23 November 2016  to  present,  the  following  words  inserted  by
art.2(4)(b) of the Immigration (Leave to enter and Remain)  Amendment  Order
2015/434 and art.2(5)(b) of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and  Remain)
Amendment Order 2016/1132: "subject to articles 13A and  13B".  Article  13B
concerns persons who have leave as partners and children  of  certain  Crown
servants etc.
[7] version in force from 1 October 2004 to 19 October 2014; words inserted
by the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 c.41 Sch.7 para.2
[8] version in force from  20  October  2014  to  30  November  2016;  words
inserted by the Immigration Act  2014  c.22  Sch.9(4)  para.23,  subject  to
savings and transitional provisions as specified in SI 2014/2771 arts 9-11)
[9] Para 2A(9) deleted with effect from 1 December 2016 by  Immigration  Act
2016 c.19 Pt 4 s.65(1). Repeal has effect subject to  c.19  c.67(3)  and  SI
2016/1037.
[10] c. 22 Sch.9(1) paras. 3(3)(a) and (b) and Sch.9(1) para.7
[11] as specified in SI 2014/2771 arts 9-11

