
                 JB (AIDS and Articles 3 and 8) Ghana [2005] UKIAT 00077 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                      Date:  1 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  31/03/2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Mr R Chalkley (Vice President)
                               Mrs D E Taylor

Between:




                       [                             ]


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Webber, instructed by Terrence Higgins Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr C  B
     Buckwell, promulgated on 29 October 2003.  The Appellant  appealed  on
     human rights grounds alone against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
     State to refuse to grant her leave to remain dated 10  November  2001,
     with supporting reasons in a letter dated 7 November  2001,  confirmed
     on 19 November 2001.  The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  in
     1970, who said that  she  entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  in
     November 1999.  The basis for the claim is that the Appellant  suffers
     from AIDS and that her return  to  Ghana  would  deprive  her  of  the
     treatment she needs, and shorten  her  life  very  considerably.   The
     Adjudicator dismissed her  appeal.   She  was  refused  permission  to
     appeal to the Tribunal because the case was seen as comparable to N  v
     SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1369.  Statutory Review was granted  because  the
     approach to affordability of treatment in the  circumstances  required
     to be argued.

  2. She had no leave to enter or remain  when  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision  was  made  and  so  no  appeal  lay  against  it  under  the
     Immigration Rules.  An appeal could only be brought  on  human  rights
     grounds.  We asked Ms Webber who appeared for  the  Appellant  whether
     this appeal was brought or continued under the 2002  Act,  because  it
     appeared from section 82 that it did  not  constitute  an  "appealable
     decision".  She was unable to assist.  The position as it  appears  to
     us is that the appeal continues  under  the  1999  Act  by  virtue  of
     paragraph 6(4) or (5) of the Schedule to the  2002  Act  (Commencement
     No.4) Order 2003.

  3. The credibility of the Appellant and her sister was  recorded  by  the
     Adjudicator as not being at issue.  This means that  it  was  accepted
     that the Appellant had not known that she had AIDS when  she  came  to
     this country.  She had not felt ill and had had no indication  of  her
     illness.  She must in fact have been ill for a very considerable time,
     with a non-symptomatic version, because by early April 2000,  she  had
     been admitted for emergency treatment to hospital, with advanced AIDS,
     a CD4 count of 5, many serious related illnesses and  near  to  death.
     In June 2000, after her emergency treatment had begun, she applied  to
     stay on compassionate grounds.  It  was  this  application  which  was
     refused in November 2001.

  4. The acceptance of the Appellant's credibility involved acceptance also
     that she had been financially supported by her church  and  Pastor  in
     Ghana for a two month Church trip to Denmark  and  Holland.   She  had
     come to the United Kingdom from Holland without visa or  passport,  as
     she later explained in a convoluted story about documents, in order to
     visit her sister who was also here illegally.   She  had  stayed  more
     than her originally intended two or three weeks because of her growing
     medical problems.  She had already gone to hospital when the  man  who
     had made the entry arrangements came to arrange her departure.

  5. The date of her arrival depended entirely on the evidence given by the
     Appellant who, because  she  had  not  arrived  from  Holland  with  a
     passport, could not show in any other way when she in fact arrived.

  6. The Adjudicator had a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  as  to  the
     progress of her illness, her treatment needs, her life expectancy with
     treatment  and  without  it,  the  prospects  of  her  obtaining  such
     treatment in Ghana, and the nature of death from AIDS.

  7. In a careful and sympathetic determination, the Adjudicator held  that
     the Appellant's condition  had  improved  significantly  although  she
     still suffered from perpetual tiredness and frequent  headaches.   She
     depended on the considerable support given to her by her sister in the
     United Kingdom.  He then said:

           "56.  I accept that if the Appellant  were  to  be  returned  to
                 Ghana, and were  unable  to  continue  with  the  necessary
                 treatment as an individual who has developed AIDS, her life
                 expectancy would be considerably shortened, possibly  to  a
                 period of months.  Whilst I  note  that  other  cases  have
                 looked carefully at CD4 counts and viral loads, I accept as
                 fact that without the necessary treatment, the life of this
                 Appellant will be curtailed.  That is  the  stark  reality.
                 It appears specifically to be the case that she needs to be
                 able  to  continue  her   treatment   with   combivir   and
                 navaripine.   I  accept  that  the  annual  costs  of  such
                 treatment, and of the necessary  testing  and  consultancy,
                 would appear, as at the date of the hearing, to be at a sum
                 (in equivalent  cedis)  of  �1,550  per  annum.   There  is
                 evidence before me that USAID have assisted  Ghana  in  the
                 establishment  of  projects  to  provide  drugs   for   the
                 treatment of AIDS.  That would appear to be in the east  of
                 Ghana, and not in the area surrounding Kumasi, or indeed in
                 Accra, the capital.  However, I am satisfied, based on  the
                 current caselaw before me,  that  the  issue  of  financial
                 affordability is not a valid reason which an appellant  may
                 raise alone in terms of the basis for resisting removal  to
                 his or her home state under the European Convention.   That
                 said, I  also  accept  that  treatment  is,  in  principle,
                 available in Ghana for the victims of AIDS."

  8. The Adjudicator next considered arguments which were said to show that
     in  Ghana  the  actual  supply  of  the  drugs  would  be  subject  to
     disruption, that there was a shortage of medical staff, and a cultural
     taboo about the illness which would make her family reluctant to offer
     support.  There were difficulties travelling between her home town and
     the town where the nearest suitable hospital was.  She would lose  the
     support of her sister and of the church here.  He continued:

           "57.  However, it is nevertheless important to consider the high
                 threshold to be  reached  for  a  claim  to  succeed  under
                 Article 3 of the European Convention.  It is the case  that
                 the condition of the Appellant  would  undoubtedly  not  be
                 worse, were she to be returned to Ghana, than  if  she  had
                 never received any treatment in  the  United  Kingdom.   My
                 findings are that treatment is available in Ghana, with the
                 appropriate medicine  available  which  the  Appellant  now
                 receives in the United Kingdom.  I cannot accept  that  the
                 issue of affordability is a matter  for  my  consideration,
                 based on present caselaw.   The  threat  of  shortages,  or
                 supply disruption generally, are in  my  view  speculative.
                 It is the case that the Appellant does  have  a  family  to
                 whom she could return.  If they react to the Appellant in a
                 particular manner, which is unsupportive, then  that  is  a
                 decision which the family,  collectively  or  individually,
                 will have made.  Ghana, sadly, has  tens  of  thousands  of
                 AIDS sufferers, and it cannot surely be a  situation  which
                 is not also faced by those sufferers.  If the  family  were
                 collectively to turn its back on the Appellant, which is in
                 my view by no means certain, despite the views of  cultural
                 reaction set before me, that is a  decision  made  by  that
                 family and its members alone.  That would not be a response
                 for which the United  Kingdom  government  should  be  held
                 responsible."

  9. The Adjudicator dealt with  Article  8  by  first  pointing  out  that
     although the Appellant enjoyed strong bonds with  the  sister  in  the
     United Kingdom, neither had any status;  the sister's had not yet been
     resolved.  There would not be a complete absence of community  support
     in Ghana.

           "60.  Without wishing to appear  mercenary,  it  could  even  be
                 argued that her treatment under the National Health Service
                 does not favour  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                 Kingdom, but it would no doubt in my view be right that the
                 Respondent would be entitled to reply upon  the  fact  that
                 the removal of the Appellant, if fit to travel at the time,
                 would constitute the legitimate enforcement of  immigration
                 laws and rules necessary in a democratic  society  for  the
                 effective enforcement of the same.  This is not in my  view
                 a case where  any  exceptional  circumstances,  as  to  the
                 establishment of private or family life, can be argued.  On
                 the basis that Article 8(2)  may  be  relied  upon  by  the
                 Respondent, no breach of Article 8 rights would occur  upon
                 the removal fo the Appellant.  The decision made previously
                 by the Respondent in this respect in  my  view  struck  the
                 correct balance between competing interests (Ala).   Whilst
                 I have expressed my own opinion in relation  to  Article  8
                 issues, this is not a  case  where  an  adjudicator  should
                 substitute  a  decision  by  the  Respondent,   which   was
                 undoubtedly reasonable (Edore)."

 10. The Adjudicator dismissed the appeal but made a recommendation to  the
     Secretary of State that some  sort  of  exceptional  leave  should  be
     granted.  We have made it clear that such recommendations  should  not
     be made.  The Adjudicator has  no  jurisdiction  to  make  them.   The
     Secretary of State is not obliged to give effect to them.  It  is  for
     the Secretary of State to assess  whether  any  case  for  exceptional
     treatment has been made out.  It is for the claimant to make it out to
     him.  If the findings of the Adjudicator  support  such  an  approach,
     that will be as persuasive as it can be.  Otherwise  it  raises  false
     hopes and it is not clear that it would be a material consideration by
     itself for the Secretary of State, but it creates confusion as to what
     should be done about it.

 11. The critical point made by Ms Webber for the Appellant  was  that  the
     Adjudicator had failed to approach the impact of Article 3  correctly.
     He had treated the critical issue as being  the  availability  of  the
     treatment in Ghana and not the availability of the necessary treatment
     to the Appellant.  She took us through a number of  authorities  which
     she submitted showed that  the  crucial  issue  was  not  whether  the
     treatment was available to someone the country of return but what  was
     available to the individual in question, and what in fact would happen
     to him.  Examples were Bensaid v UK [2001] 33 EHRR 10, D v  UK  [1997]
     23 EHRR 423, N v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1369, CA v SSHD [2004] EWCA  Civ
     1165, and R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

 12. Mr Richards, for the Secretary of State, submitted that there  was  no
     need for the Adjudicator to consider the question of the  availability
     of the treatment to this Appellant herself once he had concluded  that
     it was available at least to some in Ghana.  He founded  himself  upon
     the remarks of Sir Christopher Staughton in K v SSHD [2001] Imm AR 41.
      These are set out in N v SSHD and clearly played a considerable  part
     in the Adjudicator's thinking.

Conclusions

 13. Our first observation is that the  Adjudicator,  for  want  of  better
     material, found himself to a considerable extent reliant upon judicial
     remarks made in judgments on leave applications, or in granting  leave
     to appeal on paper, or on admissibility decisions of the ECtHR (though
     we  accept  that  those  are  supposed  to  reflect  established  ECHR
     jurisprudence).  These materials are unlikely to be helpful.   Bensaid
     is of limited direct assistance because the basis of the decision  was
     that the facts put forward to support the asserted breach of Article 3
     were found to be too speculative.

 14. However, we have no doubt but that Ms Webber is correct  in  principle
     and that her point is supported by the authorities  which  she  cites.
     The answer to the question of whether the  removal  of  someone  would
     breach Article 3 or 8, whether or not  the  conditions  faced  in  the
     country of return would themselves breach either Article, depends upon
     the facts.  These are fact sensitive decisions.  It is not possible to
     reach the necessary overall conclusion without the facts  being  found
     so far as the evidence permits them to be.  The mix  of  circumstances
     which arise is sufficiently varied for the total individual picture to
     matter.

 15. It would be quixotic to hold that  Article  3  could  be  breached  if
     treatment for AIDS was not available in  country  A  and  so  was  not
     accessible to the claimant on return, and yet would not be breached if
     treatment were available in country B but  could  not  in  reality  be
     received by the claimant there.  What is required is an  understanding
     of what the position will  be  upon  return.   It  was  the  composite
     picture which was persuasive in D, and not  in  N,  but  the  analysis
     required in both cases was of what was available  to  the  individual.
     We do not think that K says anything different.

 16. What would be a mistake however is to turn the need to understand what
     the individual's position would be on return, into a need to find that
     the treatment received in the United Kingdom must be replicated abroad
     if a breach of the ECHR is to be avoided.  That is  really  the  point
     being addressed in K.  The position may be  that  there  might  be  no
     treatment at all in the country of return, or that there might only be
     terminal  care  or  palliative  care  or  a  less  effective  form  of
     therapeutic care.  Care  might  be  available  in  the  country  in  a
     different location from that  in  which  a  claimant  would  chose  to
     reside.  That may involve difficult choices between family,  treatment
     and a shortened life expectancy.  There might only be  care  available
     which a claimant could not afford or only available through a  charity
     whose beneficence could not be guaranteed.  When the full position  of
     the claimant has been established,  the  assessment  can  be  made  of
     whether those circumstances reach the exceptionally high threshold  of
     Article 3 in its doubly extended application, as explained  in  N  and
     exemplified in D.

 17. The Adjudicator erred in law in paragraphs 56 and 57 in  the  passages
     cited.  He clearly treated the key issue as being the availability  of
     treatment  in  Ghana  and  did  not  reach  any  conclusion   on   its
     availability to the Appellant.  We do not think  that  his  conclusion
     can be read as saying that the treatment for AIDS which the  Appellant
     needs would be available to her.  There were a number of factors which
     he would have needed to consider before reaching  such  a  conclusion.
     Ms Webber submitted that the circumstances were sufficiently clear  to
     enable the appeal to be allowed outright.  Removal  would  reduce  the
     Appellant's life expectancy to between 6  and  12  months,  before  an
     agonising death.  The Appellant would always be  at  risk  of  such  a
     rapid decline because of the gravity of her condition when she started
     treatment.  She would always need such treatment. The family  evidence
     showed that there was no prospect of support from them and  they  were
     likely to shun her.  They lived in a town from which it was  difficult
     to access the nearest hospital.

 18. In any event, there had been  a  change  of  circumstances  since  the
     Adjudicator's determination, which could be put in evidence  if  there
     were a material error of law.  The Appellant had given birth to a  son
     in early April 2004.  So far, blood tests had not shown  him  to  have
     HIV but it would not be known for a while yet whether  he  was  clear.
     We were told that the Appellant had had unprotected intercourse with a
     man, the father, whose name she did not know.  He would  therefore  be
     unable to offer any support to her or to the child in Ghana but  there
     was no evidence to support the assertion that she  did  not  know  his
     name or that he could offer no support.  The birth of  the  baby  were
     said to increase the anguish which this less  than  responsible  woman
     would face, dying in Ghana, and to pose risks  there  which  the  baby
     would face from the unhygienic water  and  health  conditions  against
     which he would have no natural immunity.

 19. We are not prepared to allow this appeal  outright.   Putting  to  one
     side the effect of the birth of the baby, it does not seem to us  that
     to return the Appellant would necessarily breach Article 3.  First  as
     we have said, the facts as to what she would experience would have  to
     be found.  Areas which call for consideration are:   the  availability
     of funds to her from her church  which,  on  her  evidence,  has  been
     prepared to spend money on her enjoying a two  month  trip  to  Europe
     despite her lowly position with the pastor;  the extent to  which  her
     sister, if she were able to stay in this country, could send her money
     for treatment or care which would ease her position even if it did not
     cover the whole cost of the type of treatment which  she  now  enjoys;
     if the sister were unable to stay, she might be able  to  provide  the
     same care which she now does; the ease of living  in  the  town  where
     suitable treatment was available would be  relevant,  after  all,  the
     choice as put by the Appellant herself is stark.  The question of  the
     availability of care as death approaches to reduce pain  and  anguish,
     hospice or palliative care could also be very relevant.

 20. Even if the future were as bleak as Ms Webber sought to paint it we do
     not see it as inevitable that a claim under Article 3  would  succeed.
     The test derived from N, paragraph 40, is as follows: insert[1]

 21. It is also of note that the conclusion of the majority in N  was  that
     the law permitted only one answer on  the  facts  in  that  case.   It
     follows that the range of circumstances  which  will  lawfully  engage
     Article 3 in this type of case is very narrow.  Whilst the facts  here
     may be stronger than in N because of the lesser life expectancy, there
     is no clear dividing line.  It would be perfectly possible to conclude
     that these were not sufficiently extreme, even taken at the highest as
     put by the Appellant.

 22. The feature of D which in our view made his removal  so  inhumane  was
     not the shortening of his life expectancy;  the Article 2 claim  which
     drew upon that was not resolved by the ECtHR.  It was not that he  was
     near death and would die quickly in St Kitts.  It was that  his  death
     was inevitable within a comparatively short time anyway, or  at  least
     was then assumed to be;  the  shortening  of  his  life  was  not  the
     important point.  But given his imminent death, inevitable whether  he
     remained in the United Kingdom or not, it was inhumane to  remove  him
     to a place where the conditions of dying or death were so  lacking  in
     solace or compassion at the last, and so different from the conditions
     in which he had prepared  himself  to  die  here.   The  key  was  the
     comparative conditions under which he would be dying, not those  under
     which he would continue to enjoy life.

 23. We would regard a crude analysis of Article 3 based on life expectancy
     or the degree of its shortening as inapt.  It would  not  reflect  the
     ECHR jurisprudence.  It would involve judgments, eg that return with a
     six months life expectancy was too short but, say, that  seven  months
     was not, or that a given percentage reduction in life expectancy for a
     given age was too  great.   We  do  not  find  our  task  assisted  by
     references to circumstances in which return would be akin to  a  death
     sentence.  Indeed, part of the reasoning in  Soering  was  that  death
     would be too long delayed.   We  find  it  impossible  to  answer  the
     questions posed by these Article 3 cases by asking  ourselves  whether
     our decision amounts to a death sentence.  Does it cover  someone  who
     will live for two years on return, but could enjoy  four  years  here?
     It is difficult to see how one can say what  period  or  reduction  in
     life expectancy amounts to a death sentence.  It is not an instructive
     analogy here.

 24. We can see nothing to support the notion that to return someone  to  a
     country  where  his  life  expectancy  would   be   very   short   and
     significantly shortened necessarily breaches Article 3.  After all the
     judgment in D was that the life expectancy  would  be  halved  through
     return but that was not the crucial factor, indeed it does not  appear
     to have been a very important one.  It was  the  circumstance  of  the
     inevitably imminent death.  In D, the consequence  was  that  D  would
     still die very shortly, it was supposed, but that he would die in  the
     comfort which he had come to expect and rely on.  It was not suggested
     that the breach of Article 3 would  arise  if  he  had  to  receive  a
     lifelong treatment in the United Kingdom but would die shortly without
     it.  The Article 2 issue was not dealt with.

 25.  We find it hard to see, given the balance inherent in  the  ECHR  and
     the double extension which D involved, that  the  contrast  between  a
     long life here on permanent treatment and a short life  in  one's  own
     country, which may not provide for the same treatment or do so free as
     a matter of policy or resources, will  of  itself  breach  Article  3.
     What actions pass the exceptional  requirements  of  N  cannot  be  so
     determined;  they require all the facts to  be  known.   Someone,  for
     example may have been in the United Kingdom for a very long time;   he
     may have a  life  threatening  illness  or  condition  which  requires
     comparatively  short  term  treatment,  the  illness  may  have   been
     contracted here.  The contrast  between  resources  may  sometimes  be
     relevant.  The basis upon which he  came  may  also  be  relevant.   A
     deliberate illegal entry so as  to  impose  oneself  on  the  NHS  for
     medical   treatment   might   be   relevant   to   what   humanitarian
     considerations were engaged.  The extent to which an  application  for
     entry clearance would have been successful might also be  relevant  to
     this extended application of Article 3.

 26. It must also be relevant, when assessing whether or not there would be
     a breach of Article 3, that the  Appellant  has  already  enjoyed  the
     benefit of several more years life than she would have had  in  Ghana,
     and that she would return with a greater life expectancy than when she
     arrived.  This all affects the extent to which in any given  case  the
     exceptional humanitarian considerations of N are engaged.

 27.  Ms  Webber  contended  here  that  there   was   an   assumption   of
     responsibility by  the  United  Kingdom  authorities;   but  this  was
     scarcely an assumption of responsibility and more the imposition of it
     by someone who was illegally here and would not have been admitted had
     she asked to come for NHS treatment.  The treatment of someone  in  an
     emergency, so as to remove an immediate threat to their life, does not
     entail a lifelong obligation to treat them, to treat them free and  to
     permit them to remain for that purpose.  That is not what Article 3 in
     its doubly extended application is about.

 28. We asked the advocates about the assumption  which  underlay  all  the
     submissions of the Appellant, which was that  she  would  continue  to
     receive NHS treatment as an illegal immigrant, with no basis  for  her
     remaining other than to receive  treatment  which  she  would  not  be
     allowed in to the United Kingdom to receive and which was not  for  an
     illness contracted  here.   We  were  told  that  the  health  service
     treatment rules were  somewhat  inaccessible  and  we  were  given  Ms
     Webber's understanding of them.  This was that at present doctors  had
     a discretion, but in future would not  be  able  to  exercise  such  a
     discretion under rule changes, which would affect only those who  were
     not already receiving treatment.  Frankly, we find it astonishing that
     neither party is able to provide chapter and verse for this  and  that
     the Secretary of State is unable to show what the position is.  We are
     not prepared to reach any conclusions other  than  to  note  that  the
     Appellant has received free treatment and none of the medical  reports
     suggested that that would end.  But that does not  mean  that  she  is
     entitled to make the assumption which she does.

 29.  Rather  than  allowing  the  appeal   outright,   we   gave   careful
     consideration to whether or not the result of the appeal would be  the
     same even if the facts were as Ms Webber put them forward.  But in the
     end we concluded that the need for the full position to be ascertained
     before a final conclusion was reached, meant that the matter should be
     remitted.  The remittal hearing will also be able  to  deal  with  the
     consequences for the case of the baby, both in terms of its  wellbeing
     and the Appellant's.  It will also be able to inquire why the name  of
     the father is unknown, if it truly is unknown.  The fact of the matter
     might be thought to be that the Appellant decided to have a baby  when
     she knew that her position was at risk and knew that they  could  both
     be returned to Ghana.  That is a risk which she plainly  was  prepared
     to take, even as a mother  with  the  baby's  interests  allegedly  at
     heart.  However, the issue will have to be dealt with in the light  of
     all the facts.

 30. This appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted for  hearing  by  an
     Adjudicator other than Mr Buckwell.  In practice, it will be heard  by
     the new AIT.  We would suggest that this  matter  is  suitable  for  a
     legal Panel hearing.  We report it for what we say about the  approach
     to Article 3 and the assessment of facts.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT

-----------------------
[1] The citation omitted from paragraph 20 is:
      "[40]  But I am no less clear that D v United Kingdom (1997) 24
      EHRR 423 should be very strictly confined. I do not say that its
      confinement is to death-bed cases; that would be a coarse rule and an
      unwise one: there may be other instances which press with equal force.
      That said, in light of the considerations I have described I would
      hold that the application of Art 3 where the complaint in essence is
      of want of resources in the applicant's home country (in contrast to
      what has been available to him in the country from which he is to be
      removed) is only justified where the humanitarian appeal of the case
      is so powerful that it could not in reason be resisted by the
      authorities of a civilised State. This does not, I acknowledge, amount
      to a sharp legal test; there are no sharp legal tests in this area. I
      intend only to emphasise that an Art 3 case of this kind must be based
      on facts which are not only exceptional, but extreme; extreme, that
      is, judged in the context of cases all or many of which (like this
      one) demand one's sympathy on pressing grounds. On its facts, D was
      such a case. I consider that any broader view distorts the balance
      between the demands of the general interest of the community, whose
      service is conspicuously the duty of elected government, and the
      requirements of the protection of the individual's fundamental rights.
      It is a balance inherent in the whole of the Human Rights Convention:
      see, for example, Soering v United Kingdom (1989) 11 EHRR 439, at
      para 89".
Footnote provided with the authority of the IAT President.


