
            JT and others (Polish workers - time spent in UK) Poland [2008]
UKAIT 00077

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On 15 April 2008

                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Allen
                       Senior Immigration Judge Jordan



Between:
                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Ms Tessa Anna Sempik, solicitor
For the Respondent:          Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

(1)  Until 30 April 2006, the rights of Polish  nationals  admitted  to  the
United Kingdom  under  the  Polish  Association  Agreement  before  Poland's
accession to the EU on 1 May 2004 were governed by  paragraph  255B  of  the
Immigration Rules.  (2)  Paragraph 255B remained in  force  until  30  April
2006 when the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  came
into force.  (3)  Polish nationals whose decisions were  made  prior  to  30
April 2006 were permitted to aggregate the time spent in the United  Kingdom
under the Association Agreement and the 2000 Regulations in calculating  the
qualifying period for the grant of ILR. (4)   Paragraph  255B  does  not  to
apply in relation to decisions made after 30 April 2006.   Polish  Nationals
seeking rights of permanent residence under the  2006  Regulations  are  not
entitled to aggregation of time spent under the Association Agreement.   For
this group, the qualifying period of five years operates from  the  date  of
accession,1 May 2004, and there are can be no Polish nationals, who  qualify
under the 2006 Regulations before 1 May 2009. (5) The terms of  the  letters
written  to  Polish  nationals  granting  them  leave  to  enter  under  the
Association Agreement to the effect that they would  be  eligible  to  apply
for settlement in the United Kingdom one month prior to  the  expiration  of
their leave, did not give rise to a  legitimate  expectation  or  any  other
right, contractual or otherwise, preventing  the  Secretary  of  State  from
making  alterations  to  the  provisions  affecting  Polish  workers   after
accession or at any time  thereafter.   (6)  By  comparison  to  the  rights
afforded to other accession  state  nationals,  the  scheme  as  it  affects
Polish nationals does not unlawfully discriminate against them.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Each of the appellants is a citizen of Poland, and each, or  a  family
      member, was permitted to enter and work in the  United  Kingdom  under
      the European Community Association  Agreement  providing  benefits  to
      Polish citizens.  Each of the appellants entered  the  United  Kingdom
      and commenced work prior to the accession of Poland as a member of the
      Union on 1 May 2004.  Each was refused a grant of permanent residence.
        Each  is  now  represented  by  Tessa  Anna  Sempik,  solicitor,  of
      Castelnau, Barnes.

   2. Each of the appellants applied for, and was refused the  grant  of,  a
      permanent right of residence under paragraph  15  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (SI  2006  No  1003)  which
      came into force on 30 April 2006:


      Permanent right of residence
      15.-(1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
      United Kingdom permanently-
           (a) an EEA national who has resided in  the  United  Kingdom  in
           accordance with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
           five years; [our emphasis]


   3. The refusal was in each case made on the basis that, at  the  date  of
      decision, none had been residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
      with the 2006 Regulations because, prior to 1 May 2004,  each  resided
      in the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  Association  Agreement.
      Although each was a worker (or a family member of a worker) and became
      an EEA national when Poland became an EEA State on that day, none  was
      a qualified person within the meaning of  Reg  6  of  the  Regulations
      until accession:
                 6. (1) In these Regulations,  "qualified  person"  means  a
                 person who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                 (b) a worker;

   4. The appellants rely upon  the  transitional  provisions  contained  in
      Schedule 4 to the 2006 Regulations:


      Interpretation
      1. In this Schedule-
      (a) the "2000 Regulations" means the  Immigration  (European  Economic
      Area) Regulations 2000 and expressions used in relation  to  documents
      issued or applied for under those Regulations shall have  the  meaning
      given in regulation 2 of those Regulations;
      (b) the "Accession Regulations" means the Accession  (Immigration  and
      Worker Registration) Regulations 2004.
      Existing documents
      2.-(1) An EEA family permit issued under the 2000  Regulations  shall,
      after 29 April 2006, be treated as if it were  an  EEA  family  permit
      issued under these Regulations.
      (2) Subject to paragraph (4), a residence permit issued under the 2000
      Regulations shall, after 29 April 2006, be treated as  if  it  were  a
      registration certificate issued under these Regulations.
      (3) Subject to paragraph (5), a residence document  issued  under  the
      2000 Regulations shall, after 29 April 2006, be treated as if it  were
      a residence card issued under these Regulations.
      (4) Where a residence permit issued under  the  2000  Regulations  has
      been endorsed under the immigration rules to show permission to remain
      in the United Kingdom indefinitely it shall, after 29 April  2006,  be
      treated as if it were a document certifying permanent residence issued
      under these Regulations and the holder of the permit shall be  treated
      as a person with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15.
      (5) Where a residence document issued under the 2000  Regulations  has
      been endorsed under the immigration rules to show permission to remain
      in the United Kingdom indefinitely it shall, after 29 April  2006,  be
      treated as if it were a permanent residence card  issued  under  these
      Regulations and the holder of the permit shall be treated as a  person
      with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15.
      (6) Paragraphs (4) and (5) shall also apply to a residence  permit  or
      residence document which is endorsed under the immigration rules on or
      after 30 April 2006 to show permission to remain in the United Kingdom
      indefinitely pursuant to an application for such an  endorsement  made
      before that date.
      Outstanding applications
      3.-(1) An application for an EEA family permit, a residence permit  or
      a  residence  document  made  but  not  determined  under   the   2000
      Regulations before 30 April 2006 shall be treated  as  an  application
      under these Regulations for  an  EEA  family  permit,  a  registration
      certificate or a residence card, respectively.
      (2) But the following provisions of these Regulations shall not  apply
      to the determination of an application mentioned in sub-paragraph (1)-
           (a)  the  requirement  to  issue  a   registration   certificate
           immediately under regulation 16(1); and
           (b) the requirement to issue a certificate of application for  a
           residence card under regulation 17(3).
      Decisions to remove under the 2000 Regulations
      4.-(1) A decision to remove a person under regulation 21(3)(a) of  the
      2000 Regulations shall, after 29 April 2006, be treated as a  decision
      to remove that person under regulation 19(3)(a) of these Regulations.
      (2) A decision to remove a person under  regulation  21(3)(b)  of  the
      2000 Regulations, including a decision which is treated as a  decision
      to remove a person under  that  regulation  by  virtue  of  regulation
      6(3)(a) of the Accession Regulations, shall, after 29 April  2006,  be
      treated as a decision to remove that person under regulation  19(3)(b)
      of these Regulations.
      (3) A deportation order made under section 5 of the 1971 Act by virtue
      of regulation 26(3) of the 2000  Regulations  shall,  after  29  April
      2006, be treated as a deportation made under section 5 of the 1971 Act
      by virtue of regulation 24(3) of these Regulations.
      Appeals
      5.-(1) Where  an  appeal  against  an  EEA  decision  under  the  2000
      Regulations is pending immediately before 30 April  2006  that  appeal
      shall be treated as a pending appeal  against  the  corresponding  EEA
      Decision under these Regulations.
      (2) Where an appeal against an EEA decision under the 2000 Regulations
      has been determined, withdrawn or abandoned it shall, on and after  30
      April 2006, be treated as an  appeal  against  the  corresponding  EEA
      decision under these Regulations which has been determined,  withdrawn
      or abandoned, respectively.
      (3) For the purpose of this paragraph-
           (a)  a  decision  to  refuse  to  admit  a  person  under  these
           Regulations corresponds to a decision to refuse  to  admit  that
           person under the 2000 Regulations;
           (b) a decision to remove a person under regulation  19(3)(a)  of
           these Regulations corresponds  to  a  decision  to  remove  that
           person under regulation 21(3)(a) of the 2000 Regulations;
           (c) a decision to remove a person under regulation  19(3)(b)  of
           these Regulations corresponds  to  a  decision  to  remove  that
           person  under  regulation  21(3)(b)  of  the  2000  Regulations,
           including a decision which is treated as a decision to remove  a
           person under regulation 21(3)(b)  of  the  2000  Regulations  by
           virtue of regulation 6(3)(a) of the Accession Regulations;
           (d) a decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order  made
           against a  person  under  these  Regulations  corresponds  to  a
           decision to refuse to revoke a deportation  order  made  against
           that person under the 2000  Regulations,  including  a  decision
           which is treated as a decision to refuse to revoke a deportation
           order under the 2000 Regulations by virtue of regulation 6(3)(b)
           of the Accession Regulations;
           (e) a decision not to issue or renew or to revoke an EEA  family
           permit, a registration certificate or  a  residence  card  under
           these Regulations corresponds to a  decision  not  to  issue  or
           renew or to revoke an EEA family permit, a residence permit or a
           residence document under the 2000 Regulations, respectively.
      Periods of residence under the 2000 Regulations
      6.-(1) Any period during which a person carried out an activity or was
      resident in the United Kingdom in accordance with the 2000 Regulations
      shall be treated as a period during which the person carried out  that
      activity or was resident in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
      these Regulations for the purpose of calculating periods  of  activity
      and residence under these Regulations.


   5. We have set out the  transitional  provisions  in  full,  although  Ms
      Sempik relied solely on paragraph  6,  because  they  demonstrate  the
      relationship between the 2000 Regulations and the 2006 Regulations and
      that for many purposes those able to rely upon the provisions formerly
      contained in the 2000 Regulations will continue to benefit from  them.
      The obverse of the coin, however, is that the transitional  provisions
      make no provision to enable a person lawfully in the United Kingdom in
      some other capacity to have that  position  equated  with  that  of  a
      person who qualifies under the 2006 Regulations.


   6. Thus, whilst paragraph 6 aggregates periods of activity and  residence
      in accordance with the 2000 Regulations prior to 30  April  2006  when
      the 2006 Regulations replaced them,  both  sets  of  Regulations  were
      concerned with EU nationals and they, by definition, could  not  refer
      to Polish nationals prior to accession on 1 May 2004.


   7. In order to deal with this difficulty, Ms Sempik relied upon paragraph
      255  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  both  as  originally  laid   before
      Parliament and as amended from time to time.  We  shall  set  out  the
      history of this provision insofar as it is material:


      EEA Nationals and their families


           Settlement


           255. An EEA national (other than a student) and a family  member
           of such a person, who has been issued with a residence permit or
           residence document valid for 5 years, and who  has  remained  in
           the United Kingdom, in accordance with  the  provisions  of  the
           1994 EEA Order for 4 years  and  continues  to  do  so  may,  on
           application, have his residence permit or residence document, as
           the case may be, endorsed to show permission to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom indefinitely.

      This was deleted, with effect from 2 October 2000, and substituted by

           255. Any person (other than a  student)  who  under  either  the
           Immigration (European Economic Area) Order 1994 or the 2000  EEA
           Regulations has been issued with a residence permit or residence
           document valid for [4 or 5] years, and who has remained  in  the
           United Kingdom in accordance with the provisions of  that  Order
           or those Regulations (as the  case  may  be)  for  4  years  and
           continues to do so  may,  on  application,  have  his  residence
           permit or residence document (as the case may  be)  endorsed  to
           show permission to remain in the United Kingdom indefinitely.

      (A paragraph 255A was inserted from  18  September  2002  confined  to
      Swiss nationals.)

      255B was inserted from 1 May 2004

           255B This paragraph applies, where an Accession  State  national
           has been issued with a  residence  permit  under  the  2000  EEA
           Regulations and, prior to 1 May 2004,  remained  in  the  United
           Kingdom, in accordance with the provisions of the Rules and in a
           capacity which would have entitled that Accession State national
           to apply for indefinite  leave  to  remain  after  a  continuous
           period of 4 years in that capacity in the United Kingdom.  Where
           this paragraph applies, the period during  which  the  Accession
           State national remained in the United Kingdom  prior  to  1  May
           2004 shall be treated as a period during which  he  remained  in
           the United Kingdom, in accordance with the 2000 EEA  Regulations
           for the purposes of calculating the 4 year period referred to in
           paragraph 255.

      Thus, until 30 April 2006 (the date the  2006  Regulations  came  into
      force), rights of settlement for EEA nationals and their families were
      governed by paragraphs 255 and 255B.   These provisions  were  deleted
      with effect from 30 April 2006, the date  when  the  2006  Regulations
      came into force.  The effect of these changes  was  to  permit  Polish
      citizens who became Union citizens after 1 May 2004  to  benefit  from
      the period they had spent prior to accession so that the period  spent
      in the United Kingdom under the EC Association Agreement  was  treated
      as if they had been Union citizens for the purposes of calculating the
      qualifying conditions under the 2000 Regulations.  This was,  however,
      a limited window of opportunity because this privilege  was  withdrawn
      when the 2006 Regulations came into force, not by operation  of  those
      Regulations but by amendment to the Immigration Rules.


   8. Those  who  qualified  under  the  Association  Agreement  alone  were
      entitled to ILR.  Those who had not resided for the qualifying periods
      prior to accession were entitled to a honeymoon period  which  enabled
      them  to  have  their  pre-accession  residence  aggregated  with  the
      qualifying time spent in the United Kingdom as Union citizens.   Those
      who had not been residing in the United  Kingdom  for  the  qualifying
      period prior to the amendment of paragraph 255 on 30 April  2006  were
      not able to make use of aggregation:  they had  to  rely  solely  upon
      their period of residence after 1 May  2004  when  they  became  Union
      citizens.  Their only consolation was that the transitional provisions
      permitted an aggregation of time under the 2000 and 2006  Regulations.
      Were it not for the transitional provisions, time would  have  started
      again for them on 30 April 2006  because  they  could  not  have  been
      residing in accordance with the 20006 Regulations until they came into
      effect.


   9.  As we shall shortly see, all of the decisions  made  in  the  present
      appeals were made after 30 April 2006 when paragraphs 225  -  225B  no
      longer applied.  We shall, of course, return to  the  consequences  of
      this later in the determination.

[1] Mr Jozef Truchan, his wife and 2 dependent children


  10. Mr Truchan and his family seek a reconsideration of the  determination
      of Immigration  Judge  Mark-Bell,  promulgated  on  22  November  2007
      dismissing their appeals against the decisions of the respondent  made
      on 19 July 2007.  Mr Truchan was born on 7 December 1964 and has  been
      in the United Kingdom since at least  7  February  2002  when  he  was
      issued with an Inland Revenue  self  employed  registration.   He  was
      given a further year's leave on 1 October 2002 and a further  3  years
      leave on 13 November 2003 which would have  permitted  him  to  remain
      until November 2006.  In  each  case,  leave  was  granted  under  the
      Association Agreement.


  11. In his determination, the Immigration Judge properly, in our judgment,
      disregarded  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Lobo  in   an
      unreported determination of Gryglewski (IA/03453/2007),  relying  upon
      practice direction 10 and the citation of unreported  cases.   In  any
      event, paragraph 7 of the Immigration Judge  Lobo's  determination  is
      inadequately reasoned: the appeal was allowed only on the  basis  that
      when the first appellant applied for permanent residence on  29  March
      2006, he had been a self-employed person for  five-years,  albeit  his
      residence since 12 April 2003 was pursuant to an Association Agreement
      and not under the 2000 or 2006 Regulations.   Immigration  Judge  Lobo
      made no reference to the requirement  that  residence  in  the  United
      Kingdom had to be in accordance with those Regulations.

  12. Ms Sempik, who appeared on behalf of the appellants, argued  that  the
      first appellant's business activity before the 2006  Regulations  came
      into force was in accordance with the 2000 Regulations  and  that  the
      Immigration Rules, paragraph 255B, and its reference  to  a  residence
      permit had to be construed as a reference to a person  entitled  to  a
      residence permit after 1 May 2004, and that those who had been  issued
      a residence permit  and  permanent  residence  under  the  Association
      Agreements or were entitled to them were  to  be  equated  with  those
      resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance   with   the   2000
      Regulations.

  13. In addition, she submitted that the respondent's letter, in this  case
      dated 13 November 2003, gave  rise  to  a  legitimate  expectation  of
      permanent residence.  In the course of argument  before  us,  we  have
      been provided with a model letter, which Ms Sempik  submitted  was  in
      identical terms in all such cases.  It ran as follows:


           "I am writing to confirm that you have  been  granted  leave  to
           remain in the United Kingdom as a self-employed person under the
           provisions of an EC Association Agreement.  Leave is granted  on
           the understanding that you will not claim any public funds,  but
           will maintain and accommodate yourself and any  dependants  from
           the profits of your business.  Please note  that  you  must  not
           engage in any employment; you must  work  solely  for  your  own
           business.
           You will be eligible to  apply  for  settlement  in  the  United
           Kingdom one month before your leave expires.  When applying, you
           should provide:
         a)  proof  that  you   are   still   paying   National   Insurance
            contributions and Tax as a self-employed person*;
         b) bank statements from your business and personal accounts;*
         c) a statement to the effect that  you  have  not  worked  in  the
            United Kingdom throughout the time you have  spent  here  under
            the EC Association Agreement provisions except in your business
            and have not claimed any public funds;
         d) a  short  statement,  giving  the  progress  of  your  business
            throughout the three years;
         e)  financial  statements  for  the  business,  prepared   by   an
            accountant (preferably audited) for the three years;*
         f) proof that you are still maintaining and accommodating yourself
            in the United Kingdom (rent agreement  or  mortgage  statement,
            utility bills, council tax, etc);


        At present, those applying to leave to remain in this  category  do
        not need to complete an application form.


        * Please note that we expect bank statements  and  tax  returns  to
        corroborate any information provided in accounts for the business.


  14. Finally, she  submitted  that  the  different  treatment  provided  to
      Bulgarian and Romanian nationals when those countries acceded  to  the
      Union on 1 January 2007, which preserved their rights  under  the  old
      Association  Agreements  and  thereby  enabled  those   nationals   to
      aggregate time spent in the United Kingdom under them with time  spent
      after accession, was discriminatory as it treated them more generously
      than Polish nationals.  As discrimination was  unthinkable,  the  only
      permissible construction of the Regulations was that time spent in the
      United Kingdom  pursuant  to  the  Association  Agreement  had  to  be
      aggregated with time spent since accession, whatever  the  Regulations
      might say.

  15. The Immigration Judge dismissed each of these submissions by reference
      to GN (EEA Regulations: Five years' residence)  Hungary  [2007]  UKAIT
      00073, succinctly remarking that the appellants' clock started ticking
      only on  1  May  2004,  the  date  of  accession.   He  dismissed  the
      allegation of discrimination  based  on  the  different  treatment  of
      Romanian  and  Bulgarian  nationals  as  it  arose  out  of  the  less
      favourable  rules  applicable  to  Bulgarian  and  Romanian  nationals
      attempting  to  establish  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
      Immigration  Judge  also  dismissed  the  allegation   of   legitimate
      expectation by reference to the changes  in  the  statutory  or  quasi
      statutory provisions governing the appellants and  implying  that  the
      Secretary of State was not prevented from introducing such changes.


[2] Mr Janusz Wojtielewicz and Mr Boguslaw Ryszard Liber


  16. These two appellants  are  unrelated  but  their  appeals  were  heard
      together as they raised similar issues.


  17. Mr Wojtielewicz, born on 23 September 1957, entered the United Kingdom
      in 1988 with leave to remain until August 1988.  He  returned  to  the
      United Kingdom in November 2000 with leave to  remain  until  7  April
      2001.  During the subsistence of his leave, he applied  for  leave  to
      remain under the provisions of the Association  Agreement,  which  was
      granted from 7 April 2001 to April 2002.  Further leave was granted on
      23 December 2002 until 7 April 2005.  He sought permanent residence on
      6 July 2006.  At the time of his  application  he  had  been  lawfully
      resident in the United Kingdom since November 2000,  some  5  �  years
      before.

  18. Mr Liber, born on 15 March 1948, claims to  have  entered  the  United
      Kingdom in 1998, following the issue of a three-year work permit.   On
      26 July 2001 he applied for further leave to remain as a self-employed
      person under the Association Agreement which was granted for a  period
      of one year from 2 October 2001 until 3 October 2002.   Further  leave
      was granted on 12 May 2003 expiring on 3 October 2005.  He applied for
      permanent residence on 7 August 2006 by which time he had been in  the
      United Kingdom for about eight years.

  19. Both applications were refused by the Secretary of State in  identical
      terms on 6 February 2007.

  20.  Both  appellants  sought  reconsideration  of  the  determination  of
      Immigration Judge Sharp promulgated  on  11  July  2007  in  which  he
      dismissed both the appeals  of  Mr  Wojtielewicz  and  Mr  Liber.   He
      considered that the sole issue was whether the appellants had achieved
      five years continuous residence under Regulation  15.   He  considered
      that the computation of time could not  commence  until  the  date  of
      Poland's accession on I May 2004.

  21. In reaching his decision, the Immigration Judge took into account  the
      provisions of paragraph 255B of the Immigration  Rules  prior  to  its
      repeal on 30 April 2006.  He also  took  into  account  the  different
      position of the Bulgarian and Romanian  workers,  whose  position  was
      preserved under the Immigration Rules.  It was also be  argued  before
      him that the Home Office letters of 2003 contained assertions that the
      Secretary of State no longer considered himself bound to comply  with.
      Having considered the letters, the Immigration Judge  concluded  there
      was no legitimate expectation on what appears to us to be  two  bases.
      First, neither Appellant had applied within one  month  prior  to  the
      expiry of the leave, as he construed the letter to require.  Secondly,
      the letters did  not  give  rise  to  a  legitimate  expectation.   In
      paragraph 31 of his determination, he said:

           "They may  well  have  had  hopes  and  aspirations  that  their
           subsequent applications would succeed but that  is  a  different
           situation from having a legitimate expectation with any force of
           law.  They were  at  the  time  of  their  current  applications
           subject to the prevailing legal structure in  the  form  of  the
           2006 Regulations."


  22. In essence, the Immigration Judge in this  appeal  reached  a  similar
      conclusion to that reached in the other; namely, the  application  had
      to be determined in accordance with the then  current  Rules  and  the
      fact that, at an earlier time  such  an  application  would  (or  even
      might) have succeeded was none to the point.


  23. The Immigration Judge also considered the transitional provisions  and
      determined that those provisions did not assist the appellants.  Their
      periods of residence were not in accordance with the 2000 Regulations.
       Instead,  he  concluded  that  they  were  "in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules".  He accepted that the position of  Bulgarians  and
      Romanians might appear anomalous but determined that the Secretary  of
      State was entitled to make  subordinate  legislation  which  contained
      such anomalies.


[3] Ms Katarzyna Maria Nitecka and her two minor children as dependants


  24. This is a reconsideration sought  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   She
      sought reconsideration of the determination of Immigration Judge Flynn
      promulgated on 30 July  2007  in  which  she  allowed  the  appeal  on
      'immigration grounds'.


  25. The appellant was born on 10 May 1975 and entered the United  Kingdom,
      as a visitor in November 1999.  She was subsequently issued  leave  to
      remain in 2001 under the Association Agreement  for  the  conventional
      initial period of 12 months which was subsequently  extended  for  the
      conventional further period of three  years,  a  period  ending  on  6
      December 2005.  On 7 December 2006, by which time she had been in  the
      United Kingdom for seven years, she applied for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain.  The Secretary of State refused her application by a  decision
      made on 12 March 2007.

  26. In her determination, the Immigration Judge relied upon paragraph  222
      of the Immigration Rules:


      222. Indefinite leave to remain may be granted, on application,  to  a
      person established in business provided he:


         (i)   has spent a continuous  period  of  4  years  in  the  United
            Kingdom in this capacity and is still so engaged; and
         (ii)  has met the requirements of paragraphs 217  and  218  or  219
            throughout the 4 years; and
         (iii) submits audited accounts for the first 3 years of trading and
            management accounts for the 4th year.


      This was amended with effect from 1 January 2007, which was  prior  to
      the Secretary of State's decision in the application, to include:


      222. Indefinite leave to remain may be granted, on application,  to  a
      person established in business provided he:
           (i) is a national of Bulgaria or Romania; ...


  27. The appellant, as a Polish citizen, could  have  had  no  prospect  of
      succeeding under the  Rules  as  they  applied  at  the  date  of  the
      Secretary of State's decision. In light of  the  respondent's  letter,
      with its reference to  the  appellant  being  eligible  to  apply  for
      settlement in the United Kingdom "one month before your leave expires"
      and relying on the Tribunal's decision in GC (Legitimate  expectation-
      entry clearance) Romania [2005] UKAIT 00142 and ex parte Begbie [1999]
      EWCA Civ 2100, the Immigration Judge expressed herself satisfied  that
      the appellant had been  told  she  would  be  eligible  to  apply  for
      settlement after four years residence.  The  Immigration  Judge  found
      that the appellant relied upon that representation and that there  was
      no  overriding  public  interest   which   justified   defeating   the
      expectation.  Thus, she found the Secretary  of  State  was  bound  to
      grant  settlement  to  the   appellant   on   legitimate   expectation
      principles.  She also found that the Secretary of State had failed  to
      deal with all applicants in a similar position in an  even-handed  and
      fair way.  Accordingly,  she  found  that  the  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law and allowed the appeal on immigration grounds.


Procedural history

  28. In the period leading up to this appeal, it became  apparent  that  Ms
      Sempik's submission was to the effect that she had  been  involved  in
      the successful applications of about 150 Polish nationals who had been
      provided with a right of permanent residence in  accordance  with  the
      letter that we have set out in paragraph 13  above.   Furthermore,  it
      was her case that the  requirement  that  such  applications  be  made
      within one month of the expiration of leave ("you will be eligible  to
      apply for settlement in the United Kingdom one month before your leave
      expires") was not  a  formal  condition  precedent  to  the  grant  of
      settlement and that the Secretary of State had  routinely  disregarded
      this requirement, if requirement it was.  As we have said,  we  accept
      this.


  29. It thus became  important  to  establish  whether  in  the  150  cases
      referred to by Ms Sempik, the Secretary of State had  demonstrated  by
      his conduct a policy that ran counter to the 2000 or 2006 Regulations.
       It became readily apparent at a hearing when these conjoined  appeals
      were mentioned before Senior Immigration  Judge  Jordan  that  it  was
      impracticable for the Secretary of State to consider each of  the  140
      or 150 appeals and that the issue might more easily be identified  and
      resolved by the following directions made by  the  Senior  Immigration
      Judge on 25 January 2008:


     1) Ms Sempik was to supply  Mr  Walker,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
        Officer within 21 days with a maximum of 5 sample cases dealt  with
        by her which lead to the successful grant  of  leave  (of  whatever
        kind);
     2) The appellants were given leave for Ms Sempik to file and  serve  a
        witness statement within 21 days  setting  out  her  experience  of
        similar applications, successful and unsuccessful (if any);
     3) Mr Walker was to  make  enquiries  of  decision-makers  during  the
        period May 2004 to August 2006 on their approach to  the  grant  of
        leave in similar cases and/or those  identified  by  Ms  Sempik  in
        accordance with (1) above and to produce such information as he  is
        able to obtain within a further 21 days and no later than  21  days
        before the resumed hearing.


The appellants' sample cases

  30. In her witness statement of 14 February 2008, Ms Sempik spoke  of  the
      practice of the Home Office when conducting applications  from  Polish
      nationals to remain under the EC Association Agreement  to  grant  one
      year's initial leave followed by a further 3 years.  Subject to  proof
      that the appellant had traded, paid tax and National Insurance and was
      able to accommodate himself and any dependants without  recourse,  the
      applicant  was  then  eligible  to  apply  for  settlement   and   the
      application was routinely granted.  Ms Sempik provided 6  examples  of
      this as a sample selection.  Where necessary,  our  summary  of  these
      examples have been augmented by the comments made  by  Mr  Chris  Wood
      (Euro Caseworker) and contained in the Secretary of  State's  response
      of 14 April 2008.


              i) The decision in the case of Mr Maciej Lis was not  material
                 to the issues before us.  He switched from  self-employment
                 to employment and registered with the  Worker  Registration
                 Scheme in which capacity he remained after Poland became an
                 accession  State.   Had  he  remained  in  a  self-employed
                 capacity, he would have been able to benefit from paragraph
                 255B.
             ii) Mr Pasko was granted settlement under  the  EC  Association
                 Agreement.  His application was made before Poland  acceded
                 to the EU (although the decision was made after).
            iii) Mr Wasiak was granted settlement under the  EC  Association
                 Agreement in October 2004, following  an  application  made
                 after accession but in accordance with paragraph 255B.
             iv) Mr Kurpik  was  granted  settlement  rights  under  the  EC
                 Association  Agreement  on  26  August  2006  following  an
                 application made after accession but before the  amendments
                 to paragraph 255B.   His  application  was  dealt  with  in
                 accordance with paragraph 255B, albeit long after he  first
                 became eligible to apply in accordance with  the  Secretary
                 of State's letter: "You  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for
                 settlement in the United  Kingdom  one  month  before  your
                 leave expires."   (The  letter  does  not  state  that  the
                 applicant must apply within a month  or  otherwise  provide
                 for the consequences of a later  application.   Insofar  as
                 Immigration Judge Sharp in the appeals of  Mr  Wojtielewicz
                 and Mr Liber decided their entitlement was  dependent  upon
                 making an application within the period of one month  prior
                 to the expiry of the leave, as he construed the  letter  to
                 require, we consider he was in error.)
              v) Mr Krzysztofik was granted settlement on 10  November  2006
                 following  an  application  made  on  10  July  2006  after
                 paragraph 255B was amended  to  exclude  Polish  nationals.
                 His application  was  first  refused  but  allowed  on  re-
                 submission.   The  Secretary  of  State  says   that   this
                 application should have been refused and that his permanent
                 status will be reviewed.
             vi) Mr Klewicki was granted ILR under the  Work  Permit  Holder
                 scheme, having arrived in 2002.  He qualified for permanent
                 residence under that scheme, following application made  in
                 June 2006.

Evidence of inconsistency in decision-making

  31. Each of the grants in the above six cases is explicable on  the  basis
      of an application  of  provisions  governing  another  scheme  or  the
      application  of  paragraph  255B.   The  exception  is  at   (v),   Mr
      Krzysztofik, whose application was neither made before accession,  nor
      before 30 April 2006 and the removal of paragraph 255B in its original
      form.  This single example is not sufficient to justify  an  inference
      that the Secretary of State was conducting a policy that  ran  counter
      to the EC Association Agreement, the Rules  or  the  EEA  Regulations.
      If, as the Secretary of State now asserts,  this  application  (having
      first been refused) was  granted  in  breach  of  the  EC  Association
      Agreement or the Immigration  Rules  or  the  EEA  Regulations  it  is
      explicable if it was a mistake.  If a mistake was made, such a mistake
      does not entitle others to benefit from it as a matter of right. There
      is no material from which to infer this was an  informal  policy  that
      officials in the Home Office were  applying  inconsistently  with  the
      Association Agreement, the Rules or the Regulations.   Given  that  Ms
      Sempik was permitted to  use  specimen  examples  as  demonstrating  a
      pattern of inconsistent or  irrational  decision  making,  we  do  not
      consider that this single example permits  us  to  conclude  that  the
      correct application of the Immigration Rules and the  EEA  Regulations
      would be unfair or unjustified.


  32. On this material, there is a consistent pattern of decision-making:

        i) Those applicants who had been granted leave to enter and  remain
           under the EC Association Agreement and had completed 4 years  in
           the United Kingdom prior to Poland's accession on 1 May 2004 who
           had applied for, and whose  applications  had  been  considered,
           prior to 1 May 2004, were, if the  requirements  for  settlement
           had been met, granted ILR under the EC Association Agreement.
       ii) Those applicants who had been granted leave to enter and  remain
           under the EC Association Agreement and had not completed 4 years
           in the United Kingdom after Poland's accession on 1 May 2004 but
           had before April 2006 were, if the requirements  for  settlement
           had been met, entitled to remain under  paragraph  255B.   Those
           applicants were not prevented from obtaining leave to remain  by
           failing to  apply  within  a  specific  period.  ("You  will  be
           eligible to apply for settlement in the United Kingdom one month
           before your leave expires.")

      There is no evidence before us that the Secretary  of  State  deviated
      from that policy/application of the Rules.

  33. For those applicants who had been granted leave to  enter  and  remain
      under the EC Association Agreement but who had not completed  4  years
      in the United Kingdom prior to 30 April 2006, their claims fail.  They
      do not, of course, qualify under the Association Agreement,  or  under
      paragraph 255B which no longer applied.


  34. There is nothing inconsistent in the treatment that has been  afforded
      any of the above categories of persons.  Rather, the complaint  is  in
      reality that it is unfair that the provisions  governing  a  permanent
      right to remain changed on 1 May 2004 and on 20 April  2006  with  the
      effect of requiring those who had  not  yet  qualified  under  the  EC
      Association Agreement to re-qualify from the beginning under  the  EEA
      Regulations.  Part only of this group had the benefit of what  amounts
      to  transitional  provisions  contained  in  paragraph  255B  of   the
      Immigration Rules, restricted  to  those  applicants  who  managed  to
      satisfy the criteria by 30 April 2006.  Those unable to do  so  suffer
      the disadvantage of having time begin again, thereby  preventing  them
      from obtaining a permanent right of residence  until  1  May  2009,  5
      years after accession.

  35. Once it  is  established  that  there  is  neither  inconsistency  nor
      irrationality in the manner  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  has
      approached the various applications, the issue is reduced  to  whether
      the Regulations, properly  construed,  confer  a  right  of  permanent
      residence upon the particular applicant.  If not, the issue is whether
      it was lawful for the Secretary of State to amend the Rules or promote
      the Regulations in such a way as to prevent this  disadvantaged  group
      from reaping the benefits of what they expected would be an  unaltered
      scheme.  Those disadvantaged must either establish that the  Secretary
      of State's conduct prevents him from relying upon a strict application
      of  the  Rules  or  Regulations  in  their  cases  either  based  upon
      principles of legitimate expectation or some free-standing right  that
      prevents such reliance.  The Secretary of State was under no  duty  to
      draft the 2006 Regulations in such a way as to  provide  them  with  a
      benefit that was not in contemplation when they applied for  and  were
      granted leave to enter or remain under the EC  Association  Agreement.
      They do not complain that they should have received ILR under  the  EC
      Association Agreement.  The substance of their complaint is that  they
      are treated less favourably  than  those,  like  themselves  who  were
      admitted to the United Kingdom under the EC Association Agreement, who
      were able to benefit from the aggregation of time spent in the  United
      Kingdom prior to 1 May 2004.  The essence of their complaint  is  that
      the Secretary of State could have adopted a  policy  that  would  have
      permitted this but did not do so.


  36. This requires the Tribunal to consider the consequences of the letters
      provided to each appellant when last granted leave to remain under the
      Association Agreement and its assertion,  'You  will  be  eligible  to
      apply for settlement in the United Kingdom one month before your leave
      expires'.  If this gave rise to a legitimate expectation  at  all,  it
      would, on its face, amount only to a legitimate expectation  that  the
      appellant should receive ILR under the EC Association  Agreement.   It
      could not contain within it a legitimate expectation that  they  would
      have a right to remain as a Union citizen because, at the time, Poland
      was not an accession state.  The subsidiary issue of whether,  if  the
      right subsists, it was conditional or dependant upon a time  limit  in
      which to apply has already been disposed of.


   Aggregation of time spent under the Association Agreement


  37. In GN (EEA Regulations: Five years' residence)  Hungary  [2007]  UKAIT
      00073 the Tribunal summarised its views in these terms:

           (1)  The word "legally" in Article 16 of the Citizens  Directive
           is to be construed as a reference to  requirements  of  European
           law: it does not mean "in accordance with  national  law".   (2)
           The requirement in reg 15(1)(a) of five years' residence in  the
           UK "in accordance with these Regulations" is not contrary to any
           rights given by  the  Directive  and  means  what  it  says  (as
           supplemented by the  Transitional  Provisions  in  Schedule  4).
           Thus, a period of residence by a person not exercising  a  right
           under the 2000 or 2006 Regulations at  that  time  cannot  count
           towards the five years.

  38. GN was a Hungarian citizen who appealed against the  decision  of  the
      Secretary of State of 9 February 2007  refusing  his  application  for
      permanent residence as an EU national residing here.  He had  come  to
      the United Kingdom in August 1997 as a student  and  obtained  a  work
      permit under the Worker Registration Scheme.  Hungary  also  became  a
      member of the European Union on 1  May  2004.   In  January  2006  the
      appellant applied for, and  was  granted,  a  residence  permit  as  a
      qualified person expiring in 2011.  On 16 August 2006, having been  in
      the United Kingdom for 9  years  but  only  2  years  since  Hungary's
      accession,  he  sought  permanent  residence.   The   appellant   was,
      therefore, an EEA national but the  same  question  arose  as  in  our
      appeal as to whether his residence in the United Kingdom had been  for
      five years in accordance with the 2006 regulations which had come into
      force on 30 April 2006.


  39. Nobody then (or now) had been in the United Kingdom in accordance with
      those Regulations for 5 years.  Having referred to paragraph 6 of  the
      Schedule 4 transitional provisions, the Tribunal noted that there  are
      no other elements of the  2006  Regulations  which  enabled  residence
      before the coming into force of the 2006 Regulations to be counted  in
      calculating the 5-year period.  The Tribunal found that the appellant,
      although lawfully present, was not present under the 2000  Regulations
      until Hungary became a member of the EU on 1 May 2004 when his  period
      of residence for the purposes of Reg 15(1)(a) of the 2006  Regulations
      must have  commenced.   He  therefore  had  a  period  of  two  years'
      residence under the 2000 Regulations to which  was  to  be  added  the
      period of residence under the 2006 Regulations from  the  coming  into
      force of those regulations, a period of  just  over  three  years  and
      insufficient for the purposes of Reg. 15.

  40. The appellant submitted that his  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,
      lawful as it was, before Hungary became a member of the European Union
      should count towards residence for the purposes of Article 16  of  the
      Directive ("Union citizens who have resided legally for  a  continuous
      period of five years in the host Member State shall have the right  of
      permanent residence there") and, for that reason, should count for the
      purpose of enabling him to have  permanent  residence  in  the  United
      Kingdom, whatever the  United  Kingdom's  regulations  may  say.   The
      Tribunal stated in paragraph 10 of its determination:

           We are unpersuaded  by  the  appellant's  submissions.   Looking
           first at Article 16 of the Directive we find there, as  we  have
           indicated,  the  word  "legally".   The  appellant's  submission
           incorporates an implication that that word  means  "lawfully  in
           accordance with national law".  We see no basis for reading that
           meaning into the word "legally" in Article 16 of the  Directive.
           When one sees a word of that sort in any legal  instrument,  one
           interprets  it  normally  within  the  instrument's  own   legal
           context.  The context of the Directive is European law: and  for
           that reason we read "legally" in Article  16(1)  as  meaning  in
           accordance with European law.  If there  were  any  doubt  about
           that it would in our view be resolved by  paragraph  17  of  the
           preamble,  to  which  the  appellant  has  referred  us,   which
           indicates that the intention is to give  a  right  of  permanent
           residence to those "who have resided in the host Member State in
           compliance with the conditions laid down in this Directive"  for
           five years. That, it seems to us, is sufficient to show that the
           provisions of  the  Directive  are  properly  reflected  in  the
           regulations, which indicate that the period  of  five  years  in
           question is a period during which the applicant  was  exercising
           Treaty rights or was a spouse or family member of someone  doing
           so.  In the appellant's case he was not  exercising  any  direct
           Treaty rights before Hungary, the  country  of  which  he  is  a
           national, became a member of the European Union.

  41. Ms Sempik submitted to us that each of the appellants was entitled  to
      benefit from paragraph 6 of the transitional provisions  contained  in
      Schedule 4 to  the  2006  Regulations.   She  submitted  that  GN  was
      properly  distinguishable.   As  appears  from  paragraph  2  of   its
      determination, the Tribunal accepted that GN had come  to  the  United
      Kingdom in 1997 as a student.  Hungary, like Poland, became  a  member
      of the European Union on 1 May  2004.   On  16  August  2006  when  he
      applied for a residence  permit  he  demonstrated  that  he  had  been
      working under the Workers Registration Scheme, which came into  effect
      after accession.  In paragraph 6 of the  determination,  the  Tribunal
      recorded that GN only had a period of two years  residence  under  the
      2000 Regulations and a further period of approximately 12 months under
      the 2006 Regulations making a period  of  just  over  three  years  in
      total.  It must follow from these passages that GN had  never  been  a
      worker prior to Hungary's accession to the  Union.   Accordingly,  his
      application was bound to fail because he had never been a worker for a
      period of more than five years.  This was to be  contrasted  with  the
      position of the appellants in the present appeal,  each  of  whom  had
      been working under the Association Agreement prior to the accession of
      Poland to the Union and each of whom had been working for more than  5
      years.


  42. We accept that GN's application was bound to fail, but  the  terms  of
      the Tribunal's determination, as we have shown  by  reference  to  the
      passages we have extracted above, are much wider than by reason of his
      failure to have established he had been a worker for five  years.   It
      is clear that the Tribunal's thinking was directed in terms to whether
      any of his residence prior to accession might amount to  residence  in
      accordance with the 2006 Regulations or, pursuant to the  transitional
      provisions, under the 2000 Regulations.  It should be noted  that  the
      definition of a qualified person  within  Regulation  6  of  the  2006
      Regulations includes both a worker and a student.  Had he been a Union
      citizen, he would  have  been  a  qualified  person,  irrespective  of
      whether he had been a worker for 5 years.   For  these  purposes,  the
      exclusion of a student in paragraph 255 of the Immigration Rules  does
      not distinguish the appellant  in  GN  from  the  appellants  in  this
      appeal.

  43. The appeals before us are indistinguishable from the decision  in  GN.
      The transitional  provisions,  the  effect  of  which  is  limited  to
      aggregating the qualifying periods  set  out  in  the  2000  and  2006
      Regulations,  do  not  benefit  the  appellants.    The   benefit   of
      aggregation is limited to Union citizens  and  the  appellants  cannot
      claim the benefit of a period  when  they  were  not  Union  citizens.
      Whilst the 2006  Regulations  contain  transitional  provisions  which
      aggregate periods of residence under the 2000 Regulations and the 2006
      Regulations, no similar provisions aggregate  pre-accession  residence
      in the United Kingdom.

The Accession (Immigration and Worker  Registration)  Regulations  2004  (SI
2004 No 1219)

  44. Our approach to the issue of aggregation is strongly supported by  our
      consideration of the Accession (Immigration and  Worker  Registration)
      Regulations 2004 (SI 2004 No 1219) which came  into  force  on  1  May
      2004, the day Poland acceded to the Union, ("the Accession Regulations
      2004").  Although the parties did not refer to these provisions,  they
      are an important stage in the legislative process concerning accession
      State nationals.


  45. The United  Kingdom  government  exercised  its  right  of  derogation
      (permissible until April 2009 at least) from the obligation to  afford
      rights of free movement to nationals of the accession States in  order
      to regulate access by them to the UK labour market.  Polish  nationals
      were in general included within those entitled  to  benefit  from  the
      2000 Regulations subject to various restrictions.  Thus, for  example,
      the right of an EU job-seeker to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
      modified to the extent that a Polish  national,  as  a  member  of  an
      accession State, had also to demonstrate he was self-sufficient.  More
      importantly, the exercise of rights of  free  movement  is  subject  a
      scheme of registration under Part 3.  This draws a distinction between
      those Polish nationals already lawfully employed in the United Kingdom
      and those commencing work after 1 May 2004.  The former,  and  all  of
      the appellants fall into this category, were not required to apply for
      a registration certificate.  In contrast, those commencing work  after
      the accession date are required within a month  of  starting  work  to
      make such an application.  The Regulations provide that such a  person
      must obtain a certificate authorising him to work  for  an  authorised
      employer.  Unless he does so, he is not permitted to work.   Accession
      State workers requiring registration were not permitted to  be  issued
      with a residence permit for the benefit of a relative or spouse  under
      the 2000 Regulations or to benefit from Reg 15 dealing with the  issue
      of residence permits and residence documents.  Nevertheless,  pursuant
      to Reg 5 (2), an accession State worker requiring registration  is  to
      be treated as a qualified person under both the 2000  Regulations  and
      under Reg 6 of the 2006 Regulations provided he continues to work.


  46. The transitional  provisions  set  out  in  Reg  6  of  the  Accession
      Regulations  2004  dealt  with  the  position  of  those,   like   the
      appellants, who had been granted leave to enter or remain prior  to  1
      May 2004.  These ceased to be bound  by  any  conditions  attached  to
      their original grant of leave to enter or remain:

      6. - (1) Where before 1 May 2004 a qualified person  or  the  family
         member of a qualified person has been  given  leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  1971  Act  subject  to
         conditions, those conditions shall cease to  have  effect  on  and
         after that date.

  47. This passage requires some comment.  As set out above, under Reg 6 (1)
      where before 1 May 2004 a qualified person has  been  given  leave  to
      enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  1971  Act,  those
      conditions should cease  to  apply.   However,  the  definition  of  a
      qualified person both under Reg 5 of the 2000 Regulations and Reg 6 of
      the 2006 Regulations defines a qualified person as  an  EEA  national,
      (itself defined) who is in the United Kingdom, see paragraph 3  above.
      Since prior to 1 May 2004, no Polish national was a qualified  person,
      this would mean  that  no  Polish  national  could  benefit  from  the
      transitional provisions set out in Reg 6.  However,  the  position  is
      saved by Reg 6 (4) (d) that defines qualified person in  this  context
      as a person who becomes for the purposes of  the  2000  Regulations  a
      qualified person on 1 May 2004.  This expression is  not  without  its
      significance  because  it  makes  clear  that  the  appellants  became
      qualified persons on 1 May 2004 and not  before.   Until  they  became
      qualified persons, they could not benefit from the  2000  Regulations.




  48. Thus the scheme  brought  into  operation  two  separate  and  clearly
      defined categories of Polish workers: those  accession  State  workers
      requiring registration and those not.  This is the effect of Reg 2  of
      the Accession Regulations 2004:

        2.  - (1) Subject to the following paragraphs of  this  regulation,
          "accession State worker requiring registration" means  a  national
          of a relevant accession State working in the United Kingdom during
          the accession period.

              (2) A national of  a  relevant  accession  State  is  not  an
          accession State worker requiring registration  if  on  30th  April
          2004 he had leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  under
          the 1971 Act and that leave  was  not  subject  to  any  condition
          restricting his employment.

              (3) A national of  a  relevant  accession  State  is  not  an
          accession State worker requiring registration if  he  was  legally
          working in the United Kingdom  on  30  April  2004  and  had  been
          legally  working  in  the  United  Kingdom  without   interruption
          throughout the period of 12 months ending on that date.
  49. A person not requiring registration was further defined in Reg. 2  (7)
      by reference to his work prior to accession:

           (a) a person working in  the  United  Kingdom  during  a  period
           falling before 1 May 2004 was  legally  working  in  the  United
           Kingdom during that period if  -

                 (i) he had leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
                 under the 1971 Act for that period, that leave allowed  him
                 to work in the  United  Kingdom,  and  he  was  working  in
                 accordance with any condition on that leave restricting his
                 employment; or

                 (ii) he was entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom  for
                 that  period  under  the  2000  Regulations   without   the
                 requirement for such leave;

  50. All the appellants fall within this group.  Although  working  in  the
      United Kingdom, they did not require registration and, therefore, fell
      into the category of those who were able  to  benefit  from  the  2000
      Regulations without modification.  It is, of course, axiomatic in this
      reclassification of their status that, prior to accession,  they  were
      unable to benefit from the 2000 Regulations.  Thus, on 1 May 2004  but
      not before, these appellants became qualified  persons  and  commenced
      their enjoyment of rights of free movement alongside all  other  Union
      citizens provided by the 2000 Regulations.  There is nothing, however,
      within the 2004 Regulations that suggests such rights as they  enjoyed
      prior to accession were to be treated as aggregated  with  their  new-
      found  rights  under  the  2000  Regulations.   The  2004  Regulations
      provided an opportunity for the United Kingdom  government  to  afford
      them those rights had it chosen to do so.  The 2004  Regulations  make
      it  plain  that  they  were  provided  with  rights  of  free-movement
      untrammelled by the obligation to go through the  registration  scheme
      but that those rights accrued to them on 1 May 2004.


  51. The provisions of the 2004 Regulations were modified but not  replaced
      by the introduction of the 2006 Regulations.  Apart from a  series  of
      consequential modifications, the substance of the amendments was  that
      Polish workers like other Union workers became  subject  to  the  2006
      Regulations on their introduction on 30 April 2006  but,  importantly,
      those workers  requiring  registration  continued  to  occupy  a  less
      advantageous position than their European Union co-nationals  both  by
      reason of their duty to comply with the registration  scheme  and  the
      limitation on their rights to  obtain  residence  documentation  under
      Part 3 of the 2006 Regulations,  that  is,  registration  certificates
      under Reg 16 or residence cards under Reg 17.

  52. The effect of these provisions is that  the  rights  and  benefits  of
      three classes of Union citizens can be  identified  relevant  for  our
      purposes:

      a) Union citizens other than members of the accession States;
      b) Accession State nationals who fall into the category of workers not
         requiring registration; and
      c) Accession State nationals being workers requiring registration.


  53. The  benefits  attributable  to  each  category  were  different.   In
      particular, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  the  appellants  were
      entitled to stand in the  same  position  as  other  Union  nationals.
      Those, like the appellants, who  are  accession  State  nationals  not
      requiring registration commenced enjoyment of the rights and  benefits
      of accession from 1 May 2004, those benefits being modified along with
      all other Union  citizens  by  the  changes  introduced  by  the  2006
      Regulations.


  54. Furthermore, as we say in paragraph 62, in relation to  the  2000  and
      2006 Regulations, the Accession Regulations are  secondary,  delegated
      or subordinate legislation with the full  force  of  law,  unlike  the
      Immigration Rules.

Legitimate expectation


  55. The claim based on legitimate expectation has a  two-fold  foundation.
      First, reliance on the words of the Secretary of State's letter:  "You
      will be eligible to apply for settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  one
      month before  your  leave  expires".   Secondly,  the  fact  that  the
      accession of Poland to the Union saw the end  of  the  EC  Association
      Agreement, the repercussions of which  were  not  ameliorated  by  the
      Secretary of State  amending  the  Immigration  Rules  to  permit  the
      appellants to  benefit  from  aggregation  (or,  more  accurately,  by
      amending the Immigration Rules in April  2006  so  as  to  remove  the
      benefit of aggregation that had hitherto existed).


  56. In GC (legitimate expectation  -  entry  clearance)  (Romania)  [2005]
      UKAIT 0142, the decision is summarised in these terms:



           The  public  interest  in  ensuring  that  persons  subject   to
           immigration control do not enter the United Kingdom on  a  false
           basis can prevent a person from relying on a claim of legitimate
           expectation  so  as  to  compel  effect  to  be   given   to   a
           representation that entry clearance would  be  granted  to  that
           person

      The Tribunal said:

           25.  The Tribunal further finds that there is  in  any  event  a
           clear  overriding  public  interest  which  would   defeat   any
           legitimate expectation the appellant might seek to assert.    In
           Begbie,  Laws  LJ  explored  the  scope  of  this  principle  at
           paragraphs 75 to 85 of the  judgments.    Essentially,  Laws  LJ
           held  that  the  intensity  of  judicial  review  in  cases   of
           legitimate expectation will depend upon the extent to which  the
           decision in question raises important matters of general  policy
           affecting the public at large or a significant  section  of  it.
           At paragraph 82, the learned Lord Justice held  that  "the  more
           the decision challenged lies in what may inelegantly  be  called
           the macro-political  field,  the  less  intrusive  will  be  the
           Court's supervision.   More than  this:   in  that  field,  true
           abuse of power is less likely  to  be  found,  since  within  it
           changes of policy, fuelled by broad conceptions  of  the  public
           interest, may more readily be accepted as taking precedence over
           the interests of groups which enjoyed expectations generated  by
           an earlier policy."

  57. These considerations are echoed in MO (Date  of  decision:  applicable
      rules) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00057 which decided that  the  Immigration
      Rules applicable to an immigration decision are,  in  the  absence  of
      transitional provisions or any contrary  legitimate  expectation,  the
      rules in force at the date of the decision.  The Tribunal said:

           16. The appellant can gain nothing by putting his claim  in  the
           language  of  legitimate  expectation.   His   only   legitimate
           expectation is to have his  application  decided  in  accordance
           with the Rules at the time the decision is made.  Any other view
           would entail the conclusion that the Secretary of State's  power
           to make policy by changing  the  Rules  from  time  to  time  is
           hampered or fettered (see In re Findlay  [1985]  AC  318).   (It
           might be thought that R v SSHD ex parte Hargreaves [1997] 1  WLR
           906 assists the appellant with its  similar  view  expressed  in
           terms of the policy in force at the date of the application.  It
           is clear, however, that in Hargreaves no point was  taken  about
           any interval of time  between  application  and  decision.   The
           court's view was that the applicant was not entitled to  require
           that the decision be  made  by  reference  to  any  pre-existing
           policy.  Lord Woolf MR's summary of Hargreaves in R v North  and
           East Devon Health Authority ex parte Coughlan [2001] QB  213  at
           [75] refers only to the right that applications  be  "considered
           individually in the light of whatever policy was in force at the
           time".  Hargreaves is  not  authority  for  the  view  that  the
           relevant policy is that in force at the time of any  application
           as distinct from that in force at the date of the decision.)

  58. The decision in AA and others  (Highly  skilled  migrants:  legitimate
      expectation) Pakistan [2008} UKAIT 00003 contains similar  expressions
      of principle.  Paragraphs 62 to 73 contain a summary of the  scope  of
      legitimate  expectation  and  reiterates  the  requirements  that   an
      appellant has to establish:


           i. a promise or representation made by the Home Office  that  an
              applicant seeking an extension of leave in the  future  would
              be judged on the (then) rules and criteria  rather  than  any
              changed provisions;
          ii. if so, that it would be unfair and unlawful as  an  abuse  of
              power to renege on that promise.  [Our emphasis.]


  59. On 10 April 2008, the Court of Appeal gave its judgment in  Odelola  v
      SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 308.  This was  an  appeal  from  the  Tribunal's
      decision in MO (Date of decision:  applicable  rules)  Nigeria  [2007]
      UKAIT 00057, see paragraph 57 above.  It is important  to  state  what
      the Court said about the nature of the claim.  The appellant  asserted
      that the Secretary of State had no option in law other than to  decide
      her case according to the Immigration Rules as they stood on the  date
      of her application  but  she  expressly  disavowed  her  intention  of
      putting her claim on the basis of any  legitimate  expectation.   This
      was no mere oversight.  Buxton LJ set out why  the  appellant  adopted
      that approach:
        1. Although the matter was  not  explored  before  us,  there  were
           plainly two reasons why the appellant took that position. First,
           as a matter of fact,  there  was  nothing  to  ground  any  such
           expectation. The Secretary of State had neither given an express
           promise that she would decide applications on the basis  of  the
           Immigration Rules as they stood at the date of the  application,
           nor had followed any regular practice  to  that  effect:  indeed
           counsel  for  the  Secretary   of   State   told   us,   without
           contradiction, that it had been the Secretary of State's regular
           practice to act as she had done in  the  present  case.  Second,
           there was a strong forensic reason  why  the  appellant  had  to
           avoid the language of legitimate expectation. That jurisprudence
           lives in the world of, and attracts the rules of, administrative
           law. Once the  case  is  seen  as  one  of  administration,  the
           appellant  is  faced  with  the  principle  that  administrative
           policy, such as expressed in HC 299, can change. As Lord Diplock
           put it in Hughes v DHSS [1985] 1 AC 776 at p 788A:
           Administrative policies may change with changing  circumstances,
           including changes in the political  complexion  of  governments.
           The liberty to make such changes is something that  is  inherent
           in our constitutional form of government.
  60. The appellant therefore had  to  assert  that  in  deciding  her  case
      according to the Immigration Rules, the Secretary  of  State  had  not
      made an  error  of  an  administrative  law  nature,  but  rather  had
      infringed a right more akin to a right in private law, that vested  in
      the appellant at the moment at which she made her application, and  of
      which she could not thereafter be deprived. No such  right  is  to  be
      found in the Immigration Rules themselves. The case accordingly had to
      be based on the assertion that general principles of substantive,  not
      administrative, law prevented  the  Secretary  of  State  from  acting
      inconsistently with the appellant's right to have the case decided  on
      the rules as they stood at the date of  the  application.   The  Court
      described this as "a striking claim".


  61. The Court rejected that contention.  Buxton LJ went on  to  treat  the
      Immigration Rules as a public statement by the Secretary of  State  as
      to how she intends for the time being to exercise her powers to  grant
      admission to non-nationals to the United Kingdom.  There was therefore
      neither a legitimate expectation that the Rules would not change nor a
      right akin to a private law right enforceable by an applicant to  have
      his application decided on the basis of the Rules as they  existed  as
      at the date of the application.  In  our  own  case,  of  course,  the
      appellants' contentions must go further.  They do  not  complain  that
      the Rules changed between  application  and  decision.   Rather,  they
      complain that, when they made their application, the  Rules  had  been
      altered so that  the  requirements  of  establishing  compliance  were
      different and more onerous.

  62. They can have no claim that the Secretary of State  did  not  seek  to
      enlarge the provisions of the  2006  Regulations  to  enable  them  to
      succeed because the Regulations, (unlike the Immigration Rules), are a
      form of secondary, delegated or subordinate legislation that have  the
      full force of law being made  under  a  law-making  power  granted  by
      Parliament for that purpose.   It  was  a  matter  for  Parliament  to
      determine what transitional provisions were to  be  permitted  in  the
      Regulations.


  63. Although no submissions were addressed to us on this issue, we  should
      mention the decision of Sir George Newman in HSMP Forum Limited v SSHD
      [2008] EWHC 664.   The  judgment  was  given  on  8  April  2008  and,
      therefore, pre-dates the decision of the Court of Appeal in Odelola by
      2 days.  The Administrative Court Judge clearly did not have sight  of
      the Court of Appeal's decision.
  64. The Highly Skilled Migrant Programme ("HSMP") embodied  the  Secretary
      of State's policy of encouraging people to come to the United Kingdom,
      if  they  could  meet  the  criteria  outlined   under   the   scheme.
      Prospective candidates were  informed  that  the  programme  would  be
      reviewed on a regular basis and that the qualifying criteria might  be
      adjusted from time to time. The  government  also  confirmed  that  it
      retained the right to suspend or close the programme on an  indefinite
      basis. This reservation was clearly made  in  connection  with  future
      applications for permission but the guidance went on to state: "Should
      this occur those already in the United Kingdom, as  skilled  migrants,
      will continue to  benefit  from  the  programme's  provisions."   This
      statement  confirmed,  at  least  in  connection   with   closure   or
      suspension, that the benefits  conferred  by  the  scheme  and  to  be
      enjoyed by  skilled  migrants  already  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
      continuing in character.
  65. The application for judicial review arose out of changes to  the  HSMP
      which came into force on 7 November 2006 and, more  particularly,  the
      application of the changes to those  already  in  the  UK  as  skilled
      migrants. The  new  scheme  was  considerably  more  onerous  and  the
      applicants were unable or less likely to  qualify.   There  was  large
      scale criticism of the government's introduction  of  the  changes.  A
      Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human  Rights  conducted  an  inquiry
      into the changes in the Immigration Rules and concluded:
           "...changing the relevant criteria to be met by those  who  have
           already made their home in the UK on a  clear  understanding  of
           the criteria that would be applied to them in the future is,  in
           our view, indisputably retrospective in effect."
  66. The Judge in the Administrative Court treated  the  real  question  as
      whether, properly interpreted, the scheme conferred  a  commitment  on
      the part of the government not to change the conditions in  connection
      with the continuing implementation of the scheme.   Although the point
      was obvious, Sir George Newman thought it necessary to emphasise  that
      the defendant's discretionary power to  make  changes  to  the  scheme
      under which highly skilled migrants would be admitted to  the  UK  was
      not under challenge. If the  original  scheme  was  not  always  fully
      effective, it was the fault of the scheme, not  the  applicants  whose
      counsel submitted (i) the existence of clear, express  representations
      that the criteria for the grant of extensions would not be changed  so
      as to preclude settlement being obtained in circumstances where it had
      been represented it would be available; (ii) clear practice  prior  to
      November 2006 that revisions to the scheme were not  to  affect  those
      already on the scheme (iii) the  conspicuous  unfairness  involved  in
      encouraging migrants to sever links with their  home  country  and  to
      make the UK their main home, by issuing statements about their  future
      entitlement  to  remain  in  the  UK   and   thereafter   subsequently
      withdrawing the applicability of the statements; (iv) the  absence  of
      any pressing public interest requiring that she should  frustrate  the
      expectation of highly skilled migrants who had met the criteria of the
      scheme which they had joined and (v) the abuse of  power  involved  in
      frustrating the migrants' path to final settlement in the UK when  the
      migrants had already embarked on the journey.


  67. The Secretary of State adopted the analysis of the position  contained
      in a judgment of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in AA and  others
      at paras 87 to 95. The Minister's letter bore a  striking  resemblance
      to the conclusion in paragraph 95 of the AIT judgment:
           "Their only legitimate expectation is  that  their  applications
           will be judged on the basis of the rules and criteria under  the
           HSMP in force at the relevant  time,  namely  the  date  of  any
           decision".
  68. That said, the January 2002 guidance stated that even if the programme
      were suspended, "those already  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  Skilled
      Migrants, will continue to benefit from the  programme's  provisions".
      Later guidance stated in answer to the question "What  if  the  scheme
      changes?" and "I have already applied successfully under the HSMP. How
      does the revised HSMP affect me?"  Answer: "Not at all."


  69. The Judge found that the terms of the scheme, properly interpreted  in
      context and read with the guidance and the Rules,  contained  a  clear
      representation, made by the Secretary of State that once a migrant had
      embarked on the scheme, he would enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  scheme
      according to the terms prevailing at the date he joined.   This is the
      first stage of the approach identified by the Tribunal in paragraph 73
      of AA and others namely establishing a promise or representation  made
      by the Home Office that an applicant seeking an extension of leave  in
      the future would be judged on the (then)  Rules  and  criteria  rather
      than any changed provisions.  Sir George Newman was wholly unpersuaded
      that there were any  significant  macro-political  reasons  (repeating
      Laws LJ's inelegant expression in Begbie) for including admitted  HSMP
      migrants within the changes. He concluded at paragraph 61:
           I am unable to see a sufficient public interest which  outweighs
           the unfairness, which I am  satisfied  the  changes  visit  upon
           those   already   admitted   under   the   programme.   In   the
           circumstances, I am satisfied that the  terms  of  the  original
           scheme should be honoured and that there is no good  reason  why
           those already on the scheme shall not enjoy the benefits  of  it
           as  originally  offered  to  them.   Good   administration   and
           straightforward dealing with  the  public  require  it.  Not  to
           restrain the impact of the changes would, in my  judgment,  give
           rise to conspicuous unfairness and an abuse of power. Bad faith,
           rightly, has not been alleged, but  I  am  concerned  about  the
           repeated refusal to consider the undeniable evidence of hardship
           and the extent of  the  special  commitment  required  of  those
           migrants which has been  placed  before  the  defendant  from  a
           number  of  quarters.  I  am  satisfied,  following  the   three
           questions set out in Bibi, that the defendant  proposes  to  act
           unlawfully and the Court should intervene.
  70. It is clear that the decision in HSMP Forum Limited v SSHD was decided
      on its own facts and, in particular,  on  the  continuing  nature  and
      scope of the commitment entered into by the Secretary of State.  There
      was a promise that applicants would reap the benefits irrespective  of
      a subsequent change in the Rules.  There  is  no  such  material  upon
      which the appellants here can draw.  Secondly, the decision has to  be
      read in light of  the  Court  of  Appeal's  observations  in  Odelola,
      although we see the two decisions as being compatible with each other.
       Thirdly,  given  the  changes  that  Poland's  accession  to  the  EU
      entailed, the nature of the obligations owed  by  the  United  Kingdom
      government to Polish nationals  had  to  be  radically  remodelled  to
      reflect the structural changes that had taken place.  The  Association
      Agreement could no  longer  survive  among  European  State  partners.
      Hence, the commitment made in the 'You will be eligible to  apply  for
      settlement' letter  under  the  Association  Agreement  was  bound  to
      undergo revision and the nature of the revising hand was in the  field
      of policy, certainly macro political in character.

  71. For these reason we do not consider that the grant of entry  clearance
      to the appellant under the Association Agreement or the 'You  will  be
      eligible to apply for settlement' letter gave rise:

         a) to an obligation that the appellant was  bound  to  be  granted
            permanent  residence  under  the   EC   Association   Agreement
            notwithstanding the ending of the  Agreement  as  part  of  the
            inevitable consequence of accession; nor,
         b) to an expectation that  transitional  provisions  would  afford
            persons in the appellants'  position  a  right  under  European
            legislation   including   Regulations   or   other    secondary
            legislation to retain the benefit of time spent in  the  United
            Kingdom under the Agreement; nor,
         c) to an expectation that, if the Immigration Rules permitted such
            a concession to some applicants,  those  concessions  would  be
            extended in time to a point when the appellants  might  benefit
            from them.

Unlawful discrimination


  72. In GN, the Tribunal also rejected the appellant's submission that  the
      application  of  the  Directive  and  the   regulation   amounted   to
      discrimination on grounds of nationality.

  73. The Immigration Rules are filled  with  distinctions  between  various
      categories of persons.  These distinction may arise by reason  of  age
      (e.g., a minor or a person over the age of 65); by reason of  familial
      relationship (e.g., child,  parent,  cousin  or  other  relative);  by
      reason of the type of application (e.g., visit visa,  working  holiday
      maker); by reason of country of origin (e.g., 'white list'  countries,
      non-visa countries) or global (e.g., EU and non-EU,  commonwealth  and
      non-commonwealth); between rich and poor (e.g., those with �250,000 to
      invest and those unable to maintain  themselves  without  recourse  to
      public funds).


  74. Insofar as one category of  person  satisfies  different  criteria  in
      order to satisfy the requirements for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
      enter or remain, the Rules will render applications of one  type  more
      onerous than applications of another.  Such distinctions  discriminate
      between one group and another.  The root of the expression  is  merely
      the recognition of differences.  These distinctions arise because of a
      policy decision that certain categories of applications should satisfy
      different requirements.  Such distinctions are  in  essence  political
      decisions made as a result of a consideration of  a  wide  variety  of
      factors, known or unknown to an observer.  The drawing of distinctions
      in itself is not  unlawful.   Even  if  it  is  arbitrary  it  is  not
      necessarily unlawful so, for example, an Immigration  Rule  concerning
      10 years lawful residence or 14 years unlawful residence (or a mixture
      of the two) might as easily be a rule which requires  5  years  lawful
      residence or 7 years unlawful residence.

  75. In particular, a different scheme aimed  at  permitting  Bulgarian  or
      Romanian nationals  to  enter  the  country  and  requiring  different
      conditions to  be  satisfied  and  offering  different  benefits  when
      compared with Polish nationals clearly distinguishes between Bulgarian
      or Romanian nationals on the one hand  and  Polish  nationals  on  the
      other but that is not, in itself, unlawful.  Were it to be  so,  there
      could be no distinctions made because any  distinction  excludes  some
      from qualifying whilst permitting others to do  so.  It  only  becomes
      unlawful when it distinguishes in cases where there is  no  difference
      save for a difference that is irrelevant in  the  circumstances  of  a
      particular case (e.g., 'only whites need apply' or 'men only').

  76. There is no evidence that the discrimination (in its wider,  classical
      sense) that distinguishes the scheme that applies to Polish  nationals
      and the scheme that is offered to  Bulgarians  or  Hungarians  renders
      either scheme unlawful.  Indeed, there may well be some Bulgarians  or
      Romanians who would consider the treatment afforded to Polish entrants
      as more beneficial.  All we are prepared to say is  that  the  schemes
      are different.

Other grounds

  77. As the Court made clear in Odelola,  albeit  obiter,  the  concept  of
      legitimate expectation resonated in administrative law principles  and
      those   principles   were   grounded   in   an   acknowledgment   that
      administrative policy might change.  In the course  of  correspondence
      Ms Sempik wrote of the "contractual basis upon  which  my  client  was
      offered settlement in the United Kingdom..."  (see  the  letter  of  9
      July 2004 in relation to another client, Mr  Pasko).   There  was,  of
      course, no contractual relationship between the Secretary of State and
      Mr  Pasko  or  indeed  any  of  Ms  Sempik's  clients,  including  the
      appellants.   The  contractual  basis  was  amended   in   her   later
      submissions to the letter of commitment being 'quasi  contractual'  in
      nature or character, tantamount to a published policy.  The submission
      was developed in paragraph 6 of the appellant's Reply by reverting  to
      the previous submission that the right was contractual, as embodied in
      the letter, and containing the essential elements of a contract,  that
      is offer and acceptance and consideration.  (Later still in the Reply,
      the letters of commitment were  described  by  Ms  Sempik  as  "quasi-
      contractual in character and irrevocable").


  78. We can see  no  justification  for  importing  contractual  or  quasi-
      contractual obligations which have no place in the exercise of  powers
      by  the  Secretary  of  State  either  derived  from  statute  or  the
      prerogative by which she permits non-nationals to enjoy entry  to,  or
      the right to remain in, the United Kingdom.   In  our  judgment,  this
      characterisation of the Secretary of State's letter is unhelpful  and,
      at  worst,  misleading  in  that  it  suggests   a   fetter   on   the
      administrative powers of the Secretary of State to change her position
      which, for the reasons we have given, is untenable.   The  Immigration
      Rules as a whole (and these provisions in particular) do not create  a
      series of contracts with applicants which are  actionable  as  private
      law rights.  The rights that arise from them  arise  by  statute  (for
      example, the right of appeal to  the  Tribunal)  or  by  engaging  the
      process of good administration  that  the  Administrative  Court  will
      review.  In the wealth of literature on them,  such  a  categorisation
      has never been attempted before.  It would be a situation  similar  to
      that envisaged by Buxton LJ in Odelola such that  "there  has  been  a
      consistent pattern of unlawful behaviour on the part of the  Secretary
      of State, albeit not previously discerned by lawyers working  in  this
      field".  The Rules, as  the  Court  made  clear  in  Odelola,  are  an
      expression of the Secretary of State's policy but an  expression  that
      the Secretary of State is entitled to alter.  For the reasons we  have
      given, we do not consider that any such clog exists on  the  Secretary
      of State's freedom to amend the Immigration Rules.


  79. It follows that the Immigration Judges who dismissed  the  appellants'
      appeals reached the only conclusion  properly  open  to  them  on  the
      facts.  We have decided in paragraph 30  (iv)  that,  insofar  as  the
      appeals of Mr Wojtielewicz and Mr Liber were dismissed for failure  to
      make an application within one month of the expiry of their leave, the
      Immigration Judge was in error but the error was not material  because
      it could have had no effect upon the outcome of  their  appeals.   The
      decision in the appeal of Ms Nitecka reveals a material error  of  law
      which we will remedy on reconsideration  by  substituting  a  decision
      dismissing the appeal.  The Immigration Judge in her case had  allowed
      the appeal as a result of her finding that the Secretary of State  was
      bound to grant settlement to the appellant on  legitimate  expectation
      principles.  She also found that the Secretary of State had failed  to
      deal with all applicants in a similar position in an  even-handed  and
      fair way.  As we have set out above neither of those  propositions  is
      sustainable.

  80. None of the decisions envisages removal.  All  the  appellants  remain
      lawfully in the United Kingdom.  The appellants' human rights are  not
      engaged.

      DECISION

      [1] Mr Jozef Truchan, Mrs Beata Truchan (his wife),  Ms  Joanna  Beata
      Truchan and Bernard Jozef Truchan (their children)

           The original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and
           the original determination of the appeal shall stand.

      [2] Mr Janusz Wojtielewicz and Mr Boguslaw Ryszard Liber

           The original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and
           the original determination of the appeal shall stand.

      [3] Ms Katarzyna Maria Nitecka

        1) The original Tribunal made a material error of law.
        2) Having found that the Immigration Judge made a material error of
           law, we substitute a determination dismissing the appeal on  all
           the grounds advanced.












                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                                                11 July 2008

