
BA (321A Immigration Rules mandatory) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00080

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated:
On 10th October 2006                                   On 7th November 2006

                                   Before

                       Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                                    Senior Immigration Judge Goldstein
                      Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy

                                   Between

                                     BA
                                                                   Appellant

                                      V

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr A Lasalle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraph  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  defines  occasions  when   the
cancellation of leave to enter is mandatory.  An overstaying of  six  months
in  breach  of  conditions  of  leave  to  enter  is  "such  a   change   of
circumstances" that leave should be cancelled.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 24th  November  1946.   On
   16th May  2006  an  immigration  officer  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
   cancelled her leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor.   She
   appealed  that  decision  and  was  successful  at  her   appeal   before
   Immigration Judge Ievins.

2.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  5th  July  2006  he  allowed  the
   appellant's appeal on  immigration  grounds.   The  respondent  contended
   there was an error of law and a  failure  to  give  reasons  or  adequate
   reasons for findings on a material matter.  In  particular  it  was  said
   that the requirements at paragraph 321A of HC395, the Immigration  Rules,
   are mandatory.  The immigration judge was, it  was  contended,  wrong  to
   suggest there was a discretion within Rule 321A.   A  senior  immigration
   judge ordered reconsideration on 17th July 2006.


The background

3. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom in 1972 as a  Commonwealth
   citizen.  At least one of her children was born here.  A  number  of  her
   children  attended  fee-paying  schools  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
   appellant has been travelling to and from the UK as part of her  business
   activities and to visit her daughters for  many  years  since  the  early
   1980s.  The appellant has been a widow since 2001.

4. The appellant's business is as  a  trader.   An  important  part  of  her
   business is dealing in costume  jewellery.   She  has  also  invested  in
   property in the United Kingdom  and  currently  owns  two  properties  in
   London NW2.  One of  her  daughters  lives  in  one  of  the  properties.
   Another daughter is a doctor who lives outside London.  She has a son who
   is still in education, and  lives  in  the  appellant's  home  in  Lagos,
   Nigeria.  It appears that for many years the appellant has been receiving
   treatment under the National Health Service in the United  Kingdom.   She
   has been registered with her current doctor since at least 1983.  She has
   various health problems which have called for continuing treatment  which
   is still ongoing.

5. On 15th September 2003 the appellant applied for  a  visitor  visa.   She
   asked that it be valid for five years.  The  application  form  makes  it
   clear that an applicant for such a visa may only stay in  the  UK  for  a
   maximum of six months at any one time provided the  visa  remains  valid.
   She said in 2003 that she intended to stay in the UK for four weeks.  The
   purpose of the visit was described as "holiday and shopping".   She  said
   she had one close relative in the United Kingdom, her daughter.  She  had
   ample money available for her stay and the visa was granted.

6. During the currency of the five  year  visa  the  appellant  entered  the
   United Kingdom on 27th March 2005.  She did not leave the UK  until  22nd
   March 2006.  She overstayed by nearly six months and so broke  the  terms
   of her visa.


The immigration decision

7. The appellant had left the UK in March 2006  but  returned  on  16th  May
   2006.  She was interviewed on landing at Gatwick.  An immigration officer
   cancelled her leave to enter.  In the cancellation report it was said  in
   a box entitled 'Refusal/cancellation':

        "You were given notice of leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
        visitor.  But  I  am  satisfied  that  false  representations  were
        employed or material facts were not disclosed for  the  purpose  of
        obtaining  the  leave,  or  there  has  been  such  a   change   of
        circumstances in your case since the  leave  was  granted  that  it
        should be cancelled because:


         . You admitted to utilising  the  National  Health  Service  since
           1983;
         . You remained in the United Kingdom from March 2005 to March 2006
           thereby overstaying your visa by six months;

        I therefore cancel  your  continuing  leave.   If  your  leave  was
        conferred by an entry clearance this will also have the  effect  of
        cancelling your entry clearance."

8. The appellant in interview had said her last visit to the United  Kingdom
   was in September 2005.  There  was  however  no  stamp  on  her  passport
   indicating she arrived during that month.  She has subsequently  accepted
   that she was in the UK for the year from March 2005 to March 2006.

9. The immigration officer also established  that  the  appellant  had  been
   registered with the National Health Service since 1983.  The  Immigration
   Officer confirmed from her GPs surgery that the appellant  had  used  the
   NHS services since 1984 and had  attended  an  appointment  in  September
   2005. Visitor visas are not issued to enable visitors to the UK to access
   the NHS free of charge.   She  had  been  described  to  the  immigration
   officer by the doctor's surgery as "a regular at the surgery".   She  had
   also attended an appointment in September 2005.  The immigration  officer
   went on to say:-

           "In view of the fact that  the  passenger  had  been  using  the
           National Health Service since 1984 when  not  entitled  and  had
           overstayed her last entry conditions by six  months  I  consider
           that there had been such a change  of  circumstances  since  the
           grant of leave to  enter  conferred  by  the  passenger's  entry
           clearance that it should be cancelled."


The Immigration Rules

10. So far as relevant the Rules provide as follows:-

           "Refusal of leave to enter in relation to a person in possession
           of an entry clearance:


           321.  A person seeking leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  who
                 holds an entry clearance which was duly issued to  him  and
                 is still current may be refused leave to enter  only  where
                 the immigration officer is satisfied that:
               i)  whether  or  not  to  the   holders   knowledge,   false
                  representations were employed or material facts were  not
                  disclosed, either in writing or orally for the purpose of
                  obtaining the entry clearance;
              ii) a change of circumstances since it was issued has removed
                  the basis of the holder's claim to admission....


           Grounds on which leave to enter or remain which is in  force  is
           to be cancelled at port or  while  the  holder  is  outside  the
           United Kingdom:


           321 A.      The following grounds  for  the  cancellation  of  a
                 person's leave to enter or remain which is in force on  his
                 arrival in, or whilst he is  outside,  the  United  Kingdom
                 apply:
                 (1)   there has been such a change of circumstances of that
                       person's case, since the leave  was  given,  that  it
                       should be cancelled; or
                    2)  the  leave  was  obtained  as  a  result  of   false
                       information given by that person or by that  person's
                       failure to disclose material of facts;

11. The immigration judge said in his  determination  "it  is  not  entirely
   clear to me whether the decision to refuse the appellant leave  to  enter
   is under paragraph 321 (i) and (ii) or under 321 A".

12. The "Refusal/Cancellation" notice appears, as indicated,  in  a  box  in
   the relevant report.  In the second sentence the immigration officer says
   that he  is  "satisfied  that  false  representations  were  employed  or
   material facts were not  disclosed  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the
   leave".  This is almost a direct  quote  from  paragraph  321(i)  of  the
   Immigration Rules. It uses similar wording to paragraph 321A(2).

13. The immigration officer goes on to say in the remainder  of  the  second
   sentence in the refusal/cancellation box,  "or  there  has  been  such  a
   change of circumstances in your case since the leave was granted that  it
   should be cancelled".  This is almost a direct quote from 321  A  (1)  of
   those Rules. It also in part mirrors the wording of paragraph 321(ii).


The Immigration Judge's Decision

14. The immigration judge concluded that the appellant had over the last  30
   years travelled to United Kingdom and elsewhere in the world  partly  for
   family reasons and partly because of her business.  He said:-

      "21.  It appears that the appellant has been receiving National Health
           Treatment with her  GP  Doctor  Kelleman  since  1983  and  with
           another doctor before that.  Of course a person  who  is  not  a
           citizen of this country or of the European Union and who  is  in
           this country simply as a visitor  is  not  entitled  to  receive
           National Health Service treatment free of charge  but  I  accept
           and find that the appellant did not know that.  In all innocence
           she has received National  Health  treatment  from  her  current
           doctor since 1983.  Because the appellant did not know that  she
           should not do so I draw no conclusions adverse to her or to  her
           credibility from the fact  that  she  has,  until  now  received
           National Health Service treatment to which she is not entitled.
       22. The appellant is a much travelled woman and I believe  that  the
           appellant knew full well when her leave  to  remain  expired  in
           September 2005, that she should have left this country.  Whether
           or not it was as a result of bad advice, the appellant made, for
           her, a serious mistake when she overstayed.  I  find  that  what
           happened was that in  or  about  September  2005  the  appellant
           planned to go from the United  Kingdom  to  the  United  States.
           Because her Nigerian passport was not valid for long enough  she
           found that she would not be allowed leave to  enter  the  United
           States.  Why she did not apply from the Nigerian authorities  in
           the United Kingdom to extend her Nigerian passport or to  obtain
           a new one, I do not know.  At the same time  the  appellant  was
           seeking and receiving medical treatment for  various  conditions
           from her GP in the United Kingdom.  Rather than  going  back  to
           Nigeria, obtaining a fresh passport, and  then  coming  back  to
           this country on her  valid  Nigerian  multiple  entry  visitor's
           visa, the appellant simply decided to overstay.   She  continued
           to receive medical treatment and finally went back to Nigeria in
           March  2006.   When  the  appellant  was   interviewed   by   an
           immigration officer on her  return  in  May  2006  she  told  an
           untruth when she said  that  she  last  arrived  in  the  United
           Kingdom in September 2005, whereas it was of course March  2005.
           But the appellant has apologised for that mistake."

15. At paragraph 24 of his determination the judge correctly  accepted  that
   the appellant had a right to appeal against the immigration decision.  He
   went on to say:

           "The immigration officer has a discretion under both  Rules  321
           and 321A of HC 395. I  consider  that  the  immigration  officer
           should have exercised  his  discretion  differently.  There  are
           effectively two reasons why the decision of 16th  May  2006  was
           made: that the appellant had received  National  Health  Service
           treatment when she was not entitled to it and she had overstayed
           between September 2005 and March 2006"


Paragraph 321A Immigration Rules

16. Under paragraph 321 an immigration officer is entitled to  refuse  leave
   to enter. Under paragraph 321A an immigration officer has to cancel  such
   leave as has been granted. These are two separate and distinct decisions.
   It is unhelpful as  occurred  here  in  the  box  on  the  decision  form
   containing  that  decision  to  describe   what   is   occurring   as   a
   "Refusal/Cancellation". A separate decision  is  required  for  either  a
   refusal of leave to enter or a cancellation of leave to enter.

17. We are satisfied that  the  decision  in  this  case  was  made  by  the
   immigration officer in reliance on the rules contained in paragraph 321A.
    He "cancels" the appellants continuing leave. He does not  refuse  leave
   to enter under paragraph 321.  The preamble to the rule states "  Grounds
   on which leave to enter...is to be cancelled  at  port...".   Macdonald's
   Immigration Law & Practice (6th Edition) points out at 3.76 "The  wording
   of the rule relating to the cancellation of advance leave (whether or not
   granted by entry clearance) is mandatory: leave to enter or remain 'is to
   be cancelled' on  these  grounds".   Paragraph  321A  was  added  to  the
   Immigration Rules from 30th July 2000 by HC 704.  It is clear to us  that
   the rules contained in the paragraph were intended to be mandatory.   The
   words "is to be cancelled" are used.  These are in clear contrast to  the
   preamble to paragraph 321 "may be  refused  leave  to  enter"  which  are
   arguably discretionary.

18. The  new  paragraph  321A  was  in  our  judgement  inserted  to  define
   occasions when cancellation of leave to enter was mandatory. Had  it  not
   been so paragraph 321 could in most cases of any similarity to  this  one
   have been used to create a discretionary ground for preventing  a  person
   with a visa entering the country.  On appeal it would  then  be  open  to
   them to assert that such discretion as there is in paragraph  321  should
   be exercised differently.

19. We conclude therefore that the immigration judge was wrong in  law  when
   he held that the immigration officer had a discretion  under  rule  321A.
   He does not.  If the  grounds  in  321A  are  made  out  then  any  entry
   clearance which a passenger arriving in the United Kingdom may have is to
   be cancelled.


Conclusions

20. Here the immigration judge accepted that the appellant  has  been  using
   the services of the National Health Service for many years.  As a  matter
   of law she has not been entitled to use those services.  It appears  from
   the evidence that since about May 2006 as she is aware  of  the  position
   she is meeting her bills for healthcare privately.

21. The immigration  judge  concluded  that  she  had  been  receiving  this
   treatment "in all innocence" since 1983.  We note that the appellant  has
   three adult children  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  now.   All  those
   children appear to have been at school in the United Kingdom.   At  least
   one was born here.   One  is  a  doctor.   The  appellant  is  running  a
   successful business.  She has been in the UK on  many  occasions.  It  is
   clear to us that this appellant has a significant and detailed  knowledge
   of British society.  We find the immigration judge's conclusion that  the
   appellant did not know that a Nigerian citizen was not entitled  to  free
   treatment under the Health Service extremely surprising.  But he did  see
   and hear the appellant.  It was not however submitted  to  us  that  this
   decision was perverse and we do not think it right in these circumstances
   to disturb those findings by the judge.

22. The visa, the subject of these proceedings  was  issued  in  2003.   The
   reasons given as to why the appellant was going to the UK  were  "holiday
   and shopping".  The immigration judge found the appellant  did  not  know
   she should not receive free NHS  treatment.   There  is  no  evidence  to
   support any assertion that when the appellant applied  for  the  visa  in
   2003 she intended or proposed to make use of the National Health  Service
   as a result of her entitlement to enter the United Kingdom.

23. When the appellant  applied  for  the  visa  she  completed  a  standard
   application form. There is nothing on  the  form,  unsurprisingly,  about
   medical issues.  There is no evidence that the appellant was  interviewed
   in 2003 .  We do not therefore conclude that there  is  any  evidence  to
   support a finding that in 2003 when the visa was  granted  the  appellant
   gave "false information" or, given the immigration judges finding "failed
   to disclose material facts".  We cannot see therefore that grounds  under
   321A(2) are made out or that the visa should be cancelled on that ground.
   It appears from the evidence that since May 2006, when she indicated  she
   became aware  of  the  position,  the  appellant  has  been  meeting  her
   healthcare bills privately.

24. On the other hand it is clear  on  the  appellant's  own  admission,  as
   accepted by the immigration judge, that the appellant  overstayed  for  a
   period of approximately six months between September 2005 and March 2006.
    She lied about this overstaying  when  interviewed  by  the  immigration
   officer. When she arrived on 16th May 2006 the appellant  clearly  had  a
   leave to enter which was "in force".  The question is must that leave  be
   cancelled because the appellant overstayed for a  period  of  six  months
   prior to attempting to re-enter the United Kingdom.  In other words is an
   overstaying for a period of six months "such a  change  of  circumstances
   ... since the leave was given that it should be cancelled".  If  so  then
   because of the mandatory nature of  paragraph  321A  (1)  the  appellants
   leave to enter was properly cancelled and the appeal must be dismissed.

25. The appellant was an experienced traveller to the UK  when  she  applied
   for her visa in 2003.  She acknowledged in signing her  visa  application
   form that she was only entitled to stay for a "maximum of six  months  at
   any one time".  At that time she indicated on  the  form  that  she  only
   intended to stay for 4 weeks for  holiday  and  shopping.   She  told  an
   untruth about her six months overstay when interviewed in May 2006.  That
   very lie points in our judgement to a clear knowledge on her part of  the
   six month rule.

26. In the body  of  the  immigration  officers  decision  the  use  of  the
   National Health Service and  the  overstaying  by  six  months  are  both
   described as "such a change of circumstances since the grant of leave  to
   enter conferred by the passenger's entry  clearance  that  it  should  be
   cancelled". In our judgement the phrase "such a change of  circumstances"
   must be interpreted to mean a change of such a nature as  to  remove  the
   basis of the holder of the visas claim to admission. That is a matter  of
   fact and degree. A  rule  which  permits  multiple  entries  for  limited
   periods of six months on each occasion is in our view clearly  broken  by
   any person who remains in the UK for a further 6 months  over  and  above
   the time properly allowed. We therefore regard the appellants overstaying
   as "such a change in the circumstances" of the appellant since the  leave
   was granted as to mean the leave should be cancelled as  the  immigration
   officer did in his decision on 16th May 2006.


Decision

27. For the reason given above we regard the  immigration  judge's  decision
   to disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  On  the  facts  as  found  the
   cancellation of the visa was mandatory  and  accordingly  the  appellants
   appeal is dismissed.







                                                        Mr Justice Hodge OBE
                                                                   President
                                                            06 November 2006
