


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|GG (political oppositionists) Ivory Coast CG [2007] UKAIT 00086   |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
| Field House                    |                                |
|14 June  2007                   |                                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY                                   |
|SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LATTER                                   |
|MRS A J F CROSS DE CHAVANNES                                      |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|GG                                                                |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representatives:
For the  appellant:  Mrs  K  Ojutiku  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Freemans
Solicitors
For the respondent: Miss S Leatherland, Home Office Presenting Officer

   i. Political oppositionists in the Ivory  Coast  (including  members  and
      supporters of the  RDR)  do  not  in  general  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecution or serious harm or ill-treatment on return.

  ii. For a political oppositionist who  is  a  high-ranking  member  or  an
      activist, the position may well be different, at least so far as  risk
      in that person's home area is concerned. That is so whether he or  she
      is  a  member  of  the  RDR,  the  northern-based  FN  or  some  other
      oppositionist party or organisation.

 iii. A person who is not a member but merely a supporter of the RDR or  the
      FN (or other oppositionist party or organisation)  may,  depending  on
      the circumstances, be at real risk if he or she is also  an  activist.



  iv. In the context of deciding cases involving persons claiming to  be  at
      risk because of their actual or perceived membership  of,  or  support
      for, political opposition parties or groups, the existence of  certain
      other factors (being a northerner, being a Muslim  and  being  a  West
      African immigrant) may raise the level of risk, although whether  they
      raise it enough to cross the threshold of persecution or serious  harm
      or ill-treatment will depend on the  particular  facts  of  the  case.
      Even in combination with a low or medium-level political profile as an
      oppositionist, such factors will not normally  give  rise  to  a  real
      risk.

   v. Political oppositionists who are able to give a  credible  account  of
      risk in their home area will in general be able to avoid a  real  risk
      of further persecution or serious harm or ill-treatment by relocating.



  vi. AZ (Risk on return) Ivory Coast CG [2004] UKIAT  00170,  heard  4  May
      2004, remains valid as country guidance for  the  period  up  to  that
      date.  DI (Ivory Coast) CG  [2002]  UKIAT  04437  remains  a  relevant
      source of guidance on FGM-related claims.  However,  VG  (Coup)  Ivory
      Coast CG [2002] UKIAT 04020 and TD-K JK  (Relocation  of  ex-President
      Bedie) Ivory Coast CG [2002] UKIAT  03140  no  longer  hold  value  as
      guidance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Cote  d'Ivoire  (or  Ivory  Coast).  In  a
determination notified on  15  October  2004  the  Adjudicator  Mr  T  Jones
dismissed his appeal against a decision dated 26 May 2004 refusing to  grant
asylum and a decision of the same date to remove him as an illegal  entrant.
Following a successful application for  review,  a  panel  of  the  Tribunal
(Immigration Judge Culver, Ms S E  Singer,  Mr  A  A  Lloyd)  decided  on  7
February 2006 that  the  Adjudicator  had  materially  erred  in  law.  That
decision stated:

      "The adjudicator failed to make findings on the central issues of  the
      case. Particularly the  detention  of  the  appellant  and  the  abuse
      allegedly received. The adjudicator did accept that the appellant  was
      the  Treasurer  of  his  local  section  of  the   Rassemblement   Des
      Republicains (RDR). His findings on the documentary evidence are  less
      than clear. Both representatives agree  with  this  statement  of  the
      material error of law."

2. Subsequent directions issued by the Tribunal to the parties  stated  that
the second-stage reconsideration would require a complete rehearing  of  all
issues,  including  credibility.  Before  us  both  parties  confirmed  that
remained their position.  We  accept  that  the  errors  identified  in  the
determination are such that no findings of fact made by the Adjudicator  can
be preserved.

3. This case was originally listed for hearing on 25 October 2006,  but  had
to be adjourned, as a  need  was  identified  for  an  updated  report  from
country expert Mr R Reeve. The appellant's representatives also stated  that
it was their intention to call a second expert, Mr Said Kone, who  was  said
to be a member  of  the  RDR  and  someone  who  also  knew  the  appellant.
Permission was granted at this hearing for both these  witnesses  to  attend
in order to give oral evidence, subject to the revised report  of  Mr  Reeve
and the report and witness statement  of  Mr  Kone  and  skeleton  arguments
being served on the respondent and the Tribunal  on  or  before  10  January
2007. The parties were  also  directed  to  comply  with  standard  Tribunal
Directions  concerning  submissions  of  evidence  and  skeleton  arguments.
Almost none of the directions, specific or standard, were complied with.

4. On 11 June 2007 the appellant's solicitors faxed an  application  for  an
adjournment of the hearing set for 14 June. The application  said  that  the
country expert Mr Reeve was unavailable and that one of  the  witnesses  who
had been recognised as a refugee and who had agreed to give evidence in  the
appellant's case was busy with exams  on  the  day  of  the  hearing,  while
another witness was ill and could not attend. That application  was  refused
on 12 June 2007.

5. At the outset of the hearing Mrs  Ojutiku  did  not  seek  to  renew  the
request for an adjournment but she did seek  permission  to  call  a  female
witness who she said was someone who was an  RDR  activist  and  could  give
evidence about the appellant's RDR involvement. Ms Leatherland  objected  to
this late request.

6. We decided to refuse Mrs Ojutiku's request. This was a case in which  the
parties were given very clear directions as long ago as 25 October  2006  as
to what preparations  they  had  to  make  in  time  for  the  hearing.  The
appellant's  representatives  failed  to  comply  with  each  of  the  three
specific directions which were made (relating to a revised  report  from  Mr
Reeve, a report and  witness  statement  from  Mr  S  Kone  and  a  skeleton
argument) as well as with the standard Tribunal direction  requiring,  inter
alia, all witness statements of the evidence to be called at the hearing  to
be submitted no later than 7 working days before the date  of  the  hearing.
Even as late as 11 June 2007, in the  fax  requesting  an  adjournment,  the
appellant's representatives made no mention of  this  witness.  Mrs  Ojutiku
said that even now there was no witness statement from this person. She  was
not able to assist with why that was the  case  -   save  to  say  that  she
understood from the appellant and those instructing her  that  it  was  only
very recently that the appellant had made  contact  with  this  witness.  We
found this explanation unacceptable. The appellant has been in the UK  since
18 December 2002 and has been legally represented for much of that time.  He
has known for a considerable time that the  issue  of  his  RDR  involvement
both in the Ivory Coast and in the UK has been  viewed  as  central  to  his
case. He and his legal representatives have also known  since  October  last
year that it was seen of particular importance  by  the  Tribunal  that  the
parties in this case have an opportunity to  examine  any  further  evidence
(in addition to that which was before the Adjudicator  and  the  first-stage
reconsideration panel) in advance of the hearing,  so  that  each  would  be
able to prepare any relevant response. For these  reasons  this  application
was refused.

7. We would add that although Mrs Ojutiku did not renew the application  for
adjournment, we would have seen no merit in any  application  based  on  the
other problems mentioned in the fax requesting an  adjournment  and  touched
upon by her at the outset of the hearing. The country expert, Mr Reeve,  has
known for a considerable time what the date of hearing  was  and  there  was
ample  opportunity  before   11   June   for   him   via   the   appellant's
representatives, to have alerted the Tribunal  to  any  problems  concerning
availability. (In any event, as we mention  below,  it  transpires  that  Mr
Reeve  did  not  feel  able  to  assist  with  up-to-date  written  or  oral
evidence). Similarly Mr Kone has known for some time that  the  hearing  was
set for today and that he was supposed to submit  a  written  report  and  a
written statement by 10 January 2007. In the light of  the  failure  of  the
appellant's representatives  to  comply  with  directions  relating  to  his
evidence, we  take  the  view  that  the  appellant  has  been  given  every
opportunity to produce evidence from Mr Kone and  we  are  not  prepared  to
grant any further opportunity. So far as the person mentioned in the fax  as
being involved with exams is concerned, even disregarding  the  oddity  that
before us there were said to be two persons, not one, tied  up  with  exams,
we are not prepared, in the absence of a written statement which  could  and
should have been produced at an earlier date, to  consider  any  adjournment
or late receipt of evidence from such a person or persons.

8. We also need to clarify that we made plain at the outset  that  we  would
not consider any further documents which the appellant  said  were  relevant
to his case but which he had not been able to  adduce  earlier.  We  mention
this because Mrs Ojutiku stated that the appellant  had  informed  her  just
before the hearing that he has  assembled  a  number  of  further  documents
relevant to his case but which were in French only.  She  was  not  able  to
assist with why the appellant had not adduced  these  earlier.  For  similar
reasons as given above, we made clear that we were not prepared to  consider
such documents, even if  they  had  now  existed  in  translated  form.  The
appellant has had ample opportunity to adduce relevant documentary  evidence
and he has not even given an explanation for why  such  documents  were  not
available earlier.

9. We did make clear at the  outset,  however,  that  we  were  prepared  to
accept several items of background evidence which the parties had  submitted
late.  Both  parties  said  that  this  would  not  inconvenience  them   in
presenting their cases. They included: an Amnesty  International  Report  of
23 May 2007 and excerpts from the 10th Progress  Report  of  the  Secretary-
General on the UN Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, 17 October 2006,  the  Foreign
and Commonwealth Travel Advice on Ivory Coast, 15 November  2006  (from  the
appellant); and the US State Department Report on  Cote  d'Ivoire  March  6,
2007, BBC News Reports  4  March  2007-26  April  2007  and  a  COI  Service
Response to a Request of 21 May 2007 (from the respondent).

10. One further matter we need to clarify at this stage concerns the  status
of Mr Reeve's report. As  already  noted  the  appellant's  representatives,
despite stating at an earlier  directions  hearing  that  they  intended  to
adduce an update report from Mr Reeve, and  agreeing  to  a  direction  that
they obtain such a report, failed to do so. Not only that  but  Mrs  Ojutiku
initially sought before us to withdraw Mr Reeve's  original  report,  saying
that the appellant's representatives no longer wished  to  rely  on  it,  as
they were instructed it was no longer  relevant.  However,  apart  from  the
concern that it was now out-of-date, Mrs Ojutiku was unable to identify  any
other reason for seeking to withdraw it,  such  as  admitted  error  in  its
analysis of past events. Indeed, in answer to questions from  the  Tribunal,
she confirmed that Mr Reeve  had  not  said  anything  to  suggest  that  he
disowned the report. In such circumstances we are not prepared to  disregard
this report. It is not for a party to proceedings to  adduce  a  report  and
then, depending on whether it is seen to assist  or  weaken  an  appellant's
case, to withdraw it. Mr Reeve was asked to produce an  updated  report  but
failed to do so. We do of course take fully into account Mr Reeve's  concern
that his existing report not be taken as up to  date,  but  it  is  relevant
evidence which is before us.

11. Finally, it is appropriate to note that Senior Immigration Judge  Latter
has contributed significantly to the writing of this determination.

The Appellant's Evidence

12. We heard evidence from the appellant. He has set out the  basis  of  his
claim in his statement dated 1 December 2003 submitted  with  his  Statement
of Evidence Form  dated  5  April  2004.   He  has  also  submitted  witness
statements dated 6 July 2004, 10 October 2004, January 2006 and  19 October
2006.  He was interviewed about his claim on 21 May  2004,  a  copy  of  the
interview appearing at Annex C of the appeal papers.

13. In his oral evidence the appellant  adopted  these  various  statements.
They can be summarised as follows.  The appellant was born on 2 August  1965
in Anyama, a suburb of Abidjan in the southern part of the country.   He  is
a Muslim and is from the Bete ethnic group based in the centre west  of  the
Ivory Coast.  He was a prosperous businessman.  He and his brother  used  to
have three shops which sold construction  materials.   The  appellant  first
became interested in politics in 1994 when other  parties  were  allowed  in
what had previously been a one party state.  The appellant became an  active
member of the RDR, an offshoot of the Parti Democratique  de  Cote  d'Ivoire
(PDCI).  He was an active member and  from  1996  onwards  was  one  of  the
leaders in his area, Treichville in Adjame and  was  treasurer  of  a  local
branch.  After the presidential election on 22 October 2000  won  by  Lauren
Gbagbo of the Front Populaire Ivorien (FPI), there was a dispute as  to  the
result and the RDR leader called for renewed elections.

14. The appellant took to the  streets  with  others  to  protest.   On  his
account large numbers were involved as his party was supported by more  than
50 % of the population.  The  police  opened  fire  on  the  marchers.   The
appellant was arrested and imprisoned for 45 days  initially  at  the  Agban
Military Camp and then in the prison in Yopougan.  He  was  physically  ill-
treated and beaten regularly.  He was hit over his left  eye  and  sustained
an injury which is still visible.  After 45  days  all  the  detainees  were
released  as  there  was  an  amnesty  of  political   prisoners   following
representations made by the French authorities.  When he  returned  home  he
found that one of his shops had been burnt down.   He  continued  to  be  an
active party member.  One of his remaining shops was located in  Cocody,  an
FPI area and, because he was associated with the RDR, his  shop  came  under
suspicion.  In 2001 he received a visit from four members  of  the  judicial
police asking to inspect materials kept in the shop and he was asked  if  he
was storing arms.

15. On 19 September 2002 there was an attempted coup d'�tat  and  about  100
people were killed.  The following day rebel  soldiers  from  the  Mouvement
Patriotique de Cote d'Ivoire (MPCI) invaded the rest  of  the  country  from
the north.  On 21 September 2002 government newspapers attributed  the  coup
to the RDR.  The following day  the  house  belonging  to  the  RDR  leader,
Lassane Ouattara, was burnt down.   This  was  about  250  metres  from  the
appellant's shop in Cocody. The next day the appellant was  on  his  way  to
the  shop  when  he  saw  a  large  crowd  outside  breaking  the   windows,
vandalising and looting it.  An employee was with him and  went  as  far  as
the crowd and came back to tell the appellant that everything was burnt  and
that another of his employees, KA, had been beaten to death  and  was  lying
in a pool of blood.  The appellant drove away to the house of a  friend  and
fellow party member, SC, who told him that he was wanted by  the  government
and was accused of using his shop as an arms depot for the rebels.

16. The next day the appellant went to see his  deceased  employee's  family
to tell them about his death and when he returned he saw a  large  crowd  in
front of his house.  He decided to drive straight to his  father's  home  in
Anyama.  His father suggested that  the  appellant  hide  his  car  and  ask
someone to take him to their village, Daloa, in the country where  he  could
hide.  On 13 October that village was taken over by rebel  forces  from  the
north but on 20 October the rebels were forced out of the village.   To  the
appellant's surprise people from the village started to threaten  and  abuse
him and his relatives alleging that they had helped the rebels.  He felt  it
was unsafe to stay and so he went to the SC's family home in Port  Bouet  in
Abidjan.  Whilst in hiding there he  heard  of  more  than  ten  arrests  of
members of the RDR and he felt that he  had  no  choice  but  to  leave  the
country.

17. He left Abidjan on 14 December 2002 travelling by small boat  to  Ghana
where he stayed until 18 December 2002.  He did not stay there  as  friends
explained there was an extradition agreement between  Ghana  and  the  Ivory
Coast and for this reason he would not be  safe  there.   He  obtained  some
travel documents and boarded a Ghana Airways flight from Accra  arriving  in
London 18 December 2002.  He was able to pass  through  immigration  control
using his Ghanaian documents. He said that he no longer has these papers  as
they were stolen from his bag while he was staying  at  a  homeless  hostel.
He was befriended by a taxi driver  who  told  him  that  he  should  go  to
Croydon to claim asylum.  This the appellant did on 2 January 2003.

18. In his oral evidence he confirmed that the  summonses  he  had  produced
had been left at his home and sent to him in this country by members of  his
family.  Other documents  produced  had  also  been  sent  by  friends.   He
confirmed that he had been detained for 45 days, not 40 days as he had  said
at interview (Q20).  He was still in fear of returning to the  Ivory  Coast.
 If he was not killed he would be sent to jail.  There was fear and  hatred
there and, 20% of the people who had died  in  the  country  were  from  his
party.  It was said that the situation was improving but there was no  peace
either in the country or in the people's hearts.  He was scared to  go  back
because his enemies were still in  power.   When  asked  about  the  ongoing
peace process, he said there had been previous peace treaties but  they  had
not gone anywhere.

19. In cross examination he confirmed that he had been in business  and  was
involved in running three shops.  He had worked  for  the  RDR:  he  thought
this might be for about twenty-twenty five hours per  week.    He  confirmed
that he was the local treasurer in Treichville.  There were  other  sections
in the local party including those involved with mobilisation,  finance  and
organisation.  Their departmental secretary was  CG  who  had  provided  the
certificate at A 6.  He had been able to keep  in  contact  with  him  until
2005.

20. The appellant estimated that about 60% of the population  were  involved
in the demonstrations in October 2000.  He had been at the front of a  group
and had been lucky in the sense that  the  military  came  from  behind  and
started shooting those behind  him.   He  had  been  arrested,  taken  to  a
gendarmerie and then to prison.  There were  45  people  in  a  small  cell.
When he was released he was given a certificate (2A36).

21. He had been personally targeted as a member of the  RDR.   In  September
2002 his shop in Cocody had been attacked.  He had not been in the area  but
he was on his way to the shop and  he  could  see  the  crowd  outside.   He
learnt that one of his employers had been badly injured.  He went  to  visit
him at the hospital but he had died the following night.  The crowd  outside
the shop had sticks and machetes.  He had got  information  about  what  had
happened from Mr SC.  He told the appellant that  those  involved  were  not
robbers but from the FPI.  He also said that the government  was  after  him
because it believed he had allowed the shop to be used for keeping  weapons.
 He said that he been under a duty to tell his employee's parents about his
death and he did go to see his relatives.  He then went  to  his  own  house
and saw people outside.  He went to his father who advised him to go to  the
village as it would not be safe in  Abidjan.   He  did  have  money  and  he
explained that in Africa if you were a businessman it would not  be  unusual
to have �2,000 in your  pocket.   He  had  not  intended  to  come  to  this
country.  He had wanted to  go  into  hiding  to  avoid  being  killed.   He
confirmed that it was his claim that he was a high  ranking  member  of  the
RDR.  He referred to his membership  card.   There  were  other  people  who
could have come with him to the hearing but only one person  had  been  able
to do so.  When he was told that he could claim asylum, he had done so.

22. In answer to questions from the Tribunal he said that he  had  not  been
released on any condition after his detention nor had he been  taken  before
a court.  He  had  two  brothers  in  Ivory  Coast;  he  did  not  know  the
whereabouts of one of them now.  He thought he had  been  summonsed  because
he was wanted by the government on  suspicion  of  keeping  weapons  at  his
premises.

The Submissions

23. Miss Leatherland urged us to treat  the  Country  Guidance  case  of  AZ
(Risk on return) Ivory  Coast  CG  [2004]  UKAIT  00170  as  still  offering
reliable guidelines on risk categories in the Ivory Coast. There was  now  a
considerable body of evidence before the Tribunal dealing with events  since
early 2004, but it did not support a  contention  that  even  low  level  or
ordinary members of the RDR would be at risk. Even in respect  of  a  person
who faced charges for offences seen as political, there was now  an  amnesty
and all such prosecutions were said to have been dropped. Furthermore,  2007
had seen major changes. The UNHCR Position Paper of  October  2006  was  now
out of date, as was Mr Reeve's report and most  of  the  background  reports
analysing the situation in the Cote d'Ivoire.  If it  was  now  safe  for  a
former President to return to the Ivory Coast, then it  was  certainly  safe
for ordinary members of political opposition parties. The new  power-sharing
agreement was having a positive effect. Ivory Coast was  now  a  multi-party
democracy.   Recent  reports  (she  quoted  from  a  Home   Office   Country
Information Bulletin 2/2004) showed a decrease of attacks on  Muslims  (6.2)
and only relatively few incidents of attacks on RDR members  and  supporters
(64.2).  She  accepted  there  remained  significant  levels  of   violence,
including politically and non-politically motivated attacks, but  there  was
no systematic targeting of RDR members or supporters.  The 2006  FCO  travel
advice was directed specifically to persons who  were  British  citizens  or
who were non-Ivorian foreigners; it was not intended as  a  risk  assessment
relevant to refugee-determinations.

24. Mrs Ojutiku's submissions on the general risk  categories  made  several
main points.  The AZ  case  should  no  longer  be  considered  as  reliable
country guidance.   Events  between  2004-2006  had  demonstrated  that  the
degree of insecurity and the levels of violence were  more  entrenched  than
AZ had envisaged.  She urged us not to  attach  any  significant  weight  to
other recent  events  of  since  March/April  2007.  As  the  appellant  had
emphasised, the period since 2002 had seen many peace  agreements  come  and
go.

25. There was no sound reason to think that the latest one  will  prove  any
different especially as  President  Gbagbo  and  the  FPI  retain  principal
control of the army, the police and the security forces.    To set store  by
a series of events spanning only a few months  (4  March  2007  -June  2007)
would be foolhardy.   The background evidence concerning 2006  continued  to
document attacks on  RDR members and supporters.  Significantly a number  of
the references describe attacks  on  RDR  members,  without  differentiating
between high- level or low-level  members.  She  submitted  that  we  should
adhere closely to the October 2006 UNHCR position  paper.   The  authorities
still have every reason to want to  visit  harm  upon  political  opponents,
including members and supporters of the RDR.

26. Mrs Ojutiku accepted that being of Bete  ethnicity  did  not  appear  to
place person at any significantly greater risk, but  there  was  significant
evidence that being a northerner and being  a  Muslim  added  to  risk  were
additional risk factors.

27. In summary, Mrs Ojutiku argued that mere membership or support  for  the
RDR sufficed to put a returnee at risk.

28. Turning to the appellant's particular case, Miss  Leatherland  submitted
that the appellant had not been a credible  witness  and  that  his  answers
were inconsistent and evasive.  There was no clear evidence about his  level
of involvement with the RDR.  It was not likely,  if  he  was  working  full
time as a businessman, that he would  have  the  time  to  be  a  high-level
activist for the RDR.  There was no satisfactory  evidence  to  confirm  his
position within the party.   There  were  doubts  about  the  dates  of  his
arrest.  The release document was dated 14 December 2000 and  this  was  not
consistent with being arrested on 23 October 2000 and held for  40-45  days.
If he had been wanted by the authorities there was no reason why they  would
not have taken action against him before  2002.   The  appellant's  evidence
was confused about the events of September 2002 and  in  particular  whether
he had sent a friend or Mr SC to go and find out what was happening at  his
shop.  The appellant had used forged documents to  travel  to  this  country
and  had  delayed  in  claiming  asylum.   The  documents  produced  by  the
appellant were unreliable. The death certificate of  his  employee  did  not
identify the cause of death.  Despite the length of time the  appellant  had
been in this country, very little documentation had been produced  from  the
RDR to confirm his account.

29. Mrs Ojutiku submitted that the appellant's evidence was credible.  There
was nothing inconsistent, she said, about the appellant running  a  business
and working for the RDR at the same time.  Evidence had been produced  about
the appellant's  role  in  the  RDR:  A6/7.   No  adverse  inferences  could
properly be drawn from the difficulties that  the  appellant  had  with  the
precise dates of detention.  The fact remained  that  he  was  detained  and
released after international pressure  was  put  on  the  authorities.   The
employee's death certificate did record that his parents were  deceased  but
it would be natural for the appellant to want to make sure  that  his  close
relatives were properly informed.  There was no proper basis for drawing  an
adverse inference from the delay in claiming  asylum.   He  had  arrived  in
this country on 18 December 2000 and claimed asylum on 2 January  2001.   In
the light of Christmas and the New Year holiday this delay could  hardly  be
described as unreasonable.

30. Against this background she asked us to accept the appellant's  evidence
that he was a high-level RDR member or consider that on  the  basis  of  his
evidence he was at least a medium-level RDR  member.  Even  if  we  did  not
accept this, we should find that he was still a refugee for the  reason  she
had already stated, namely that mere membership for the RDR sufficed to  put
a returnee at risk.

The Background Evidence

31. We had before us a copious  body  of  background  materials,  which  are
itemised in the Annex. Below we summarise the main  sources,  but  we  shall
first seek to describe the general situation and  basic  details  about  the
RDR - drawing on all the evidence we had before us.

The General Situation

32. Since becoming independent in 1990 the Ivory Coast has  had  contrasting
experiences. Under its first President, Felix  Houphouet  Boigny  who  ruled
for thirty-three years until his death in 1993, the country  was  considered
the  wealthiest  and  most  stable  country  in  the  West  African  region,
notwithstanding  the  economic  recession  in  the   1980s,  when  its  main
exports, cocoa and  coffee  were  hit  by  plunging  commodity  prices.  The
government of the country's second President, Henri  Konan  Bedie,  did  not
maintain the careful ethnic and regional  balance.   Laurent  Gbabgo  became
the country's third elected President in 2000,  but  the  election  excluded
those of the major parties,  the  PDCI  and  the  RDR,  and  was  marred  by
significant  violence  and  irregularities.   A  failed  coup   attempt   in
September 2002 split the country into  two,  the  rebel  "Forces  Nouvelles"
(NF) retaining control  of  the  northern  60%  of  the  country,  with  the
government controlling the slightly smaller but  numerically  larger  south.
Various peace  agreements  and  UN  Resolutions  followed,   none  of  which
resulted in any real change: the Marcoussis Accord  in  2003;  the  February
2004 Resolution 1528 (approving  the  UN  Operation  Cote  d'Ivoire  (ONUCI)
deploying 6,000 peace keeping corps  alongside  the   4,000  French  Licorne
force);  Accra III (July 2004); the  Pretoria  Agreement  (April  6,  2005);
Pretoria II (June 29, 2005); the 6 October  2006 extension by  the   African
Union (AU) and UN Security Council Resolution   1721  of  Gbagbo's  term  of
office by up to one year and the agreed installation  of  economist  Charles
Konan Banny as Prime Minster with the  mandate  of  disarming  militias  and
rebels and organising elections.  In March 2006 the rebel leader,  Guillaume
Soro, had taken up his seat of  government  in  the  rebel-controlled  north
which has remained under his control since.

33. As to what has happened more recently, we only have news reports  to  go
by: their contents is described below at para 71 under the  heading  "Recent
developments". Nevertheless we can note here that they appear  to  chronicle
a number of major developments  following  the  signing  of  the  Ougadougou
peace agreement in early 2007  institutionalising  power-sharing.  In  April
2007 Guillane Soro was appointed Prime  Minister  and  formed  a  government
comprising thirty-one ministers from different  parties  and  organisations,
including President Gbagbo's FPI (11), his  own  FN  (5)  and  the  RDR  and
Democratic Party (5). The UN and French troops withdrew  from  the  600  km-
long buffer zone (or "confidence zone") dividing the  rebel-run  north  from
the loyalist-controlled south. In the same month an amnesty law was  passed.
Measures have also been taken to begin the process of disarming fighters  on
both sides, to fix a date for free and fair elections within 10  months  and
to pursue  a  mass  identification  programme  to  give  identity  cards  to
disenfranchised, mainly immigrant Ivorians.

34. As regards the state of human rights in the Ivory  Coast,  there  is  as
yet no hard evidence that the new  power-sharing  agreement  struck  between
President  Gbagbo and Guillame Soro in early  2007  has  resulted  in  major
improvements. Hence for the moment the situation has  to  be  considered  as
continuing to exhibit the patterns which have dominated since  the  outbreak
of civil war in 2002.

35. The  US  State  Department  Reports  and  other  major  country  reports
covering the period since September  2002 up to  the   present  consistently
describe the government's and rebel organisation's human rights  records  as
poor. Reported human rights abuses attributed to the government include:

      "restriction of citizens' rights to change their government; arbitrary
      and  unlawful  killings,  including  summary  executions  by  security
      forces, pro-government militias and student groups;    disappearances;
      torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment
      by security forces,  pro-government  militias  and  a  student  group;
      deplorable prison and detention centre  conditions;   security  forces
      impunity,  arbitrary arrest and detention;  denial of  a  fair  public
      trial;  arbitrary  interference  with  privacy,   family,   home   and
      correspondence,  ;  police  harassment  and  abuse   of    non-citizen
      Africans;  use  of  excessive  force  and  other  abuses  of  internal
      conflicts;  restrictions  on  freedoms  of  speech,  press,   peaceful
      assembly, association, and movement.  Corruption,  discrimination  and
      violence against women;  female genital mutilation, (FGM); child abuse
      and exploitation; trafficking in persons; forced labour  including  by
      children, and child  labour  including  hazardous  labour"  (US  State
      Department Report for 2006, March 6, 2007)

36. Reported human  rights  abuses  attributable  to  the  NF  include:  the
killing and disappearance of civilians  in  NF-held  territories,  arbitrary
arrests, detentions and ad hoc justice.

37. On the social front,  the  crisis  has  exacerbated  the  poverty  rate,
accounting for an estimated  44%  of  the  country.   On  the  Human  Rights
Development  Index  (HRDI),  the   county's   position   has   significantly
deteriorated; the country now ranks 163 of 179 countries noted.

38. So far as opposition parties in the south are concerned,  the  US  State
Department reports  continue  to  record  disappearances  (disappearance  of
journalists and ordinary  citizens  were  specifically  noted)  and  violent
actions and threats against both political opposition  activists  and  human
rights activists. On p.4 the  latest  report  observes  that  "[t]here  were
numerous reports that opposition leaders received  death  threats  over  the
phone and from armed men dressed in fatigues, and that  armed  men  harassed
family members". Police and security forces used excessive or  lethal  force
to disperse demonstrations. At page 5 it is stated:

      "Security forces remained on  heightened  alert  for  potential  rebel
      infiltrators or active sympathizers erected  numerous  roadblocks  and
      searched Abidjan neighbourhoods. Individuals who were associated  with
      opposition parties or rebellion leaders or believed to be sympathisers
      were subjected to increased harassment and abuse".

39. There were reports of security forces  conducting  warrantless  searches
of opposition party officials' residences, allegedly in search  of  weapons.
Mention was also made that  other  groups  who  supported  President  Gbagbo
attacked opposition newspapers, several  ONUCI  convoys,  and  person  under
ONUCI protection  during  the  year.  However,  there  were  no  reports  of
political prisoners or detainees. Although there are a number of  newspapers
critical of the government, according to  the  latest  US  State  Department
Report  the  government  and  the  ruling   FPI   "continued   to   exercise
considerable influence over the official media's programme content and  news
coverage, using them  to  promote  government  policies  and  criticise  the
opposition".  On December 12, President Gbagbo renewed a ban  on  all  forms
of outdoor public demonstrations in Abidjan  until  June  15,  2007.  Police
harassed  opposition  members  at  the  airport  and   sometimes   prevented
foreigners from travelling overland between the north and the south.

The RDR

40. The  Rassemblement des Republicans (RDR) was started in  October   1994,
as a dissident faction of the ruling PDCI party. By  1994  it  had  replaced
the FPI as the main opposition party.  It draws its main  support  from  the
(mainly Muslim) north. As the major opposition party in the south,  the  RDR
has often borne the brunt  of  the  government's  repressive  measures.  The
latest US  State  Department  Report   notes,  for  example,  that  in  2006
security forces arrested and detained several hundred  RDR  members  in  the
wake of the July 2005 violence in  Anyama and Agboville,  sixty-one  persons
being charged. On  May   5,  2006  three  police  officers  arrested  Mariam
Sangone-Traore, the wife  of  an  RDR  local  leader  for  the  district  of
Yupougon in  Abidjan, alleging that she had forged identity papers (she  was
later released).  On May 8, security forces  in  the  district  of  Yopougon
entered the homes of RDR members to search for weapons  that  the   RDR  had
allegedly distributed to its followers (no weapons  were  found).   In  July
2006 the RDR reported that its militants were attacked in clashes  over  the
UN-backed identification programme  (designed  to  register  over  3,000,000
unregistered   workers).   RDR   members   occasionally   had   difficulties
associating freely and there were  reports  that  security  forces  harassed
members who had been  "disappeared"; most were RDR.  From time to  time  RDR
activists also had  to  contend  with  adverse  attention   from  government
militias: e.g. on July 2, 2006 the Young Patriots attacked a  delegation  of
RDR activists in Boloquin.

41. However, the RDR was able to function as a legal  opposition  party.  To
some extent its level of activity depended on governmental actions  e.g.  in
2006 the youth wings of both the  RDR and the PDCI were reported  as  having
become more active following the  security  forces  violently  repressing  a
demonstration by the  unarmed opposition.

42. We turn to summarise the main reports which were produced before  us  as
well as pre-existing country guidance. After that, we will turn  to  attempt
a  summary  of  recent  developments  in  the  light  of  recent  press/news
cuttings.

Home Office Country of Origin Service: Ivory Coast, 14 November 2006.

43. This is a short document: leaving aside its index  it  occupies  only  8
pages. Since it largely draws and relies on reports  we  mention  below,  no
separate summary of this source is necessary

Amnesty International Report 2007: Cote d'Ivoire, 23 May  2007

44. Despite being dated May 2007  this  report,  disappointingly,  does  not
cover the major events  which  have  taken  place  since  March/April  2007.
However, it remains useful as a  source  describing  the  general  situation
prior to that date.  Its report and assessment is very  much  in  line  with
that contained in the US State Department Report, March 2007.

Freedom House: 'Freedom in the World 2006: Cote d'Ivoire', 6.9.2006.

45. This report's overview was:


      "Deadlines for  disarmament  passed  in  2005,  and  presidential  and
      legislative elections scheduled for the end of the year were postponed
      for at least  one  year.   Cote  d'Ivoire  remained  split  between  a
      government-controlled  south  and   rebel-controlled   north.   Ethnic
      tensions remained rife, especially in  the  country's  volatile  west,
      although press freedom improved slightly."

46.  The  report  notes  the  important  step  taken  towards  breaking  the
political  deadlock in  Cote  d'Ivoire  in  2005,  when   Gbagbo  signed  an
executive order that would allow his main  opponent,  Outtara,  to  run  for
President  (the  nationality  law   had   formerly   required   presidential
candidates to have two Ivorian born parents).  It later states:

      "The New York-based Human Rights Watch (HRW) has  reported  that  pro-
      government militias kill, torture and harass civilians  with impunity.
       Most of the militia members are from Gbagbo's Bete  tribe  in  south-
      central Cote d'Ivoire. HRW said in a May 2005 report  that  government
      forces in the first  three  months  of  the  year  were  training  and
      equipping militia forces, including Liberian mercenaries, to renew the
      war against the New Forces.  The report said the government was making
      increased use of the militia by  targeting  northerners,  Muslims  and
      West African immigrants."

The Foreign and Commonwealth Travel Advice for  the  Ivory  Coast  dated  15
November 2006

47. This document summarises its advice as follows:

      "We continue to advise  against  all  travel  to  Ivory  Coast.    The
      situation in the country remains fragile and unpredictable  especially
      in the far west of the country, which should be avoided at all times.


      There is potential for  unrest,  with  implications,  for  the  sudden
      deterioration of law and order, at any time.  Political  tensions  are
      particularly heightened at present  as  the  peace  process  is  at  a
      critical stage with UN Security Council Resolution 1633 expiring on 31
      October. ..."


UNHCR, "Update on International Protection  Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from
Cote d'Ivoire", November 2006

 48. This  October  UNHCR  Position  Paper  begins  by  recalling  that  its
previous position paper of January 2004  had  recommended  a  moratorium  on
returns to  Cote  d'Ivoire  with  the  exception  of  individuals  from  the
economic capital  Abidjan, whose relatives had been contacted  in  the  city
prior to their return (in order to avoid  creating  internal  displacement).
It explained that its January 2004 position depended on a:

      "relatively favourably level of security having  been  established  in
      Abidjan, in contrast to the presence of armed  elements  elsewhere  in
      the country which posed a serious threat to both  people  and  propery
      outside Abidjan".

49. Since then there had been "significant  negative  developments"  in  the
country despite the signing of further enhancements to the  Linas-Marcoussis
Peace Agreement. The paper pointed to the acute situation in  the  country's
western region, particularly within the Zone of Confidence, as a  result  of
an increase in both inter-ethnic violence and  crime.   It  cited  Professor
Walter Kalin, the Secretary-General's Representative on the Human Rights  of
Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who, as a result of his mission to  Cote
d'Ivoire from  17-24 April 2006,  concluded that there  was  a   "protection
crisis in terms of the  human rights  of  the  internally  displaced"  [some
700,000 persons].   The paper concludes:

      "In light of the foregoing, it is apparent that  Cote d'Ivoire is, for
      the  time being, unstable and unsafe, with  the  rule  of  law  having
      broken down  and  the  government  absent  from  large  parts  of  the
      country."

50. Under the subhead "Security Developments", the paper states:

      "Cote d'Ivorie remains one  of  the  most  insecure  nations  in  West
      Africa. Apart from the two main  fighting  factions,  namely  the  FDS
      (government forces) in the south  and  the  FAFN  (opponents  of   the
      government) in the north, rather there are large numbers of  militants
      and uncontrolled armed elements all over the country ...  Despite  the
      presence of the   11,000 strong international force comprised of UN as
      well as French forces, the  security situation in the  country remains
      unstable and unpredictable, with  frequent  reports  of  incidents  of
      extreme violence, including  looting,  extortion  and  armed  attacks,
      which occur notably in the Zone of Confidence.:

      Whilst recognising that not all asylum seekers from Cote d'Ivoire  may
      qualify for refugee status under the 1951 Convention, UNHCR recommends
      that persons fleeing Cote d'Ivoire and seeking asylum abroad should be
      recognised as in need of international protection.  Where such persons
      are found not  to  be  eligible  under  the  criteria  of  the    1951
      Convention and/or  1967  Protocol  ...,  they  should  be  accorded  a
      complementary form of protection  unless  excluded  or  based  on  the
      exclusion clauses of the   1951 Convention.  In  countries  where  the
      1969  OAU  Convention  Governing  the  Specific  Aspects  of   Refugee
      Problems in Africa is applicable,  Art 1(2)  should  be  applied  with
      regard to those who are not excludable but are not eligible under  Art
      1(1).

51. More particularly UNHCR recommends that:

      1)    All claims should be examined  in  fair  and  efficient  refugee
           status  determination  procedures,  on  the   basis   of   their
           individual merits, against the criteria of the  1951  Convention
           and/or 1967 protocol, or, where applicable,   Art  1(1)  of  the
           1969 OAU  Convention.  Due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the
           possible grounds for exclusion ...


      2)    With regard to individuals found  to  be  eligible  for  refugee
           status under the 1951 Convention and/or 1967 Protocol,  but  the
           individual is not  excluded  from  international  protection,  a
           complementary form of protection should be  granted.   Similarly
           in countries where the 1969 OAU Convention  is  applicable,  the
           current  situation  in   Cote   d'Ivoire   warrants   favourable
           consideration of  the  refugee  claim  under  Art  1(2)  of  the
           Convention, unless the exclusion clauses are found applicable.

      3)    No asylum seeker from Cote d'Ivoire should be forcibly  returned
           until such time as the security and human  rights  situation  in
           the country has improved sufficiently to justify it."

Expert Report of Richard Reeve, 9 October  2006

52. We have already noted our reasons for deciding to take this report  into
account.

53. Mr Reeve describes his specialist field as political and  security  risk
and the role of the military in the government and society in  West  Africa.
He worked as an independent consultant but has been an Associate Fellow  for
the African Programme at Chatham  House  (Royal  Institute  for  Intentional
Affairs), London since September 2005 and is their primary contract on  West
Africa. Between November 2000  and  September  2005  he  worked  for  Jane's
Information Group producing a number of conflict  analysis  publications  in
their  name.   He  remains  Africa  correspondent  for  Jane's  Intelligence
Review.  In  2005  he  advised  the  UN  Group  of   Experts   tasked   with
investigating the arms embargo  on  Ivory  Coast.   His  report  covers  the
general situation in the Ivory Coast and the appellant's  risk  profile  (on
the basis of the appellant's own account).

54. Dealing with political oppositionists generally he states:

      "Those  groups  opposed  to  the  current  government  or  significant
      elements within the government may be summarised as the four political
      parties aligned  in  the  Rassemblement  des  houphouetistas  pour  le
      development et la paix (RHDP) and the armed insurgent  movement  Force
      Nouvelle, which have controlled the north of the  country  since  late
      2002.  All these groups have been represented in government  at  least
      since March 2003, although  most  power  still  rests  with  President
      Gbagbo and a parallel administration of his  Front  Popularie  Ivorian
      (FPI)."

55. He situates the position of the RDR  within  the  opposition  forces  as
follows:

      "The ... RDR party, for which  [the appellant]  has  been  a  district
      treasurer of Abidjan, is seen as particularly strongly opposed to  the
      FPI because of the  perceived overlap of its agenda and  support  base
      with the FN rebels and the strong electoral challenge it is likely  to
      present. Many southerners and FPI supports identify all Ivorians  with
      northern or foreign origins as supporters  of  both  the  RDR  and  FN
      rebellion]."

56. On the risk to returnees perceived as oppositionists he writes:

      "The risk to returnees - which I hold to be similar  to  the  risk  to
      those already residing in Ivory Coast - identified as supporting those
      opposition groups derives from the  proliferation  of  pro-FPI  street
      militia and parallel  security  forces,  chiefly  in  Abidjan.   Their
      attacks on opposition supporters have  been  sporadic  and  relatively
      infrequent but would be likely to escalate in the  likely  event  that
      the current peace process goes off track.  It is reasonable to believe
      that they have a good knowledge of the activity and residence of  most
      opposition organisers, if not their movement to and from the UK.


      The pro-FPI militia so far operate  with  complete  impunity  and  the
      apparent complicity of the uniformed  security  services.  It  is  not
      reasonable to believe that an opposition activist would seek to expect
      protection from them if persecuted. Similarly, the  Ivorian  judiciary
      is political, over-burdened and unlikely to provide protection."

57. His report goes on to explain that in view of  the  various  experiments
in multi-party governments of national unity, which have seen the RDR,  PDCI
and small parties being given ministerial portfolios for brief periods,  the
term "current Government" is  best  understood  as  referring  to  President
Gbagbo and the FPI, rather than through the de  jure  structures  that  have
included the RDR and some other "opposition" parties and movements for  most
of the last  four  years.  He  subdivides  opposition  forces  into  unarmed
political parties and the "armed opposition". Of the  latter  the  principal
component, he says, is the Forces Nouvelles (FN).  Of the  former,  the  two
major political parties are the PDCI and the RDR.  The PDCI,  which  was  in
power between  1960 and December 1999, has its main support base  among  the
Baoule people of the centre-east, as an area of the country  which  includes
both the national political capital, Yamoussoukro  and  the  FN's  de  facto
northern capital, Bouake.  Its head is still  the  former  president,  Henri
Konan Bedie.   Reeve said that the PDCI is generally seen as  a  more  truly
national party than its southern and northern rivals.

58. On the RDR and its relationship with the other unarmed parties Mr  Reeve
writes:

      "The RDR was founded as a breakaway from the PDCI in 1994,  reflecting
      a schism between Bedie (then President of the National  Assembly)  and
      Prime Minister Alassone Dramone Outtara (1990-1993) over the country's
      leadership after the death  of  founding  President  Felix  Houphouet-
      Boligny.  Whereas the  FPI dominated the southwest and the  PDCI  held
      on to the centre-east, the  RDR  attracted  support  from   the   poor
      north, which  felt  discriminated  against  by   Bedie's  increasingly
      southern-based government. Like  many  others  of  northern  parentage
      Outtara    was  disenfranchised  during  the  late  1990s   when   the
      authorities  claimed he was Burkinabe rather than Ivorian and declared
       him eligible to  contest the Presidency.  Because of  this,  the  RDR
      has boycotted every national election since 1996.  Only  the  muncipal
      elections of March 2001, which it won,  indicate  its  likely  support
      relative to the FPI and the PDCI.


      Since May 2005, the RDR and PDCI have been  joined  in  an  opposition
      coalition known as  the  Rassembelement  des  houphouetistes  pour  le
      development et  la  paix  (RHDP).   This  also  includes  two  smaller
      parties: Union pour la democratie et la paix (EDPCI)  created  by  the
      late General Guei in  2001 after he was forced from power,  and  often
      seen to represent the interests of is native west (FN  occupied);  and
      the  Mouvement des forces de  l'avenir  (MFA).  However,  Outtara  and
      Bedie are historic rivals, only united by a desire to unseat the FPI."

59. Mr Reeve does not consider that the  armed  opposition  group  FN  seeks
power in its own right; its policy  positions  have  largely  been  borrowed
from the established and political parties which most  northerners  support.
It seeks, he says:

      "a change in the political rules and an end to discrimination  against
      northern Ivorians. As such, it is informally  aligned  with  the  RHDP
      through  the  G7  grouping,  via  which  it  usually  coordinates  its
      responses to major developments with the unarmed opposition."

60. He explains that many in the country have seen these links to show  that
 Outtara has been behind organising  of   the  coup  and  coup  attempts  in
December 1999, January 2001 and September 2000 - allegations which  the  RDR
consistently denies.

61. Although Mr Reeve sees several of the important parties or movements  in
the Ivory Coast as having an ethno-regional basis, he stresses that  Ivorian
politics is not entirely divided on a north-south basis. The people  in  the
north, who make up about a third of the population, are speakers  of  south-
eastern Manding and Gur languages similar to those spoken in  Burkina  Faso,
Mali and Guineau. The people of what he refers to as "the lush  south",  who
comprise around 55% of the population, are  speakers  of  Kwa,Akan  and  Kru
languages related to those of Ghana and Liberia respectively. The  remainder
are Eastern Mande speakers of the centre-west,  neither  obviously  northern
nor southern, although most of the territory of the people speaking  Eastern
Mande languages is under the control of the FN. In  addition  there  are  an
estimated  5  million  residents  of  foreign  origin,  including  a   large
proportion born in Ivory Coast as the children of immigrants and  unable  to
naturalise or vote. About half  of  these  non-Ivorians  are  of  Burkinable
origin, one-quarter Malian and the rest from  Guinea,  Liberia,  other  West
African states and Lebanon. The  vast  majority  are  from  ethno-linguistic
groups related to those of the  northern  Ivory  Coast  and  use  Dioula,  a
Manding-based lingua franca of northern Ivory Coast, Burkina Faso and  Mali.
 He  notes  that  :"Southern  Ivorians  often  lump  all  northern  Ivorians
together with these immigrants under the collective  ethnic  term  'Dioula'.
which  has  inherently  foreign  connotations".  He  refers  to   the   very
contentious issue of  the  registration  as  citizens  (and  potentially  as
voters) of an estimated 3.5 million Ivorians disenfranchised over  the  last
14 years:

      "Since most of them are believed to be of Northern  origin,  and  most
      northerners appear to support the RDR, the southern-based parties that
      have ruled the country since independence fear a political/demographic
      shift that would cede power to northern interests. This  also  appears
      to be the thinking of the FN, in insisting that  it  will  not  disarm
      until the citizen identification programme is completed. The  FPI  has
      successfully mobilised southern supporters against  the  programme  by
      alleging that the RDR is registering 'Dioula'  immigrants  as  Ivorian
      citizens in order to tip the balance definitively".

62. As to religion and Muslims in particular he writes:

      "Compared to ethnicity, the link between 'Northerners' or 'Dioula' and
      Islam is considerably weaker. About two-thirds of  northerners  regard
      themselves as Muslims,  while  there  are  many  northern  Christians.
      Traditional animist cultural and religious practices are strong  among
      many Ivorian Muslim and Christian groups, north  and  south.  However,
      there are few Muslims among southern ethnic groups. I  am  unaware  of
      any specific connection between non-Dioula Muslims and support for the
      RDR or FN (there  is  no  overt  Islamic  element  to  either  group's
      policies) but I consider it credible that  many  in  the  south  would
      consider a southern Muslim as at least likely to support  the  RDR  or
      oppose the FPI in power. Muslim names serve as a common  signifier  of
      northern origins in the south, although the family names of almost all
      Ivorian  Muslims  are  African  (rather  than  Arabic)  and   commonly
      understood as representative of particular ethnic groups."

63. Reeve identifies the chief  source  of  persecution  facing  "opposition
activist  or  perceived  opposition  supporters  (chiefly  Northerners   and
immigrants)" as now being various street militias  organised  by  the  young
supporters of the FPI. In May 2005 Human Rights Watch estimated  the  number
of these pro-Gbagbo groups as about 20,000 strong,  able  to  mobilise  many
tens of thousands  and  supporters  more.  The  principal  of  these  street
militias were the Congres  Panafricain  des  Jeunes  et  Patriotes  (COJEP),
Union pour la Liberation  Totale  de  la  Cote  d'Ivoire  (UPLTCI)  and  the
Groupement  Patriotique  pour  la  Paix  (GPP).  These  groups,  which   are
organised into hierarchical structures much like parties are  used  to  keep
track  of  opposition  organisation  in  the  same  areas  and  to   respond
accordingly; they are also known to use ad hoc  roadblocks  and  checkpoints
to monitor the movements of citizens, although this is not  systematic.  The
great advantage these  groups  enjoy  is  being  able  to  organise  against
opposition parties with apparent impunity.  Mr  Reeve  also  highlights  the
role of pro-Gbagbo 'hate media' in inciting anti-Northerner sentiment.

 64. Mr Reeve's report also deals inter alia, with; the rule of law,  formal
and informal security forces and the judiciary. His conclusions are set  out
as follows:

      "Those Ivorians who may be described as at risk because of their  real
      or perceived opposition to President Gbagbo and his FPI  inner  circle
      are supporters of the other  parties aligned in the RHDP, most notably
      the RDR because of the perceived overlap of its  agenda  with  the  FN
      insurgency. In the  eyes  of  many  FPI  activists,  all  Ivorians  of
      northern or imigrant origins are potential supporters of the  RDR  and
      FN.  However, it may be assumed that the  extensive  networks  of  the
      'ruling party' and its supporters have already provided a good deal of
      accurate intelligence to the presidency on how the opposition  parties
      are organised in Abidjan and who their chief local activists are.


      On the one hand, continued attacks on 'Diouala' as regularly described
      by the UN and Human Rights Watch are evidence of  a  clear  danger  to
      Northerners in Abidjan, especially those who are affiliated  with  the
      political opposition. On the other hand,  the  incidence  of  recorded
      violence has been sporadic and not particularly high overall given the
      large population of the metropolis (an estimated 4  million)  and  its
      very large resident population of Northerners and immigrants.  Persons
      of northern origin not engaged in political activism and with no  past
      record of such activism may be considered relatively safe at present.


      However, there is enormous uncertainty over the  direction  of  events
      from this month forward with the alteration of the terms of the  peace
      process, most likely to the detriment of President Gbagbo and the FPI.
      In the event of a return to on   hostilities  along  the  front  line,
      another coup attempt in  Abidjan or the  imposition  of  international
      sanctions on the FPI leadership for  obstructing  the  peace  process,
      there appears to be a very considerable danger of generalised violence
      against Northerners and or  the  perceived  opposition  supporters  in
      Abidjan due to the  proliferation  of  hard  line  pro-Gbagbo  militia
      there, the capacity of pro-Gbagbo media  and  youth  organisations  to
      mobilise support for violence, and the inability and/or  unwillingness
      of the small local and UN police forces to provide  protection  should
      the situation deteriorate.


      Mr G would appear not to be at risk because  of  his  ethnic  identity
      since he is not easily identifiable  as  a  Northerner  or  immigrant,
      although his Muslim names could attract attention. However,  he  would
      appear to be at greater risk  because  of  his  acknowledged  activism
      within the RDR. Indeed, it is credible that other members of his  B�t�
      ethnic group might be more aggravated by his perceived alignment  with
      the northern opposition."


65. The final paragraph encapsulates  Mr  Reeve's  assessment  of  the  risk
facing the appellant if he were to be returned to the Ivory Coast.

Home Office OGN, 14 November 2006

66. The Home Office Operational Guidance Notes v3.0 issued 14 November  2006
stated its conclusion on risk to RDR members at 3.6.8 as follows:

      "The RDR is one of the main opposition groups to play a major role  in
      opposition  political  activity.    It  is  a  registered  party   and
      therefore being a member is not  illegal.  In  spite  of  the  party's
      activities continuing to be subject to restrictions by the  government
      during  2004 and 2005, RDR affiliates are not considered to be at risk
      of treatment amounting to persecution on the basis of their membership
      of, or association with, the party. Membership of, involvement in,  or
      perceived involvement in the RDR at low or medium  level is not likely
      to  lead  to  the  level  of  ill-treatment  that  would   amount   to
      persecution.  The grant of asylum  in  such  cases  is  therefore  not
      likely to  be  apropriate.  In  cases  where  claimants  are  able  to
      demonstrate that  they  are  a  high-level  RDR  director  or  leading
      activist, there may be a real risk that the claimant  will  encoujnter
      ill-treatment amounting to persecution. The grant of  asylum  in  such
      cases may therefore be appropriate."

67. The OGN contains a separate subsection (3.7) on members  of  the  Forces
Nouvelles (FN), the opposition ex-rebel movement that controls the  northern
 half of the country. It states that the FN is  comprised  of  three  former
rebel groups: the Patriotic Movement of  Ivory  Coast  (MPCI),  the  Ivorian
Popular Movement of the Far West (MPIGO) and  the  Movement  for  Peace  and
Justice (MJP).  The north and most of the west of the country is  under  the
control of the FN.  The FN has been involved in  a  number  of  transitional
government arrangements, but these had all fallen apart: "Tense and  fragile
relations between the Government and the FN have  continued  into  2005  and
2006".  The OGN notes that perceived rebel (FN) sympathisers  were  believed
to be particularly targeted. However, it does not consider  that  there  has
been a consistent pattern of ill-treatment of FN  members  or  sympathisers.
It further considers that, even where members or perceived  members  of  the
FN faced a real risk of persecution from the authorities  or  pro-government
militias, "relocation to the  FN-dominated  rebel-held  north  would  be  an
effective way of avoiding any risk of ill-treatment and would not be  unduly
harsh".

68. At 5.2 the same  OGN  gives  its  reasons  for  not  adopting  the  same
conclusion as the UNHCR in its position papers of January 2004  and  October
2006: the UNHCR position has been that no asylum seeker should  be  forcibly
returned to Ivory Coast until such time as the  security  and  human  rights
situation in the country concerned has improved sufficiently to justify it.

69. The OGN also deals with  Non-Ivorians  and/or  Muslims  from  the  north
(3.8), FGM (3.9), prison conditions (3.10)  minors,  medical  treatment  and
returns.

Country Guidance
70. In AZ (Risk on return) Ivory Coast CG [2004] UKIAT  00170, heard  4  May
2004, the Tribunal found that the background  evidence did  not   show  that
there was a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment for returned  (failed)
asylum seekers to the Ivory  Coast, notwithstanding its acceptance that  the
country conditions were difficult.   It further found that ordinary or  low-
level RDR members and supporters would not be at real  risk  of  persecution
or ill-treatment on return.  It concluded that for persons who faced a  real
risk of persecution or ill-treatment in Abidjan, there  would  be  a  viable
internal relocation alternative. In DI (Ivory Coast) CG [2002]  UKIAT  04437
the Tribunal found that in general protection  would  be  available  against
the threat of FGM, or, where there was a real risk  of  FGM  in  a  person's
home area, internal relocation would be available. Mention  should  also  be
made of two CG cases decided in 2002: VG (Coup) Ivory Coast CG [2002]  UKIAT
04020 and TD-K JK (Relocation of ex-President Bedie) Ivory Coast  CG  [2002]
UKIAT 03140.

Recent developments
71. In addition to country reports, the main ones which we  have  summarised
above, we also had  produced  before  us  a  number  of  news/press  reports
covering the period from January 2007 virtually up to the  date  of  hearing
before us. We have  already  noted  the  main  events  they  chronicle,  but
consider it useful to summarise their contents separately  here.   Early  in
April 2007, following the signing of the Ougadougou peace agreement the  new
Ivorian  Prime  Minister,  former  rebel  leader  Guillane  Soro,  formed  a
government comprising thirty-one ministers, including eleven from  President
Gbagbo's FPI, seven from the FN and five from  the  two  leading  opposition
parties (the RDR of Alassone  Outtara  and  the  Democratic  Party  of  Cote
D'Ivoire of  Henri Bedle). The President  and   new  Prime  Minster  jointly
oversaw the removal of the  600 km-long buffer zone (or  "confidence  zone")
separating the rebel-run north  from  the   loyalist-controlled  south.  The
eleven thousand French and  UN  peacekeepers  who  had  patrolled  the  zone
withdrew to seventeen observation  posts.  The  loyalist  and  rebel  armies
began to mount joint patrols. Also in April President Gbagbo  signed  a  law
giving amnesty for crimes committed  during  the  civil  war.   Any  ongoing
prosecutions were dropped and prisoners convicted of such  crimes  released.
This amnesty applies to both the NF rebels and the  armed  forces  loyal  to
the President.   It is backdated to September 2000, so that it  also  covers
crimes committed by loyalist soldiers before war broke out.   Measures  have
been taken with a view to disarming fighters on both sides.  Also under  the
Ougadougou peace agreement a date was fixed  for  free  and  fair  elections
within ten months and for a mass identification programme to  give  identity
cards to the millions on Ivorians who do not have them.

72. Although the fact that this peace agreement has been struck between  the
two main protagonists in the  era  of  civil  war  affords  more  cause  for
optimism that it will have a lasting  beneficial  effect,  the  reaction  of
most international commentators  have been one of  cautious  optimism.   The
UN, the AU, ECOWAS, the French and  other  key  regional  and  international
organisations have welcomed the developments.   However,  the  former  Prime
Minister,  Charles Konan  Banny, has warned that Gbagbo and  Soro  may  have
"hidden agendas". The withdrawal of the UN and French peacekeepers from  the
buffer zone has led to a sharp increase  in  attacks  on  civilians  in  and
about the western town of Bongola.  The road between the  town  of  Duekoue,
in the government-controlled south, and  Man,  which  is  in  NF  hands,  is
considered to be particularly dangerous.   Armed  bandits  are  said  to  be
mainly responsible. The BBC News report of 26 April  comments  that  if  the
loyalist and rebel troops cannot provide security, the value of some of  the
recent steps taken in the peace process will be called into question.

The legal framework

73. The burden of proof rests on the appellant to  prove  his  case  on  the
lower standard of a reasonable degree of likelihood, which  we  take  to  be
the same as "substantial grounds for believing" or "real risk". We  have  to
consider all of the evidence in the round and, so far as the  assessment  of
the appellant's case is concerned, place it in the context  of  all  of  the
background evidence. We  must  apply  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
International   Protection   (Qualification)   Regulations   SI    2006/2525
(hereafter the "Protection Regulations") and the  Statement  of  Changes  in
Immigration Rules, Cm6918. These Regulations  together  with  amendments  to
the Immigration Rules in part implement EU Council Directive  2004/83/EC  on
minimum  standards  for  the  qualification  and  status  of  third  country
nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise  need
international protection and the content  of  the  protection  granted,  (OJ
L304/12 of 30.9.2004). By virtue of para  23  of  the  President's  Practice
Directions,  we  are  obliged  to  apply  these  Regulations   and   amended
Immigration Rules to all pending appeals, of which this is one.

74. The Protection Regulations set out, inter alia, definitions of  acts  of
persecution  (Regulation  5),  actors  of  persecution   or   serious   harm
(Regulation 3) and actors of protection (Regulation 4).

75. Of particular relevance to part of the guidance given in  this  case  is
paragraph 339O headed "Internal Relocation". This states:

   "(i) The Secretary of State will not make:
    (a) a grant of asylum if in part of the  country  of  origin  a  person
    would not have a well founded fear of being persecuted, and the  person
    can reasonably be expected to stay in that part of the country; or
    (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of  the  country  of
    return a person would not face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm,
    and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of  the
    country.
   (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or  country  of
   return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of State, when  making
   his decision on whether to grant asylum or humanitarian protection,  will
   have regard to the general circumstances prevailing in that part  of  the
   country and to the personal circumstances of the person.
   (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to  the
   country of origin or country of return."


76. In considering the proper approach to the issue of  internal  relocation
we have also to apply the principles set out in the recent  House  of  Lords
case of Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 which adopts  the  criteria  now  contained  in
paragraph 339O but also contains more detailed guidance.

77. The new Regulations and Rules also identify the right of a person to  be
considered as  to  his  or  her  eligibility  for  humanitarian  protection.
Paragraph 339 C (in its first part) provides:


   " A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom
   if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
     (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port  of  entry  in
   the United Kingdom;
     (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2 of The
   Refugee or Person in Need  of  International  Protection  (Qualification)
   Regulations 2006;
     (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person
   concerned, if he returned to the country of return,  would  face  a  real
   risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or,  owing  to  such  risk,
   unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country; and
     (iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection".

78. The same paragraph in its second part  gives  a  definition  of  serious
harm:

   "Serious harm consists of:
    (i) the death penalty or execution;
   (ii) unlawful killing;
   (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a person
   in the country of return; or
   (iv) serious and individual threat to a  civilian's  life  or  person  by
   reason of indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of  international  or
   internal armed conflict".

79. Where below we refer to "risk" or "real risk", this is to be  understood
as an abbreviated way of identifying: (1)  whether  on  return  there  is  a
well-founded fear of being persecuted  under  the  Refugee  Convention;  (2)
whether on return there are substantial grounds for believing that a  person
would face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm  within  the  meaning  of
paragraph 339C of the amended Immigration Rules; and (3) whether  on  return
there are substantial grounds for believing that a person would face a  real
risk of being exposed to a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3
ECHR.

Our assessment: (1) General
80. As already noted,  there  are  indications  that  the  Ougadougou  peace
accord and subsequent steps taken under it during March-May 2007 may  result
in significant changes in the political situation in  Ivory  Coast  and  may
seal the end of the period of armed  conflict  and  a  north-south  division
which has engulfed the country since 2002. However, it  remains  that  there
is as yet no hard evidence to show previous patterns of  violence  and  wide
scale human rights abuses have abated and  setbacks  of  some  kind  in  the
peace process can be expected. Hence, an asssessment of  current  risk  must
continue to assume that these pre-March 2007 patterns continue.

81.  Even  discounting  likely  recent  improvements,  however,  we  do  not
consider that there is any proper basis for taking a different view of  risk
categories from those taken by the Tribunal in AZ in 2004.

Failed asylum seekers

82.  The  issue  of  risk  on  return  to  failed  asylum  seekers  was  not
specifically raised before us but in any event it is clear to  us  that  the
more recent background country reports  confirms  the  view  taken  of  this
category in AZ.

Political oppositionists

83. In this decision we have concentrated primarily on the issue of risk  to
RDR members and supporters (or sympathisers) or persons perceived  as  such.
 However, we think it is sensible (because we had much evidence relating  to
the subject) to deal more broadly  with  claims  made  by  persons  who  are
members or supporters of the FN or who are perceived as such, together  with
claims made by political oppositionists in the south such as those  involved
in RDR. Both can be classified as political oppositionists.  There  are,  of
course, important differences between the  two  groupings,  not  least  that
those who are members or sympathizers of the FN (or are perceived  as  such)
are part of the armed political opposition and  so  it  may  be  in  certain
cases extremely relevant to have regard to  possible  issues  of  exclusion.
That is a point which is properly emphasised  in  the  current  Home  Office
OGN.

84. We consider that taken as a whole the background evidence does not  bear
out that political oppositionists in the Ivory Coast in general face a  real
risk of persecution or serious harm or  ill-treatment  on  return.  However,
where a person is able to establish  a  political  profile  as  an  activist
political oppositionist (whether as  a  member  from  a  southern  political
party (e.g. the RDR) or  as  a  member  from  the  northern-based  FN),  the
position may well be different, at least so far as  risk  in  that  person's
home area is concerned. For the sake of clarity we emphasise  here  that  by
activist or militant we mean something  more  than  being  someone  with  an
official position in a local branch of a party. Likewise, a  person  who  is
not a member but merely  a  supporter  of  the  RDR  or  the  FN  (or  other
oppositionist party or organisation) may, depending  on  the  circumstances,
be able to show a real risk if he or she is also an  activist.  Once  again,
however, that leaves the issue of whether he or  she  would  have  a  viable
option of internal relocation.

85. In reaching the above conclusions we acknowledge that  there  were  more
incidents  of  threats  and  violence  directed  against  certain  political
opposition parties (including the RDR) in 2006 than in  2005.   However,  as
before, it was primarily directed at oppositionist (especially RDR)  leaders
and activists and those closely involved with them.   While  the  background
evidence (including Mr Reeve's report) does bear out a continuing real  risk
of persecution or ill-treatment to high-level opposition  party  members  or
to activists,  it  does  not  demonstrate  that  low-level  or  medium-level
members or supporters are at risk: the principal thrust  of  his  report  is
that there is a serious risk on return to active members or supporters,  not
to low-level or medium-low-level oppositionists.

86. So far as the RDR is concerned  (and  in  this  regard  its  experiences
appear typical of the other oppositionist parties), we find  it  significant
that the reports of difficulties facing RDR members or those  involved  with
the RDR predominantly relate to  RDR  leaders  or  activists  or  militants.
Whilst there  are  also  references  in  the  main  reports  which  identify
difficulties for RDR members and supporters generally, these  are  far  from
showing a consistent pattern of violence or adverse  treatment  meeting  the
threshold of persecution  or  serious  harm  or  ill-treatment  contrary  to
Article 3.

Internal relocation
87. For those oppositionists able, by virtue of their  actual  or  perceived
profile as a leading member or activist, to establish that they face a  real
risk in their home area, there remains the further  issue  of  whether  they
would  have  a  viable  internal  relocation  alternative.  There  are  some
continuing restrictions on internal freedom of  movement  and  there  remain
hazards such as ad hoc  roadblocks  manned  by  government  forces  or  pro-
government militias and there has been a recent increase in violence  around
the Zone of Confidence. However, it is equally clear that there is still  an
extensive degree of internal free movement, including free movement  between
north and south. The fact that such movement for the most  part  appears  on
the evidence to take place without apparent difficulty,  satisfies  us  that
internal relocation will often be a viable option to the  following  extent.
Political oppositionists and  FN members or supporters who are able to  give
a credible account of risk in their  home area will in general  be  able  to
avoid a real risk of further persecution or serious  harm  or  ill-treatment
by relocating.  However, we  emphasise  that  both  when  assessing  whether
there would  be  a  continuing  risk  of  persecution  (serious  harm,  ill-
treatment) and when assessing whether relocation  would  be  reasonable  (or
unduly harsh), much will depend  on  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
individual case.

Additional risk factors
88. In the context of deciding cases involving persons  claiming  to  be  at
risk because of their actual or perceived membership  of,  or  support  for,
political opposition parties or groups, we consider that  the  existence  of
certain other factors may raise the level of  risk,  although  whether  they
raise it enough to cross the threshold of persecution  or  serious  harm  or
ill-treatment will depend on the particular facts of the case.  The  factors
we  have  in  mind  are:  being  of  a  particular  ethnic  or  ethnographic
background, being a northerner, being a Muslim and being a  perceived  (West
African) immigrant.  However, it seems to us that  the  background  evidence
(including Mr Reeve's expert report) reflects the fact that  none  of  these
is sufficient in itself to give risk a real risk.  Even in combination  with
a low or medium-level political profile  as  an  oppositionist,  we  do  not
think that such factors will normally give risk to a real risk;  but  we  do
not rule out that they may sometimes operate as additional risk  factors  of
some significance. What we say below  about  the  appellant's  circumstances
serves to illustrate this. Even when several factors relating to  ethnicity,
being a Muslim and a northerner are taken into account (alongside a  finding
that a person is a low-level  political  oppositionist),  the  threshold  of
real risk may still not be reached.

89. (We have not in this case dealt with the potential risk factor of  being
or being perceived as an Ivorian of (West African) immigrant origin  and  we
think it prudent to reserve our positon on that. Bearing in  mind  that  the
numbers of such persons are estimated at several millions, we  certainly  do
not think that being in such a category would be  sufficient  in  itself  to
give rise to a real risk of persecution or serious harm). But equally we  do
not rule out that, combined with other factors, this factor  may  give  rise
to a real risk.

The 2006 UNHCR Position Paper
90. It will be apparent from what we have said earlier that in the light  of
recent significant changes in the Ivory Coast  during  2007  -  encompassing
among other things loyalist and rebel  army  co-operation  in  the  Zone  of
Confidence, in place of the previous UN and French peace-keeping  patrolling
-  the November 2006 UNHCR Position Paper cannot be taken  to  describe  the
present situation accurately.

91. Be that as it may, since we have taken the view that  we  should  assess
risk on the basis that pre-March 2007 levels and patterns  of  conflict  may
well continue, it is necessary for us to address the  implications  of  this
position paper. We recognise that UNHCR's  conclusion  is  that  "No  asylum
seeker from Cote d'Ivoire should be forcibly returned  until  such  time  as
the security  and  human  rights  situation  in  the  country  has  improved
sufficiently to justify it". However, it seems very clear to  us  that  this
is  a  conclusion  which  is  based  to  a  significant  extent  on  UNHCR's
institutional concerns about the problems of mass returns and  their  impact
on Ivorian infrastructures. As the Tribunal has been at pains to  point  out
in a number of cases,  our  task  (by  contrast)  is  confined  to  deciding
whether a person can show he meets the requirements  for  eligibility  as  a
refugee or as a person entitled to humanitarian protection or  as  a  people
whose removal would be contrary to  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.  We  are  not
concerned with the mode of return or with the volume of  returns.  Secondly,
this Position Paper expressly recognises that "not all asylum  seekers  from
Cote d'Ivoire may qualify for refugee status  under  the  1951  Convention";
indeed it instructs that claims from asylum seekers from Cote d'Ivoire  must
be the subject of individual, not group, examination. Thirdly,  although  it
says that in relation to those who are found  not  to  qualify  for  refugee
status under the 1951 Convention, "they should be accorded  a  complementary
form of protection unless excluded...", the paper clearly employs  the  term
"complementary protection" in a broad sense. We say this  because  the  only
reason they give  for  considering  that  persons  who  do  not  qualify  as
refugees might nevertheless be entitled  to  "complementary  protection"  is
because of the "security and human rights  situation  in  the  country".  It
cannot seriously be suggested  - and UNHCR  does  not  suggest  it  in  this
Position Paper -   that  the  security  and  human  rights  situation  alone
suffices to  show  for  humanitarian  protection  purposes  (as  defined  by
paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules (Article  15  of  the  Qualification
Directive)) that there  exist  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  a
Ivorian asylum-seeker is at real risk of suffering serious harm or  suffices
to show for Article 3 ECHR purposes that  he   faces  a  real  risk  of  ill
treatment: see Vilvirajah v UK (1991) 14 EHRR 248.  It is  certainly  within
the remit  of  UNHCR  to  recommend  that  states  consider  according  some
residual form of complementary protection, but in the UK the AIT  only  have
jurisdiction to deal with refugee protection,  humanitarian  protection  and
Article 3 protection - none of these forms of  protection  is  as  broad  as
what this Position Paper invokes.

Country guidance
92. Where does our decision  leave  Tribunal  country  guidance?  Whilst  we
consider that the very comprehensive  assessment  contained  in  AZ  remains
valid as country guidance for the period up to 4 May  2004,  we  think  that
the present decision is now to be seen as the only  source  of  guidance  on
the situation from 4 May 2004 to the present.  The DI decision, too  remains
a relevant source of guidance  on  FGM-related  claims,  the  other  two  CG
cases, VG and TD-KJK, no longer hold value as guidance.


Our assessment: (2)  the Appellant's Evidence

93. We have not found the appellant's evidence easy to  evaluate  and  there
are a number of areas which have caused us particular  concern.   The  first
relates to the appellant's evidence about the level of his involvement  with
the RDR.  He has produced a membership  card  (2A10-11).   He  said  in  his
original statement  and  at  interview  that  he  was  a  treasurer  in  the
Treichville District.  In support of his claim he produced  the  certificate
from CG dated 23 June 1996 (A6) describing the appellant as  the  president
of local committee 8 of section 16 Habita Autoroute.  It could be  that  the
appellant later became treasurer of a local district but  it  is  surprising
that there has been no further evidence from the RDR about  the  appellant's
position in the party, particularly in the light of the  fact  that  he  has
been able to produce letters dated December 2003 (2A41-42)  confirming  that
the party has given help to his family by moving them to a safer  place  and
giving them money. One letter stated in general terms  that  close  comrades
of the RDR are being actively sought by the authorities and  are  living  in
hiding, but nothing is said about the appellant's doings.

94. So far as the  appellant's  detention  in  2000  is  concerned,  he  has
supported that with a notice  of  release.   This  describes  him  as  being
"sentenced to conditional release for breach of public peace by  a  judgment
on 30 October 2000 of Abidjan Magistrates' Court of the Court of  Appeal  of
Abidjan Plateau."  The appellant  told  us  in  evidence  that  he  had  not
appeared before a court but confirmed that he had been given  this  document
on his release.  We accept that it  could  be  the  case  that  following  a
release caused by international pressure detainees were given a document  to
give a legal  veneer  to  their  detention.   We  have  concerns  about  the
appellant's chronology: if he was detained for  45  days  from  23  October,
that would mean that he would have been released  around  the  beginning  of
December, not 14 December, as shown in the document, but  we  bear  in  mind
that the document may be  primarily  confirmatory  of  release  rather  than
intended to date its commencement. Nevertheless, it was the appellant's  own
case that following his release he was able to return both to  work  and  to
his political activities.

95. It was the appellant's evidence that because his  shop  was  located  in
Cocody he came under suspicion and in  early and mid 2001 he was visited  by
the judicial police (on more than one occasion)  who  questioned  him  about
whether he was storing arms.  He does not say that he was arrested  or  ill-
treated on any of these occasions.  In support  of  his  claim  about  these
events, the appellant has produced a document purporting  to  be  an  arrest
warrant issued on 28 December 2000 (A31-2).  We have serious concerns  about
this document. One is its date, which,  if  correct,  would  have  pre-dated
even the judicial police visits. Another concern is that even assuming  this
warrant was issued  soon  after  their  visit  (which  appeared  to  be  the
appellant's fall-back position), it is quite unclear why the  appellant  was
not arrested immediately, particularly as on his own  account  he  continued
to be the subject of suspicion by the authorities.

96. It is the appellant's case that the events  of  September  2002  finally
caused him to leave the Ivory Coast and  that  his  premises  were  targeted
because he was a member of the RDR and was suspected of  storing  arms.   He
has described the crowd outside his premises and described  how  he  learned
that  one  of  his  employees  was  injured  and  one  killed.   There   are
discrepancies in his evidence as to who went to see what was  happening  and
in relation to whether his employee was killed at the scene  or  later  died
in hospital. We found  the  appellant's  evidence  on  those  issues  to  be
confused and contradictory.

97. It was the appellant's evidence that within days on his father's  advice
he had left for his home village where he remained until  20  October  2002.
 When he left it was because the people from the village  alleged  that  he
had helped the rebel troops.  No  reason  was  put  to  us  as  to  why  the
villagers would take that view.   We regard this as  an  untruthful  attempt
to explain why the appellant did not remain in his village rather than  move
away and leave Ivory Coast.

 98. The appellant says that the reason he did  not  remain  in  Ghana  was
because there was an extradition agreement between  Ivory  Coast  and  Ghana
and he feared that he would be returned.  We have  very  real  doubts  about
this  explanation,  particularly  as  Ghana  is  a  signatory  to  the  1951
Convention.  We are not satisfied that the appellant would have been  unable
to claim asylum there and, if able to show to the authorities there that  he
had a well-founded fear of persecution, we do not consider there would  have
been any real risk of extradition.

99. We also taken into account that he arrived in this country  using  false
documentation which was then, he claims, lost  and  that  he  also  delayed,
albeit for a relatively limited period, in claiming asylum.

100. Assessing the appellant's evidence in the light of  these  concerns  we
make  mixed  credibility  findings.  We  are  satisfied  that  there  is   a
reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  the  appellant  is  a  member  and
supporter of the RDR.  We accept he has been an office holder in  his  local
area in Treichville and to this extent has been active  in  his  support  of
the RDR.  We also accept that he did take  part  in  the  demonstrations  on
23 October 2000 in which large numbers were involved.  In the light of  the
objective evidence about the violence following the  presidential  elections
and the number of people involved, we cannot rule out the  possibility  that
the appellant was arrested, and,  despite  the  doubts  we  have  about  the
release document and the appellant's own chronology and/or history,  we  are
prepared  to  accept  that  he  was  detained  and  more  than  likely  ill-
treated. However, we note that he was released when there was an amnesty of
political prisoners following international  pressure  and  that,  following
release, he was able to return to his business and to his  involvement  with
the RDR.

 101. We do not accept that in 2001 he was the  subject  of  any  suspicion
that he was storing arms at his business premises.  If he  was,  we  believe
that he would have been arrested and detained and we see no reason  why  the
warrant would not have been put into immediate effect.  We do not find  that
this  document  is  either  genuine  or  reliable.   There  is  no  adequate
explanation why this warrant would have been issued in December  2000,  nor,
even if we take the appellant to be claiming it was issued  soon  after  the
judicial police visits during the first three quarters of 2001, then  it  is
not plausible  they  would  not  have  enforced  it  against  the  appellant
straightaway.

102. We also do  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of  the  events  of
September 2002.  It is clear from the  background  evidence  that  following
the attempted coup there was  a  period  of  disorder  and  disruption  with
incidents of indiscriminate violence.  The  appellant  may  well  have  been
caught up in such incidents, but we do not  believe  that  he  was  targeted
because of his membership of the RDR or because he was suspected of  storing
arms.  We do not believe that  he  left  the  Ivory  Coast  because  of  any
specific risk to him, but rather because of the general  risk  arising  from
the situation in the country at that time.

103. So far  as  the  various  documents  the  appellant  has  produced  are
concerned, save for the limited weight we feel able to give to the  document
 relating to his court appearance in 2000, we do not consider we  can  place
any reliance on them. When assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
evidence we have, of course, taken into account Mr Reeve's  report  both  as
regards general risk categories  and  his  assessment  of  risk  facing  the
appellant. However, it is  notable  that  in  very  large  part  Mr  Reeve's
assessment of risk to the appellant is based  on  the  assumption  that  the
appellant's account was wholly credible and that, in particular (to use  the
term Mr Reeve employs in the final paragraph of his summary)  the  appellant
was someone of "acknowledged activism within the RDR". For  the  reasons  we
have given above, we found ourselves unable to accept  that  the  appellant,
albeit holding some position within the RDR in his local area, was a  person
who was an activist or militant party member.

104. In summary we accept that the appellant has been an  active  member  of
the RDR but we  do  not  accept  he  is  someone  who  could  reasonably  be
described as in a high- level or senior position or as someone who at  least
since 2000) has been an activist or militant member.  With  some  hesitation
we are prepared to accept that he was  detained  and  ill-treated  following
the demonstrations in October 2000, but we  are  not  satisfied  that  after
that time he did anything by way of organising or  demonstrating  that  made
him of any specific  interest  to  the  authorities.  Contrary  to  what  he
claimed, we do not accept that he was the subject of  any  adverse  interest
from the judicial police or other authorities in  2001,  nor  do  we  accept
that either he or his shop  were  personally  targeted  in  September  2002.
Notwithstanding that he  may  in  the  past  have  suffered  persecution  or
serious harm (being detained and ill-treated), the authorities did not  seek
to harm him further.

105. Can the appellant nevertheless succeed on  the  basis  of  our  limited
positive credibility finding that he is a  low  level  RDR  member  who  was
arrested along with many others in 2ooo in the course of the  demonstrations
which took place after the presidential election on 22 October 2000 was  won
by Lauren Gbagbo of the FPI? Our answer is a definite no.  In the  light  of
our findings on the current situation in Ivory Coast  and  our  findings  on
the categories of those likely to be at real risk of persecution or  serious
harm or ill treatment on return, we are not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
falls into any such category nor are there any particularly features of  his
background  and  circumstances  which  would  put  him  at  such   risk   of
persecution on return. So far as paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules is
concerned,  this  means  that  in  our  view  there  are  good  reasons  for
considering that there will not be a repetition  of  the  adverse  treatment
the appellant received in 2000.

106. In this regard we take into account that Mr  Reeve  expressly  did  not
consider that the appellant's Bete ethnic identity would give  rise  to  any
risk from the government or others.  Mrs  Ojutiku  also  conceded  that  his
ethnic identity would not be as a risk factor. If the appellant's  perceived
alignment with the northern opposition (through his membership of  RDR)  was
a factor which might aggravate fellow- Bete's, that comes to much  the  same
thing as his being perceived as a northerner  and  in  any  event  does  not
demonstrate that he would be at real risk of persecution or serious harm.

107. We do not glean from Mr Reeve's report or  from  any  other  background
source that the appellant's Muslim identity would operate as  a  significant
risk factor: for the most part Ivorian politics does not split on  religious
lines. At most the appellant's Muslim identity would lead many in the  south
to consider him, by virtue of  his  being  a  southern  Muslim,  as  someone
likely to support the RDR or oppose the FPI in power: but that was and is  a
feature about the appellant which was already known to his fellow-Ivorians.

 108. The fact that the appellant would be perceived as  closely  linked  to
northerners, by virtue of his  RDR  involvement,  is  clearly  a  factor  of
considerable importance. The north-south divide  remains  the  major  fault-
line in  Ivorian  politics,  even  today.  However,  even  disregarding  the
apparent  improvements  in  the  situation  since  March/April   2007,   the
background evidence falls well short of demonstrating that the appellant  on
return would face a real risk of persecution or serious harm simply  because
he was a low level RDR member and was perceived as closely  associated  with
northerners.

109. Accordingly, we do not see any real indication that the above  factors,
taken singly or in combination with others,  placed  the  appellant  at  any
risk from 2001-2oo3 (when he left Ivory Coast). Nor do  we  see  that  these
factors would place  him  at  real  risk  on  return  now,  even  considered
cumulatively and on the basis that his involvement with  the  RDR  would  be
known.

110. For the above reasons we conclude:

The Adjudicator materially erred in law. The decision we  substitute  is  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.  The
appellant is not entitled to the grant of humanitarian protection.



Signed:


               DR H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)




Annex: Background Materials before the Tribunal

Home Office Cote d'Ivoire Country Assessment October 2001
UN Office for the Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs,  Crisis  in  Cote
d'Ivoire, report no.23, 15 March 2004
Human Rights  Watch:  Cote  d'Ivoire:  Security  Forces  Violently  Suppress
Protest, 26 March 2004
US Committee for Refugees, World Refugee Survey: Cote d'Ivoire, 24 May 2004
Amnesty International Annual Report: Cote d'Ivoire, 26 May 2004
COIS Country Information Bulletin 2/2004 on Ivory Coast, June 2004
UN Office for the Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs:  Crisis  in  Cote
d'Ivoire, report no. 29, June 2004
IRIN news report, 27 July 2004
COIS Country Information Bulletin 3/2004 on Ivory Coast November 2004
COIS Country Information Bulletin 1/2005 on Ivory Coast, 22 June 2005
Foreign & Commonwealth Office Annual Report ch 5, 2005
Home Office OGN on Ivory Coast, 21 March 2006
US State Department Report on Cote d'Ivoire, March 2006
Expert Report of Richard Reeve, 9 October  2006
Freedom House: 'Freedom in the World  2006:  Cote  d'Ivoire',  6  September,
2006.
CIA-The World Factbook: Cote d'Ivoire, 5 October 2006
Expert report dated 9 October 2006 from Mr Richard Reeve
Library of Congress website entries on  Ivory  Coast  dealing,  inter  alia,
with ethnic diversity and cultures
UNHCR, "Update on International Protection  Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from
Cote d'Ivoire", November 2006
Home Office OGN, 14 November 2006
Home Office Country of Origin Service: Ivory Coast, 14 November 2006.
Foreign and Commonwealth Travel Advice for  the  Ivory  Coast,  15  November
2006
US State Department Report on Cote d'Ivoire March 6, 2007
COI Service Response to a Request of 21 May 2007 (from the respondent).
Amnesty International Report 2007: Cote d'Ivoire, 23 May  2007

Various news reports dated 6 July 2004, 27 April  2005,  7  August  2006,  3
September 2006, -15 September 2006 Various BBC News Reports 4 March  2007-26
April 2007



                    Approved for electronic distribution
