

                                             Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

            SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082


     THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |
|On 13, 14 & 15 May 2008                       |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MATHER
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE WAUMSLEY
                          SIR JEFFREY JAMES KBE CMG

                                   Between

                                     SZ
                                                             First Appellant

                                     JM
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the First Appellant:    Ms A Weston, Counsel instructed by Lawrence
Lupin, Solicitors
For the Second Appellant: Ms S Naik, Counsel instructed by Wilson & Co.
For the Respondent: Mr S Kovats, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


Conditions for Christians in Iran  have  not  deteriorated  sufficiently  to
necessitate a change in the guidance in FS Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303  Iran.
 For some converts to sacrament-based churches the conditions  may  be  such
that they could not reasonably be expected to return and  their  cases  must
be  considered  on   HJ   (homosexuality:   reasonably   tolerating   living
discreetly) Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044 grounds.

It remains to be seen whether the proposed  inclusion  of  apostasy  in  the
amended criminal code will make a material difference.   The  amendments  to
the code are part of a wholesale change in the criminal law and  not  solely
aimed at converts.  The proposals are still before Parliament.

'Proselytising' and 'evangelising' are not terms  of  art  and  distinctions
should not be drawn between them.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are both citizens of  Iran.   Their  appeals  have  been
    linked because they raise similar issues.   Both  appellants  claim  to
    have converted away from Islam and become Christians.  The  cases  have
    been listed together so that the Tribunal can consider developments  in
    Iran since FS and Others (Iran - Christian  converts)  Iran  CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00303.  This determination is intended to be read in  conjunction
    with FS Iran and not to replace it.  The object of this  determination,
    in addition to determining the appeals of the  two  appellants,  is  to
    give guidance on the events and  developments  in  Iran  since  FS  and
    Others was decided.   It is not suggested that FS is in any  way  wrong
    insofar as it considered the position in March 2004.  There is a  great
    deal of general background material in  FS  and  Others,  such  as  the
    identity and nature of the various churches.   We  do  not  propose  to
    repeat that.  The only way in which any party in  this  reconsideration
    sought to contradict the findings in FS was the  extent  to  which  the
    passage  of  time,  and  events  since  2004,  may   enable   different
    conclusions to be drawn from events in 2003/2004.   This  determination
    considers the evidence as it was in May 2008.

2.   Before we started to hear evidence Counsel confirmed that they  had  no
    objection to Sir Jeffrey James sitting on  the  panel,  notwithstanding
    that he had been the United Kingdom's charg� d'affaires in Iran between
    1993  and  1997.    Similarly,  there  was  no  objection   to   Senior
    Immigration Judge Waumsley sitting on the panel,  notwithstanding  that
    he had declined to order reconsideration in the first appellant's case,
    reconsideration being subsequently ordered by Keith J.  Insofar as  Sir
    Jeffrey James is concerned, the parties did ask him to confirm that  if
    he had any information, or knowledge, that in any way contradicted  the
    evidence which we were to hear, he would declare  it  at  the  time  in
    order to enable the point to be dealt with, which he did.  The Tribunal
    discussed the issues (including credibility) and concluded its findings
    immediately  after  the  hearing  finished.    The  determination  was,
    subject to a final read through to check spelling and syntax, ready for
    promulgation prior to the respondent's response (in  early  August)  to
    late  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant.   The  only  substantive
    amendment to the determination thereafter was the addition  of  section
    14, dealing with that late evidence.

3.   Because we have written this determination under subject headings,  any
    one witness's evidence may not  appear  in  one  place.   We  therefore
    summarise, in order of appearance, the oral  witnesses  that  we  heard
    from for ease of reference:-

    i.   The appellant M


    ii.  EV, a Canadian citizen, originally a citizen of  Netherlands,  and
        who claims to be M's current partner.


    iii. The appellant Z.


    iv.   Nigel  Desborough,  formerly  the  leader  of  Ichthus  Christian
        Fellowship Community in Forest Hill to whose  church  Z  went  from
        about 20033.  Mr Desborough later moved to  Forest  Hill  Community
        Church.  He  made reference to  some  written  evidence  of  Edmund
        Nichols, the Pastor of the Dunston  Family  Church  which  Z  later
        attended, having been dispersed.


    v.   EF.  A witness with  continuing  involvement  with  Christians  in
        Iran.


    vi.  Jessie Axtell, the wife of the Reverend Ronald Axtell.  They  both
        lived in Iran between 1962 and 1978  and  speak  Farsi.   She  gave
        evidence of contacts with Christians who travel outside the country
        and, in particular, about two people, X and  Y.   Although  it  was
        never clear why X and Y did not attend to give evidence themselves,
        their identities were revealed  to  the  respondent  prior  to  the
        hearing.


    vii. The very Reverend  Nicholas  Coulton,  sub-dean  of  Christchurch,
        Oxford, who was formerly Dean of Newcastle.


    viii.     Dr Anna Enayat, a recognised expert witness on Iran.


    ix.  Mr M  M  Hedayati-Kakhki,  an  Iranian  Attorney,  now  a  British
        citizen.


    x.   Father Christopher  Basdon,  a  Roman  Catholic  priest  who  gave
        evidence about M and the Roman Catholic Church in Iran.


    We were also referred to a great deal of written evidence to  which  we
    have referred in the determination.  There were substantial bundles  of
    documents and we made it clear to the  representatives  that  we  would
    prepare our determination based on that written evidence  to  which  we
    were referred, either in submissions or skeleton argument, in  addition
    to the oral evidence.


    The asserted factual basis of Z's claim for international protection
4.   Z has been attending a number of different evangelical Churches in  the
    United Kingdom, having arrived from Iran  on  5  March  2003.   He  has
    attended more than one, mainly because the  respondent  dispersed  him.
    The original basis for his claim was that he  had  been  introduced  to
    Christianity by a student friend of his sister, and would be treated as
    an apostate.  He had developed an interest in  Christianity  before  he
    left Iran, but claimed that evangelism had  only  become  an  important
    part of his faith after arrival here.  In Iran he had  attended  church
    about four times and claimed that the authorities had raided  his  home
    and found a bible.  He now attends church regularly.


    The asserted factual basis of M's claim to international protection


5.   M is a convert to Roman Catholicism.  He  has  a  degree  in  Petroleum
    Engineering,  acquired  in  Iran.   He  first  became   interested   in
    Christianity when he met an Indian Christian colleague  whilst  working
    in Dubai.  As part of his work he came to the United Kingdom  to  study
    an English language course, and met a fellow student,  a  Bolivian  who
    was also a Catholic.  He met, through the internet, a British  citizen,
    living in Holland who shared the same religion.  She  introduced  M  to
    Father Basden who trained him for baptism.


    Once M had obtained an extension of his leave to enable him to continue
    with his studies, he returned to Iran,  believing  his  brother  needed
    help with a legal dispute (the family had been  monarchists  which  had
    caused difficulties in the past, including the confiscation  of  land).
    M heard of his brother's problem through a long-standing friend, AN, in
    whom he  had  confided  his  conversion  during  exchanges  of  emails.
    Shortly after arriving in Iran, and  without  finding  his  brother,  M
    claims to have been kidnapped, detained  and  mis-treated  for  several
    days.  He does not know who his captors were, but claimed to have heard
    AN's voice.  He was released on promising to pay $1000  and  left  Iran
    shortly thereafter and claimed asylum on arriving back  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


    Thereafter he met EV, with  whom  he  lives  in  Scotland.   She  is  a
    Canadian citizen, born  in  the  Netherlands,  and  attends  Church  of
    Scotland services.  They have been unable to  marry  because  of  their
    respective immigration status.  She is a visitor to the United Kingdom.


    His conversion has been publicised in the Catholic Herald  and  he  has
    now been confirmed.  He attends church regularly.

SECTION 1

Conclusions in FS

6.   The Tribunal's overall conclusions in FS and Others were as follows:-


    "186 We now draw those threads together to reach our conclusion in  the
         individual cases.  Persecution for Geneva  Convention  purposes  is
         not confined to acts of individual brutality or imprisonment.  Some
         discrimination, continuing harassment and a  climate  of  incessant
         fear are constituent parts as well.   All  Christians  suffer  from
         significant legal, social and economic discrimination.   All  known
         converts live in a society where those forms of discrimination  are
         reinforced.  The legal regime in theory can be very harsh; they can
         be seen as enemies of the theocratic state,  and  their  lives  and
         well-being can be threatened by the apparatus of the state and  the
         violent attentions of covertly sanctioned religious zealots.  There
         is no state protection.  There would  be  a  pervasive  climate  of
         fear, varying in degree, from time to time, and place to place.


    187. For the  ordinary  convert,  who  is  neither  a  leader,  lay  or
         ordained, nor a Pastor,  nor  a  proselytiser  or  evangelist,  the
         actual degree of risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article
         3 is not sufficient to warrant the protection of either Convention.
          The reality is that a social and economic life can be  maintained;
         Christianity can be practised, if necessary, cautiously  at  times,
         by Church attendance, association with Christians and Bible  study.
         There may well be monitoring of services and identity checks.  They
         would be able to practise, however, as most  Iranian  converts  do.
         It is realistic to expect that there may sometimes be  questioning,
         disruption, orders not to attend  Church,  which  may  require  the
         convert to stay away for a while.  But there is no  evidence  of  a
         real risk of ill-treatment during such questioning or  of  anything
         more than a short period of detention at worst.  There is  evidence
         of random or sporadic violence by the likes of the Basiji,  but  at
         too infrequent a level to constitute a real risk  to  the  ordinary
         convert.  The longer  official  questioning,  detentions,  and  the
         greater risk of charges, trumped up or menacingly vague  or  simply
         threatened are not a real risk for the ordinary convert.


    188. We would, on the present evidence, regard them as not  at  a  real
         risk of persecution or treatment breaching Article 3.  We allow  in
         that assessment for some recent worsening in the current climate.


    189. We would regard the more active convert,  Pastor,  church  leader,
         proselytiser or evangelist as being at a real risk.   Their  higher
         profile and role would be more likely to attract the malevolence of
         the licensed zealot  and  the  serious  adverse  attention  of  the
         theocratic state when it sought, as it will do on  some  occasions,
         to repress conversions from Islam which it sees as a menace and  an
         affront to the state and God.


    190. Where an ordinary individual convert has additional risk  factors,
         they too may well be at a real risk.  We have already said that  we
         accept that the conversions would become known to the  authorities,
         but that is not of itself an additional factor because  it  is  the
         very assumption upon which  we  are  assessing  risk.   These  risk
         factors may not relate to  religious  views  at  all.   It  is  the
         combination which may  provoke  persecutory  attentions  where,  by
         itself, the individual conversion would have been allowed  to  pass
         without  undue  hindrance.   A  woman  faces   additional   serious
         discrimination in Iran, though it falls short of being  persecutory
         merely on the grounds of gender.  But for a single  woman,  lacking
         such economic  or  social  protection  which  a  husband  or  other
         immediate family or friends might  provide,  the  difficulties  she
         faces as a convert are significantly compounded.  Her legal  status
         in any prosecution is much weaker;  the risk  of  ill-treatment  in
         any questioning is increased.  This factor tips the overall  nature
         of the treatment and risk into a  real  risk  of  persecution.   We
         would regard NS [one of the other appellants in FS and  Others]  as
         falling into that category;  she is at a real risk  of  persecution
         for her religion, or of treatment which breaches  Article  3.   The
         role of family  as  a  source  of  protection  should  be  examined
         carefully in individual  cases.   Similar  support  might  also  be
         provided by close friends or colleagues in employment."

7.   Prior to coming to those conclusions the Tribunal observed  that  there
    was "some force  in  the  characterisation  of  Iran  as  unstable  and
    volatile".  At the time  the  President  was  President  Khatami.   The
    Tribunal said that his reformist approach cannot be said to be a change
    "well embedded for the longer term".  The Tribunal noted there had been
    incidents suggestive of a reversal of the trend, and that the  Tribunal
    had seen evidence that there had been isolated incidents of persecution
    through the late 1990s.   At  the  date  of  the  decision,  there  had
    recently been an openly held  Annual  General  Meeting  of  evangelical
    Churches which resulted in the detention of a number  of  people.   The
    Tribunal noted that all but ten of the leaders were released  the  same
    day, and those who remained in detention were pastors.   The   Tribunal
    concluded that there was no  evidence  of  problems  for  the  ordinary
    congregant, convert or not, "save those which attend the  detention  of
    pastors and an ensuing climate of fear and anxiety".  The Tribunal  did
    not expressly anticipate a reversal of the reformist trend but clearly,
    in paragraph 182, recognised the possibility.  It said that  those  who
    would be at particular risk from any such reverse of  change  would  be
    those converts with the higher profile, "i.e. either the  proselytising
    convert, the church leader who had converted,  and  the  Protestant  or
    evangelical church leaders or activists, whether converted  from  Islam
    or not."

8.   The Tribunal expressed some caution over background material  emanating
    from US sources.   In  so  doing  it  observed  that  the  USA  had  no
    diplomatic representation in Iran which had the effect of reducing  the
    number of informed contacts which it could report.  It said  that  made
    it more reliant on indirect sources,  and  also  noted  an  element  of
    political hostility which affected the religious sources.  The Tribunal
    had noted that the sources seemed, at times, to differ from  the  other
    (non-US) sources.

9.   At paragraph 184, the Tribunal accepted that there was no real risk  on
    return for someone who has simply been an asylum seeker.  It  cautioned
    against drawing conclusions by reference to the position of  those  who
    return merely as failed  asylum  seekers,  when  considering  what  may
    happen to those returning if  the  fact  of  conversion  becomes  known
    before or at the point of return.   The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    evidence did not show that by itself would lead to  ill-treatment,  but
    found it could lead to questioning, warnings and the  possibility  that
    local police or vigilante groups, family and associates  may  be  told.
    The Tribunal found that if there was hostility from families that would
    need to be considered in each case, but generally   did  not  create  a
    risk of persecution, although it acknowledged that it could  make  life
    more difficult.

10.  In these appeals it is the appellants' case that there has indeed  been
    a reversal of the reformist trend.  In 2004 the parliamentary elections
    gave rise to a conservative majority in the Majlis  and  in  June  2005
    Mahmood Ahmadi-Nejad was elected President.  At  3.41  of  the  January
    2008 Iran Country of Origin Information Report (COIR)  the  Center  for
    Contemporary Conflict is reported as saying,

         "Many observers described Ahmadi-Nejad's victory as a  key  turning
         point for Iran, predicting that  it  will  produce  a  new  era  of
         radical, puritanical rule at home and a greater militancy in Iran's
         foreign policy".


    We do not quote that as the only view and the report went on to predict
    that there may be political obstacles limiting the President's  ability
    to act.  The quotation  is there to indicate the possible  significance
    of the change in political leadership since early 2004.

SECTION 2

Events since FS and Others

11.  We are only concerned in this determination with  the  position  as  it
    affects ordinary converts because FS  and  Others  decided  that  those
    converts who could not be so described  would  be  at  real  risk.   Mr
    Kovats did not seek to argue that the situation for those who  are  not
    ordinary  converts  had  improved.   Because  the  two  appellants  are
    arguably "ordinary converts", we propose to set out in this section the
    evidence that relates to the mistreatment of church members  generally.
    That will assist us to decide whether there has,  in  reality,  been  a
    change in  the  attitude  towards  Christians  generally  and  ordinary
    converts in particular.  We will deal later,  at  Section  6  with  the
    extent to which it is appropriate to refer to "ordinary converts".

(i)  The Evidence of Anna Enayat

12.  In FS and Others Ms Enayat gave evidence, and was referred  to  as  AB.
    There were particular reasons, of which the Tribunal is aware, for  her
    request to be referred to anonymously in that determination.   She  has
    expressly said that she is now content both to be referred to openly in
    this determination and for it to be disclosed that she was the "AB"  in
    FS and Others.  We have her CV.  Ms Enayat is well known as  an  expert
    on Iran.  She has taught in the  past  at  Tehran  University,  and  we
    accept that she is appropriately qualified  to  give  expert  evidence.
    Although her report was prepared for the first appellant she  indicated
    that she is content for it to  be  used  in  the  case  of  the  second
    appellant also.

13.  With regard to incidents concerning the churches and their  members  Ms
    Enayat started in her report by warning against what  she  thought  was
    the underreporting of such incidents.  This had been raised by her as a
    concern in FS and Others (see  paragraph  171).   Notwithstanding  that
    Tribunal's doubt about the underreporting, Ms Enayat  remained  of  the
    view that that is the case.   She quotes the then  Secretary  of  State
    for Foreign Affairs in a briefing  to  the  House  Of  Commons  Foreign
    Affairs Committee, prior to a visit to Iran in October 2003, as saying:-



         "Accurate information about the actual  treatment  of  converts  or
         those who seek to convert others is hard to obtain and  we  do  not
         have a full picture."


    Whilst she acknowledged that the  arrest  or  severe  ill-treatment  of
    relatively high profile individuals, or mass arrest,  would  come  into
    the public domain, she did not believe that was the case  for  ordinary
    converts.  She referred to the arrest of house  church  members  on  21
    September 2005 which was not reported until October 2007. She  referred
    to the Reverend Dehquani who gave evidence in FS and  Others  that  the
    Anglican Church  did  not  monitor  how  converts  were  treated.   She
    observed that, at paragraph 149 of FS and Others, there had been a late
    submission concerning the persecution of an Anglican who had left  Iran
    and whose mistreatment had not been mentioned by the Reverend  Dehquani
    or in any public  sources.   Finally,  she  referred  to  a  successful
    applicant for asylum referred  to  as  SS.   He  claimed  to  have  had
    experienced two periods of difficulty, neither of  which  the  Anglican
    Church knew of, although she conceded  that  the  incidents  themselves
    were not of a major nature.


14.  Ms Enayat's report gives the  following  examples  of  mistreatment  of
    Christians.  Her evidence is all sourced although many of the incidents
    are referred to only by websites closely associated with churches.

15.  She referred to some incidents which date from before  FS  and  Others,
    but which were not before it.  She did so largely by  reference  to  an
    affidavit by Mr Ghaffari of Iranian Christians International, to  which
    we refer later, but she also added details about  a  1994  incident  in
    Kermanshah in which some Kurdish  converts  were  badly  beaten.   That
    incident was referred to in a letter, written by Bishop  Hovsepian-Mehr
    (a bishop in the Assembly of God) the day before he was  murdered,  and
    recently  reproduced  in  his  biography,  published  in   2004.    She
    summarised by saying that the incidents referred to by Mr Ghaffari, and
    the bishop, are noteworthy because,  with  one  exception,  the  people
    concerned were all ordinary converts and showed that persecution  often
    followed a chance event other than church attendance.  Those  incidents
    cover a period from 1994 to March 2004 and number twelve in total.

16.  In her report, where  she  gives  her  sources,  Miss  Enayat  said  in
    relation to more recent events (in summary):-

    i.   Although an incident in May 2004 was referred to in FS and Others,
         rather more information is  now  available.   Compass  Direct  News
         Agency (an agency which is  a  regular  source  of  information  in
         relation to Assembly of God news) referred to dozens  of  believers
         from two church groups who generally met  in  secret  house  church
         groups, and were  former  Muslims,  being  subjected  to  "physical
         mistreatment and interrogation methods" for  refusing  to  renounce
         their faith.  All but four had been released by the middle  of  the
         month and the rest by the end, although one pastor  (a  convert  to
         Christianity from the Bahai faith) was detained for six  weeks  and
         his wife and two children kept in prison for one week.


    ii.  Another person, described  as  a  Protestant  Church  leader,  was
         arrested nearby in Nowshahr on 30 May 2004  and  detained  until  6
         July.  It seems that none of the people detained appeared in  court
         or had any formal charges pressed against them.  They were told  to
         stop evangelising and meeting for  worship  and  "to  stop  talking
         about Jesus".


    iii. On 9 September 2004, the Assembly of God was targeted  again  when
         police invaded the Annual General Conference of the Church in Karaj
         and 80 participants were arrested.  Most were released after a  day
         although ten (of which  six  were  pastors)  were  detained  for  a
         further few days.  The exception was Hameed Pourmand, who  remained
         incarcerated.  It was said that he was the only convert from  Islam
         amongst the pastors detained.  Pourmand was a middle ranking  naval
         officer  and,  although  subsequently  charged  with  apostasy  and
         proselytising, it is not clear whether he was  acquitted  of  those
         charges  or  they  were  not  proceeded  with.   He  was,  however,
         sentenced to three years for charges of deception.  On  release  he
         was warned against attending church services.   In  oral  evidence,
         Miss Enayat was asked about the fact  that  Pourmand  was  a  naval
         officer and a Christian and whether that was surprising.  She  said
         that he had been in the navy for  a  long  time.   There  was  some
         dispute as to whether the authorities knew about his religion.  She
         said there was no bar to a Christian being an officer in the forces
         although she would have expected that the usual vetting  procedures
         would have precluded him.  She thought it was more  a  question  of
         his not being purged from the Navy, rather than being admitted as a
         Christian.


    iv.  On 22 November 2005 a convert in Gonbad-e  Kavous  (in  the  North
         East of Iran) was murdered by  unnamed  people.   He  is  named  as
         Ghorban Dordi Tourani (elsewhere as Ghorban Tori), a  convert  from
         Sunni Islam.  He was said to have  been  pastoring  an  independent
         house church of converted Christians.  It is said he was stabbed to
         death and his body thrown in front of the house.   The  authorities
         searched his house and, by the end of the following day,  they  had
         also raided the houses of all other known  Christian  believers  in
         the city.  Cross-examined about this, Ms Enayat  accepted  that  he
         could not be described  as  "an  ordinary  convert"  since  he  was
         clearly an evangeliser.  She said that it is not known  who  killed
         him.  There had been no report of his murder, of any  follow-up  or
         investigation; the assumption is that he was killed  by  vigilantes
         with or  without  the  support  of  the  security  apparatus.   She
         observed that he was a person who was well known in his  community.
         She explained that the law  is  such  that  whoever  committed  the
         murder would not be subject to  prosecution.   She  justified  that
         assertion by referring to page 59 of her report. There, she said:-


             "It is important to note  that  such  murders  are  often  the
             result of what is known in Islamic jurisprudence as  Takfir  -
             namely a declaration that a Muslim has departed into  unbelief
             (become a Kafir).  A Takfir usually involves a religious order
             (Fatwa) that a certain person or group of people  are  "worthy
             of death" (madhur al-damm).


             Even if a religious order is not issued, Article  226  of  the
             Law of Islamic Punishment grants impunity in cases  of  murder
             to those who can prove in a  court  of  law  that  the  victim
             deserves to be killed.  The Article reads as follows:


                  "Murder (qatl-e nafs) is subject  to  retaliation  (qesas)
                  when the murdered person is not according to  Sharia'  law
                  one who deserves to be killed.  If the person deserves  to
                  be killed, the murderer must demonstrate the necessity  of
                  killing that person according to Sharia  principles  in  a
                  court of law"."


    v.   In late November  2005  it  was  reported  that  the  Ministry  of
         Intelligence and Security ("MOIS" - known in Persian as  Ettela'at)
         had arrested and severely tortured ten Christians in several cities
         including Tehran.  It was also reported  that  MOIS  officials  had
         visited known Christian leaders  following  Tourani's  murder  (see
         (iv) above) and instructed  them  to  warn  those  taking  part  in
         unofficial house fellowships that "the government  knows  what  you
         are doing, and we will come for you soon".


    vi.  On 2 May 2006 in Gorgan, Ali Kaboli, a member of the  Assembly  of
         God Church, was placed under arrest and held incommunicado until 12
         June when a large amount of bail was  posted.   It  was  said  that
         Kaboli had converted to Christianity before the 1979 revolution and
         had been a house church leader since the mid-1990s.


    vii. In the second half of 2006, Issa Motamedi Mojdehi a convert member
         of a house church group was arrested in Rasht and charged with drug
         trafficking.  His wife was treated in the same way.  It is reported
         that he was told that his real offence, and which would  appear  on
         his confidential legal file, was of abandoning Islam.  He was  told
         that unless he renounced his faith he could remain in jail and face
         execution.  Releasing him on bail, the  judge  told  him  that  his
         eight year old daughter had been trying to lead other  children  to
         the Christian faith.


    viii.     About ten days before Mojdehi was released, police shut  down
         the shop of another believer.  Compass Direct reported was told  by
         an Iranian source that depriving people of their livelihood was one
         way of controlling the situation, because it asphyxiated the church
         of funds and drove people abroad.  The same report referred to five
         other incidents of harassment and mistreatment  of  local  converts
         who, it was said, had at least in part fled to larger cities so  as
         to be more inconspicuous.  On 19 August 2006, there  was  reference
         to leaders of two house fellowships being  arrested  and  held  for
         twenty days before being bailed; and of another who was  beaten  up
         in a park and detained for a few days, allegedly  for  beating  his
         attackers.  There was a report of two  young  women  being  beaten.
         One of them was arrested and detained for several days, after which
         the police telephoned daily and threatened to re-arrest her and her
         family.


    ix.  On 26 September 2006 Razar Montazami and his wife were arrested in
         Mashhad, and held incommunicado by officials from the  Ministry  of
         Information.  His wife, Fereshteh Dibaj, is the  youngest  daughter
         of the Reverend Dibaj (of the  Assembly  of  God  Church)  who  was
         executed for apostasy in December  1999.   It  was  said  that  her
         husband is a convert to Christianity.  They were accused of holding
         devotional meetings in their home since the local Assembly  of  God
         Church closed in 1988.  They were released on substantial  bail  of
         $20,000 after his mother signed an undertaking that their apartment
         would no longer be used for meetings.  Apparently, nothing  further
         was heard until April 2008 when Fereshteh Dibaj was prevented  from
         leaving Iran at Tehran Airport when she was hoping to visit friends
         and relatives in Turkey; notwithstanding the  fact  they  had  both
         travelled abroad several times between their release and that date.


    x.   On 26 October 2006  a  Christian  called  Qaneh  was  arrested  in
         Sanandaj, and held for ten hours.


    xi.  On 14 November 2006 there was a report of an evangelical Christian
         in Isfahan whose home was raided.  His  wife,  recently  discharged
         from hospital, was severely beaten  and  physically  abused  in  an
         attempt to learn his whereabouts.  Other relatives and friends were
         stopped and questioned by the regime to discover his location.


    xii. On 10 December 2006 fourteen converts belonging to a  group  other
         than the Assembly of God were arrested in Rasht, Karaj, Enzeli  and
         Tehran.   Six were released after 24 hours, and eight  remained  in
         custody until about Christmas.  It is said that the  fourteen  were
         leaders of an indigenous house church movement of approximately 600
         people.  It was described by Compass Direct as a non-denominational
         Christian community of "free  evangelicals"  although  regarded  by
         others as somewhat unorthodox, having rejected the Trinity.


    xiii.    On 3 January 2007, an Iranian human rights website reported an
         intensification of MOIS pressure on evangelical churches, including
         both Assembly of God Churches and unofficial  house  churches,  all
         over Iran.  Christians meeting in Rasht, Tehran and Karaj had  been
         subjected to conditions, namely the submission of a weekly list  of
         all those who attend services, together with an explanation of  any
         decrease or increase in those present.  There was also a  condition
         that the members of the church should have no  contact  with  other
         social groups.  That meant they should not make contact with people
         on the streets, or university campuses, and that they should refuse
         admission to non-Christian visitors.  The  report  also  said  that
         house churches were forbidden from holding religious  meetings  and
         that such meetings could only be convened with a  permit  from  the
         MOIS, and their requests had gone  unanswered.   It  was  suggested
         that the movements and telephones of those arrested  in  2005  were
         under surveillance.


    xiv. On 18 January 2007 there were attempts to arrest  the  leaders  of
         another evangelical house church in  Rasht.   The  leaders  were  a
         married couple who managed to escape, but members of the group were
         told to refrain from gathering and that,  if  they  did  not  their
         leaders would end up "on ward 209 of Evin Prison".  In March  2007,
         church members were summoned and interrogated in  groups  of  four.
         They were made to sign undertakings that they would have no contact
         with other members of the  church,  would  not  arrange  or  attend
         services, and would inform the MOIS of any change of  address.   It
         is said that some members were detained for between one  and  seven
         days, and subjected to harsh questioning.


    xv.  On 27 June 2007, the police raided the house of Fred  Safarian  (a
         convert) with a warrant to search for a TV satellite  receiver  and
         drugs.  On finding a Bible and other materials he was arrested.  On
         16 July 2007,  the Bible class  of  the  Central  Assembly  of  God
         Church in Tehran was raided by police who declared that an  illegal
         gathering was taking place without a permit.  They closed down  the
         meeting.  Although it is suggested that three church  leaders  were
         arrested after the incident, there is no  other  information  about
         those arrests.


    xvi. On 15 August 2007 pictures were published, on a website  belonging
         to Farsi Christian News Network (FCNN), of a convert who  had  been
         involved in a car accident involving a police car on  a  street  in
         Tehran.  The man was subsequently lashed.  It  was  said  that  the
         officers had inspected his vehicle, found a Bible, accused  him  of
         apostasy and, after beating and insulting him, handed him  over  to
         the Revolutionary Guard.  Thereafter he was detained and beaten for
         two days, whipped and then released on bail.  His identity was  not
         given.


    xvii.    On 12 October 2007, FCNN published  pictures  of  a  Christian
         couple who had been flogged by judiciary officials  in  Karaj.   It
         was said they had been arrested along with the rest of their  house
         church congregation on 21 September 2005 and, having been  released
         on bail, came to trial in June or July  2007.   They  were  charged
         with attending an illegal  church  and  also  an  apostasy  related
         offence.   The  woman  was  from  an  ethnic  Christian   community
         (Assyrian) but the man a convert from Islam.  At  trial  the  judge
         had ruled that the woman should be viewed as a convert to Islam who
         had converted back to Christianity and should therefore be  treated
         as an apostate.  Having been released on bail pending the decision,
         the woman was sexually assaulted when she went to  report.    As  a
         result, she did not report the next time for fear of a repeat  but,
         in September 2007, judiciary officials arrived at their  home  with
         the sentence order and flogged them on the spot.


    xviii.   FCNN reported a convert belonging to the  Pentecostal  Church,
         in the west of Iran, having fled  because  of  increasing  pressure
         from both the authorities and extremist groups.  They described the
         pressure as threats by telephone, and face-to-face insults.  He had
         received a threat from Ansar-e  Islam,  an  extremist  Sunni  group
         operating in the Kurdish area on the borders of Iraq and Iran.  The
         group is said to have links to Al Qaeda and, notwithstanding  being
         a Sunni group, to have the  support  of  the  Iranian  authorities.
         After he fled, the authorities interrogated friends and  relatives,
         tortured one of  his  brothers  who  headed  a  house  church,  and
         intimidated his brother's employer into dismissing him.


    xix. On 5 March 2008 Shahram (Daniel) Bonyadi, being described  as  one
         of the most energetic house church leaders in the western areas  of
         Isfahan, was reported to have been forced to leave the  country  in
         early  2008,  following  a  campaign   by   neighbours   who   were
         fundamentalist Muslims.


    xx.  In her report, Ms  Enayat  referred  to  a  report  that  she  had
         personally received on 13 March 2008.  This concerned a man  called
         Z whose family thought he led ten  to  fifteen  house  churches  in
         South and South East Iran.  It is said that he received  a  lot  of
         attention, described as "persecution and torture", including  death
         threats.  He said that the last time he  was  arrested  his  entire
         family were first separated, then  put  together  and  taken  to  a
         cemetery "to discuss death with the gravedigger".  As  one  of  the
         family was a six  year  old  boy,  that  was  regarded  as  a  very
         difficult experience for him.  As a result the family now  live  in
         Northern Cyprus.


(ii) Ebrahim Ghaffari


    17.  Among the papers was a report from Mr Ghaffari, now a  citizen  of
         the United States.  The report was in the  form  of  an  affidavit,
         sworn in 2006, in which he described himself as the  friend  of  an
         Executive  Director  of  Iranian  Christians  International.   This
         report was  not  expressly  referred  to  in  the  course  of  oral
         submissions although Miss  Weston  referred  to  it  as   essential
         reading in her written submissions on the evidence.  The  statement
         is a generic document dealing with its  author's  views  about  the
         position of the status of Muslim converts to Christianity in  Iran.
         It is written in what we can only describe as a campaigning  style,
         and does not induce the reader to conclude that there  is  a  great
         deal of objectivity about it.  Ms Enayat included it in the list of
         documents from which she drew support and, in particular,  we  have
         noted the earlier incidents referred to by Mr  Ghaffari  and  which
         are listed by Ms Enayat at page 48 of her report.  The incidents do
         not add greatly to the material that was before the Tribunal in  FS
         and Others, but do suggest that more people left  Iran  during  the
         period 1995 to 2000 for reasons which they claim were connected  to
         their conversion to Christianity, than were referred to in  FS  and
         Others.  Ms Enayat said  that  she  had  read  his  report  and  it
         coincides with her views in  relation  to  the  material  from  the
         1990s.  From the 2000 she said it  was  not  very  different.   She
         regarded it as less comprehensive than her  own  information.   She
         did not agree with Mr Ghaffari's generalisations.


    (iii)   Mrs Jessie Axtell


    18.  Mrs Axtell is the wife of the Reverend Ronald Axtell.  They  lived
         in Iran between 1962 and 1978 when her husband was  a  minister  in
         the Anglican (Episcopal) Church.  She provided a statement,  signed
         on  30  July  2007,  which  gives  a  second-hand  account  of  the
         experiences of two people (described as X and  Y)  prior  to  their
         leaving Iran.  Both X and Y are in the United Kingdom.  We were not
         told why they were not called  to  give  evidence  themselves.   At
         least one has been granted refugee  status.     In  her  statement,
         dealing first with Y, she described how he had been summoned  twice
         to the Ettela'at (ie MOIS) offices and interrogated.  He  was  kept
         by the religious police for several days after being caught  giving
         an audio tape of St. Luke's Gospel to some Qashqais.  His wife was
         also seized.  They were released, after signing an undertaking  not
         to evangelise, on the threat of fifteen years  imprisonment.   They
         had already planned to leave in January 2006 (intending to come  to
         the United Kingdom for their child to receive  medical  treatment).
         Prior to that, they held a Bible party, involving Bible  study  and
         worship over the new year period.  Shortly before they left,  their
         home was raided and  their  money,  computer  and  Christian  books
         removed.  Y obtained refugee status in the United Kingdom following
         a successful appeal.


    19.  X arrived in the United Kingdom from Shiraz in January  2007.   In
         Iran he was an Episcopal Church Council member.  He  was  described
         as having been a Christian for about sixteen years,  but  was  only
         baptised nine years ago.  His wife and  child  fled  whilst  X  was
         detained and she was granted asylum.  When X arrived he was granted
         leave in line with that of his wife.  It is said that he was one of
         the lay readers of the church with Y.  He described a  CCTV  camera
         being trained on the church entrance, placed in a building occupied
         by government employees.   He had told Mrs Axtell of  one  occasion
         when he was asked about some foreign  tourists who had visited  the
         church the day before at a time when there would  not  normally  be
         anyone around.  He said that he was first summoned to Ershad, seven
         years earlier, because a  youth  group  met  in  his  house.   This
         resulted in his having to report to the authorities at six  monthly
         intervals.  He has also  been  questioned  by  the  Ettela'at.   He
         described regular questioning by both Ershad  and  Ettela'at.   She
         describes Ershad as part of the security hierarchy, coming  between
         the  Basij  and  the  Provincial  Council  in  terms  of  level  of
         authority.  The Ettela'at is an intelligence unit.  He said he  was
         taken about six times to  a  hotel  where,  on  occasions,  he  was
         interrogated in an empty room by loudspeaker  and  microphone.   He
         said he had been asked about  the Axtells on occasions, and about a
         report that had been published in the South China Morning News some
         time before.  He was eventually detained for about 40  days  before
         being brought before a judge and accused of seventeen offences.  By
         the time he was released his wife had fled.   In  cross-examination
         Mrs Axtell was asked a number of questions about general conditions
         in Iran to which we will refer later.  [We understand that "Ershad"
         is the Ministry of Islamic Guidance and Culture with offices around
         the country.  Whilst not strictly part of the security hierarchy it
         has a role with people, such as writers and artists,  and  includes
         in  its  brief  the  approval  of  scripts  for   publication   and
         performance].


    SECTION 3
     House Churches and Television evangelism


20.  In her report, at paragraph 2.3.7 Ms Enayat dealt with  house  churches
    and the related topic of television evangelism.  She said that Assembly
    of God members have been meeting in  house  churches  since  the  early
    1990s and, on a limited scale, so have Anglicans.  She  said  there  is
    evidence that over the last ten years house  church  groups  have  been
    developing independently of the older established churches.  She  cited
    one example the Jesus Only group, to which we referred earlier  as  the
    unorthodox group which denies the Trinity.  She described how  Tourani,
    who was murdered in 2005, had been  pastoring  in  a  house  church  to
    convert Christians.  He had himself converted whilst serving a sentence
    for manslaughter in Russia.   She  said  that  others  appear  to  have
    founded  house  churches  having  been  converted  through   television
    evangelism.  She described Daniel Bonyadi as one of the most  energetic
    house church leaders in Isfahan.  He was forced to leave as a result of
    pressure from fundamentalist Muslims and the MOIS.  He claimed that  he
    happened to see a sermon on one of the Farsi language  broadcasts  and,
    having studied a Bible which he was able to find, telephoned the number
    on a TV programme and made his conversion.  He is said to have come  to
    Christ by the telephone.  Thereafter, he spent his time  organising  an
    underground Pentecostalist group, but  may also have been in touch with
    the Assembly of God and Ingili (Presbyterian) pastors in Tehran

21.  Ms Enayat  referred  to  three  separate  television  channels  beaming
    programmes to Iran, although she said there are more, mostly US  based.
    Nejat TV is run by a convert and has been broadcasting three days  week
    since May 2003.  Mohabat TV is a consortium under the umbrella  of  the
    Antioch Ministries broadcasting a variety of programmes, many in Farsi.
    Sat Seven was launched in Cyprus in December 2006 by  a  consortium  of
    Middle East Christian organisations and broadcasts for  eighteen  hours
    (she did not say in what period).  She said the programmes are  varied.
    Some are said to preach a straightforward  Iranianised  version  of  US
    Born Again Christianity.  Others,  made  by  the  Assembly  of  God  or
    Presbyterian  (Injili)  Christians,  have  an  indigenous  flavour  and
    produce  evangelical  and  educational  material  which  is  culturally
    appealing to Iranians.  Sat Seven has counsellors who can be telephoned
    from inside Iran.  These channels claim a high success rate and a  very
    large following.  In her report she said there is  room  to  doubt  the
    optimistic figures given by the channels, saying that  they  cannot  be
    disproved.  She said the Christian Post claimed in 2004, that there had
    been 50,000 conversions in two years.  Elsewhere there  are  claims  to
    100,000 converts.  The Iranian Christian TV programme, which is seen in
    prime time throughout Iran, describes itself as  the  home  church  for
    many within closed Muslim countries who avoid the risks of  worshipping
    openly.  It also claimed that over 50,000 Iranian Muslims have accepted
    Christianity  through  the  satellite  TV  ministry.   Its  five   year
    objective includes winning ten per cent of the  Iranian  population  to
    Christ, the figure now being about 1%.

22.  She said that there is an accumulation of evidence that  a  significant
    minority  of  ordinary  Iranians  are  searching  for  an   alternative
    spiritual framework.  There is a widespread, if illegal,  ownership  of
    satellite  dishes.   Thus  the  impact  of  TV  conversion  cannot   be
    discounted.  In cross-examination, asked how  she  would  describe  the
    impact of television evangelism, she said  she  was  very  hesitant  to
    express a view because the information was very slim.  The only way  to
    find out would be to do research on the ground, and that is impossible.

23.  Saying again that it was  difficult  to  assess  the  spread  of  house
    churches she said that after the 1990s some  of  the  Assembly  of  God
    churches which had set up had since had to  close  down  again.   Their
    members were likely to have started attending house churches.

SECTION 4

The Churches, their size and activity

24.  That part of Ms Enayat's report  which  deals  with  the  size  of  the
    Christian community starts with a table giving the figures from various
    official censi from 1976 until  2006.   The  latest  figure  given  for
    Christians was 109,415 which equates to 0.155 per  cent  of  the  total
    population.   The total population was given  as  70,495,782  of  which
    99.44 per cent were Muslims.  She observed that the COIR 2008  gives  a
    figure of 300,000 for the Christian population.  But, she  noted,  that
    was the rounded figure given for the number of Christians in  the  1976
    census and which for some reason has never been revised  in  the  COIR.
    She said that 109,415 is a misleading figure because  it  is  only  the
    figure for recognised religious minorities  -  unrecognised  minorities
    were not counted.  Unrecognised groups include Bahais and Mandeans, and
    would, obviously, include the secret members  of  underground  churches
    which is likely to  include  most  if  not  all  converts.   There  are
    categories in the 2006 census for other religions (i.e. non-Muslim) and
    for those who do not state their religion.  They amount to  54,234  and
    205,317 respectively.  It is not known what those figures represent.

25.  The recognised religions, Christians, Jews and  Zoroastrians  have  MPs
    in  the  Majlis.   The  Christian  MP  represents  the  Assyrians   and
    Chaldeans.  Each of those MPs has challenged the figures given for  the
    number of their own religious grouping.  In relation to  the  Jews  and
    Zoroastrians, the official figures were claimed to be half that of  the
    actual numbers.  According to the representatives of the two recognised
    Christian minorities, in 1999 their communities were 190,000,  compared
    with the 79,000 recorded in the 1996 census.  It is, however,  apparent
    from Ms Enayat's report that even the representatives' figures are  not
    consistent.  Ms Enayat concluded that, since the 1979  revolution,  the
    religious minorities  have  been  reduced  considerably  by  migration,
    dramatically between 1980 and 1986, and that there had been a  smaller,
    but  still  substantial,  outflow  since  the  1990s.   A  UN   Special
    Representative claimed in 2001 that 15,000 to 20,000  Christians  leave
    annually, mostly Armenians and Assyrians going to  the  United  States.
    Ms Enayat concluded that the  numbers  of  the  Armenian  and  Assyrian
    Orthodox and Catholic denominations are approximately as follows:-

         Armenian Orthodox (Gregorian) 80,000-100,000
         Assyrian Apostolic Church of the East (Nestorian) 8,000 - 12,000
         Russian Orthodox, very small numbers
         Armenian Catholic (Eastern Catholic Rite), about 500
         Assyrian Chaldean Church (Eastern Catholic Rite), 3,000 to 4,000
         Roman Catholic (Latin Rite), 2,000  which  includes  diplomats  and
         other expatriates.


26.  As is apparent from FS and Others, there is a clear distinction  to  be
    drawn between what are called the ethnic Christian  churches,  and  the
    Protestant churches.   The  ethnically  based  Armenian  Gregorian  and
    Assyrian Nestorian churches do not accept new members and nor does  the
    Russian Orthodox Church.  The Chaldean Catholic Church, and  the  small
    Roman Catholic Church, do not proselytise.  Although in principle  they
    would not turn a convert away, In practice they would find it difficult
    him or her.  We are not primarily concerned with those ethnic Christian
    churches save for the  Roman  Catholic  Church  which  is  of  interest
    because of the second appellant's membership of it.

27.  Ms Enayat said that however difficult  it  is  to  assess  the  current
    membership size of the ethnic  Christian  churches,  it  is  even  more
    difficult to assess the  current  membership  size  of  the  Protestant
    churches.  She concluded that on the eve of the 1979  revolution  there
    were (not  counting  expatriates)  around  7,000,  broken  down  as  to
    approximately 2,000 Anglicans, 3,000 Presbyterians, 700 Pentecostalists
    and an unknown, but very small, number of  Plymouth  Brethren,  Seventh
    Day Adventists and Jehovah's Witnesses.

28.  By the  early  2000s  she  describes  the  figure  as  having  declined
    precipitously by the early 2000s, with the Anglican Church congregation
    having fallen to between 60 and 80 and the Presbyterian Church (Injili)
    to  1,000  including  the  Armenian,  Assyrian  and  Persian   speaking
    branches.  She concludes that the figure, in the early 2000s, would  be
    a total of about 3,000 to 3,500 people.  Although that  is  about  half
    the figure given by Human Rights Watch in  1997,  she  noted  that  her
    calculation does tally with the figures given  by  Operation  World  in
    2000.  Within those figures, she said it is very difficult to  estimate
    the proportion of converts from Islam.  The  figure  given  by  Iranian
    Christians International, for the number at the time of the revolution,
    was no more than 200 to 300.  She described that figure as low but said
    that all the sources she has looked  at  agree  that  conversions  from
    Islam were rare before 1979, with a  substantial increase, both in Iran
    and among the diaspora,  since  that  time.   She  doubts  the  Iranian
    Christians International figure of 6,000 new converts between 1980  and
    1990, and estimates that the number of new converts will be half  that.
    She referred, in this section of her report, to the large  claims  made
    by  the  television  evangelists.   She  said  that  the  numbers   are
    impossible to determine and considers that, between 2000 and late 2003,
    with the relatively relaxed government attitude, there  may  well  have
    been a new wave of conversions, much of it  outside  the  institutional
    framework  of  the  established  churches.   Finally,  she   said   the
    difficulties in assessing the change in size and composition of  church
    congregations are compounded both by the tendency  to  maintain  a  low
    profile and also by emigration amongst all religious  minorities  since
    the revolution.

29.  She elaborated, when giving evidence, saying that the  Anglican  Church
    lost almost  all  its  expatriates  and  many  of  its  native  members
    following the revolution and was very small by the mid 1990s.   Of  the
    Presbyterian churches, the Persian-speaking congregation, she believes,
    is about 60 (it only  has  one  church).   She  had  thought  that  the
    Anglicans had about 60 in their congregation, but she noticed  that  EF
    had said about  100.   She  thought  that,  whatever  the  figure,  the
    majority were probably converts; although some would be  converts  from
    Judaism and other minorities,  not  necessarily  from  Islam.   Of  the
    Presbyterian churches, she thought that all would be converts but  from
    a mixture made up of Jews, Bahais, Zoroastrians and Muslims.  Her  best
    estimate for the membership of the Assembly of God Churches  was  1,500
    to 2,500 now whereas, from two or three sources, it  seems  there  were
    2,000 to 3,000 in the early 2000s.  She said that her figures  excluded
    the newer house churches. Her Assembly of  God  figure  included  house
    churches that were a consequence of the closures of the Assembly of God
    Churches, probably amounting to a maximum of 1,000.   Summarising,  she
    said she  thought  that  the  number  of  converts  in  all  Protestant
    Churches, not including the ethnic Christian Churches, is between about
    1,000 to 2,000, of which some would not be  converts  from  Islam,  and
    some would be very longstanding converts.

30.  Cross-examined by Ms Naik, Ms  Enayat  said  the  Latin  Rite  Catholic
    Church comprises Roman Catholics as generally understood.  She did  not
    know what language was used now, but said that it had been  French  and
    English in the past, because of the variety of expatriate  congregants.
    She has seen very little information about how it has functioned  since
    the revolution.  She said the church was not aimed only at diplomats in
    the past but used to run schools and convents  before  the  revolution.
    She thought the church would have been tolerated in those days  because
    very few Iranians were involved.  She did not  know  whether  it  would
    admit converts, and  did  not  think  it  would  have  any  underground
    churches as there were so few Iranians involved there would be no need.
     She knew that because a close  friend's  father  had  been  the  Papal
    Nuncio before the revolution.  She said the Iranians  that  did  attend
    were mostly Catholic women married to Iranians and  their families,  or
    those who had moved from the Chaldean Rite to the Latin Rite.

31.  Mr Kovats asked Ms Enayat about the census  table  on  page  8  of  her
    report.  She said the figure for Christians would include the  Armenian
    and the Assyrian Protestants.  Also, that converts would  not,  in  the
    eyes of the authorities, be Christians.   Asked  about  lifelong  Roman
    Catholics and Anglicans, she said that second-generation adherents  are
    not regarded as apostates.  She  thought  that  all  Christians  except
    converts would be included in the figures in the census table.  She was
    reminded that she had said on page 14 of her report that it was  almost
    impossible to estimate the number of Christians who are  converts  from
    Islam.  She accepted she had said that, but observed that any  estimate
    has to relate to such figures as there are.   She  was  referred  to  a
    footnote on page 22 to the effect that "claims by the Assembly  of  God
    of 8,000 members in Iran at the end of the 1990s are quite likely to be
    an aspiration rather than reality" and asked why it was an  aspiration.
    She said that in 1979 the Assembly of  God  had  seven  churches  (some
    without a building) and, by  1990,  fifteen  pastors.   Of  those,  the
    church at Gorgar was tiny and by the end of 1996 at least nine  of  the
    pastors had gone and many churches closed.  She could not see  how,  in
    those circumstances, there could be a congregation of 8,000.   She  did
    not think that even the largest church had  800  in  the  congregation.
    She was asked why the Assembly of God Church  did  not  know  how  many
    members it had, and replied that the article  she  quoted  on  page  22
    paints a picture of far less people and does not anywhere give a  total
    membership figure.  She referred to an article by  a  lecturer  at  the
    Assembly of God College in Godalming who is a church  historian.   That
    produced a picture in 2007 which showed the largest church  would  have
    been about 300.  She speculated that outside Iran  the  church  has  an
    interest in exaggerating the numbers because it  raises  funds  in  the
    United States.  She said she  was  not  accusing  anybody  of  anything
    dishonest, observing that was how ethnic minorities tend to talk  about
    themselves and added that, if she had thought that 8,000 was a  serious
    figure, she would have done more than refer to the claim in a footnote.
     She was asked about the 50,000 conversions referred to by some of  the
    television evangelists and said that if there were any basis  for  that
    figure it would be phone calls made to the  Antioch  Ministries.   That
    ministry takes a corporate form and is an "expatriate  Iranian  outfit"
    which claims that people ring them up.  She said there  was  no  actual
    evidence that the 50,000 figure is wrong.   She  was  asked  about  the
    aspiration to increase the number of converts from one per cent to  ten
    per cent, and whether the regime in Iran has cause to be concerned.  Ms
    Enayat said the person who made that claim was in the United States but
    it is always the case that the regime is concerned; things have  become
    worse in his eyes since the inception of satellites and the  web.   She
    said the authorities may well be concerned about an  increasing  number
    of people trying to convert, which is one of the factors  she  sees  as
    underlying the renewal of persecution.  She said that, ultimately,  one
    can have no idea and, in particular, she had not seen any source  which
    gives an indication of how extensive the development of house  churches
    actually is.

32.  Ms Naik asked how big an issue, from the  perspective  of  the  Iranian
    Government,  was  the  fact  that  the  United  States  Commission   on
    International  Religious  Freedom  has  expressed  concern  about   the
    worsening  situation  for  religious  minorities  in  Iran.  She   made
    reference to the  Commission's  request  for  $75 million  to  support
    democracy in Iran, including funding  for  effective  ways  to  promote
    human rights and the rule of law.  Ms Enayat said this was a very large
    subject although it should first be noted that none of those funds have
    actually been allocated, notwithstanding the funding of minorities  has
    been going on for years.  She cited a  US  based  charity  called  "The
    Hebrew Immigration Society", an NGO  originally  formed  to  help  Jews
    under threat, but which in the case of Iran has also helped  Assyrians,
    Armenians, Zoroastrians and Bahais to leave and  obtain  United  States
    visas.

33.  EF explained why he said he was in a position to speak  authoritatively
    about the Anglican Church in Iran even though  he  personally  had  not
    been there since 1979.  He still has some involvement with the  Diocese
    of  Iran.   In  his  evidence,  EF  referred  to  the   size   of   the
    Episcopal/Anglican Church. He said that, historically, the congregation
    was made up of converts from Islam, Judaism and Zoroastrianism, as well
    as expatriates.  The church used to have congregations in at least five
    cities but is now limited to Tehran, Isfahan and Shiraz.  He  was  then
    asked about numbers and thought the three congregations totalled  about
    100 regular worshippers.  Of those, a number are  older  and,  if  they
    were converts, would have converted  before  the  revolution,  although
    some have converted since.  He said the numbers decreased  dramatically
    after  the  revolution  because  all  the  expatriates  left,   and   a
    significant number of families have also left over the last  28  years.
    He said that some  of  those  who  have  become  Christians  since  the
    revolution have also left because of the problems  and  pressures  they
    face.  He thought that over the last five years  the  congregation  had
    decreased from about 130 or 140 down to just under 100.  He  knew  that
    quite a  number  have  taken  refuge  in  Turkey,  or  obtained  asylum
    elsewhere (in particular in the United States or Australia).  Asked  by
    Ms Naik about Catholic Churches he said there were two  that  will  not
    accept converts, they had split off from the Armenian  Orthodox  Church
    and attached themselves to Rome.  He was asked whether he knew  of  the
    scope for worship by a Catholic convert and said he thought  there  was
    an English speaking Catholic Church and, at the time of the  revolution
    there had been a Latin one.  He was  not  aware  of  a  Farsi  speaking
    Catholic Church.  He agreed with her that there was little  opportunity
    of spiritual guidance for a Catholic  convert  in  the  Farsi  language
    although he thought there may well be an English-speaking  priest.   He
    said he did not know one way or the other about Catholic house churches
    but  accepted  that,  to  Anglicans  and  Roman  Catholics  alike,  the
    Communion service was fundamental.

34.  Father Christopher Basdon, a  Roman  Catholic  priest  from  St  Bede's
    Church, Clapham Park in London, gave evidence that he  worked  in  Iran
    some years ago.  He has some knowledge of the current situation  there.
    He said that the ethnic churches do not  accept  converts  at  all  and
    their only policy is to try to survive.  The Latin rite Catholic Church
    merely comprises churches  for  foreigners,  such  as  Phillipinos  and
    Koreans, and diplomats.  He was  not  aware  that  Iranians  worshipped
    there  although  the  children  of  mixed  marriages  did  before   the
    revolution.  He said that an Iranian would be prominent if he entered a
    Latin Rite Catholic Church which he believes are  monitored.   He  said
    that, in principle, any Catholic  Church  is  open  to  anyone  but  in
    practice that is a very delicate business.  Fundamentalist Muslims like
    to see who is going in and out.  He said that there  were  services  in
    Farsi prior to the revolution but he did not think that  happened  now.
    The languages used are English, other European languages,  Tagalog  and
    Korean because the church is  really  for  foreigners.   He  was  asked
    whether there were any underground Catholic churches and he said  there
    were not.  He said most Iranian Catholics had escaped to the west, some
    having worked with the Educational Apostolate when it was effective  up
    to the revolution.  Those people are now effectively in exile.

SECTION 5

General Conditions for Christian Churches
    This section deals with  the  evidence  about  the  experience  of  the
    churches and their members other than the specific  instances  relating
    to individuals.

(i)  Miss Enayat's Evidence

35.  Ms Enayat dealt with events subsequent to  FS  and  Others.   She  also
    considered that some of the later incidents referred  to  in  FS  were,
    with hindsight, indicative of a new wave of pressure and persecution of
    converts to Christianity and adherents to other religious groups viewed
    by the regime as deviant, non-conformist or  heretical,  in  particular
    Bahais and Sufis.  She  said  that  it  is  because  the  regime  views
    converts to Christianity in the same light as  Bahais  and  Sufis  that
    events involving those other groups are relevant.   As to the  pre-  FS
    and  Others  events,  she  started  with  the  events   involving   the
    Anglican/Episcopalian community and in  particular  with  an  event  in
    August 2003.  The Diocesan Administrator in  Isfahan,  lay  readers,  a
    preacher and an organist and the Bishop's secretary were  all  arrested
    and accused of unlawful propaganda before being released on bail.  They
    were forbidden to attend church and, according to the information which
    was before the Tribunal in FS and Others, one was badly beaten  in  and
    banned from Isfahan.  There was a similar event in  Shiraz,  where  the
    Iranian  authorities  only  allowed  regular  churchgoers  to  go  into
    services, with one recent convert being badly beaten before leaving the
    country.  In Tehran, in September 2003, five families were told not  to
    attend the church, others lost their jobs, were warned,  questioned  or
    asked to inform (this is  referred  to  in  paragraph  149  of  FS  and
    Others).    The  Bishop  of  Iran,  Iradj  Mottahedeh,  considered  the
    measures were aimed at bringing pressure on the church as a whole.   In
    his farewell address, the Bishop wrote, in early spring 2004, that  the
    authorities seemed to want the downfall of the  church  and  had  taken
    away many of its resources.  That made the community  appear  to  think
    the authorities were ready to celebrate the defeat of  the  church  and
    could see no other reason behind sanctions which were imposed.

36.  In September 2005, an Article  about  the  church  of   St.  Simon  the
    Zealot in Shiraz referred to the church's regular congregation of about
    30 appearing to be risking the wrath of the authorities.  It said  that
    almost all had converted from Islam.  The church's lay leader,  himself
    a former Muslim, was quoted as  saying  that  the  authorities  enjoyed
    giving the church a hard time.  They monitored on Sundays  to  see  who
    attended.  He said that he was not allowed to  work,  although  it  was
    never expressly said that was because he was a Christian.  He said that
    when he was called into an interrogation by the  intelligence  services
    he was told that:

          "The period when people were killed for being a Christian is past,
         but that I might find  myself  with  two  kilos  of  heroin  in  my
         possession, the punishment for that is life imprisonment or death".

37.  Ms Enayat said that a new non-Iranian Bishop has been appointed to  the
    Diocese of Isfahan and, although resident outside the country,  he  has
    attempted  to  restore  relationships  with  the  Iranian  authorities.
    Although there  was  apparent  progress  in  the  discussions,  it  was
    reported in 2007 that none of the promises  made  had  been  fulfilled.
    Speaking of  uncertainties  the  Bishop  said,  in  a  message  to  his
    congregation, that there  was  a  negative  mindset  which  existed  in
    government circles coming from the inevitable belief that the church is
    a foreign body serving  foreign  purposes  and  interests.   Ms  Enayat
    confirmed that the church has a policy of silence  which  it  maintains
    and that  in  fact  one  only  learns  of  violations  through  private
    channels.  She had been informed that  at  least  two  members  of  the
    church, who were converts from Islam, had been threatened and forced to
    leave the country, one having been kept in solitary confinement for  40
    days; the other having escaped before he was arrested (this appears  to
    be X and Y).  She also understands that the church is  not  allowed  to
    admit newcomers to its congregation.

38.  Turning to the Assembly of  God  Church,  she  said  that  events  from
    spring 2004 were less well documented in FS and  Others,  because  some
    relevant reports were not brought to the Tribunal's attention.  We have
    dealt earlier with individual incidents in those parts of the  evidence
    which could have been, but were not, produced to the  Tribunal  in  FS,
    and we will not repeat that here.  Other than the reports  of  the  way
    individuals had been treated, the only observation Ms Enayat made about
    the Assembly of God Churches was that, at  the  end  of  2004  and  the
    beginning of 2005, a conservative Iranian website  "Baztab"  criticised
    the elders of the Pentecostal Churches for violating normal procedures,
    by holding services in Farsi on Fridays and Sundays  in  which  Muslims
    participated.  It was said that the  Assyrian  representative,  in  the
    Majlis, had  protested  about  this  and  that  the  matter  was  being
    investigated by the authorities.  Ms Enayat observed that spokespersons
    for the official ethnic religious minorities have, in  the  past,  been
    roped in to support state policy.  For an account of that she cited  an
    article "Religious Minorities  in  Iran",  Cambridge  University  Press
    2000.

39.  Her report suggested that towards  the  end  of  2006  the  authorities
    turned their attention to evangelicals other than the Assembly of  God.
    The evidence in support of that assertion  is  that  contained  in  our
    earlier section dealing with individual difficulties.

40.  At 3.2 of her report Ms Enayat referred to what she described  as  "the
    new cycle of persecution".  She referred to the report she prepared for
    FS and Others where she had made reference to the political  and  human
    rights situation fluctuating considerably over the years, with  periods
    of relative relaxation towards one or another of the groups who were at
    risk from human rights abuses.  She quoted Human Rights Watch which, in
    2002, had said that the Armenian Christians and some other groups,  not
    including the evangelical Christians or converts, had enjoyed  improved
    conditions over  the  previous  four  years  under  the  leadership  of
    President Khatami although then no one knew how long that  would  last,
    especially in view of the tenuous nature of President Khatami's hold on
    power.  That in part was due  to  the  recently  revived  anti-American
    sentiment.  She did not, in that report, elaborate on earlier cycles of
    pressure because she was focusing on  persecution  which  continued  to
    affect individual converts, in an arbitrary way even during the  lulls.
    She  describes three cycles of pressure in  her  current  report.   She
    said the first period began immediately after the 1979 revolution  when
    the Anglican church had been the main target, but began to recede after
    the outbreak of the Iran/Iraq war from 1982.  She said that, from  1989
    shortly after that war came to an end, a  new  cycle  of  activity  was
    initiated, coming to a head with the murders of Protestant  priests  in
    1994, when the focus was on the Assembly of  God.   There  was  then  a
    temporary easing of the situation in 1995  following  an  international
    outcry over the murders, and a scheduled visit of a Special  Rapporteur
    on religious intolerance.  A new wave of pressure began  in  1996  when
    Protestant pastors were forced  to  accede  to  restrictions  on  their
    churches' activities.  That continued until 1999,  affecting  both  the
    Anglican Church and the Assembly of God.  She  then  described  a  lull
    which lasted for about four years from 1999 to  2003,  until  a  fourth
    cycle began in May 2003.  That took a turn  for  the  worse  after  the
    advent of the Ahmadi-Nejad Government.  She said that there  have  been
    reports over this later period pointing to a  renewal  of  pressure  on
    members  of  the  Bihai  faith,  Sufi  Orders  and  other  non-approved
    religious minorities regarded as deviant.  She referred  to episodes of
    persecution affecting Bahais from mid-2003 to early  2006,  which  were
    set out in the US  State  Department  International  Religious  Freedom
    Report and also referred to by Amnesty International.   The  first  six
    months of 2007 were covered by reports  from  Bahai  International  and
    refer to a widespread  and  calculated  effort  by  the  government  to
    maintain, and gradually intensify, the persecution of  Iranian  Bahais.
    The persecution included the destruction of two  of  the  Bahais'  most
    holy sites, and the  resumption  of  short  term  arrests  designed  to
    intimidate the Bahai community.

41.  Although she did not give details, she offered a  summary  of  episodes
    of persecution since 2003 which affects the Nematollahi  Gonabadi  Sufi
    Order, the largest of several, active in Iran.  From the  mid  to  late
    1990s, to early in 2000,  they  suffered,  treatment  similar  to  that
    involving converts to Christianity but maintained a policy  of  silence
    both in Iran and abroad.  They had  a  period  of  relative  calm  from
    between 2000 to mid-2003.

42.  Since October 2007 there has been evidence of Bahais  in  at  least  17
    towns being detained for interrogation, including a 70-year-old man who
    was sentenced to 70  lashes  for  propagating  and  spreading  Bahaism.
    Bahai graves were destroyed in Natanz, and a few  days  later  a  Bahai
    cemetery in Yazd was bulldozed.

43.  In that  same  period,  a  Sufi  place  of  worship  was  destroyed  by
    bulldozers in Borujerd, following sustained harassment and intimidation
    of the  worshippers.   Many  Sufis  were  arrested  there  and  similar
    intimidation has been experienced at a Sufi centre in Karaj since  mid-
    summer 2007.

44.  Autumn 2007 saw new  pressure  on  Sunnis,  and  Shia  dissidents  from
    orthodox Shi'ism.  In mid-October, there were widespread  beatings  and
    arrests of leaders and  followers  of  a  popular  non-political  Sunni
    faction, in both Kurdish cities and at the School of  the  Koran  which
    had not previously been persecuted (so far as  is  known).   About  the
    same time, Shia modernists in Tehran who were intending to hold prayers
    at Eid-e-Fetr to mark the end of Ramadan, were harassed to  the  extent
    that their ceremony had to be abandoned.  It  is  thought  it  was  the
    first time this group had been prevented from holding  its  own  prayer
    meeting.  At the end of October, a mainstream Sunni building in Bojnurd
    was bulldozed.

45.  Gonabadi Sufis and Sunnis were affected in October and  November  2007.
    All this gave rise to protests from an establishment  party,  known  as
    Mojahedin-e-Enqelab-e-Eslami, who referred  to  the  imposition  of  an
    unannounced policy of establishing uniformity/homogeneity by those  who
    hold power and make policy.  Ms Enayat concluded that it has  not  been
    possible to define what forces or organisations initiated the cycle  in
    2003, or why there was a change at that particular time,  or  how  deep
    the persecution has bitten.  However, she did say that the incidents in
    relation to converts to Christianity make it clear that such  incidents
    are policy driven.

46.  She then turned to the possible reasons for the renewal  of  this  form
    of activity.  She  regarded  it  as  two  fold;  namely  the  perceived
    increase in conversions, and political changes.

47.  As to the  perceived  increases  in  the  number  of  conversions,  she
    referred to the concern about the impact of foreign based "born  again"
    Christian radio and television broadcasts to  Iran.   She  mentioned  a
    senior cleric,  Hasan  Mohammadi,  described  as  an  official  of  the
    Ministry of Education, who said in a speech to high school students  in
    April 2004 that "unfortunately, on average, every day 50 Iranian  girls
    and boys convert secretly to Christian denominations in  our  country".
    Following the Assembly of  God  arrests  in  December  2004  (including
    Pourmand), the authorities pledged to  protect  the  nation's  "beloved
    Shi'ite  Islam  from  all  outside  forces",  saying   that   Christian
    activities had got out of control and  insisting  that  the  church  do
    something to stop the flood of  Christian  literature,  television  and
    radio programmes targeting Iran.

48.  In April 2005, the head of the Qom Seminaries (which Ms Enayat  equated
    to the Vatican bureaucracy) said in a keynote address to a  theological
    conference, that in relation to the house  church  movement  there  was
    credible information that Christians were renting properties in Tehran,
    and inviting the young to convert.  He also referred  to  a  conference
    attended by major Christian figures where it was said that "the beliefs
    of Islam must be resisted and that the dangers  of  Islam  are  greater
    than those of Communism".  There was further reference to the expansion
    of the mass media, especially radio, which it  was  said  always  speak
    against the Prophet of Islam and the Quran.

49.  Elaborating on the above, the "Deputy Director of Religious  Propaganda
    and Applied Training of the Qom Seminaries" said that Christianity  had
    become extremely active in academic circles.  He referred to  Christian
    missionaries establishing house churches in Tehran, and  proselytising.
     He was concerned by the way in which the young were being attracted to
    Christianity, and said that statistics gave rise to grave concern.   He
    said the religion appealed to youth, because it set no limits.

50.  Ms Enayat referred to several other reports,  one  from  an  ISNA  News
    Agency (not to be confused with IRNA, which is the official  government
    agency) in September 2003 which spoke of  unknown  groups  distributing
    CDs about the life of Christ, in the mountains north of Tehran.   There
    was a report, in July 2005, of books and CDs  propagating  Christianity
    being distributed in Dezful.  In February 2006, there  was  an  article
    referring to the free distribution of Bibles in  some  Tehran  squares.
    This practice was said to involve pocket-sized Bibles being distributed
    among the young on a large-scale.  The same report referred  to  Bibles
    with translated annotations, printed abroad and distributed free in the
    border areas, and at a  special  price  in  Tehran;  and  to  pamphlets
    promoting the Christian religion being distributed in various areas  of
    Tehran, especially poorer areas.  It suggested that the pamphlets  were
    being distributed by the United Nations Commissariat  along  with  food
    aid; and made mention of meetings in Tehran to introduce  the  theology
    of Christ; increased activity by churches to promote  Christianity  and
    cards, bearing slogans about compassion and forgiveness, distributed to
    people who were then invited to join the faith; it said a known  priest
    had been  advocating  the  creation  of  a  television  network  called
    "Salvation" to promote the Christian religion  in  Iran.   The  article
    suggested  that  those  examples  demonstrate  a  calculated  burst  of
    activity designed to recruit people to Christianity.

51.  In March 2006, an ultra conservative political news website,  Daricheh,
    reported that the British Embassy had given $4,000 to  a  Karaj  Church
    observing that the British Embassy's divisive activities in  Iran  have
    intensified.  It said there were reports  of  proselytising.   In  June
    2006,  the  conservative  newspaper,  Qods,  said  that  the   Assyrian
    representative in parliament condemned the practice of  putting  Bibles
    into people's letterboxes.  In October 2006, a website  reported  well-
    dressed young people evangelising in a square in Tehran,  and  offering
    cut-price Bibles.  There was also a report  of  tins  of  British  made
    biscuits being sold in a bazaar in Qom and  which  were  said  to  have
    contained CDs  propagating  the  Christian  faith.   In  May  2007,  an
    influential Iranian website, Baztab, translated  an  article  from  the
    Christian Post on the success of television evangelism into Persian and
    observed that:

          "Owing to the neglect of some of our cultural officials a new wave
         of Christian propaganda using soft and hard channels  is  targeting
         the cultural values of the Iranian people."


52.  As to political change, Ms Enayat started by saying that it  cannot  be
    attributed entirely to the election of President Ahmadi-Nejad in August
    2005, because the 2003 crackdown had started  eighteen  months  to  two
    years  before  that.   Neither,  she  considered,   was   it   entirely
    attributable to the demise of Khatami's reformist administration.   She
    said that, as with many currents in Iran it is necessary to look at the
    power balance for an explanation.  Ms Enayat went into detail about the
    changes in state structures which occurred in the early 2000s.   We  do
    not need to be concerned about the detail of that, save to accept  that
    it is a possible explanation  for  the  change  in  attitude  from  the
    beginning of 2003.  Thereafter  she  went  on  to  say  that  political
    developments in Iran since the accession  of  Mr  Ahmadi-Nejad  to  the
    presidency in 2005 had produced a far more threatening situation.   The
    new Minister of Islamic Guidance and Culture, Safar Harandi, is said to
    have long been  a  vocal  warrior  in   "the  battle  against  cultural
    onslaught" by which  is  meant  un-Islamic  cultural  intellectual  and
    religious trends.  Men of a similar outlook and  background  have  been
    appointed to other ministries and as provincial governors.  In addition
    to changes at the top, there has been a purge of civil  servants  on  a
    scale not seen since the 1979 revolution.  The leader of the Expediency
    Council, Ali Rafsanjani, warned in November 2005, that:


        "a current in Iran is trying to banish competent officials  and  is
        harming the country like a plague".


    Ms Enayat referred to a number of other cabinet appointments from among
    the ranks of the ultra conservative security elite.

53.  She then went on to describe as  "a  worrying  feature"  an  increasing
    flood of rhetoric from a number of quarters, including senior  clerics,
    attacking  non-conformist  religious   groups   such   as   evangelical
    Christians, Sufis, Bahais and Wahhabis.   She referred to a  number  of
    anti-Sufi  and  anti-Bahai  articles.    She   also   said   that   the
    pronouncements were not confined to specific religious groups and  that
    the head of the Guardian Council, one of Iran's most  powerful  figures
    and an ultra conservative, Ayatollah Jannati, said:

         "Non-Muslim human beings are animals who graze the earth and engage
         in corruption".


     Ms Enayat suggested that not since the early years of  the  revolution
    has somebody of such prominence used language of that kind in public.

54.  Ms Enayat  referred  to  an  allegation,  made  by  Compass  Direct  in
    November 2005, that a few days before the murder of Tourani,  President
    Ahmadi-Nejad and the Minister of the Interior had held an open  meeting
    with the nation's Provincial Governors in which he  declared  that  the
    government needed to "put a stop to the burgeoning  movement  of  house
    churches across Iran".    She  also  referred  to  the  official  of  a
    Catholic charity, specialising in church affairs  in  areas  where  the
    church is persecuted and "close to the  Vatican",  telling  Radio  Free
    Europe that the complete text of his speech  showed  that  Ahmadi-Nejad
    had requested Provincial Governors to:

         "put a stop, in any event, to the activities  of  Christian  groups
         and particularly those groups which include former Muslims who have
         converted to Christianity".

    Ms Enayat was unable to confirm the statement from  any  official  news
    agency report because none printed the whole of the speech.   She  did,
    however, say that such  threatening  instructions  on  the  subject  of
    converts was consistent with other positions  that  the  President  had
    publicly taken, the best known being his attitude  towards  Israel  and
    the Holocaust.  She observed that he is at odds  with  the  traditional
    Muslim  outlook,  which  enjoins  respect,  though  not  equality,  for
    religions of the book, when he publicly called Christianity and Judaism
    deviant religions, saying that the only road to deliverance for mankind
    is through Islam.

55.  Ms Enayat argued that  this  sort  of  rhetoric  is  not  to  be  taken
    lightly.  The  principal  representative  of  the  Bahai  international
    community to the United Nations suggested that episodes of  persecution
    of Bahais come in the wake of mounting media attacks, which in the past
    have also preceded government-led assaults on Bahais in Iran.  He  also
    suggested that the Tehran daily newspaper,  Kayhan,  had  carried  more
    than 30 articles about Bahais and their religion in recent weeks.   All
    were  defamatory  and  all  were  intended   to   create   provocation.
    Similarly, in the case of a Sufi Order, demands by senior figures  that
    its activities be curtailed developed  into  attacks  on  Sufi  meeting
    places in January 2006.

56.  When she came to give evidence on this aspect of her report,  she  said
    the main difference between the present time and earlier was that there
    are now the smaller house church communities operating independently of
    the three established Protestant communities.  She was not sure whether
    the current attempts to "contain" the Protestant Churches is as violent
    as the one in the late 90s, but so far there has only been one  murder,
    although it is not known who carried it out; compared with four or five
    in 1999.  Asked whether "contain" was a deliberate choice of  word  she
    said it was, because so far as it was possible to divine a  reason  for
    the clampdown it was to curtail the increase in conversions.

57.  Cross-examined by Mr  Kovats,  Ms  Enayat  was  asked  the  meaning  of
    "evangelise".  She said that the issue of proselytising means that  the
    primary view of the Iranian authorities, as is apparent from statements
    made to human rights officials in the 1990s, is that anyone is free  to
    change their religion but not to proselytise.  She prefers not  to  use
    the term proselytise.  She said that, so far as the Iranian authorities
    are concerned, they interpret the printing of Bibles, and the  printing
    of devotional literature, and the distribution of it, as spreading  the
    word.  That is what they do not like.  She was asked what word would be
    used in the Iranian language and she said, in general, "tabligh", which
    is a general term for  propaganda.   There  is  no  specific  word  for
    religious propaganda.  She said that standing on a corner and spreading
    the word would be "tabligh", as would giving a Bible to a friend and as
    would a casual conversation or action attempting to  convert  somebody.
    She said that, in general, people had been  forbidden  to  "talk  about
    Jesus".  She was asked whether the public statements to the effect that
    the  authorities  do  not  mind  if  people   change   their   religion
    spontaneously, but that attempts to persuade are the  problem,  were  a
    sham.  Ms Enayat said that there is an  arbitrary  pattern  and  it  is
    impossible to say, but people are persecuted because they have changed.
     She asked rhetorically how concern about proselytising could not  also
    be a  concern  about  conversion  itself.   She  said  there  has  been
    deterioration in relations between the UK and Iran, and a  marked  rise
    in discourse about Zionist Christianity (the Iranian term for  US-based
    fundamentalism, through the television channels).  In  one  section  of
    her report she suggested that the political situation in Iran, and  the
    geopolitical situation concerning the stand off with the  USA  and  the
    UK,  has  made  matters  worse  for  converts  and  in  particular  the
    evangelicals.  Asked whether, by the geopolitical situation, she  meant
    that in the  widest  sense,  she  said  that  the  whole  framework  of
    relationships was involved.  The Minister of Intelligence and  Interior
    (Mohseni Ejhei) had been around  for  a  long  time  and  regarded  the
    cultural invasion as the threat.  He has made reference to  the  United
    States, and sometimes the United Kingdom, as being engaged in fomenting
    a velvet revolution in Iran.  She said that Christians are regarded  in
    a similar way, intellectually.

58.  It was put to her that a great majority of the people  who  experienced
    difficulties as Christians are either leaders or active  proselytisers.
     Ms Enayat said it was not fair to say that in terms  of  the  numbers.
    She referred to where she had summarised the position  in  her  report.
    She said, if you go over the detail, it  is  obvious  that  short  term
    arrests of ordinary converts, whilst not massive  in  number,  are  not
    rare either.  She said it was quite  common  for  people  to  be  badly
    beaten in short term detention, because there was little or no judicial
    oversight.  Mr Kovats suggested that she had not given any examples  of
    people being beaten in short term detention, but she  referred  him  to
    page 27 of her report where she said there is reference to  the  dozens
    of people suffering in that way.  She said there were other examples on
    pages 46, 47 and 48 and, if the victims had been leaders, she felt sure
    that would have been specified.

59.  Ms  Enayat  was  asked  about  the  new,  non-Iranian  Anglican  Bishop
    resident outside the country who has been appointed to the  Diocese  of
    Isfahan  and the fact that  he  is  in  a  dialogue  with  the  Iranian
    authorities.  She said that this has always been the case, the churches
    have always had such discussions.  Mrs Axtell had said as  much.    She
    said it was instructive to note that, during the mid-90s when there was
    discussion between an Iranian Foreign  Office  official  and  a  United
    Nations official about the poor situation  amongst  the  churches,  the
    Iranian Government line was that they were not dealing  with  religions
    but with political groups.  They thought  that  being  a  member  of  a
    political group, and being a member of a  church,  is  much  the  same.
    Asked about the statement to the school audience by the official of the
    Ministry  of  Education  (ante  paragraph  47),  that  there  were   50
    conversions a day, and whether there was any reason to doubt  that  was
    the genuine belief of the authorities, Ms Enayat said it was an Iranian
    way of speaking, using exaggeration and hyperbole to make a point.  She
    said it was a cultural matter and no  one  would  take  what  was  said
    literally, but it conveyed the idea that there were  too  many.   Asked
    whether there was any doubt that the speaker  thought  there  were  too
    many, she said there was not.  He definitely believed  that  and  there
    was a campaign to do something about  it.   She  had  no  idea  whether
    Christianity had become active in academic circles as was also asserted
    by  the  authorities.   Asked  about  missionaries  establishing  house
    churches, she said that it was impossible to know what  was  going  on,
    unless a group became troubled and its existence came into  the  public
    domain. Mostly the house churches  are  secret,  as  indicated  by  the
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office letters, but Ms Enayat accepted that it
    seemed likely that there had been an unknown expansion of house  groups
    during the early 2000s.  She was then asked about the  distribution  of
    CDs and Bibles.  In her view,  the  reports  were  a  mixture  of  what
    actually happens, and an exaggeration of what happens.  She  very  much
    doubted that the British Embassy had  given  a  $4,000  donation  to  a
    church.

60.  She was then asked about the  "flood  of  rhetoric",  and  whether  she
    accepted that a change in relation to that did not necessarily entail a
    change in activity on the ground.  Ms Enayat said it was  necessary  to
    be very careful about that issue.  She accepted there was no one-to-one
    immediate connection, but in her opinion it has been the case that  the
    rhetoric,  and  subsequent  activity  experienced  on  the  ground,  go
    together.  She said that, in the 1990s, there  had  been  a  much  more
    closed atmosphere and the rhetoric was more subdued.  Now, the type  of
    reaction from newspapers, such as  Kayhan  (the  edition  published  in
    Tehran), is concerning because that paper is the bastion of  the  ultra
    right and has connections to the security forces.  She said there is  a
    recognisable pattern of Kayhan instigating change which comes later  as
    a result.  For example, when  Ayatollah  Henmadani  was  released  from
    prison in the 90s the newspaper agitated  for  his  elimination  as  an
    apostate, and that came to pass.

61.  Ms Enayat said her report was neither a comprehensive, nor  exhaustive,
    description of incidents of  religious  persecution  in  recent  years.
    Even subject to the caveat that it is not possible to know what else is
    going on, she thought  it  was  important  to  contextualise  what  was
    happening.   She said that she has, to  the  largest  possible  extent,
    kept to what is available in the public domain, although she  has  used
    some private sources.  Hers was not empirical research.  She  said  she
    has not used every report that has come into the public domain; if  she
    was uncertain  she kept it out.   She also wanted to ensure that it  is
    appreciated that this is a field where not everything  comes  into  the
    public domain.   She accepted some converts manage to go to church  and
    not face persecution for quite long periods.  She accepted that she had
    not said that there are some who have not  been  persecuted.   She  was
    asked about her statement:-

         "Whilst it is clear that the principal focus of state  measures  to
         curb the activities of the Protestant/evangelical Churches has been
         their clergy and lay leaders  coupled  with  intimidatory  measures
         designed to  enforce  restrictions  on  worship,  evangelising  and
         conversion the authorities have also, from time to  time,  arrested
         the whole or part of evangelical congregations. "


     She was asked whether that was a conclusion and said it was not.   She
    said that in the 90s, and in her view in 2003 and 2008, it was possible
    to see  concerted attempts  to  contain,  limit  and  put  pressure  on
    proselytising Protestant communities.


62.  Asked how many people had been charged with offences  since  2003,  she
    accepted it was only  one,  but  added  that  the  charge  is  not  the
    principal method of persecution.  That one person was Pourmand  and  he
    was acquitted, but he was nevertheless persecuted for the fact  of  his
    activities.  Asked in what way he had been persecuted, she said that he
    had been kept in solitary confinement for five months, denied access to
    a lawyer until his trial and charged with offences like  espionage  and
    membership of a political group, and that his trial had been in camera.
     She regarded that as persecution.  She did not know  if  he  had  been
    physically mistreated.  Asked whether he had claimed to be  mistreated,
    she said he had not said anything about it either way.

63.  She was taken to an article in  the  South  China  Post,  in  September
    2005, about the Church of St. Simon the  Zealot.   The  lay  leader,  a
    former Muslim, was quoted as saying that the numbers asking to join the
    church is increasing.  He said many were former observant  Muslims  who
    had begun to question Islam, and others were secular  people  who  have
    experienced a spiritual awakening.  The article also  said  that  there
    were yet more who are turned away who only want to become Christians in
    order to help them seek political asylum.  Mr Kovats asked whether this
    indicated that it was fair to say that by  no  means  all  were  turned
    away.  Ms Enayat said the interview had been in 2005 when it  was  said
    that about 30 members had been allowed in, although it  is  clear  from
    later reports the numbers  have  declined,  some  having  fled  abroad,
    including him.

64.  Finally, in cross-examination, Ms Enayat said again  that  she  thought
    that the American websites were exaggerating.  When it was put  to  her
    that the Christian Persecution Watch Group said that there had  been  a
    remarkable increase in converts, she observed that had been their  line
    for the last four or five years.  She did not disagree that  there  had
    been an increase in conversions, but did dispute the figures quoted  by
    the US-based evangelical Churches.

65.  In re-examination, she was asked  by  Ms  Weston  about  the  link  she
    perceived  between  incidents  on  the  grounds  and   earlier   public
    pronouncements.  Ms Enayat  said, when someone like  Ayatollah  Jannati
    made his now famous declaration,  (paragraph  53  ante)  that  was  "no
    joke".  He is the head of the Council of  Guardians,  the  second  most
    important institution  after  the  Supreme  Leader.   He  is  also  the
    spiritual leader of Ansar-e-Hezbollah (the Helpers of God) -  religious
    vigilantes.  When he makes such a statement, it sends out clear signals
    and those signals are read.  It is part of the culture of Shi'ism  that
    such signals are sent and read and, although the  consequences  do  not
    happen immediately, the atmosphere is  deeply  affected.   Nothing  has
    been said in such extreme terms since the early  1980s.   She  observed
    that Khomenei used to use a lot  of  anti-minority  rhetoric,  but  the
    moment it became clear in 1983/5 that the Islamists had won the  battle
    for control of the nation, he put a stop to it.  She saw  a  resurgence
    of the use of agitation rhetoric by  certain  parts  of  the  religious
    establishment.  It did not happen in Khatami's time, until the MOIS was
    partially dismantled.  She  cited  what  became  known  as  the  "chain
    murders" when an obscure Hezbollah paper had carried a copy of a  fatwa
    authorising the detention of the victims.

66.   Asked  about  her  report  in  general  terms,  she  said   that   her
    instructions had been to produce evidence in relation  to  persecution.
    The report was not intended to be a situation analysis, but  that  when
    the analysis is considered, especially with what  she  has  said  about
    Sufis and Bahais, and the crackdown on Sunnis and some Orthodox  Shias,
    the patterns which emerge suggest the correctness of her conclusions to
    the  extent she made  them.   Her  evidence  was  not  intended  to  be
    empirical.

67.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal,  she  said  that  there  had
    been no more outbursts on the scale of the Jannati  one,  save  perhaps
    for  the  Ahmadi-Nejad  observations  about  Christianity  and  Judaism
    despite their being religions of the book.  Generally, she was aware of
    other incidents that were not included in the report.   They  were  not
    put in there because it is often difficult to get people with links  to
    the churches to testify, and she has a policy of being discreet as much
    to members of the Assembly of God Church, as with the  Anglicans.   She
    said that over the last two to three years she  has  heard  of  six  or
    seven other cases, some of which go back to the 80s and 90s, but  which
    culminate in the more recent period.

68.  Asked whether the authority's real fear was of conversions  or  western
    influence, she said that she thought there were two dimensions.   There
    had been hope in the early 2000s of democracy and  a  move  to  greater
    pluralism and tolerance, but now  there  is  a  return  to  a  type  of
    politics which wants to homogenise.  There is no toleration of  outside
    groups which may have independent social bases.   She  said  this  also
    results in an extreme and irrational sensitivity in relation  to  NGOs.
    She said this is in some ways best expressed by the public reaction  of
    reformist groupings to the destruction of the Sunni mosques when Mohsen
    Armin, the spokesman for a group of Shia modernists, said:-

         "The repetition and continuity of these parallel events prevents us
         from concluding that they are isolated incidents with no connection
         to one another. ...  These incidents speak of the imposition of  an
         unannounced policy of  establishing  a  formative  homogeneity,  by
         those who hold power and  make  policies  affecting  not  only  the
         political, social and cultural roles but also the realm of religion
         and beliefs".

(ii) Evidence of EF

69.  In his report, EF did not deal with recent difficulties in any  detail,
    although he said that he was aware of one convert who had  worked  with
    the Anglican/Episcopal church until 2005 and who was  exiled  from  his
    city, having been charged with evangelism.   He  had  been  accused  of
    sharing his faith with Muslim enquirers although he denied that, saying
    he did not initiate the discussions but only responded to questions and
    provided literature.  In 2006, his house was raided, his  computer  and
    passport confiscated and  he  fled  abroad.   EF   said  that  he  knew
    converts and families had been threatened to  stay  away  from  church,
    although it  was  unclear  where  the  threats  came  from,  given  the
    overlapping power groups in Iran.  He said that regular church  members
    were warned not to allow any newcomers  to  attend  services,  and  the
    gates of church compounds are often watched to  see  who  is  entering.
    The churches had been threatened with closure if they  allowed  Muslims
    to come onto their compounds.  He last heard of such a  threat  in  May
    2007.  Giving evidence, EF said he was not in direct contact with  Iran
    but was in touch with church members when they visit the UK.   He   had
    also met with members of the diocese who had taken  refuge  in  Turkey.
    Asked whether he had sufficient information from his  interlocutors  to
    take a view about what had occurred in the last five years, he said his
    impression was that life for Christians is  becoming  harder,  and  had
    started to become so before 2004.  He said that there  were  references
    to arrests in FS and Others, but it  should  be  appreciated  that  the
    effects of an arrest ripple through  the  small  communities.   He  was
    aware of three converts who have fled  to  either  Turkey  or  Northern
    Cyprus.  One went back but was banished from Isfahan, his passport  was
    taken and he had to pay to get himself back to Turkey.   He  had  heard
    one report of a second young Iranian, who had spoken  to  the  Anglican
    Chaplain in Ankara, having been deported  by  the  Iranian  authorities
    following  imprisonment  and  torture.   This  report  reached  him  as
    recently as 14 May by e-mail.  Another left Iran in February  2008  and
    remained in Northern Cyprus.  He said two of the  three  were  converts
    from Islam as long ago as the 1980s.

70.  EF said he also  gets  some  information  about  the  Assembly  of  God
    Churches from those who are in the UK.   He  was  last  in  touch  with
    somebody in January.  Asked the tenor of the information that  he  had,
    he said it was a mixture.  People tended to talk of the spread of house
    churches, but also of the chilling  effects  of  the  arrest  of  their
    leaders.  He made reference to the arrest of 80  people  at  an  annual
    meeting  and  observed  that  that  incident   had   suppressed   them.
    Summarising, at the end of his statement, he said that  the  experience
    of the last two decades has contributed to a mood of anxiety among  the
    churches in Iran, and that it "requires courage to be an open Christian
    and it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to be a private one."
      He said that a  number  of  activities  which  would  be  normal  for
    Christians in a western country would be considered  highly  risky  for
    new converts and he listed:-

     . Attending church and associating with church members generally;
     . Baptism as an outward sign of conversion and Christian commitment;
     . outward signs of devotion, e.g. wearing a crucifix or cross or other
       symbol of Christianity;
     . Bible study, including possession of a Bible;
     . promotion or public approval of Christian values or beliefs.

    He was asked why he said the risks were for new converts.  He said that
    those who converted fifteen or twenty years ago have  a  track  record,
    and therefore a  degree  of  acceptance.   With  somebody  new,  church
    attendance would single them out, because attendance can  be  monitored
    at  the  gates.   When  there  are  only  twenty  or  30  people  in  a
    congregation they stand out.  He also said that leaders are supposed to
    report attendance to the authorities on a monthly basis and  from  time
    to time agents may attend to see who is present at the church.  He said
    the adverse attention, which the issues in his bullet  points  attract,
    range from telephone calls telling people  not  to  go  to  church,  to
    personal visits with threats, to possible detention for questioning and
    threats to employment.  He had  not  received  any  direct  information
    about people who had not  stopped  when  told.   He  said  one  of  the
    consequences of all this is suspicion, and small churches are reluctant
    to receive newcomers for fear of consequences to themselves.   He  said
    some of the bolder members of the congregation will keep in touch  with
    potential  enquirers.   Asked  about  baptism,  and   whether   adverse
    attention arose as a consequence, he said that in the  Anglican  Church
    only children of present members are said to be baptised, although over
    the years he thinks that others have been baptised secretly.   He  said
    that for a Muslim convert being baptised is a crossing of the Rubicon.


71.  He was asked whether he had any view as to  what  contact  the  Iranian
    authorities would consider to amount  to  disseminating  religion.   He
    said the sense he gets is that it depends on the  local  context  in  a
    particular town or area, and on the attitude of the  convert's  family,
    employer or work colleagues and, more particularly, the attitude of the
    head of whatever the local power group was.  He said it was hard to see
    national policy, beyond the chilling effect of  public  pronouncements.
    He said that when church leaders in Shiraz were arrested in 2003  there
    was a protest to the President, who asked for action to be taken for  a
    just solution, but nothing happened at the local level.  He  said  that
    local factors seem to be arbitrary and depended in part on what  forces
    were at work at any  particular  time,  which  makes  it  difficult  to
    predict who may fall foul of the authorities.  To some  extent  it  may
    depend on the attitude of the local mullah.

72.  Asked to assess the relative risks between the  present,  and  four  or
    five years ago, he said that in his assessment the risks had increased.
     The evidence for that is the numbers who have  fled,  particularly  to
    Turkey, among which were a number from Anglican  Churches.   The  other
    evidence  was  the  general  tone  of  official  announcements  and  in
    particular the new draft law on apostasy.  He said the proliferation of
    home churches was an unknown quantity.  The  only  information  he  had
    concerned the arrest of ten leaders, and the murder of one leader of  a
    house church in Northern Iran.  But, he did not see how it was possible
    to get any idea of the true scale of  house  churches.   He  said  that
    before 2003 people from  different  towns  would  approach  the  Bishop
    asking for Christian teaching, but that is  no  longer  the  case.   He
    thought that it was the authorities' caution about unregistered  groups
    which caused the difficulty with home churches.

73.  Cross-examined by Mr Kovats, EF said that he had not mentioned  in  his
    statement the fact it was harder under the current regime,  because  he
    had not realised how the Tribunal was going to be focused  on  evidence
    since FS and Others.  As a result  he  had  not  made  any  attempt  to
    compare.  He felt  that  a  person  who  converted  outside  Iran,  and
    returned, would not be at any lesser risk than a convert in  Iran.   He
    said that was simply because they would also be new to the church,  and
    therefore at the  same  risk.   Socially,  much  would  depend  on  the
    attitude of the family.  He thought  it  would  be  easier  for  a  new
    convert to attend the Assembly of God Church in Tehran  because  it  is
    quite a lot larger than the others.

74.  Asked  how  the  tone  of  official  announcements  related  to  actual
    practice on the ground, EF said it was the climate that was  generated,
    and the general level  of  anxiety  that  Christians  experience,  that
    caused concern.  He accepted he did not have any evidence to show  that
    announcements actually give  rise  to  action  and  said  it  is  often
    difficult to make a connection.  He said that, of the Anglicans who had
    fled to Turkey, there had been about twelve to  twenty  over  the  last
    five years, and the residual congregation of the Anglican Church now is
    about 100.  It was therefore a significant  number,  when  taken  as  a
    proportion.  When it was put to him that there may  be  any  number  of
    reasons for people leaving Iran to go to Turkey, EF said he could  only
    judge by the people he met and what they said  about  the  pressure  on
    them as Christians.  He said that  large  numbers  left  in  the  short
    period after the revolution.  That had been something of an exodus, and
    now there seemed to be a similar amount of pressure.  He accepted  that
    it was difficult to evaluate whether the situation is better  or  worse
    now, because there are no figures for the earlier periods.   Asked  the
    extent to which it was the coming to power  of  Ahmadi-Nejad  that  had
    increased the pressure, he said that the President contributes  to  the
    chilling of the climate towards those who are not  Muslims,  and  hence
    gives a greater licence to those operating locally.  The war with  Iraq
    does not help, and nor does the attitude of the Iranian  Government  to
    the United Kingdom Government, as illustrated  by  the  fact  that  the
    Anglican Church is known as the  English  Church.  Christians  with  an
    Anglican background are having to deal with that.   In  re-examination,
    he said that, as far as he knew, those who fled  to  Turkey  were  just
    ordinary church members.

75.  At the end of his evidence EF was asked  whether  evangelising  was  no
    longer a priority for the Anglican Church in  Iran  in  view  of  their
    numbers and the way they felt.  He said that was the  case.   He  later
    submitted a note, having had further thoughts about that after  leaving
    court.  He was recalled the next day because he wished to elaborate and
    Mr Kovats did not accept the contents of the note.  EF then  said  that
    evangelising is limited, but goes on  through  personal  conversations,
    and generally through what happens in church services.  It was  put  to
    him by Mr Kovats that his note had said  the church did not  engage  in
    evangelising.  He said that he meant it did not hold  special  services
    for those who are not Anglicans, nor did it undertake the  distribution
    of literature.  But, he did not want to give the impression that  there
    was no personal witnessing.  Asked to what  extent  Anglicans  actively
    set out to convert or initiate conversion, he said some  will  initiate
    to people they know well, but that would be to people they could  trust
    and who they would be sure were not agents.  For  example,  this  might
    include regular attendees from a different background.


    Evidence of Mrs Axtell

76.  In her statement Mrs Axtell did not deal with general  conditions  save
    to say that X believed that the Iranian authorities  are  not  keen  to
    have Christians leaving the country because it does nothing for  Iran's
    reputation.  Rather,  they  would  prefer  to  control  those  who  are
    Christians, and prevent Muslims becoming Christians.

77.  In the course of her oral evidence  she  explained  that  she  got  her
    information not just from X and Y.  She is also in touch  with  a  lady
    who is the American wife of an Iranian, who goes in and  out  of  Iran,
    but is not  a  Christian.   She  is  also  in  communication  with  two
    daughters of an English woman who had been married to  an  Iranian  and
    who lives in Shiraz.   One  daughter  is  a  Christian,  the  other  is
    interested in Christianity.  She said that both X and Y  had  told  her
    that things were getting more difficult rather than  less  even  during
    the  time  that  they  were  there.   She  believed  that  the  Iranian
    authorities believe all Christians are connected with the west.

78.   Although Mrs Axtell purported to give some evidence about the  current
    conditions, it is not evidence to which we give any significant weight.
     She accepted immediately on  cross-examination  that  she  is  not  an
    expert, and was merely passing on information that she had  heard  from
    others.  She accepted that none of the people to whom she spoke were in
    Iran when she did speak to them, and that much of  the  information  is
    from people who have arrived in the United Kingdom.  She was  not  able
    to speak of any Christian in Iran who has not had problems.   She  said
    she had spent  sixteen  years  in  Iran,  and  as  a  result  had  some
    opportunity of  gaining  an  understanding  of  the  Iranian  attitudes
    towards Christians.  She said that when she was there the attitude  was
    bad, but she had the impression that it was worse now.  She  said  that
    Iranian families are very close, and very extended.  Even in the Shah's
    day, people who converted could be ostracised by their family but  that
    ostracism now extended into the public sphere.   She did not think that
    would have happened under the Shah.

SECTION 6

Ordinary Converts

79.  The evidence in this section covers two  different  areas  of  concern.
    The first deals with the question of whether it is appropriate to  look
    for the differential treatment of ordinary converts, as envisaged in FS
    and Others.  The second is whether there is, in reality, a  distinction
    between ordinary converts and others.

80.  As to the first, Ms Enayat, in her report, referred to the  arrest  and
    temporary detention of clergy and  lay  leaders/administrators  in  the
    period 2003 to 2007.  In particularly  she  referred  to  the  Anglican
    Church in Isfahan in August 2003, the Assembly  of  God  in  May  2004,
    September 2004, May 2006  and  September  2006  and  independent  house
    churches on 10 December 2007 and 18 January 2007.  She  said  that  the
    reports of the incidents suggested that most churches have  again  been
    forbidden to admit Muslims to their premises, forbidden to proselytise,
    required to not admit new  members  and  in  the  case  of  some  house
    churches, forbidden to hold prayer meetings altogether.   However,  she
    went on to say that whilst it is clear that the principal focus of  the
    state measures to curb the activities of the churches has been the  lay
    clergy and lay leaders, the authorities have also "from time  to  time,
    arrested  the  whole  or  part  of  evangelical  congregations".    She
    referred, in particular, to an Iranian Christian  International  Report
    of four  short-term  group  arrests  of  members  of  Assembly  of  God
    congregations in the second half of the 1990s and said that  there  had
    been two incidents since 2003.  The first was the  arrest,  and  short-
    term detention for up to three weeks,  of  two  church  groups  in  the
    Chalous area of Mazanderan in May 2004.  She said those  arrested  were
    involved  in  beatings  and  heavy  interrogation  methods,  which  she
    described as a common feature of detention in Iran.   She  referred  to
    the arrest of the whole of a house church group on 21  September  2005,
    and  referred  to  members  of  an  independent  house   church   being
    interrogated in groups of four in early March 2007.  Having said  that,
    she acknowledged that:

         "It is  clear  that  there  are  ordinary  converts,  perhaps  many
         ordinary converts, who apart from suffering sanctions such  as  the
         loss of their job and the uncertainties created by  cases  of  more
         severe intimidation  they  hear  of,  there  is  evidence  that  an
         ordinary convert can suffer persecution or harassment amounting  to
         persecution  even  if   they   are   not   committed   and   active
         proselytisers". (sic)

81.  In referring to cases of  individuals,  she  referred  firstly  to  the
    murder of Tourani in November 2005.  Compass Direct, reporting on that,
    said that by the end of the following day secret police had raided  the
    houses of all other known Christian believers in  the  city  and  that,
    according to one other source, the MOIS arrested and severely  tortured
    ten other Christians in several cities including Tehran,  although  all
    had since been released.  She referred to the  arrest,  on  false  drug
    charges, of Mojdehi.  This was reported by Compass Direct where he  was
    not described as a leader, but as a  member  of  a  local  house  group
    together with his wife.  The same report recorded at least  five  other
    incidents of police harassing and mistreating local converts.  She also
    referred to the reports of the treatment of the man arrested  following
    a car accident in August 2007; and in October 2007 of a Assyrian  woman
    and her convert husband.  She then referred to Mr Ghaffari's affidavit,
    saying that some of the information provided was before the Tribunal in
    FS and Others.  She referred to eleven other cases, which she listed as
    having  occurred  prior  to  March  2000,  which  appeared  to  be  the
    mistreatment of non-leaders.  The dates covered  by  the  eleven  range
    from January 1998 to March 2000 although those dates are the dates when
    the individuals left Iran, rather than the incident or incidents  which
    gave rise to that.  She made  two  observations  about  that  evidence.
    First, that the type of incidents  reported  in  relation  to  ordinary
    converts are within the category  least  likely  to  reach  the  public
    domain and therefore likely to be subject to under reporting.   Second,
    that mistreatment often followed a chance event other  than  attendance
    at church but which  brought  the  convert  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities.  A prime example of this was the man  who  was  mistreated
    following a collision with a police car.  Ms Enayat did not say a great
    deal in oral evidence about this aspect of the case, save that  it  was
    difficult to categorise who will be at risk, and agreeing with the  FCO
    letters  that  those  at  risk  are  at  risk  on  an   arbitrary   and
    unpredictable basis.

82.  In relation to the question of whether there is  such  a  thing  as  an
    ordinary convert  we  heard  evidence  from  the  Very  Revd.  Nicholas
    Coulton, the sub-Dean of Christchurch Oxford.    He,  together  with  a
    small ecumenical group, is  authorised  by  the  Churches'  Legislation
    Advisory Service, to handle asylum issues in relation to both the  Home
    Office and the Ministry of Justice.  He first became involved with  the
    Home Office as Dean of Newcastle where  he  had  been  responsible  for
    pastoring a group of Iranians who  worshipped  there.   He  had  become
    aware that much of what he heard, both about the way  in  which  asylum
    seekers are questioned about their Christianity, and the way  in  which
    Immigration Judges come to their conclusions about the  genuineness  of
    conversions, did not square with his understanding of Christianity.  He
    gave as an example the following quotation from a determination:-

         "I do not consider a  mainstream  Church  of  England  adherent  is
         required to proselytise Christianity in the  sense  of  seeking  to
         convert others."


    He had heard statements  that  Methodists  were  not  evangelical.   He
    described the Jesmond Church in Newcastle as  being  one  of  the  most
    extreme members of the reform group of evangelical Churches, and it  is
    an Anglican Church.  Another phrase which had caused him concern, in  a
    determination, was that an appellant was "not in danger if sent back as
    he is not a member of an evangelical Church".  The church  in  question
    was Derby Cathedral.


83.  It became clear during the course of his evidence that,  in  his  view,
    the words "proselytise" and  "evangelical"  are  misunderstood,  or  at
    least misused, in many cases.  He said there is also confusion  between
    the words evangelical and evangelistic.  The Adjudicator in one  appeal
    quoted the appellant's  vicar  as  saying  that  his  church  was  "not
    evangelical as such".  Canon Coulton said that was  true,  because  the
    particular church was Anglo-Catholic in its character  and  convictions
    and the word evangelical describes a particular swathe of churchmanship
    within the Church of England.  The appropriate question to  have  asked
    was whether the applicant's church was evangelistic, and the vicar  had
    given evidence that it was.  He told us that  the  distinction  between
    proselytising and evangelising was blurred.   He  said  that  the  word
    "proselytising"  can   be   used   pejoratively   but   then   so   can
    "evangelising".   He  thought  the  one  area  of  difference  is  that
    proselytising could be said to apply to those who feel driven to give a
    courageous account of the faith that is in  them.   The  words  of  the
    Anglican covenant are that it "equips God's  people  to  be  courageous
    witnesses to the power of  the  gospel  in  the  world".   Evangelising
    simply means spreading the gospel.

84.  Canon Coulton was asked to describe the sort of scale of activity  that
    the church would encourage under that rubric.  He  said  that,  in  the
    last analysis, it is without limit and people should preach to the ends
    of the earth.  However, within that there is scope for an assessment of
    the appropriateness and  effectiveness  of  any  particular  situation,
    although there is a Christian history of people who have borne  witness
    to the point of martyrdom.  On a more practical level, he said that the
    majority would be prepared to move outside their comfort  zone.   Asked
    about denying one's  religion,  he  said  that  it  is  wrong  to  deny
    Christian faith, although doing so would  not  prevent  a  person  from
    being a practising Christian because Christianity includes forgiveness.

85.  He was asked about the core elements of Christian faith and  he  quoted
    the five marks of mission which, he said, together describe what it  is
    to be a practising Christian.  They are:-

    i.   to proclaim the good news;


    ii.  to teach, baptise and nurture new believers;


    iii. to respond to human need by loving service;


    iv.  to seek to transform unjust structures of society; and


    v.   to strive to safeguard the integrity of creation  and  to  sustain
         and renew the life of the earth.


    He said that following any one of those marks could draw attention to a
    Christian.  Asked where attending  church  fits  into  the  life  of  a
    Christian, he said that whilst the above missions are  what  Christians
    are called to share, it is worship  that  enables  people  to  grow  up
    together.  "Christian faith cannot be done secretively in a back garden
    or on your own."  Worship provides important elements  of  support,  is
    one of the obligations, and is essential as part of the formation of  a
    Christian.  He said that Christianity is not a religion of the book  in
    the same sense as Islam, but requires Christians to be together in  the
    body of Christ, and the word of Christ is the  living  word.   He  said
    that if one is denied being able to come together, by reason of safety,
    that would be a serious handicap and impoverishment of one's  religion.
    He did not say that  all  those  that  had  gone  through  baptism  and
    confirmation would be at risk, what he did say was that those  who  are
    committed regular churchgoers would feel called to give an  account  of
    the faith that is in them,  and  to  create  opportunities  to  do  so.
    Bearing witness was not, in his view, an add-on  to  the  religion  but
    part of it.  Perhaps importantly, he said  that  those  who  are  first
    generation Christians are more likely to feel acutely the obligation to
    do so, and that is at least  in  part  because  they  have  chosen  the
    religion rather than being born into it.


86.  He said that whilst most branches of the church  have  the  requirement
    to worship God, and to come together  in  church,  for  those  who  are
    sacramentally instructed in Anglican and Roman  Catholic  Churches  the
    weekly reception of the  sacrament  is  important.   But  in  the  less
    sacramental churches the getting together  to  hear  the  word  of  the
    scriptures is still underlined as a priority.

87.  In his statement he said that in many determinations  it  can  be  seen
    that immigration judges make the incorrect assumption that  the  Church
    of England is not evangelistic or proselytising  in  its  nature.   The
    church is contrasted with American style tele-evangelism but, he  said,
    the Church of England does seek to persuade  people  of  the  truth  of
    Christian faith, although it does so less ostentatiously.

88.  Canon Coulton also said that many determinations seem to  suggest  that
    conversion is an instantaneous event, whereas in reality  the  majority
    of people take steps towards the commitment often over a period  of  up
    to four years.  It is not something that can be forced,  and  Tribunals
    are wrong to seek evidence that people have been converted as a  result
    of a claimant's evangelism.  He argued that this is a  false  test  and
    many  Christians  will  seek  to  persuade  others  of  the  truth   of
    Christianity  unsuccessfully.   That  does  not  mean  they   are   not
    evangelistic, only that they have not  been  successful.   It  was  the
    attempt to persuade, i.e. the  proselytising,  which  is  found  to  be
    offensive in Iran, not whether it is successful.

89.  At the Lambeth Conference in 1998,  when  the  marks  of  mission  were
    discussed, it was said that the first: "proclaiming the  good  news  of
    the Kingdom of God" was "the key statement about everything  we  do  in
    mission".  The conference also said that this statement  affirmed  that
    Anglicans are those that gather in worship to be people of mission, and
    that the Mission of God into which all Anglicans are called is  one  of
    transformation   -   transforming   individual   lives,    transforming
    communities and transforming the world.  Canon Coulton  and  his  small
    group had been sufficiently  concerned  about  the  way  in  which  the
    genuineness of conversion to Christianity has been tested in the  past.
    He made a number of points of general application.  We include some, as
    they are sound guidance of  general  application.   He  said  that  the
    culture of being a Christian varies considerably from  one  country  to
    another and, as a result, aspects of Christianity that appear important
    in one place, or branch of Christianity, may not elsewhere.  Discussing
    what becoming a Christian involves,  he  said  that  can  vary  between
    countries.  It is not always 'safe' to  undertake  outward  sacramental
    forms such as baptism or confirmation, despite a person having  reached
    the appropriate conviction in his or her heart.  He reminded  us  that,
    in some branches of the church, lay members do not receive wine at Holy
    Communion, and in others rarely receive the Communion at  all.   It  is
    not always safe to attend church to receive the sacraments and in other
    branches receiving the word in the form of Bible reading, singing hymns
    and prayers is more common than Communion.  Not all churches accord the
    same significance to the Bible (both Old and New Testaments) and church
    traditions play varying parts  in  different  churches.   He  cautioned
    against using knowledge of any particular part of the Bible as  a  test
    for whether someone has genuinely become a Christian, saying also  that
    in the United Kingdom it is thought that takes  up  to  four  years  to
    effect the change to accept the faith but  that  the  change  may  have
    occurred before any outward commitment is taken.  For example, he  said
    asking a Catholic about speaking in tongues, or a Pentecostalist  about
    the Seven Sacraments, is unlikely to be informative.  It  is  also  the
    case that some concepts, such as  the  Trinity,  or  Epiphany,  do  not
    readily translate into languages used in countries with a  mostly  non-
    Christian population.  Nothing that Canon Coulton said should come as a
    surprise to Immigration Judges, who have been  regularly  cautioned  by
    the higher courts not to make assumptions based on limited personal, or
    local, knowledge and experience.

SECTION 7

Apostasy

90.  The evidence in this section deals with  the  proposed  change  to  the
    Iranian law on apostasy and to the significance  of  that  change.   At
    page 53 of her report Ms Enayat said that formal  charges  of  apostasy
    have been used  infrequently  against  converts  to  Christianity.   Ms
    Enayat approved the definition  of  the  crime  of  apostasy  which  is
    contained in the COIR (now at 19.21 in the January 2008 Report) but she
    did not consider that the COIR  sufficiently  emphasised  that  Ertedad
    (apostasy) is a turning away from, or annunciation of, Islam  and  does
    not require the formal adoption of another religion.  She also, in  her
    report, drew attention to the distinction between those  who  are  born
    Muslims and leave their religion, and those who convert  to  Islam  and
    then reconvert.  In the former case, the penalty is for  a  man  to  be
    executed and a woman imprisoned for life, but she may  be  released  if
    she repents.  That form of apostasy is  innate  apostasy.   The  latter
    category, parental apostates,  are  to  be  executed  upon  refusal  to
    repent.

91.  At present, the offence of apostasy is  not  included  in  the  Iranian
    Criminal Code although it is  still  possible  to  bring  a  charge  of
    apostasy by virtue of Article 167 of the  Iranian  Constitution.   That
    provides that, where there is no codified law:-

         "In the case of the absence of any such  law  [the  judge]  has  to
         deliver his judgment on the basis of authoritative Islamic  sources
         and authentic  fatwa.    On  the  pretext  of  the  silence  of  or
         deficiency of law in the matter, or its  brevity  or  contradictory
         nature, he cannot refrain from admitting and  examining  cases  and
         delivering his judgment."

    Miss Enayat said that, although Islamic judges are in  theory  free  to
    select a source of law which they regard as authoritative, in  practice
    they are recommended to follow a multi-volume work by Khomeini.   It is
    also possible to deal with apostasy by charging sacrilege under Article
    513 of the Law of Islamic Punishment.


92.  The Majles (Parliament) is currently involved  in  revising  the  first
    four books of the Law of  Islamic  Punishment.   Book  two  concerns  a
    category of offence known as "the Hadd" which are offences against  the
    divine order, whose punishment is fixed and cannot be modified  by  the
    judge.  Hadd offences were first codified in 1982 but did  not  include
    apostasy.  Miss Enayat says that the codification is significant for  a
    number of reasons:-

         i.   At present, the question of the  application  of  the  law  is
             theoretically left to the conscience  of  the  judge  and  his
             interpretation  of  the  Sharia.   That  there  is  scope  for
             interpretation is illustrated by one line of thinking in  Shia
             jurisprudence that believes that apostasy is a matter for  the
             day of judgment.  When the law is  codified,  the  court  will
             have no options at its disposal  if  a  case  of  apostasy  is
             brought and the accused refuses to recant.


         ii.  The proposed draft specifies the methods by which apostasy may
             be proved, and that includes circumstantial evidence, which is
             referred to as  "the  instinctive  knowledge  of  the  judge".
             There is therefore no suggestion that the  crime  of  apostasy
             will involve methods of proof that are difficult or impossible
             to achieve.  There is no possibility under the  code  for  the
             judge to modify the punishment, as only the supreme leader can
             pardon a person in order to avoid a Hadd punishment.  There is
             no statute of limitations.


    She added a number of other concerns which essentially arise out of the
    breadth of the offence but which do not have an immediate relevance  to
    this reconsideration.


93.  In giving evidence, Miss Enayat said the bill before the Majlis  is  at
    its second reading stage.  We do not fall into the  error  of  assuming
    that bears any relation to a second reading within the  UK  Parliament,
    but it does show that it has been introduced  and  passed  at  least  a
    preliminary stage.  She was unable to say how  matters  would  progress
    because  there  have  been  delays  caused  by   recent   parliamentary
    elections.  She  did  not  know  the  imperative  behind  the  changes,
    although she observed that  since  the  election  of  Ahmadi-Nejad  the
    authorities are apparently  concerned  about  all  forms  of  religious
    dissidence.   Asked  why,  given  the  relatively  rare  incidents   of
    prosecution for apostasy, it should be included in the code,  she  said
    that the  reformists  are  concerned  because  they  question  why  the
    authorities want to codify the law unless they intended to use it.   Ms
    Enayat said that, unlike prosecutions for homosexuality, there were  no
    statistics for prosecutions relating to apostasy.  She said it was rare
    and would, in any event, be statistically insignificant.  Asked  by  Ms
    Naik, Ms Enayat said that  she  did  not  think  that  there  were  any
    particular obstacles to the new code becoming law.   Often  it  is  the
    Council of Guardians who object but they are unlikely to  dispute  this
    bill as it was drafted by theologians.  The general opinion seems to be
    that it will pass into law intact.

94.  We also heard from Mohammad M H Kakhki, who  describes  himself  as  an
    "Attorney at Law (Iran's jurisdiction)".  He is now a British  citizen.
    He was asked about his expertise by Mr Kovats.  He said he has been  at
    Durham University and had completed  his  PhD  in  April.    On  closer
    questioning it transpired that he has not been awarded a  PhD,  but  he
    has submitted his thesis and undergone his  viva.   The  title  of  his
    thesis was "Iranian Oil Contracts under the Buy Back Transactions".  He
    said he was a member of the Iranian Bar, and that a Bar licence has  to
    be renewed every three years.  He did not renew his after he left Iran.
     He is not currently entitled to practice, but all he needs to  do,  in
    order to be entitled, is to pay a fee.  He last appeared  in  court  in
    Iran in February 2002.  Although he denied  specialising,  saying  that
    Iranian advocates did not, his practice seems to have comprised family,
    criminal and commercial  work,  although  he  described  his  field  of
    expertise as Iranian Law and procedure in general.    He gave  evidence
    in chief  concerning  the  intelligence  gathering  activities  of  the
    Iranian Embassy in London.  Mr Kovats asked him what qualified  him  to
    express an opinion about that.  He said that the intelligence  services
    work alongside the Iranian judiciary.  On qualifying, one  is  familiar
    with the different security forces who investigate cases and hand  them
    over to be decided.  He said that, having been a practising lawyer  and
    knowing the law, he knew their activities and  the  reasons  for  their
    activities.

95.  We were not prepared to accept  Mr  Kakhki  as  an  expert  on  Iranian
    intelligence.  As to the law in  Iran,  although  Mr  Kovats  submitted
    that, "if he is an expert he is only just an expert", we are  satisfied
    that he has the expertise to tell us  what  the  law  is,  although  we
    approach his evidence from the standpoint that he has been out of  Iran
    for six years.

96.  Mr Kakhki had submitted a substantial report dated 14 April 2008.   The
    Tribunal read that before he gave evidence but it was not  referred  to
    in any significant way during his oral evidence.  We  observe  that  it
    did not add to any of the other material  that  we  had.   Although  it
    contained some unsupported assertions about general conditions in  Iran
    there was nothing which, even if it had been  properly  sourced,  would
    add to the wealth of material that we had from elsewhere.  He gave some
    evidence about marriage requirements which we will come to later in the
    determination.  In relation to apostasy, he did not  disagree  with  Ms
    Enayat's analysis.  He did say that (in the case of M) if he married  a
    non-Iranian Christian that  might  be  used  as  evidence  of  his  own
    conversion under the circumstantial evidence  rule  (knowledge  of  the
    judge).

SECTION 8

The Evidence of Father Christopher Basdon

97.  In this section we deal with Father Basdon's evidence  in  relation  to
    the Catholic Church.  We deal later here with his  evidence  concerning
    the appellant M.  In his statement he said that when he lived in  Iran,
    in more tolerant  days,  the  Catholic  Church  had  a  policy  of  not
    baptising Muslims because every avenue of  their  life  afterwards  was
    blocked.  In oral evidence he was asked about whether M would  be  able
    to practice as a Roman Catholic in Iran and he said it  was  untenable.
    He  said  the  church  in  Iran  has  been  decimated.   Prior  to  the
    revolution, it ran schools, convents and other  establishments  all  of
    which were confiscated at the time of the revolution.   Even  then  the
    church was very careful about conversions  because  converting  Muslims
    made their relationship with the country untenable if the  convert  and
    his family were  seen  going  to  church.   He  said  that  his  is  an
    international church and not simply a grouping.  The relationship  with
    the host country is therefore more delicate.  The church has diplomatic
    relations  with  Iran  and  does  not  have  the  option   of   working
    underground.  He said  that  prior  to  the  revolution  the  church's'
    activities were those of bridge  building  and  they  had  medical  and
    religious apostolates.  He said the church was criticised by  some  for
    not being more apostolic, but it would have endangered  all  that  they
    had there.  He referred to a recent case of an Iranian girl (Bernadette
    Aliari) who is now in the United Kingdom having  claimed  asylum.   She
    went into a Catholic information centre run by Father Ambio  who,  when
    he realised that she was genuinely interested in converting,  told  her
    to leave the country.  Father Ambio has been in Iran for a  long  time,
    he is a member of a French group called The Prado, which offers help to
    other churches.  He offered himself to  the  Chaldean  Catholic  Church
    which is based in Rome.  He said that churches such as the Chaldean are
    ethnic churches and do not accept converts at all,  indeed  their  only
    policy is that of survival.  He said that if  M  returned  to  Iran  he
    would have to be a member of the Latin Rite Church.  He said the  Latin
    Rite church has very few congregants and is monitored.  In  reality  it
    is a church for foreigners.  He said  that  the  congregation  includes
    Philippinos, Koreans and diplomats.  He  is  not  aware  that  Iranians
    worship there, although children of  mixed  marriages  did  before  the
    revolution.  He said that an Iranian would  be  very  prominent  if  he
    entered that church.  He said that in theory  the  Catholic  Church  in
    Iran is open to anyone.  However, he said that in Iran  it  is  a  very
    delicate business because the fundamentalist groups observe,  and  want
    to see who is going in and out.  There were services in Farsi prior  to
    the revolution, but he doubts that is offered  now.   He  believed  the
    languages used are  English,  other  European  languages,  Tagalog  and
    Korean.  He said there are no indigenous Roman Catholic Churches.  Most
    congregants  had  escaped  to  the  west.   Some  came  out  with   the
    Educational Apostolate and are effectively in exile.

98.  He was not sure whether the church would baptise a  Muslim  today,  but
    he said they would have to be extremely  careful.   He  recalled  that,
    even in his  day,  the  baptismal  registers  were  locked  up  in  the
    Apostolic Nunciate, which is the equivalent of the Vatican Embassy  and
    had diplomatic immunity.

99.  Asked what would be the position of a Catholic convert who is not  able
    to practise his faith he said that the Roman Catholic Church, in common
    with nearly all Christian churches, is based on the sacraments.  It has
    a hierarchy of bishops, priests and deacons.  There is  no  possibility
    of administering the sacrament  of  communion  without  a  priest.   He
    referred to the more  evangelical  churches  as  small  groups  of  lay
    Christians who do not even need a pastor, but said that  in  the  Roman
    Catholic Church the priest is the activator of the liturgy as  well  as
    being the pastor to his flock.  He stands in the place of  Christ.   He
    said that in order to be  a  practising  Catholic,  a  person  requires
    attendance at mass and participation in the  sacraments  of  confession
    and communion.  He said the Ten Commandments require attendance at mass
    on Sundays at least, and confession at least once a year although it is
    a good idea to go more often.   Asked  whether  it  was  more  or  less
    difficult for a new convert to be deprived of his faith, he said it was
    more difficult, because it was somewhat like a newlywed having a forced
    absence from a spouse.  Asked  in  cross-examination  how  many  clergy
    there were in Iran he said he thought there were five,  or  fewer,  for
    the Latin Rite.  There were as many as  there  are  because  a  lot  of
    foreigners attend the church.  He said the church has three centres.


SECTION 9

The Respondent's Evidence

100. In addition to  the  Operational  Guidance  Note,  and  the  COIR,  the
    respondent's  evidence  comprised  four  letters  from  the  Iran   Co-
    ordination Group at the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  addressed  to
    the Immigration and Nationality Directorate (and later  the  UK  Border
    Agency).  The first letter,  dated  7  December  2006,  said  that  the
    British Embassy in Tehran was not aware of any new decrees, guidance or
    law concerning the treatment of converted or  proselytising  Christians
    since 2004.  At that stage they had not been aware of any incidents  of
    rhetoric, speechmaking or government publicity about such matters.  The
    letter recorded the change in administration from the reformist  minded
    Khatami regime, to the conservative administration of President Ahmadi-
    Nejad.  In the letter, the Embassy  said it had not seen evidence  that
    the new administration was taking a deliberately  harder  line  against
    converts.  Having said that,  the  letter  expressed  general  concerns
    about  the  treatment  of  religious  minorities  in  Iran,   including
    Christians.  It said there had been cases of Christian  converts  being
    arrested on charges of  apostasy,  and  evangelical  church  literature
    being confiscated on suspicion that it will be used to convert Muslims.
     They had received a report that a church was  under  surveillance,  to
    ensure nobody entering was a convert, but they were not aware that  the
    treatment of converted Christians had worsened since 2004.  It was  the
    understanding of the Embassy that Muslims can convert  to  Christianity
    without persecution from the authorities as long as they practice their
    new faith in private.  The view was that the authorities appear to take
    action if they suspect Christians are proselytising.

101. On 28 June 2007 a second letter was written  following  a  request  for
    further information, and a specific request for Embassy staff to  speak
    to apostates to evangelical and house churches to ask them whether  the
    treatment of Christians has worsened since 2004.  A  Christian  convert
    belonging to  the  Assembly  of  God  network  of  house  churches  was
    interviewed in May 2007.   He  said  he  had  converted  several  years
    previously, but was very discreet about it.  He had not told  any  work
    colleagues for fear of  word  getting  back  to  the  authorities.   He
    described the atmosphere as being  more  difficult  than  it  had  been
    before Ahmadi-Nejad had come to power, and that the surveillance of the
    churches was greater.  He said that  the  authorities  would  sometimes
    check ID cards as people went into churches.  He described intimidation
    by the authorities of individual church members  as  having  increased,
    although this had not extended to physical injury.   The  letter  added
    that it was unclear whether the lack of resort to physical  injury  was
    due to lack of intent on the part of the authorities, or the discretion
    of the convert.  Somewhat confusingly the letter went on  to  say  that
    some members of the church's committee had been assaulted in  the  past
    several years but that it was unclear whether  this  was  because  they
    were converts or if it was state sanctioned, as  their  assailants  had
    not been in uniform.  The interviewee was unaware of any deaths arising
    from such assaults, but there  was  mention  of  suspicious  deaths  of
    converts in other parts of the country which the Embassy  said  it  was
    already aware of.

102. A minister of the Assyrian evangelical Church was also  interviewed  in
    June 2007.   This  church  is  not  itself  under  threat  because  the
    community has been in Iran since before the time of the  Prophet.   The
    minister said the church had reluctantly refrained from  proselytising.
    He described the atmosphere as better than in the early years after the
    revolution but his church still judges it too unwise  to  restart  such
    activity,  as  it  felt  that  open   proselytising   would   lead   to
    intimidation, arrests and perhaps worse.

103. There was also a discussion with the representative of another  Embassy
    who had met the pastor of a house church in April  2006.   That  pastor
    had been reluctant to meet, and said that most of the house churches in
    Iran were part of the Assembly of God network, nd before  that  it  had
    been growing in recent years, but  was  very  secretive.   The  network
    feared persecution if their  activities  became  more  publicly  known.
    Neither  he, nor his congregation, had been the victims of  persecution
    as they had been able to keep their activities quiet.  The letter  said
    that following some research on the treatment of Christians, the  other
    Embassy's  assessment  was  that  the  red  line  for  the  regime  was
    evangelising.  Iranians born as Christian were left  alone,  but  those
    who tried to convert Muslims, and those Iranians who  converted,  might
    suffer persecution if they came to  the  authorities'  attention.   The
    official of the other Embassy thought that a small change had  occurred
    since 2005 which had resulted in increased pressure  being  exerted  on
    evangelisers rather than converts.  Generally that Embassy's assessment
    was broadly in line with that of the British.  The author of the letter
    comments that although the sample size is small  because  the  churches
    tend to keep a low profile, information received was  consistent.   The
    conclusion was that, since  the  letter  of  7  December  2006,  verbal
    intimidation and surveillance of Christian converts had  increased  but
    there was no evidence to suggest that violence against, or arrests  of,
    converted Christians have increased.  Christians  are  more  likely  to
    face persecution from the authorities if they are actively evangelising
    or are themselves converts.  There have been reports of an increase  in
    activity against other religious minorities, including  Bahais,  during
    the same period.

104. In the third letter, dated 17 September 2007, the  Co-ordination  Group
    had been asked to comment on three expert reports.  The  report  of  Mr
    Ghaffari was said to contain information which appeared  reliable,  and
    the Embassy said it was aware of most of the cases  he  included.   The
    Embassy observed that the report did not include much  recent  evidence
    and they anticipated that most of the  evidence  he  gave  was  already
    included in the COIR.  They did make the point  that  Akbar  Mohammadi,
    who died in custody in Evin Prison was a student protester rather  than
    a Muslim convert to Christianity, and that Pourmand had been  acquitted
    on the charge of apostasy which  Mr  Ghaffari  did  not  mention.   The
    references in the third letter  to  increasing  pressure  on  Christian
    communities by surveillance outside church premises, and  requests  for
    identification, are similar to the assessment already provided  by  the
    earlier letters.

105.     The Group described Ms Enayat's report as comprehensive.   It  said
    that the evidence she provided, of arrest and intimidation, is  largely
    based on media reporting in the public domain  and  appeared  credible.
    It observed that her report included more recent examples than Ghaffari
    and concluded that her assertion is that any convert from Islam  is  at
    some risk of persecution, but she acknowledged it is  hard  to  predict
    the degree of this risk.  Having described her report as well balanced,
    and acknowledged that not all converts are treated in the same fashion,
    and that it is difficult to see a clear pattern  in  the  incidents  of
    persecution, the letter said:

         "We would agree with this judgment: this fact in itself  highlights
         the arbitrariness characteristic of repression in Iran - it is  not
         necessarily systematic and can be unpredictable and  this  adds  to
         the atmosphere of fear."

     It agreed with Ms Enayat that, although apostasy is a capital  offence,
    in both law and theory, cases are rarely heard in Iranian Courts and do
    not represent the main  form  of  persecution  of  faith  by  Christian
    converts.   The  letter  says,  "Harassment  is  more  likely   to   be
    extrajudicial and without  connections  to  government".   The  Embassy
    considered that Mr Kakhki's report added little to the other reports.

106. The letter went  on  to  remind  the  reader  that  Christianity  is  a
    recognised minority religion under the Iranian Constitution,  but  that
    does not mean that official discrimination against Christians and other
    minority religious groups does not exist.  It said that Christians  are
    not permitted to hold senior  official  positions  in  the  government,
    judiciary, school system or military.  Conversion may therefore  impact
    on work and education opportunities.  The Embassy agreed with the major
    concerns expressed in the reports about lack of due process in  Iranian
    judicial proceedings, with trials taking place behind closed doors  and
    with  the  defendants  not  being  given  adequate  access   to   legal
    representation.  The Embassy is also concerned by the  growing  use  of
    arbitrary arrests, followed by release on bail, without public charges.
     The practice, coupled with the implicit threat of future arrests,  was
    said to create  fear  and  uncertainty  and  is  used  as  a  means  of
    intimidation.  The letter  goes  on  to  say  that  human  rights  have
    deteriorated in the past year with a notable clampdown on  the  freedom
    of expression and association.  It concluded that it would be  fair  to
    assess that Christian converts, and other religious  minorities,  might
    have come under increased pressure and  intimidation,  particularly  if
    they were openly proselytising.  The letter expressed the  caveat  that
    the Embassy has limited access to Christian sources in Iran and adopted
    a cautious approach, so it was difficult to get a full  picture.   They
    were not aware of any individuals being executed, having been convicted
    of apostasy, in the last fifteen years.  It said that Tourani  was  the
    last person they were aware of whose death may have been related to his
    Christian activities, but it is not clear whether the murder was  state
    sanctioned or perpetrated by  members  of  his  local  community.   The
    letter concluded that verbal intimidation, or monitoring  of  Christian
    converts, has increased since 2004 but there was no evidence to suggest
    that arrests or violence against converted  Christians  has  increased.
    Christians were more likely to face persecution from the authorities if
    they are actively evangelising and trying to  convert  Muslims,  or  if
    they themselves have converted from Islam to Christianity.

107. Finally, a short letter dated 28 April  2008  confirmed  the  situation
    had not changed since the earlier letters and that the Embassy had  not
    become aware of any recent developments in terms  of   regulations,  or
    reports of action taken against Christian converts.

108. Ms Enayat was asked if she had any criticism of  the  letters  and  she
    indicated that she was broadly in agreement.  She did question  whether
    comparing the present situation to 2004 was necessarily the appropriate
    time span, as her view was that things had started to deteriorate prior
    to the decision in FS and Others, although not  necessarily  recognised
    at that time.

SECTION 10

Evidence Relevant to Z's own Reconsideration

109. The fact of Z's conversion to Christianity is not now  in  dispute  and
    reconsideration was  ordered  only  on  the  basis  that  the  original
    Tribunal had not properly assessed the extent to  which  the  appellant
    would evangelise on being returned to Iran, and the assessment  of  any
    risk caused thereby.  The original decision was made in December  2003.
    Observing that the Adjudicator's determination predated FS  and  Others
    the Tribunal said at the first stage reconsideration, "it is  clear  in
    light of the fact that the determination is over two  years  old  there
    will need to be a reconsideration of all issues including credibility".
      We directed that that did not mean that the respondent  could  reopen
    the issue of the appellant's conversion.

110. Z was called to give evidence.  In his most recent  statement  he  said
    that he was dispersed to Newcastle at the end  of  2003  and  could  no
    longer attend the Ichthus Christian Fellowship run by Nigel Desborough.
     He has contacted Mr Desborough on a few occasions and attended at  the
    fellowship on three or four occasions when he has visited  London.   In
    Newcastle he began to attend the Dunston Family  Church  in  Gateshead,
    under the direction of Pastor Edmund Nichols.  The church used to  hold
    an Iranian meeting on Wednesdays, conducted in Farsi, but he  now  also
    attends on Sundays.  The Wednesday meetings stopped some time ago and Z
    now attends on Tuesdays and Sundays,  but  also  goes  to  meetings  at
    people's houses for Bible reading and planning.  He gave an account  of
    the various meetings and festivals which  he  has  attended  throughout
    England and Scotland.  In his statement he said that  he  continued  to
    practice his Christian faith and to bring others into the church.  That
    has included some colleagues from Newcastle College, at  least  one  of
    whom has since been baptised.  He has bought fifteen  Bibles  in  Farsi
    from a website in Germany and given them to friends who  did  not  have
    Bibles themselves, and whose English is not very good.  As at  25  July
    2007 he was in a relationship with Lynn Susan  Kylie  whom  he  met  in
    Newcastle.  He has given her literature and spoken to her about  coming
    to church but she is not yet fully committed to it.  He  asserted  that
    he could not return to Iran for the reasons explained  in  his  earlier
    statements, because he would  not  be  free  to  continue  with  church
    activities and the distribution of Bibles and talking openly to friends
    and other people about his faith.

111. Mr Kovats indicated he did not require Z to be called, as  he  did  not
    dispute what he has been doing in the United  Kingdom  adding  that  it
    does not follow, from what he does here, that it is  accepted  that  he
    would behave in any particular way in Iran.  Z was called.   Asked  how
    he would want to continue to practice his faith, he said that  he would
    want to attend church regularly and also to attend religious  teachings
    and classes.  He would want to tell other people about it, and he would
    want to invite other people to understand about his religion.  He  said
    he wanted to tell people the  good  news  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  he
    described as having been a miracle in his life.   He  would  hope  that
    others would follow the same way.  Asked what he would say in  Iran  if
    he was asked his religion, he said he would definitely  say  he  was  a
    Christian.  He said that his parents know of his conversion.  They have
    not rejected him as they know it is something he  wants  to  do.   They
    said they cannot do anything about it and they have left it to his  own
    choice.

112. Cross-examined by Mr Kovats, Z said he would want to share  his  belief
    if he was returned to Iran.  This is what he would do and he would find
    the way to do it.  The appellant said that in Iran he would be revealed
    by what he believed in, and that  would  result  in  his  disappearance
    because according to the Islamic faith, if you give it up,  the  result
    will be a death sentence.  He said he would definitely go to church  in
    Iran.  He said that standing on a street corner and  proselytising  was
    not the only way to share his faith, and he would not try to share  his
    faith in that way.  It would be dangerous for anyone to do such an act,
    and he would not do it.  When it was first suggested  to  him  that  he
    would not do anything in Iran that would put his life in  danger,  such
    as standing on a street corner, he asked whether talking to a neighbour
    at his house was any different from on a street  corner.   He  said  he
    would share his faith with his  neighbours.   Asked  again  whether  he
    would stand on a street corner he said he would not  as  he  would  not
    have a chance.  After a careful cross-examination,  the  appellant  was
    finally asked whether it was the case that he would exercise  his  duty
    as a Christian only insofar as it was not dangerous, and he  said  that
    was correct.  Despite her best efforts in re-examination, Ms Weston was
    unable to get the appellant to say more than that he would  be  willing
    to take small risks by sharing his belief with individuals.   Asked  by
    the Tribunal whether he would be worried about  whether  his  neighbour
    would report him to  the  authorities,  the  appellant  said  he  would
    consider taking that risk but he also considered that would  not  be  a
    stupid thing.  He would not do it in a stupid way,  he  would  approach
    the neighbour face to face, one to one or perhaps with  three  in  all.
    He would hope that the person would understand  what  it  is  that  the
    appellant was telling him and his intention would be to tell him how to
    lead a comfortable and happy life.

113. On behalf of Z we heard from Pastor Nigel  Desborough,  who  no  longer
    operates under the umbrella of the Ichthus Christian Fellowship, but is
    at Forest Hill Community Church.  He said that he was only  in  regular
    contact with Z for  a  period  of  about  five  months  before  he  was
    dispersed, but at that  time  he  used  to  see  him  most  weeks.   He
    explained how the church approached Z's conversion, saying he had shown
    signs of an embryonic faith when he first  arrived  from  Iran.   Asked
    what was involved in bearing  witness,  he  said  that  witnessing  and
    communicating is fundamental to the faith because Jesus had  said  that
    people should go into the world and preach the gospel.  Z had got  hold
    of this concept of his duty and Mr Desborough  said  he  was  the  most
    zealous among a number of Iranians, and played  a  role  in  attracting
    others.  Somehow he had managed to just embrace the idea,  but  it  was
    not clear  whether  this  was  because  he  had  particular  skills  in
    befriending people, and he was certainly keen to serve.  He  was  asked
    whether he had read statements by the Reverend Nichols and he had.  The
    Rev. Nichols was the Pastor of Dunston Family Church.  He was not  able
    to attend to give evidence because his  wife  is  seriously  ill.   The
    letters from Mr Nichols did not add  greatly  to  the  evidence  of  Mr
    Desborough and Z himself.  They went to confirm the genuineness of  his
    conversion, which was not in dispute, and to assert that Z is a zealous
    member of the church demonstrating his enthusiasm.  Mr  Desborough  was
    able to confirm that the Rev. Nichols' account  of  Z's  role  accorded
    with his own experience, and was a continuation of it.  He was asked by
    Ms Weston whether, as part of the study and instruction he had given to
    Z, he had ever addressed  the  subject  of  sharing  faith  or  bearing
    witness  under  difficult  circumstances.   He  said  it  was  a  clear
    responsibility of a Christian to bear witness and he acknowledged  that
    it is easier in some  places  than  in  others.   He  said  it  is  the
    responsibility of each disciple to decide what to  do  and  it  is  not
    possible to force people to follow the faith.  He accepted  that  there
    could be risks involved but that was not a reason to stop  sharing  his
    faith.  Cross-examined by Mr Kovats, Mr Desborough said that Z had  not
    said he would  like  to  return  to  spread  the  gospel,  nor  had  he
    encouraged him to do so.  Asked by Mr Kovats why he had not  encouraged
    that, as Z is Iranian and could do good there, Mr  Desborough  said  he
    was not sure.  He did, however, say that Z had shared the  gospel  with
    Iranians in the UK but accepted there were difficulties in  doing  that
    in Iran.  In answer to the Tribunal, Mr Desborough said it was not  the
    church's place to encourage people to lay down their lives  for  faith.
    It was laudable if they did so, but it would be between themselves  and
    God if they decided to risk martyrdom.

114. We were referred to a number of letters in support of Z.

SECTION 11

The Evidence Relating to the Individual Appeal of M

115. The Tribunal ordered reconsideration  in  the  case  of  M  because  it
    considered that the Immigration Judge gave  insufficient  consideration
    to an expert report by Ms Enayat.  Although, in making the  order,  the
    Tribunal said that ground 1, relating to the  findings  of  fact  being
    perverse or irrational was not arguable, at the first stage,  error  of
    law hearing the Senior Immigration Judge said  that  the  issues  would
    need to be widened from the failure to consider the  expert  report  to
    include the credibility of the appellant's claims and the consideration
    of the appellant's human rights claims.  The human rights aspect of the
    case had not been considered by the Immigration Judge because  at  that
    time JM (Liberia) [2006] UKAIT 00009 had not  been  overturned  by  the
    Court of Appeal and it was generally thought that, where there were  no
    removal directions, the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider  human
    rights.  The position with M is that it was accepted that he  has  been
    baptised but, at the time of the Immigration Judge's decision, not  yet
    confirmed.  We need to make findings as to his current level  of  faith
    and the degree of evangelising, what he might do in Iran and the  level
    of risk entailed in that.

116. In his witness statement, M gives a history which includes reading  for
    a degree in Petroleum Engineering from 1990 to 1995,  and  conscription
    from 1995 to 1997.  His father had been a monarchist and  the  family's
    lands in Ahwaz had been confiscated after the revolution.   His  father
    was imprisoned for trying to get the land back and died in hospital  in
    1990, the family not having seen him since his imprisonment until  they
    saw him in  hospital  immediately  before  he  died.   The  appellant's
    brother was also a monarchist and as a result had  to  serve  an  extra
    year of military service.

117. The appellant went to Dubai to  work,  after  completing  his  military
    service, and was there for seven years.  There, he met an Indian  Roman
    Catholic who became a close friend and that  ignited  M's  interest  in
    Christianity.  He did not have any  opportunity  to  attend  church  in
    Dubai.  He briefly visited the UK in January 2005 to take a  one  month
    course in cementing, which he failed due to his lack of command of  the
    English language.  He returned to Dubai but came  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom in June to study on a language course.  Whilst on that  course,
    he made friends with  a  man  called  Fernando  from  Bolivia,  also  a
    Catholic.  Through the internet the appellant met  Barbara  Urmston,  a
    British national living in Holland and  who  is  also  Roman  Catholic.
    They spent two weeks at her parents' house when she visited the  UK  in
    August 2005.

118. In December 2005 he was introduced  to  Father  Basdon  of  St  Bede's.
    Father Basdon trained him for baptism.  Following a  successful  appeal
    against a refusal to extend his leave  to  remain  as  a  student,  the
    appellant returned to Iran.  He explained that  he  had  a  friend,  in
    Iran, called AN who he had kept in contact with by phone  and  internet
    from Dubai, and later by internet from the United Kingdom.   They  were
    childhood  friends  and  discussed  everything.   Trusting   him,   the
    appellant divulged his interest in Catholicism and that he  was  to  be
    baptised.  On 21 March the appellant claims AN told him that his  (M's)
    brother was in trouble in  Iran  and  needed  M's  help  with  a  legal
    dispute.   Although  aware  that   Christian   converts   were   facing
    persecution in Iran, he did not  think  anyone  would  know  about  his
    conversion during the short visit he planned.

119. He arrived in Iran on 29 March to stay with his sister-in-law  and  her
    and his brother's children.  He said he learned that  his  brother  had
    been taken away two months earlier by an anonymous group, thought to be
    government agents.  He spent three  days  searching  for  his  brother,
    visiting police stations and detention centres.  After three  days,  as
    he was about to enter his brother's house, he was approached by a group
    of people, grabbed, blindfolded handcuffed and  taken  to  a  detention
    centre.  They were calling him a Kaffir (un unbeliever).  He  was  kept
    in detention for two weeks.  The only times that anyone visited him  in
    solitary confinement was when they came to  beat  him  by  kicking  and
    punching and with food.  They opened the handcuffs  only  when  he  had
    food, which was once a day.  He concluded they could  only  have  known
    about his conversion through AN whom he  felt  had  betrayed  him.   He
    later heard AN's voice among the guards who came to him in his cell.  M
    believes that AN denounced  him  as  an  unbeliever,  although  he  had
    himself apparently shown an interest in Christianity over the internet.
     Towards the end of the detention one of the guards said that he  would
    help M to get out if paid.  In his statement, M said, "We agreed to pay
    him US$1,000".  On 15 April "the guard" let him out and took him to his
    brother's house, still blindfolded.   Once  there,  they  demanded  the
    payment and were paid out of money which M had kept  at  his  brother's
    house.  M left Iran shortly  thereafter.   Commenting  on  the  refusal
    letter, he said that AN was not the person who helped him  escape  from
    prison.  It was "another person, a guard".

120. M claimed asylum on return to the United  Kingdom,  and  was  detained.
    His application was put into the  fast  track  system.   His  case  was
    eventually removed from fast track and he was released from  detention.
    On 18 June 2006 he was baptised at St Bede's by Father Basdon.  In  his
    statement M said he took Geoffrey as  his  name  on  baptism.   He  was
    confirmed on 28 April 2007, by Bishop Lynch,  and  took  James  as  his
    confirmation name.  He was prepared for confirmation by Father Andrea.

121. His current partner is EV.  They live together  in  Scotland  and  have
    done since September 2007.  There he attends services  at  St  Aloysius
    Church, daily.  He said that his partner is a Canadian national who was
    born in the Netherlands.  She attends Church of Scotland  services.   M
    said he has been unable to marry her because they are in  the  position
    of needing approval from the respondent, and he has been told  that  as
    an asylum seeker it would be refused.  An attempt to obtain a visa  for
    Canada resulted in  the  Canadian  Embassy  refusing  to  consider  the
    application due to  his  lack  of  immigration  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He cannot marry in  the  local  Anglican  Church  in  Glasgow
    because he is not a member of the church.  He  said  that  he  and  his
    partner have decided to marry when his immigration status is resolved.

122. The only member of his family with whom he is now  in  contact  is  his
    sister, who lives in Dubai.  The appellant says he has set up  his  own
    English language website www.christianconvert.net, which is designed to
    encourage others to follow their hearts and  convert  to  Christianity.
    In evidence, he was asked by Ms Naik who his website was aimed at.   He
    said Christians and comrades.  He wanted to attract Christian  converts
    and that is why he used the name he did.  He said  it  is  targeted  at
    Muslims.  Asked how he would practice his Christianity if  he  returned
    to Iran he said he could not do so; not least because of what President
    Ahmadi-Nejad had said.  His family have  always  been  strict  Muslims.
    The appellant said he is a Sayed, they are said  to  have  been  direct
    descendants of the Prophet.  He said that when he was briefly  free  in
    Iran recently, he attempted to go  to  Church.   He  said  he  went  to
    St Abrahams and wanted to meet Father Christopher there.  However, when
    he arrived the doors were closed and there appeared to be no  services.
    He was unable to find anybody.  It was a  building  devoid  of  outward
    symbols.  He said he heard AN's voice when he was detained at the  time
    when the offer was made to help him to escape.  There were three guards
    but he only recognised the voice of AN.  He was asked about  a  article
    about him in the Catholic Herald that he had adduced  in  evidence  and
    how that had come about.  It was published on 18 August 2006.  He  said
    that the Catholic Herald had contacted Father Christopher, who spoke to
    him.  He was later met by a journalist called Mark who both interviewed
    him over the telephone and in person.  He was not sure how the  initial
    contact came about.  In relation to the request to marry,  he  said  he
    had not applied for a certificate, because he was told that he would be
    refused.

123. Cross-examined, he said he used his  Iranian  name  in  his  statement,
    because that is how the Home Office know him, but he is known as James.
     In relation to the release from detention, he said that  when  he  was
    dropped off outside his brother's house he paid the people that dropped
    him.  That did not include AN.  It was not his case that AN helped  him
    to escape, and it was not AN who asked for the money.  He said that  he
    did not pay the money over until he was released.  He was reminded that
    the  Immigration  Judge  had  recorded,  in   paragraph   22   of   his
    determination, that on the last day he heard the voice of  AN  and  had
    said he " told him that he would pay him money".  He said that  it  was
    AN who had brought the food but he paid the guards.  He was referred to
    the article in the Catholic Herald where he said  he  had  not  met  AN
    after returning to Iran.  The appellant said he did not meet him,  only
    heard his voice.  He denied his accounts were different.

124. Asked about what he would do if he went back, M said he  could  not  go
    back because he was a convert and would be  killed,  because  that  was
    Islamic Law.  Asked if that was all, he  said  that  because  he  is  a
    Christian he would want to practice freely.  Asked what he would do, he
    said he would speak out on religious matters and he would  help  others
    by telling them the truth.  He said he could not keep silent  and  that
    is why he had made his website.  He accepted that the only reference to
    him on the website  was  to  the  name  James.   He  said  the  Iranian
    authorities would know his name was now James and his sister knows, and
    he would tell everyone he was James.  He would no longer live with  his
    Iranian name, although  he  did  say  that  he  could  not  change  his
    passport.  Asked if all Christians were killed in Iran,  he  said  that
    all  practising  Christian  converts  were.   Those  who  were  already
    Christians could practice, but those who are not  cannot  because  that
    would demonstrate apostasy.  He was asked if there  were  any  converts
    who did not practice, and he said he was not aware of any.  It was  put
    to him that he really had no idea of the situation but he said he  did,
    converts had been killed and persecuted and that President Ahmadi-Nejad
    had said they will be.  Asked if Christians said prayers  in  Iran,  he
    said they do so in underground churches but he would want to  say  that
    he is a Christian.  He would need to practice publicly,  go  to  church
    and be in public and pray.  He said the only Catholic churches in  Iran
    were underground but, asked again, he said some practice on Sunday, not
    only underground, but he would be treated differently as a convert.  He
    said he did not know any converts personally in Iran.  When he was  re-
    examined, he said he went to Mass daily,  and  confession  weekly.   He
    said that, as far as he was aware, AN was the only person in  Iran  who
    knew about his conversion.  He was not assisted to escape  through  the
    airport.  Asked by the Tribunal what he thought AN did for a living, he
    said he had known him working for an oil company.  He did not  know  on
    what basis he was at the detention centre.

125. Ms Enayat was asked by Mr Kovats whether the account of  the  appellant
    being kept blindfolded and hearing the voice  of  someone  he  knew  in
    detention, chimed with anything in her experience.  She said that there
    had been a time when she had heard similar stories in  the  context  of
    political claimants, but never religious ones.  Father Basdon was  able
    to identify from the appellant's description the Catholic Church M  had
    tried to visit in Iran, saying it was currently leased to the Pakistani
    branch of the church although its future was under review.

126. The Tribunal then heard from EV.  She had made a  statement  describing
    M as her partner.  She said she was born in the  Netherlands,  but  had
    lived in Canada for half her life.  She could not get a Dutch  passport
    unless she returned and lived there for a year.  She  said  she  met  M
    through an internet chat room.  They met in person  in  May  2007,  and
    began living together in September 2007.  Her  statement  said  she  is
    completely committed to M and they plan to  marry.   She  loves  M  and
    believes their future is together.  She asserted that  he  is  a  fully
    committed genuine convert, he attends his church daily and also attends
    the Church of Scotland with her.  EV gave evidence  saying  that  there
    would not be any difficulty in going to Canada with  the  appellant  if
    they were married, but now they were unable to  do  so.   She  had  not
    brought a copy of the written application with her.  She then said  she
    did not have a copy of  the  application  but  her  passport  has  been
    endorsed to the effect that it was rejected.  She can only stay another
    six months in the  United  Kingdom.   There  was  then  some  confusion
    because clearly EV had thought she was being asked about an application
    to extend her leave to remain in the UK, but the questioning was  about
    an application to the Canadian Embassy in respect of M.  About that she
    said that a formal application had not been made there, only  a  verbal
    enquiry whereupon she was told an application would not  succeed.   She
    said she had consulted an MP in Canada  who  said  she  could  make  an
    application, there would be a fee of �1,500 and it  was  likely  to  be
    rejected.  She had not asked the MP about  the  position  if  she  were
    married.  Asked whether she had discussed with M where they would  live
    if they married, she said she had.  She said it would be impossible for
    her to live in Iran because she could not live with the knowledge  that
    he could be arrested for his religion, and may have to give it up.  She
    was only in the United Kingdom as  a  visitor.   Cross-examined  by  Mr
    Kovats, she was asked why she had said she would have to  give  up  her
    religion, and she said hers is the same as M's and  that  the  Iranians
    would only allow the Muslim religion.  She said that  was  well  known,
    and that if she was not a Muslim  she  could  not  live  there.   Asked
    whether she now thought that she would have to give  up  her  religion,
    she said she would, because otherwise she would be in trouble.   At  Mr
    Kovats's request, M was recalled and asked why he wanted to marry.   He
    said he loved the church and he loved EV.  It was put to him  the  only
    reason he wanted to marry her was to improve his  immigration  position
    but he was insistent he wanted to marry her, and would  live  with  her
    forever.  He referred to marriage as a sacrament.

127. There were some parts of other witnesses' evidence that  were  relevant
    to this aspect of the reconsideration.  Mr Kakhki said  that  in  order
    for the appellant and EV to register a marriage in Iran she would  have
    to convert to Islam.  In the eyes of the Iranian authorities,  M  would
    remain a Muslim.  We have already referred to Mr Kakhki's evidence that
    marrying a Christian  could  be  used  as  circumstantial  evidence  to
    support a prosecution for apostasy.

SECTION 12

Evidence referred to in Submissions

128. Ms Weston, on behalf of Z, referred to a Freedom House  paper  entitled
    "Iranian  Christians:  an  Ethno-religious  Minority"  published  on  1
    November  2006  which  referred  to   constant   discrimination   being
    experienced  by  Christians,  Jews  and  Zoroastrians   despite   being
    officially recognised as minorities by  the  Constitution.   There  was
    reference to the  communities  not  being  able  to  talk  about  their
    religion outside their communities.  There was reference to the Islamic
    regime vigorously applying restrictions over the  religious  activities
    of evangelical Christians by closing down their churches and  arresting
    new converts.  It was said that members of the church must carry  their
    membership cards and be able to hand over  a  copy  to  the  officials.
    Identities of members are  controlled  by  officials  standing  by  the
    entrance doors during gatherings.   It  was  said  the  government  has
    limited services to Sundays only, and that new members must be notified
    to the Ministry of Islamic Culture and Guidance and the MOIS.   It  was
    said that the evangelical Christian groups have resisted the  order  to
    submit membership lists.  We have read the whole document.

129. The US Congregational Research Service  has  produced  a  paper  "Iran:
    Ethnic and Religious Minorities" dated 25 May 2007.  At page  5,  there
    was reference to the authorities having become increasingly  assertive,
    and  to  the  curbing  of  proselytising  activities   by   evangelical
    Christians whose services are conducted in Farsi.  The report said that
    government officials closed evangelical Churches and arrested converts.
     There was reference to the same information  about  membership  cards,
    identity checks and new members as the last report.  The  article  went
    on to say that Christian groups have reported instances  of  government
    harassment to churchgoers in Tehran, in particular at the  Assembly  of
    God Congregation in the capital.  This harassment included  conspicuous
    monitoring outside the premises, and demands for identity  papers  from
    worshippers.

130. International Christian Concern, based in Washington  DC,  produced  an
    article entitled "The  Hall  of  Shame,  2007:  The  Worlds  Ten  Worst
    Persecutors of Christians" . The document placed Iran  as  number  six.
    There was reference to the current situation whereby evangelicals  face
    the most pressure because they evangelise and  reach  out  to  Muslims,
    whereas the Armenian and Assyrian Christians do not.  The article gives
    some figures which are out of line with the other information  we  have
    received, suggesting that there are now between 4,000 and 20,000 Muslim-
    background believers, compared with only 500 prior to  the  revolution.
    The article suggested there are another 222,000 to 250,000  ethnic  and
    evangelical Christians despite a massive emigration  of  the  Christian
    population.  The report went on to list a number of incidents.

131.  Ms  Weston  then  referred  to  the  US  State  Department  Report  on
    "International Religious Freedom Report 2007",  in  relation  to  Iran,
    which was issued on 14 September 2007.  In particular, she referred  to
    page eight (of eleven).  There, is found further reference to the  need
    to carry membership cards and to identity checks outside churches, with
    restrictions to Sundays  for  services  and  the  requirement  to  give
    information about new members.  It then listed a  number  of  incidents
    all of which we have seen reported elsewhere and  have  dealt  with  in
    this determination.  Ms Weston asked us to consider  the  document  "US
    Commission on  International  Religious  Freedom,  Advancing  Religious
    Freedom and Related Human Rights in Iran: Strategies for  an  Effective
    US Policy" published on 21 February 2008 following  a  public  hearing.
    She took us in particular to page 25 (of 27) where there  is  reference
    to Christians in Iran totalling 300,000  but  enduring  discrimination,
    harassment, surveillance  etc.   The  article  makes  several  familiar
    points, to which we have already referred to elsewhere.  We  have  also
    considered page  23  of  that  document  which  contains  some  of  the
    testimony of Paul Marshall to the hearing.  Again, that  repeated  much
    of the evidence that we have seen  elsewhere.   Ms  Weston  said  those
    parts of her bundle had not been considered by Ms Enayat  or  commented
    upon by her.

132. She drew our attention to a  number  of  news  reports.   HJT  Research
    (said to be an independent research agency which publishes  a  database
    on JIN) on 10 January 2007 (page 99 of bundle  IV)  reported  that  the
    evangelical Church has to provide a list of names  for  all  those  who
    take part in church functions.  An Italian news agency  reported  on  4
    June that Christians were extremely active in Iranian society and  that
    the number  of  converts  from  Islam  to  the  evangelical  church  is
    increasing,  whereas  the  Catholic  and  Gregorian   Orthodox   Church
    discouraged conversions for fear of reprisals.  Church services held in
    homes were said to be illegal, and the agency had
    noticed a significant crackdown on Christians, in particular on members
    of the evangelical Church.  The summary was produced  by  HJT  Research
    but there is no indication of the provenance of the  news  agency,  AKI
    other than it is Italian.

133. She drew our attention to  a  copy  of  an  article  published  in  the
    Guardian on 27 December 2005 about the Church of St Simon the Zealot at
    page 112.  This was the source of the assertion  that  the  senior  lay
    member had been told  that  the  days  of  being  killed  for  being  a
    Christian had passed, but he may find himself with two kilos of  heroin
    in his possession.

134. Page 114 of the bundle contains an article headed "Persecution  against
    Christian Converts in Iran Escalating".   This  was  published  in  the
    Christian Post on 30 November 2005 and it is mostly about Mr Tori, who
    is referred to elsewhere as Tourbani.  It quotes President Ahmadi-Nejad
    openly declaring opposition to house  churches  and  saying,  during  a
    meeting with 30 Provisional  Governors, "I will  stop  Christianity  in
    this country".  The quotation was referred to by Ms Enayat.

135. At page 142, the  US  Commission  on  International  Religious  Freedom
    produced a report concerning the deteriorating situation for  religious
    minorities dated 24 February 2006.  In particular, Ms Weston  drew  our
    attention to the fact that the Commission was alarmed  by  the  growing
    frequency of inflammatory rhetoric aimed  at  religious  minorities  by
    high-level Iranian Government  officials  and  clerics.   The  report's
    chairman is quoted as saying,

         "This pattern unfortunately is reminiscent  of  language,  used  by
         Iranian  authorities  during  the  early  years  of   the   Iranian
         revolution, which preceded the severe atrocities committed  against
         all  members  of  religious  minorities,  particularly  the   Bahai
         community".


    The Commission  also  considered  that  Christians  in  Iran  had  been
    increasingly subjected to harassment, arrest,  close  surveillance  and
    imprisonment and that there had been  several  incidents  of  raids  on
    churches during the previous year, with worshippers detained and church
    leaders harassed and threatened.  It does not  seem  that  the  article
    says anything which has not been said elsewhere in the evidence.

136. In his written submissions  Mr  Kovats  referred  us  to  a  number  of
    passages in the COIR and the Operational Guidance Note  which  we  have
    considered.  The  summary  in  his  skeleton  accepted  that  the  COIR
    contains evidence of a perceived  deterioration  in  the  human  rights
    situation since 2005 for religious minorities, among others.   He  also
    accepted that the section on religious freedom contains evidence  of  a
    more hostile attitude  towards  religious  minorities.   He  considered
    these were most notably Bahais and Sufis, but also Christians.  He said
    the evidence also showed  the  Iranian  authorities  were  particularly
    concerned about what they  see  as  an  increase  in  proselytising  by
    evangelical Christians, but that concern is not new.  He observed  that
    the Operational Guidance Note, drawing largely on the COIR,  said  that
    minority activities, including conversion to Christianity, are normally
    tolerated as long as they are carried on with a degree  of  discretion,
    but those who publicly proselytise are likely to get into trouble.

137. Finally, in relation to the evidence, we have been provided  with  some
    late documentation, submitted  by  Lawrence  Lupin.   The  first  is  a
    document which appears to emanate from the Salvation Army.  We were not
    quite sure what to  make  of  this  particular,  and  rather  peculiar,
    document but it makes reference to a member of the Army  speaking  with
    an Assyrian Christian about Christianity and others about  things  they
    had heard whilst in Iran.  There appears to be  some  general  evidence
    about setting up of house churches.  The provenance of this document is
    entirely unclear, as is much of the meaning of it.  The part  to  which
    our attention was drawn appears to be reporting the interrogation of  a
    Christian who was told that religious apostasy is equivalent to warring
    against God and that the interrogator hoped that  the  bill  containing
    the Islamic Canon Law will be passed by parliament so that it  will  be
    possible, and obligatory, to enforce it so that a stop can  be  put  to
    these activities.  The second of the late documents was a report  of  a
    visit by Bishop Maly (the Catholic auxiliary Bishop of Prague) to Iran.
     The report appears  to  come  from  Radio  Free  Europe.   The  Bishop
    apparently visited Iran for two weeks but it does  not  say  when.   He
    visited Tehran, Shiraz and Isfahan.  Much  of  his  concern  was  about
    political prisoners and  the  conditions  in  Iranian  prisons.   In  a
    section about Christians leaving Iran, it was said that Christians  are
    in general free to practice their faith  but  those  who  convert  from
    Islam  to  Christianity  can  face  the  death  penalty.   The  article
    suggested conversions are increasing and that the government has  taken
    measures to curb proselytising by Christians.  The bishop was  reported
    as saying that many of the estimated 200,000  Christians  were  leaving
    Iran because of social, cultural and religious restrictions and "mainly
    because they live in an environment where they cannot fully live  their
    lives as Christians."

    The bishop is reported as saying,


          "They are not prosecuted  for  being  Christians  but  in  certain
         issues they are not considered equal; sometimes they are treated as
         second class citizens, for example they  cannot  be  in  commanding
         positions in the army".


    The bishop describes the emigration of Christians as a serious  problem
    that could result in a great loss for Iran, saying that it  will  be  a
    spiritual  and  cultural  pity  because  the  Christians  were  on  the
    territory before Islam.  Finally, we were provided with a copy  of  the
    US Commission on International Religious Freedoms "Annual Report of the
    United States Commission on International Religious Freedom 2008: Iran"
    dated 2 May 2008.  The Commission  continued  to  recommend  that  Iran
    remains a "country of particular concern", a designation by  the  State
    Department.  Our attention was not drawn to any particular part of this
    report.  We note that it referred to the  government  intensifying  its
    campaign against non-Muslim religious  minorities  since  August  2005.
    There  is  quite  a  long  section  about  Bahais.   The   section   on
    Christianity makes some general points along the lines of the  evidence
    we have seen elsewhere, and reports arrests and other  incidents  that,
    again, we have seen elsewhere.

SECTION 13

Conclusions - General

138. We start by looking at whether  the  Tribunal  in  FS  and  Others  was
    justified in drawing a distinction  (at  paragraph  173)  "between  the
    ordinary convert and those who proselytise".   We  readily  accept  the
    points made by Canon Coulton that all  Christians  for  whom  he  could
    speak are required to spread  the  word  and  to  evangelise.   He  was
    speaking from the standpoint of the Anglican Church, across which there
    is a broad spectrum of adherence.  Some members  are  more  evangelical
    than others.  Father Basdon also referred  to  the  extent  that  Roman
    Catholics are required to spread the gospel.  It is self  evident  that
    some are more enthusiastic or  serious  about  their  obligations  than
    others, and the point has been made throughout the  evidence  that  the
    Iranian authorities  are  particularly  concerned  with  those  who  do
    proselytise or evangelise and attempt to convert Muslims.  The  Canon's
    view was essentially a theoretical, and aspirational, view of  the  way
    Christians behave and he acknowledged that not everybody  lived  up  to
    the ideal.  The empirical reality is that not all come anywhere near to
    the ideal.  As Mr Desborough said "it is between an individual and  God
    as to whether to risk martyrdom".  The observations in  FS  and  Others
    were, in our judgment, sound in that there are distinctions between the
    ordinary convert and the proselytiser.  What needs to be looked  at  is
    not only the church to which an individual is an adherent, but the  way
    in which that individual returnee is likely to behave.  When  assessing
    that, it is right that it should be borne in mind that the evidence  of
    Canon Coulton was that a person  who  has  come  for  himself,  and  by
    choice, to a new religion is more likely to want  to  spread  the  word
    than someone who is second or later generation and born into it.   That
    is not a new concept, the zeal of the convert has  been  recognised  in
    many different contexts over the years.  But that is not  true  of  all
    converts; references to generalisations of that kind are no  substitute
    for case-by-case assessment of the particular facts.

139. We had hoped that we would be able to  include  in  this  determination
    clarification of  the  precise  distinction  between  evangelising  and
    proselytising because this has exercised the Tribunal in  a  number  of
    cases involving religious persecution (see,  for  example,  MJ  and  ZM
    (Ahmadis - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT  00033  where  the   possible
    distinction was between preaching and proselytising).  On the basis  of
    the evidence and submissions that we have heard, we are not able to  do
    that.  It is perhaps arguable that proselytising is a more robust  form
    of evangelising but the terms should not be used as terms of art and no
    conclusion can be drawn by the use of one word  in  preference  to  the
    other.  The Iranians are unlikely to draw any distinction  -  the  word
    they use being Tabligh, the word for propaganda.  Subject to  our  view
    that there are not only  two  distinct  grades  of  convert,  rather  a
    spectrum of  adherence,  we  have  concluded  that  the  more  accurate
    description of the distinction is that between the ordinary convert and
    those who undertake 'active evangelising'.   Canon  Coulton  counselled
    caution in  distinguishing  between  evangelical  and  evangelistic  as
    mistakes have been made in  the  past.   evangelical  is  an  adjective
    meaning "a calling to the teaching  of  the  gospel  or  the  Christian
    religion" whereas an evangelist is a person who seeks to convert others
    to  the  faith  especially  by   public   preaching   (Concise   Oxford
    Dictionary).

140. In  conclusion,  the  question  of  whether  someone  is  an  "ordinary
    convert" in each case will depend on its own facts.  There  should  not
    be findings based solely on the denomination  of  the  church  which  a
    person has joined.  They must also be based on the evidence as  to  his
    own conduct as it will manifest itself in Iran.  When deciding  whether
    a convert is genuine, it is important to take care because, as  we  set
    out earlier in this determination, one  individual's  view  as  to  how
    another person may perceive, or practice,  or  understand  Christianity
    may be very different from the reality in another denomination, country
    or community.  Insofar as it is necessary to consider whether it  would
    be  persecutory  to  expect  an  individual  returning  to  modify  his
    behaviour,  the  Tribunal  has  now  promulgated   HJ   (homosexuality:
    reasonably tolerating living discreetly) Iran [2008] UKAIT 00044  which
    deals with that issue.  The Tribunal identified a two  stage  approach.
    The first is to decide how  it  is  likely  a  possible  returnee  will
    behave.  That question must be decided from the evidence and  facts  of
    each case including the way in which the person has  behaved  up  until
    the present.  It should not be based on how it is thought an individual
    should behave.  The Tribunal described a factual and  not  a  normative
    approach.  The second stage is a test  to  decide  whether  that  would
    entail that person having to live a life that he could  not  reasonably
    be expected to tolerate because doing so would entail  the  suppression
    of many aspects of his identity (which is an objective test).  In HJ it
    was the sexual aspects of that appellant's identity, here it  would  be
    the religious aspects.  HJ was recently cited without  comment  by  the
    Court of Appeal in  XY  (Iran)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 911.

141. We turn to the question of whether  the  situation  in  Iran,  for  the
    ordinary convert, has changed since FS and Others.  There is  no  doubt
    that the general human  rights  situation  in  Iran  is  deteriorating,
    rather than  improving.   All  concerned,  including  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office as expressed in the  letters  in  evidence,  accept
    that the Iranian authorities act  in  an  arbitrary  and  unpredictable
    manner.  That makes the task of assessing risk more difficult  than  it
    would otherwise be.  We accept that there appears to have  been  action
    on the part of the Iranian Government which has been designed to "raise
    the temperature".  We have in mind the evidence of  the  short  extract
    from Ayatollah Jannati's speech in which he referred to non-Muslims  in
    derogatory terms.  We also bear in mind that President Ahmadi-Nejad has
    been reported as saying that he wants to  end  the  Christian  problem.
    There is no doubt in our minds that these are intended as messages  and
    are more than opportunistic rhetoric.

142. Ms Enayat is of the view that there is a  link  between  such  messages
    from senior people, and a later worsening of conditions on the  ground.
    She recognised this from the time of the revolution, and gave  evidence
    to the effect that this was a technique used by Ayatollah Khomeini.  It
    is therefore dangerous to reject these speeches as mere  rhetoric.   On
    the other hand it is the position  on  the  ground  (both  current  and
    foreseeable) with which we are concerned.

143. In a similar vein there is the intended recodification of  the  Iranian
    Criminal Law which will, for the first time, include apostasy  as  part
    of the criminal code.  This is not an issue which, as things stand,  is
    of direct relevance  to  the  assessment  of  the  risks  to  returning
    Christians because there is no satisfactory evidence that the  existing
    law on apostasy has been used against them.  The only person  known  to
    have been charged was either acquitted, or the charges dropped, and  so
    there is no evidence of any conviction and very little evidence of  the
    use of charges.  If, as seems probable, the law is changed  to  include
    apostasy in the  criminal  code  there  are  two  possible  significant
    consequences.  First, if the authorities were to  charge  the  offence,
    the new codified law makes it clear that "knowledge of the judge" is  a
    permissible way to prove a charge.  Arguably, at least, that  may  make
    it an easier charge to prove.  We are conscious of the reformist's view
    that the law would not be being changed if it were not intended to  use
    it, but we do not accept that as anything more than a political  point,
    as there is no evidence to suggest that  is,  or  will  be,  the  case.
    After all, the law is not being redrafted just to include apostasy, the
    Majlis is undertaking a wholesale redraft of the first  four  books  of
    the criminal code.

144.     Perhaps the more significant point about the change is  the  signal
    which is being sent out.  In some ways it could be said to add  to  the
    rhetoric against converts, and it has been suggested that as  a  result
    vigilantes may be encouraged to take action. It  should  be  remembered
    that the law can, at least possibly, give them immunity for  killing  a
    Kaffir (paragraph 14(iv) ante) as a result of the concept of Takfir and
    Article 226 of the Law of Islamic Punishment.

145. We are concerned with the position on the ground.   We  have  carefully
    considered the examples of incidents experienced by individuals and the
    more general experience of the churches, as reported  in  the  evidence
    and to which we have referred in detail earlier in this  determination.
    It remains the case that it is  the  active  evangeliser  in  whom  the
    authorities are primarily interested.  Whether a person is at risk  for
    that reason, will depend upon what a Tribunal finds  about  the  way  a
    person will conduct him or herself on return.  It is also true  to  say
    that some evidence shows that the authorities can be hostile  to  those
    who have converted, without more.  Whilst we acknowledge that there  is
    evidence that some mere converts have been seriously mistreated by  the
    authorities, that mostly seems to be  either  because  the  authorities
    have, very rarely, seen fit to arrest an entire congregation,  or  some
    event (such as a car accident) occurs which is  entirely  unpredictable
    but brings a person to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  who  then
    discover that he  or  she  is  a  convert.   Mr  Kovats  warned  us  in
    submissions that we should beware of assuming that if  a  Christian  is
    mistreated it is because he or she is  a  Christian.   We  accept  that
    certainly does not follow.  However, the evidence about the person  who
    was involved in the accident with a police car  suggests  that  it  was
    when a Bible was seen in the car that matters got worse.  It will be  a
    question of fact as to whether it can properly be  said  that  such  an
    incident arises from a person's conversion.

146. We are conscious of the fact that some of the "ordinary  converts"  who
    have been caught up with the authorities have been severely mistreated.
     We have in mind the man in the car. As we have said, it  is  extremely
    difficult to predict under what circumstances  this  kind  of  incident
    might arise, and to a very large extent it seems to be chance.  In  our
    judgment the number and frequency of these events is  not  such  as  to
    show that there is a real risk of serious mistreatment to those who are
    not  seen  as  the  more  active  convert,   Pastor,   church   leader,
    proselytiser or evangelist (FS and  Others  Para  189).   We  add  that
    church leaders would certainly include those  leading  house  churches.
    We say that because the incidents are still not  large  in  number  but
    also do not always  result  in  serious  harm  which  would  amount  to
    persecution or Article 3 mistreatment.

147. We have found it difficult to compare the number of incidents  reported
    with the number of Christians because the estimates of  the  number  of
    Christians vary considerably.  We have only been concerned with the non-
    ethnic Christians but even then it is difficult.  We say  that  because
    of the evidence of the undoubted growth of the house  church  movement.
    House churches are intended to be hard to find and identify and we  can
    understand that the authorities are concerned,  given  their  antipathy
    towards conversion.  That is particularly so when  one  also  bears  in
    mind the type of Christian based material that is being broadcast  into
    Iran via satellite and the internet, largely from  the  Untied  States'
    evangelical Churches.  They are undoubtedly provoking the situation  by
    making exaggerated claims as to their  effectiveness,  and  we  observe
    that the Iranian authorities appear to be expressing their  concern  by
    repeating those exaggerated claims.  Even though Ms  Enayat  says  that
    the numbers given by the Iranians are not a genuine estimate, but  more
    figurative in order to  make  a  point,  it  does  however  show  their
    concern.  Even so, there is no satisfactory evidence about  the  number
    of  incidents  relating  to  house  churches  and  little  satisfactory
    evidence of the prevalence of such churches.  There  is  in  fact  very
    little evidence about how house churches  operate,  or  the  extent  to
    which, and even if, their members openly evangelise.

148. It remains our view that for the ordinary convert (within  the  meaning
    which we have slightly modified from FS and Others)  that  there  is  a
    risk, but not a real risk, of serious harm if returned to Iran.  We  do
    not demur from the concept of the added risk factor as referred  to  in
    FS and Others.

149. We have not heard argument about the categories of returning  Christian
    converts which were found to be at real risk in FS and Others.  As  the
    situation has deteriorated, rather than improved, we  cannot  see  that
    the situation for them would be any better than that considered  in  FS
    and Others.  In drawing that conclusion we have borne in mind  that  Ms
    Enayat considers that, if  anything,  there  is  an  underreporting  of
    incidents. By that she meant that there may be more incidents than  are
    reported.  As in all walks of  life,  leaders  and  more  high  profile
    members  of  the  churches,  are  in  a  better   position   to   raise
    international concern and to interest the  international  observers  in
    what is going on.  Of course, that can still happen  for  the  ordinary
    convert but it also makes sense that  the  individual,  or  the  family
    concerned, may wish keep a low profile, rather than making an  incident
    public.  We acknowledge  therefore  that  there  may  be  a  degree  of
    underreporting.  We are not in a position to know how  substantial  any
    underreporting is.  We merely  acknowledge  it  as  a  possibility  and
    accept that things may be worse than has been  reported.   Having  said
    that, there are a great number of supportive  Christian  organisations,
    especially in the United States, monitoring the situation in Iran.  The
    volume of evidence that we have seen does not suggest any reluctance to
    make public any  incident  which  does  come  to  light.    X  and  Y's
    reluctance does not contradict that because we do  not  know  why  they
    were reluctant to give evidence, especially as they are safely  in  the
    United Kingdom.

150. We were provided with a very large volume of background evidence  which
    is listed in the Appendix.  In this determination, having told  counsel
    prior to submissions that would be our approach,  our  principal  focus
    has been on that to which we were expressly referred,  either  in  oral
    submissions, skeleton arguments or written  submissions  but,  for  the
    avoidance of doubt, that does not mean we have not taken  into  account
    the evidence in its entirety.  Much of the material deals with the same
    incidents and whilst it may be true there is a degree of underreporting
    it is also true that a great deal is made of that which is reported, in
    the sense that it is reported in very many different places.

SECTION 14

Late Evidence

151. After the end of the hearing, solicitors  for  Z  submitted  some  late
    evidence.  They said that the evidence related to events prior  to  the
    date of the hearing but which were only reported after the date of  the
    hearing and therefore it had not  been  possible  to  adduce  them  any
    earlier.  The documents were submitted with  a  letter  dated  26  June
    2008.  They were also sent to the Treasury Solicitor who asked for time
    to consider them.  After some agreed extensions of time to  enable  the
    Embassy  in  Tehran  to  be  consulted  we  received  the  respondent's
    submissions under cover of a letter of 8 August 2008.

152. With the new documentation Z's solicitors referred the Tribunal  to  SD
    (Treatment of post-hearing evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037 in which
    a Tribunal chaired by the President considered the proper  approach  to
    such late submissions.   He  referred  to  the  principles  in  Ladd  v
    Marshall [1954] 1WLR 1489 which set out  the  relevant  principles.   A
    Tribunal should not normally admit fresh evidence unless,

           (i)   it  could  not  have  been  previously  obtained  with  due
             diligence;


         (ii)     it would have had an important influence  on  the  result;
             and


         (iii)    was apparently credible.


    The President said that if, having applied that test, the Tribunal  was
    satisfied there was a risk of serious injustice  because  of  something
    which had gone wrong at the hearing or, there  was  evidence  that  had
    been overlooked, then it was likely to be material.  He suggested  that
    it may then be necessary to either  reconvene  the  hearing  or  obtain
    written submissions from the other side  in  relation  to  the  matters
    included in the late submissions.

153. We are far from satisfied that this new  material  passes  the  Ladd  v
    Marshall test. Whilst we accept that if the reports were only published
    after the hearing they could not have been adduced at it,  we  are  not
    satisfied that this evidence would have had  a  material  or  important
    influence on the result and nor  are  we  satisfied  that  it  was  all
    credible.  By that, we are not saying that  the  evidence  was  not  on
    point.

154. The evidence comes in large part from Compass Direct, a  website  which
    acts as the news agency for the Assembly of God Churches.  It refers to
    the arrests of three Christian families and the release of most of them
    with little delay.  It also refers to the arrests of two young men in a
    park, and to a family detained at the airport as they left the country.
     The reports refer repeatedly to the  facts  and  all  go  on  to  make
    similar points about general  conditions.   The  reports  about  Mohsen
    Namvar suggests that he is a pastor.   There  is  a  report  about  six
    Baha'i leaders who have been detained which  is  not  relevant.   Also,
    there is a report from the Christian Post that the exaggeration of  the
    numbers of converts continues and both the  churches  and  the  Iranian
    government are involved.

155. In FS and Others there was a  submission  of  late  evidence  and  that
    Tribunal decided to deal with it, but not on Ladd and  Marshall  terms.
    At paragraph 147, the Tribunal said:-

         "We see no advantage in not considering the material,  late  though
         it is in arriving after the conclusion of the hearing.  If it is of
         real significance, we would  be  producing  a  determination  which
         would shortly thereafter have to be reconsidered  and  which  could
         afford no useful guidance.  If it were  of  no  real  significance,
         little would have been lost by its reception".


    We adopt that approach.


156. We find that the material which has  been  submitted  adds  nothing  of
    substance to the material which we  have  considered  above.   We  have
    observed that incidents which are reported are reported in many places,
    which appears to be the case with  the  new  evidence.   Taken  at  its
    highest this late evidence does no more than confirm the views which we
    have already expressed and contains no surprises.  It adds  nothing  to
    the appellants' case in the sense that it does not show any  change  in
    the trends or any increase in the scope, of what is already known to be
    happening.  We have indicted elsewhere  that  the  background  evidence
    needs to be looked at in the light of Ms Enayat's view  that  there  is
    under-reporting, and our observation about repeated reporting.  We also
    note that this new evidence is unclear as to why some of those who have
    been detained, and mostly released promptly, were detained.  Mr  Kovats
    has made the point that, if a Christian is arrested, it does not follow
    he was arrested because he was a Christian.  We do not regard this  new
    evidence as capable of changing our view.  We have dealt with it, after
    giving the respondent the opportunity to comment, and having considered
    those comments.


SECTION 15

Decision in the Reconsideration of the Appeal of Z

157. In assessing the risk to both appellants we have  borne  in  mind  that
    the burden of proof is on them and they have to show that  there  is  a
    reasonable  likelihood  that  they  will  be   subjected   to   serious
    mistreatment on return.  That serious mistreatment  needs  to  be  such
    that it will amount to persecution for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, inhuman or degrading treatment for the purposes of  Article
    3 ECHR or serious harm as in the meaning of paragraph 339 of HC 395  in
    relation  to  humanitarian  protection.   It  was   accepted   by   the
    Adjudicator that Z had converted to Christianity and was a member of an
    evangelical Church.  Keith J ordered reconsideration on the basis  that
    the Adjudicator had failed to address whether his fear  of  persecution
    on return to Iran on the grounds  of  his  apostasy  was  well  founded
    because  that  involved  determining  whether  he  would  practice  his
    religion  discreetly  or  evangelically.   The  error  which  Keith   J
    identified was that the Adjudicator had found it significant that Z had
    not shown any desire to proselytise when he was in Iran previously.  On
    the other hand his evidence was  that  evangelism  had  only  become  a
    significant part of his faith after he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    Keith J also said the Adjudicator  had  overlooked  the  tenet  of  not
    hiding one's Christian faith.  In confirming that there was an error of
    law the Tribunal (Senior Immigration  Judge  Allen,  Immigration  Judge
    Davey and Mrs Hewitt) recorded that the  respondent  had  conceded  the
    Adjudicator had made a material error of law in confining his  findings
    as to whether the appellant would proselytise or act in some  open  and
    public manner.   They said:

          "1. The appellant a citizen of Iran sought a reconsideration on  a
          decision of an Adjudicator, Mr T R Cockrill,  who  on  8  December
          2003, dismissed an appeal based on refugee Convention  Articles  2
          and 3 ECHR grounds against a decision of the Secretary of State on
          2 May 2003 to remove the appellant following  the  service  of  an
          IS151A notice.


          2.  The Tribunal refused permission  on  9  February  2004  but  a
          statutory review on 8 March 2004 determined that the assessment of
          risk on return particularly the  extent  to  which  the  appellant
          would evangelise not being properly considered.


          3.  The Secretary of State conceded that there was an error of law
          in the Adjudicator's determination in simply confining  the  issue
          to likelihood of the appellant proselytising  or  acting  in  some
          open and public manner and or  being  obliged  to  practice  in  a
          manner likely to bring him to the attention of  or  conflict  with
          the Iranian authorities.


          4.  In the light the fact that FS(Shirazi) is now in being, it  is
          clear in the light of the fact that the determination  is  over  2
          years old there will need to be a reconsideration  of  all  issues
          including credibility."


158. We do not doubt that the  appellant  has  become  a  Christian  and  we
    accept the evidence about that from Mr Desborough and  Pastor  Nichols.
    The appellant would therefore return as  a  converted  Christian.   The
    question then is whether he would be regarded as an ordinary convert in
    the way in which we have concluded that phrase should be used.  We  are
    entirely satisfied that he would not seek to draw attention to  himself
    by proselytising or evangelising openly after he returned.  He said  in
    terms, in reply to Mr Kovats, that he would  not  put  himself  through
    anything that would put himself at risk.  He expressed the view that he
    may spread the word to a neighbour on a one-to-one basis  but  that  he
    would not do anything foolish.  Despite her best efforts, Ms Weston was
    unable to establish that the true position was anything other than that
    and, in our judgment, that is the clearest possible evidence  that  the
    appellant is an ordinary convert for the purpose of the  assessment  of
    risk. Consequently he would not be at real risk of serious harm were he
    to return and behave in that way.

159. HJ requires us to also consider whether Z can  reasonably  be  expected
    to tolerate living in that way.  Our conclusion is  that  he  can.   He
    would be giving up the ability to express his religion as openly as  he
    can in the United Kingdom, but would not,  in  practice,  be  prevented
    from practising his faith or from  associating  with  other  believers.
    The requirement to spread the word  is  flexible  as  to  how  that  is
    achieved and the appellant has described  how  he  would  approach  the
    obligation.  We have found that his religious behaviour will  not  take
    the form of proclaiming the word from street corners, but  we  are  not
    persuaded that for him it is essential to his religious  identity  that
    his behaviour takes that  form.   We  have  found  that  his  religious
    behaviour will be discreet, but on our assessment he is someone who  is
    reasonably likely to be able to maintain his basic  religious  identity
    by worshipping with others, or attending bible classes (ie by  discreet
    ways of being religious).  The evidence does not  show  that  for  this
    appellant conducting himself discreetly will involve suppression of his
    basic religious identity.

160. Ms Weston expressly said that she was not  putting  forward  any  claim
    under Article 8 of ECHR on Z's behalf.

SECTION 16

The Decision in the Reconsideration of the Appeal of M

161. In finding that the Immigration Judge had made an error of law  in  his
    earlier determination, Senior Immigration Judge Eshun said:


          "The IJ accepted that the appellant wishes to convert to
          Christianity, and that he has been baptised.  At the date of the
          hearing, the appellant was yet to be confirmed.  The appellant is
          converting to the Catholic faith.


          The IJ relied on FS for his conclusion that as an ordinary
          convert, the appellant would not be at risk on his return to Iran.
           Although the IJ claimed to have considered the recent report of
          Anna Enayat, he did not properly do so and both representatives
          agreed that this was a material error of law. "

162.  It  was  not  in  dispute  that  M  is  a  genuine  convert  to  Roman
    Catholicism.  He is unusual in that  regard  because  the  majority  of
    Iranian Christians that the Tribunal sees have converted to  Protestant
    Churches.  We are satisfied, having heard  both  from  him  and  Father
    Basdon, that his conversion is genuine.

163. There are a number of aspects of M's claim that we do  not  accept.   M
    claims to have returned to Iran, following a message from his so-called
    lifelong friend AN to the effect that his brother had difficulty with a
    legal dispute and required his assistance.  The appellant  claims  that
    he had revealed to AN that he had become a Christian, although  he  had
    not revealed it to anybody else in  Iran.   AN  appears  to  have  been
    employed in the petroleum industry, like  M.   M  claims  that,  having
    returned to Iran using his own passport, at a time when he was  in  the
    United Kingdom with leave as a student, he went to stay with his sister-
    in-law and his nephews and nieces, only to  be  told  his  brother  had
    disappeared and could not be found.  After three  days,  the  appellant
    claims that he was seized by a group  of  men,  taken  to  a  place  of
    detention, and kept blindfolded for two weeks.  He was  mistreated  and
    claims he was released on a day when a number of people  came  to  give
    him a meal and he recognised the voice of AN among that group.  He  has
    given evidence, not always consistently, about who raised the issue  of
    releasing him in exchange for money and the  extent  to  which  AN  was
    involved in that.  He has said that AN was not among those who took him
    back to his brother's home, whereupon he paid cash  and  was  released.
    He was able to leave Iran with no difficulty.

164. We do not accept that account.  Ms  Enayat  said  that  she  had  never
    heard of such  a  thing  happening  to  a  person  claiming  to  be  in
    difficulty because of his religion,  although  she  had  heard  similar
    accounts by those claiming political difficulties.  She  was  referring
    to his evidence about hearing the voice of a person who must have  been
    an accuser.  In view of the fact that the account is one that  is  more
    usually heard from those who are detained for  political  reasons;  the
    vagueness of the account as  to  how  the  suggestion  of  payment  for
    release came about; and the general  implausibility  of  the  appellant
    being  called  back  to  Iran,  with  a  view  to  either  causing  him
    difficulty, or extracting a bribe - we do not accept that account.

165. We also not accept the appellant's relationship with EV.  There  is  no
    reason why M should not be expected  to  establish  that  he  is  in  a
    relationship with another person in the United Kingdom on  the  balance
    of probabilities.  We say that, given the reasons underlying  the  need
    for the lower standard of proof in asylum cases, namely the  difficulty
    in establishing facts in other countries and  the  seriousness  of  the
    risks.  We heard evidence both from M and EV that they were in love and
    intended to marry.  We did not hear the age of EV  but  it  is  obvious
    that she is very considerably older than the appellant.  He  claims  to
    have met her through an internet chat room, as  indeed  he  claimed  to
    have met the British citizen with whom he was associating at  the  time
    of the original appeal.  EV is from an  entirely  different  background
    both in terms of culture and religion.  She is not  a  Roman  Catholic,
    was born in Holland and has lived most of her life in Canada.   She  is
    currently here with a visit visa.  Of course, we acknowledge  that  two
    people with a considerable age difference, and  different  backgrounds,
    can meet and fall in love but we would have expected to see rather more
    in the way of evidence of devotion.  M did not call any  witnesses  who
    knew them as a couple.  We  heard  nothing  about  their  relationship,
    other than the fact they had been living at the same address for a  few
    months.  We accept that if they had genuinely wished to marry it  would
    have been very difficult for them to do so in view of the  respondent's
    regulations.  (That may change in view of  R  (On  The  Application  of
    Baiai and Others) v Secretary of State For The Home Department   [2008]
    UKHL 53). Neither is a British  citizen,  neither  is  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, and neither is a member of  the  Anglican  Church.   We
    were unimpressed by the lack of apparent effort made  to  obtain  entry
    clearance for the appellant to  Canada.   Whilst  we  accept  that  the
    Canadian Embassy may  view  the  whole  thing  with  a  great  deal  of
    suspicion, the only enquiry that appears to have been made was  whether
    the appellant could join EV as a spouse and how much it would  cost  to
    make the application.  There do not appear to have been  any  enquiries
    as to whether the appellant could get entry clearance to  Canada  as  a
    fianc� or as somebody who is in a relationship with a Canadian citizen.
     We were impressed, not by the refusal of the Embassy to  encourage  an
    application, but by the lack of energy used by M and EV to try to  find
    the best way to proceed.  We are not,  therefore,  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is in a relationship with EV as he  would  have  us  believe,
    although we do accept they are living at the same address.  We  do  not
    accept they would marry and the question of his being returned to  Iran
    with a Christian wife does not arise.

166. Having said that, we are concerned with the effect of  returning  M  to
    Iran.  We do not  accept  that  he  would  proselytise  or  evangelise,
    however enthusiastic  he  may  be  about  his  adopted  Roman  Catholic
    religion.  In saying that we accept that spreading the gospel  is  part
    of the obligation.  We find he would not be at  real  risk  of  serious
    harm as a result of his conversion.

167. But we are concerned about whether he would, in  reality,  be  able  to
    practise his religion at all,  as  it  is  necessary  for  an  actively
    practising and genuinely adherent member of the Roman Catholic  Church,
    as we  have  found  that  the  appellant  is,  to  participate  in  the
    sacramental life of the church by attending services in the presence of
    a priest.   In contrast to  those  who  have  converted  to  Protestant
    religions, there is an extremely limited scope for attending  services.
    For the appellant, there is only the Latin Rite Roman Catholic  Church.
    Although it has three centres, and possibly as many as five clergy,  it
    is a church which exists largely, and probably exclusively, to  service
    the expatriate population and is clearly extremely cautious in the  way
    it proceeds.  Father Basdon explained that it is not simply a group  of
    churches but an international church that has diplomatic relations with
    Iran and has to operate carefully.  There is no scope at all for  house
    churches, partially because of the need for discretion by  the  church,
    but also because, being a sacramental church, it  is  not  possible  to
    meet in a meaningful way without the presence of a priest to administer
    Mass and take confession.  The evidence is that attendees at church are
    monitored, and that as an Iranian M would stand out.  The church  would
    not, in our judgment, welcome M  notwithstanding  that  in  theory  the
    church is open to all comers.  It is the type of  activity  that  would
    draw attention to the church and undermine its  relationship  with  the
    Iranian authorities.  Father Basdon said it would be untenable for M to
    attend church.  We therefore find that the appellant, as a  convert  to
    Roman Catholicism, would not be able to practise his religion  in  Iran
    on return.  We must apply the two stage test in HJ.  In general, we are
    aware both that there is a great diversity in the way that  members  of
    churches practise their religion, and that there are many  who  may  be
    considered (or consider themselves) as genuine members of a  sacrament-
    based church who seldom, if ever, attend services.  The differences  in
    practice, and the question  of  whether  religious  identity  would  be
    suppressed to a degree that it would be unacceptable  is  a  matter  of
    fact and degree in every case.  As to how, firstly, M  will  behave  in
    Iran, we are in no doubt that in practice he will be unable  to  attend
    church for mass or confession, to associate  and  worship  openly  with
    other Roman Catholics or  access  the  services  of  a  priest  in  any
    meaningful way.  We make that finding having regard to the evidence  we
    have heard about the presence of the Roman Catholic church in Iran, the
    nature of the congregations,  the  need  for  maintaining  satisfactory
    relations with the Iranian authorities and the degree  of  surveillance
    of churches in general.


168. As to the second stage objective test, accepting the evidence we  heard
    about the demands on Roman Catholics to attend  sacramental  rites  and
    the source of those demands (and there was nothing before us that might
    cause us to doubt Father Basdon's evidence), we find  that  to  deprive
    the appellant,  as  an  actively  practising  Roman  Catholic,  of  any
    meaningful contact with his church, and any of the  accepted  essential
    elements of that sacramental religion, is to require him to live a life
    that he could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  tolerate.   It  would
    partially suppress his religious identity.  For  that  reason  we  find
    that M has shown that it reasonably likely that, if he is  returned  to
    Iran, he will be subjected to persecution there.

169.  By parity of reasoning, to return M to Iran  would  cause  the  United
    Kingdom to be in breach of his rights as protected by article  3  ECHR.
    If it amounts to persecution to return a person to a place where it  is
    unreasonable to expect them  to  tolerate  such  suppression  of  their
    identity, we cannot but find that would be to subject them  to  inhuman
    or degrading treatment.



          The first appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian
          protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds.


          The first appellant did not make any claim on the basis of Article
          8 ECHR.


          The second appellant's appeal is  allowed  on  refugee  and  human
          rights grounds but dismissed on humanitarian protection grounds.





Signed                                  Date

Senior Immigration Judge Mather

                                  APPENDIX


     List of documents and background material to which the Tribunal was
     referred APPENDIX: LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


|1     |01/01/1997 |Iranian Christian International, "The Continued      |
|      |           |escalation of persecution of evangelical Christians  |
|      |           |in the Islamic Republic of Iran, condensed update"   |
|      |           |[this report contains the odd numbered pages]        |
|2     |01/04/2001 |Your Prayers and Support are asked for the Episcopal |
|      |           |Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East Bible Lands  |
|      |           |published by The Jerusalem and The Middle East Church|
|      |           |Association.  Surrey.                                |
|3     |24/05/2004 |Guardian: Stumbling in the dark                      |
|4     |07/06/2004 |Human Rights Watch, Like the Dead in Their Coffins:  |
|      |           |Torture, Detention, and the Crushing of Dissent in   |
|      |           |Iran                                                 |
|5     |04/08/2004 |International PEN: Iran: Academic Hashem Aghajari    |
|      |           |Release on Bail                                      |
|6     |13/09/2004 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Police Release 10      |
|      |           |evangelical Pastors                                  |
|7     |07/12/2004 |Human Rights Watch: Iran: Torture Used to Obtain     |
|      |           |"Confessions"                                        |
|8     |20/12/2004 |Human Rights Watch: Iran: Judiciary Uses Coercion to |
|      |           |Cover Up Torture                                     |
|9     |23/12/2004 |Radio Free/Radio Liberty: Iran: A Look At The Islamic|
|      |           |Republic's Christian Minority                        |
|10    |01/01/2005 |UNHCR, Returns to Iran                               |
|11    |01/01/2005 |UNHCR, Treatment of Religious Minorities in Iran     |
|12    |04/02/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Jailed Iranian Pastor Finally  |
|      |           |Produced in Court                                    |
|13    |11/03/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Christian Jailed in    |
|      |           |Evin Prison                                          |
|14    |15/03/2005 |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for   |
|      |           |Human Rights (OHCHR), Report of the Special          |
|      |           |Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief: Summary |
|      |           |of cases transmitted to Governments and replies      |
|      |           |received (Iran excerpt)                              |
|15    |30/04/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Changes Venue for Apostasy|
|      |           |Trial                                                |
|16    |13/05/2005 |Amnesty International: Iran: Too little, too late -  |
|      |           |Afsaneh Norouzi's death sentence and pardon          |
|17    |30/05/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Islamic Court Acquits Iranian  |
|      |           |Christian                                            |
|18    |04/06/2005 |AsiaNews.it: Iran, a Christian convert to face death |
|      |           |penalty for apostasy                                 |
|19    |26/07/2005 |Iran Daily: Judiciary Criticizes Media Coverage      |
|20    |08/11/2005 |US Department of State, International Religious      |
|      |           |Freedom Report, Iran                                 |
|21    |11/11/2005 |www.chiesa.espressonline.it, "The Church Breaks its  |
|      |           |Silence over the Islam of the Ayatollahs"            |
|22    |15/11/2005 |Iran Focus: Iran's Rafsanjani criticises purge of    |
|      |           |officials                                            |
|23    |18/11/2005 |Guardian: Iran in turmoil as president's purge       |
|      |           |deepens                                              |
|24    |28/11/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Convert Stabbed to     |
|      |           |Death                                                |
|25    |30/11/2005 |Christian Post: Persecution against Christian        |
|      |           |Converts in Iran Escalating                          |
|26    |06/12/2005 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Christians Mourn       |
|      |           |Martyred Convert                                     |
|27    |06/12/2005 |The Voice of Martyrs - News - Iran: New details      |
|      |           |emerge on house church pastor's murder               |
|28    |07/12/2005 |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: The         |
|      |           |repatriation of failed refugee claimants to Iran,    |
|      |           |including reports of claimants being detained,       |
|      |           |mistreated, tortured upon removal from Canada on the |
|      |           |basis they made refugee claims in Canada             |
|29    |19/12/2005 |Baha'i World News Service: Wrongly imprisoned Baha'i |
|      |           |dies in Iranian jail                                 |
|30    |27/12/2005 |Guardian: Bearing the cross                          |
|31    |18/01/2006 |Human Rights Watch, World Report 2006: Iran          |
|32    |16/02/2006 |Amnesty International: Iran: New government fails to |
|      |           |address human rights                                 |
|33    |16/02/2006 |Amnesty International, Iran: New government fails to |
|      |           |address dire human rights situation.                 |
|34    |17/02/2006 |Amnesty International: Iran: urgent investigation    |
|      |           |required into security forces violence against Sufi  |
|      |           |Muslims in Qom                                       |
|35    |24/02/2006 |Amnesty International: Iran: Worrying trends in use  |
|      |           |of death penalty                                     |
|36    |24/02/2006 |US Commission on International Religious Freedom     |
|      |           |(USCIRF): Iran: USCIRF Concerned over Deteriorating  |
|      |           |Situation for Religious Minorities                   |
|37    |24/03/2006 |Danish Immigration Service: On certain crimes and    |
|      |           |punishments in Iran: report from fact-finding mission|
|      |           |to Teheran and Ankara - 29 January 2005              |
|38    |27/03/2006 |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for   |
|      |           |Human Rights (OHCHR), "Report of the Special         |
|      |           |Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief: Summary |
|      |           |of cases transmitted to Governments and replies      |
|      |           |received (Iran excerpt)"                             |
|39    |03/04/2006 |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Exit and    |
|      |           |entry procedures at airports and land borders,       |
|      |           |particularly at Mehrabad International airport       |
|40    |03/04/2006 |Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada: Types of    |
|      |           |exit permits issued to individuals for travel abroad;|
|      |           |the difference between an exit permit and an exit    |
|      |           |stamp; how these permits are obtained and whether    |
|      |           |they are placed inside the passport or take some     |
|      |           |other                                                |
|41    |04/05/2006 |Letter from William Young and recommendation from    |
|      |           |"Comite de Apoyo al Menor Abandonado de la           |
|      |           |Convencion" (CAMAC)                                  |
|42    |07/05/2006 |Letter from Joyce Edwins                             |
|43    |08/05/2006 |Letter from Rev. Harry Elias (Jesuit Refugee Service |
|      |           |UK)                                                  |
|44    |17/05/2006 |Amnesty International: Further Information on Urgent |
|      |           |Action 43/06 - Iran: Incommunicado detention / fear  |
|      |           |of torture, New concern: fear of flogging (52 members|
|      |           |of the Nematollahi Sufi community sentenced to prison|
|      |           |and are to be flogged)                               |
|45    |22/05/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran's Secret Police Arrest    |
|      |           |Long-Time Convert                                    |
|46    |22/05/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran's Secret Police Arrest    |
|      |           |Long-Term Convert                                    |
|47    |23/05/2006 |Amnesty International, Amnesty International Report  |
|      |           |2006: Iran                                           |
|48    |13/06/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Convert Pastor Released|
|      |           |on Bail                                              |
|49    |24/07/2006 |Immigration and Nationality Directorate: Operational |
|      |           |Guidance Note                                        |
|50    |27/07/2006 |BosNewsLife News Agency (Hungary): Germany Halts     |
|      |           |Deportation Iranian Christian                        |
|51    |08/08/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran "Officially" Charges      |
|      |           |Ex-Muslim with Drug Trafficking                      |
|52    |11/08/2006 |Iran Focus: Iran threatens life of young man for     |
|      |           |apostasy-report                                      |
|53    |11/08/2006 |Iran Focus: Iran threatens life of young man for     |
|      |           |apostasy - report                                    |
|54    |04/09/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Releases Jailed Convert to|
|      |           |Christianity                                         |
|55    |04/09/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Release Jailed Convert to |
|      |           |Christianity                                         |
|56    |06/09/2006 |Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2006: Iran"     |
|57    |12/09/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Quietly Releases Convert  |
|      |           |Christian Prisoner                                   |
|58    |14/09/2006 |Radio Free Europe: Iran: Bishop concerned about human|
|      |           |rights after visit                                   |
|59    |15/09/2006 |US Department of State, "International Religious     |
|      |           |Freedom Report, Iran"                                |
|60    |29/09/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Police Arrest Martyred |
|      |           |Christian's Daughter                                 |
|61    |29/09/2006 |Compass Direct (USA): Iranian Police Arrest Martyred |
|      |           |Christian's Daughter                                 |
|62    |02/10/2006 |ASSIST News Service: Martyred Iranian's daughter     |
|      |           |disappears after arrest                              |
|63    |10/10/2006 |Amnesty International: Further Information on Urgent |
|      |           |Action 263/06 - Iran: Incommunicado detention /      |
|      |           |Possible prisoners of conscience (Christian husband  |
|      |           |and wife released on bail)                           |
|64    |11/11/2006 |Gozaar (Freedom House), "Iranian Christians: An      |
|      |           |Ethno-Religious Minority"                            |
|65    |17/11/2006 |Amnesty International: Urgent Action 308/06 -        |
|      |           |Belgium: Fear of forcible return / Torture / Unfair  |
|      |           |Trial (asylum seekers at risk of forcible return to  |
|      |           |Iran)                                                |
|66    |17/11/2006 |Regarding the Status of Muslim Converts to           |
|      |           |Christianity in the Islamic Republic or Iran -       |
|      |           |Ebrahim Ghaffari (Executive Director of Iranian      |
|      |           |Christians International, Inc.)                      |
|67    |15/12/2006 |www.worthynews.com: Iran: Authorities Arrest Eight   |
|      |           |Leaders of House Church Movement                     |
|68    |18/12/2006 |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Christians arrested |
|      |           |in Iran                                              |
|69    |03/01/2007 |Support statement from Church of Norway regarding "X"|
|70    |03/01/2007 |International Christian Concern (USA), The Hall of   |
|      |           |Shame 2007: The World's Ten  Worst Persecutors of    |
|      |           |Christian (Iran Excerpt)                             |
|71    |04/01/2007 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Still Holding House Church|
|      |           |Leader                                               |
|72    |09/01/2007 |Asylum Statement from "X"                            |
|73    |10/01/2007 |HJT Research: evangelical Church must report all     |
|      |           |active members to the authorities                    |
|74    |11/01/2007 |Human Rights Watch, World Report 2007: Iran          |
|75    |27/02/2007 |Immigration and Nationality Directorate: Operational |
|      |           |Guidance Note                                        |
|76    |06/03/2007 |US Department of State, "Country Reports on Human    |
|      |           |Rights Practices 2006: Iran"                         |
|77    |08/03/2007 |US Department of State, Report on Human Rights       |
|      |           |Practices Iran                                       |
|78    |08/03/2007 |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for   |
|      |           |Human Rights (OHCHR), "Report of the Special         |
|      |           |Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief: Summary |
|      |           |of cases transmitted to Governments and replies      |
|      |           |received (Islamic Republic of Iran excerpt)"         |
|79    |19/04/2007 |The New York Times: Iran exonerates Six Who Killed in|
|      |           |Islam's Name                                         |
|80    |24/04/2007 |HJT Research: Hundreds of women arrested as police   |
|      |           |launch major crackdown on dress code violations      |
|81    |02/05/2007 |US Commission on International Religious Freedom,    |
|      |           |2007 Annual Report: Iran                             |
|82    |23/05/2007 |Amnesty International, Amnesty International Report  |
|      |           |2007: Iran                                           |
|83    |25/05/2007 |US Congressional Research Service, "Iran: Ethnic and |
|      |           |Religious Minorities"                                |
|84    |01/06/2007 |Gozaar (Freedom House), The injustice of the         |
|      |           |Judiciary                                            |
|85    |15/06/2007 |HJT Research: Protestors accuse Britain of being a   |
|      |           |"den of spies" as embassy is attacked in Tehran      |
|86    |26/06/2007 |Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2007: Iran       |
|87    |27/06/2007 |AP Associated Press: Persecution against Christians  |
|      |           |increasing in Iran                                   |
|88    |03/07/2007 |The Barnabas Fund: The application of the apostasy   |
|      |           |law in the world today                               |
|89    |03/07/2007 |The Barnabas Fund: Islamic teaching on the           |
|      |           |consequences of apostasy from Islam: Dr Patrick      |
|      |           |Sookhdeo                                             |
|90    |04/07/2007 |www.english.justitie.nl: Individual Assessment of    |
|      |           |Iranian Christian Asylum Cases                       |
|91    |09/07/2007 |Middle East Times: Christian converts "may not be    |
|      |           |deported" to Iran                                    |
|92    |09/07/2007 |Stuttgart Court of Appeals (Administrative):         |
|      |           |Ubertritt zum Chistlichen Gauben schutzt vor...      |
|93    |17/07/2007 |BosNewsLife News Agency (Hungary): UK to Deport      |
|      |           |Iranian Christian Convert Despite Execution Threat   |
|94    |18/07/2007 |Human Rights Watch: Iran: Cancel Televised           |
|      |           |"Confessions"                                        |
|95    |19/07/2007 |Amnesty International: Iran: The broadcast of        |
|      |           |self-incriminating interviews made by detainees      |
|      |           |facing charges violate fair trial standards          |
|96    |29/07/2007 |FOXNews.com: Christian Group Warns: Iran wants to hit|
|      |           |Israel first, US next                                |
|97    |29/07/2007 |FOXNews.com: Christian Group Warns: Iran Wants to Hit|
|      |           |Israel First, US Next                                |
|98    |30/07/2007 |Memorandum with regard to country conditions - John  |
|      |           |Clark (Chairman of the Friends of the Diocese of     |
|      |           |Iran)                                                |
|99    |01/08/2007 |FCNN: Torturing an Iranian Christian for his         |
|      |           |confession of faith in Christ                        |
|100   |03/08/2007 |Amnesty International MDE 13/099/2007: Arbitrary     |
|      |           |arrest/Fear for safety/Possible prisoners of         |
|      |           |conscience and new concern: Medical concern          |
|101   |10/08/2007 |Amnesty International: Further Information on Urgent |
|      |           |Action 262/06 - Iran: Arbitrary arrest / fear for    |
|      |           |safety / possible prisoners of conscience / medical  |
|      |           |concern / torture and ill-treatment (Ayatollah       |
|      |           |Boroujerdi gravely ill, reportedly tortured in       |
|      |           |prison)                                              |
|102   |13/08/2007 |Iran Focus: Iran authorities lash man for having     |
|      |           |bible in car - report                                |
|103   |21/08/2007 |ASSIST News Service (USA): Iran: As repression       |
|      |           |escalates, Iran grows restless                       |
|104   |06/09/2007 |Amnesty International New Zealand (AINZ): Position on|
|      |           |the return of Christian converts to Iran             |
|105   |06/09/2007 |FCNN: Amnesties on Returning Christian Converts to   |
|      |           |Iran                                                 |
|106   |10/09/2007 |FCNN: Converting to Islam, the only way to escape the|
|      |           |death penalty for the Christian woman                |
|107   |14/09/2007 |US Department of State: International Religious      |
|      |           |Freedom Report 2007: Iran                            |
|108   |06/12/2007 |Letter from Treasury Solicitor regarding identities  |
|      |           |of "Y" and "X"                                       |
|109   |07/01/2008 |Human Rights Watch: You can detain anyone for        |
|      |           |anything: Iran's broadening clampdown on independent |
|      |           |activism                                             |
|110   |31/01/2008 |Human Rights Watch: Word Report 2008: Iran           |
|111   |04/02/2008 |The Grieboski Report: Draft Iranian Penal Code       |
|      |           |Legislates Death Penalty for Apostasy                |
|112   |05/02/2008 |Institute on Religion and Public Policy: Proposed    |
|      |           |Iranian Bill for Islamic Penal Law                   |
|113   |05/02/2008 |Institute on Religion and Public Policy: Institute   |
|      |           |Denounces Draft Iranian Penal Code; Death Sentence   |
|      |           |Legislated for "Apostasy"                            |
|114   |08/02/2008 |Compass Direct (USA): Iran Proposes Death Penalty for|
|      |           |"Apostates"                                          |
|115   |09/02/2008 |FCNN: Death Penalty Proposed for Apostates           |
|116   |09/02/2008 |FCNN: Death Penalty proposed for Apostates           |
|117   |13/02/2008 |Reporters Sans Frontieres (Reporters Without         |
|      |           |Borders): 2008 Annual Report: Iran                   |
|118   |21/02/2008 |US Commission on International Religious Freedom:    |
|      |           |Advancing religious freedom and related human rights |
|      |           |in Iran: strategies for an effective US policy       |
|119   |22/02/2008 |Baha'i World News Service: Draft Iranian law         |
|      |           |threatens gross human rights violations              |
|120   |22/02/2008 |House of Commons Hansard: Written Answers for        |
|      |           |22/02/08 - Written Answers of Norman Baker           |
|121   |25/02/2008 |Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for   |
|      |           |Human Rights (OHCHR): Report of the Special          |
|      |           |Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the    |
|      |           |right to freedom of opinion and expression: Summary  |
|      |           |of cases transmitted to governments and replies      |
|      |           |received (Iran excerpt)                              |
|122   |25/02/2008 |European Union: Declaration by the Presidency on     |
|      |           |behalf of the EU concerning the consideration of a   |
|      |           |draft Penal code in Iran                             |
|123   |25/02/2008 |CFSP Statements: Declaration by the Presidency on    |
|      |           |behalf of the EU concerning the consideration of a   |
|      |           |draft Penal code in Iran                             |
|124   |26/02/2008 |BBC News: EU attacks Iran's new penal code           |
|125   |26/02/2008 |FCNN: A new Draft law proposes Death Penalty for     |
|      |           |Apostasy in Iran                                     |
|126   |11/03/2008 |US Department of State: Country Reports on Human     |
|      |           |Rights Practices 2007: Iran                          |
|127   |13/03/2008 |Human Rights Watch: Iran: Reformist Candidates Barred|
|      |           |From Election                                        |
|128   |21/03/2008 |Goncharov, Pyotr (www.spacewar.com): Outside view:   |
|      |           |Iran's election results                              |
|129   |25/03/2008 |UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO): Human      |
|      |           |Rights Annual Report 2007: Iran                      |
|130   |31/03/2008 |Voice of America News: Iran approves contested Tehran|
|      |           |election results                                     |
|131   |09/04/2008 |Inter Press Service News Agency (IPS): Politics:     |
|      |           |Iran's engineered elections                          |
|132   |11/04/2008 |Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty: Iranian cleric      |
|      |           |starts jail term                                     |
|133   |14/04/2008 |FCNN: Travel ban on Fershteh Dibaj in Tehran Airport |
|134   |14/04/2008 |Expert Report by M Hedayati-Kakhki                   |
|135   |17/04/2008 |Email from Yahoo Geocities confirming Appellant's    |
|      |           |ownership of the website "christianconvert.net"      |
|136   |02/05/2008 |Daily Telegraph: Obituary - The Rt Rev Hassan        |
|      |           |Dehqani-Tafti                                        |
|137   |06/05/2008 |Chronology of Events                                 |
|138   |June 2007  |The Bahai'is: Background: Recent Attacks against     |
|      |           |Baha'is in Iran                                      |
|139   |undated    |Excerpts from the draft Penal Code                   |
|140   |undated    |FCNN: Report on the condition of Christians and      |
|      |           |Churches in Iran                                     |
|141   |undated    |FCNN: News about Iranian Christians                  |

