
FO & ors (children: settlement - OM distinguished) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT
00089
                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

Heard at :  Field House
On :        20th October 2006
Prepared :  24th October 2006

                                                  Determination promulgated:
                                                            04 December 2006

Before :
                      Senior Immigration Judge Batiste
                       Senior Immigration Judge McKee
                            Miss R.J. Emblin, JP

Between :
                                     F O
                                     A O
                                     A O
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos
                                                                  Respondent

Representation :

For the appellants :   Mr M.A. Makinde, Solicitor

For the respondent :   Mrs D. Cantrell, Senior Presenting Officer


The Tribunal's remarks in OM about the Immigration  Rules  relating  to  the
settlement of children (paragraphs 296 to 316 of HC  395)  are  obiter,  and
are not to be taken as  an  authoritative  interpretation  of  those  rules.
Thus, there is no requirement that when a child  applies  for  a  settlement
visa, there must be presented a form of  lawful  consent  from  the  child's
carer or, failing that, a court order.  Nor is there a  requirement  that  a
child coming  for  settlement  here  must  be  registered  with  the  Social
Services Department of the Local Authority where it is to reside.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.  This is the reconsideration of an appeal against  the  refusal  on  30th
September 2004 of entry clearance for the  three  appellants,  who  were  at
that time all below the age of 18, to  join  their  father,  Kabiru  Olaloko
('the sponsor'), for settlement in the United Kingdom.   The  appeal  papers
were not released to the AIT by the Appeals  Processing  Centre  in  Croydon
until February 2006, and the appeal was then listed for hearing  at  Croydon
Magistrates' Court on 9th June.  The appeal was allowed  by  an  immigration
judge, Mrs Foulkes-Jones, but an  application  for  a  review  was  made  on
behalf of the respondent, and reconsideration was ordered on 5th July 2006.

2.  The facts of the case can be recounted quite briefly,  as  they  are  no
longer in dispute.  The sponsor has been living in this country since  1992,
and in 2003 he  was  naturalized  as  a  British  citizen.   Before  leaving
Nigeria, he entrusted his three children, the appellants,  to  the  care  of
his parents.  The eldest child, Fatima, has a different mother from her  two
brothers, but neither of the mothers has played any part in  the  upbringing
of the children since at least 1992, when the children were all very  young.
 Fatima was the only one  of  the  three  to  be  interviewed  at  the  High
Commission, and she told the ECO that she had not seen her mother since  she
was very young, and could not remember her.

3.  The applications for entry clearance were refused because  the  ECO  was
not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
appellants, or in the alternative that there  were  serious  and  compelling
family or other considerations rendering their  exclusion  undesirable.   In
addition, he was not satisfied  that  the  appellants  could  be  maintained
adequately without recourse to public funds.

4.  All these objections were overcome at  the  hearing  before  Immigration
Judge Foulkes-Jones, who was satisfied that, although the sponsor's  parents
had exercised day-to-day care  of  the  appellants,  the  sponsor  had  been
mainly (if not wholly) responsible for their  upkeep,  had  taken  the  main
decisions in their lives, had maintained regular contact  through  telephone
calls and visits to Nigeria, and throughout  had  shown  continuing  concern
for and interest in the children.   In other words,  the  criteria  for  the
satisfaction of the sole responsibility rule, as developed in the case  law,
were met,  and  the  judge  did  not  find  it  necessary  to  consider  the
'exclusion undesirable' alternative.  She  did  find  the  sponsor's  income
perfectly adequate to maintain the three children, and when  the  Presenting
Officer raised a fresh issue, which  had  not  featured  in  the  Notice  of
Refusal, she dealt with that too.  The HOPO  suggested  that  the  sponsor's
accommodation in a two-bedroom flat would not be adequate, but applying  the
'room standard' and the 'space standard' of the Housing Act 1985, the  judge
found that it would be perfectly adequate.

5.  None of these findings has been challenged  in  the  application  for  a
review.  Instead, a wholly new head of challenge has been raised  on  behalf
of the respondent, namely the judge's failure to apply what is  called  "the
principle of law that children only qualify for  settlement  in  the  United
Kingdom if their transfer from the country of origin  is  lawful  both  here
and in the country of origin."  The test for that is said to  be  laid  down
in the reported case of OM (children : settlement - cross  border  movement)
[2005] UKAIT 177, and paragraph 42 of that determination  is  quoted,  which
states that

    "it is wholly reasonable and  appropriate  to  require  the  sponsoring
    parent or relative to satisfy an Entry Clearance Officer  or  the  SSHD
    that he or she has parental rights and that  any  surviving  parent  or
    person with parental rights has given his or her lawful consent to  the
    removal of the child from the country of origin.   Where  such  consent
    cannot be obtained or is unreasonably withheld, then a  Sponsor  should
    produce a court order dispensing with that consent.   In  circumstances
    where the infrastructure of a country was such that no courts or  other
    legal/ customary law system were in existence, through  which  such  an
    order might be obtained, then alternative means of demonstrating lawful
    removal would need to be considered."


6.  The grounds for seeking a review appear to  make  a  concession  in  the
case of the eldest child, Fatima, whose mother had died about  three  months
before the hearing in June this year.  "However", the grounds continue,  the
immigration judge "failed to make a finding as to  whether  the  removal  of
the other children would be lawful."  The drafter of these  grounds  appears
to think that if the other  parent  is  dead,  there  is  no  need  for  the
sponsoring parent to obtain anyone else's consent before bringing the  child
to the UK.  But at paragraphs 40 and 41, the Tribunal in OM insist that  the
surviving parent must still demonstrate that  he  is  lawfully  entitled  to
remove the child from  the  jurisdiction  in  which  it  has  hitherto  been
living.  As the respondent here  is  relying  on  OM,  the  concession  over
Fatima does not seem to us to  be  consistent  with  that.   In  any  event,
Fatima's mother was alive at the date of decision in September 2004, and  as
this is an appeal under s.85(5) of the 2002 Act, the fact  that  her  mother
passed away in March 2006 would not be a circumstance "appertaining" at  the
time of that decision, which the Tribunal could take into account.

7.  But as we shall endeavour to show, we do not believe the  respondent  to
have been entitled to rely on OM at all in the instant case.  Mr Makinde  so
argued in his Written Submissions on behalf of  the  appellants,  while  Mrs
Cantrell, quite sensibly we think, did not attempt  to  elaborate  upon  the
grounds for seeking a review.  We should say first of all that we  deprecate
the late introduction, at the stage of applying for a reconsideration, of  a
ground which was neither included among the  original  reasons  for  refusal
nor raised by the respondent before or at the  first-instance  hearing.   In
the present case, the HOPO did bring up the issue of  accommodation  at  the
hearing, and could have  raised  OM  (which  had  been  promulgated  several
months previously) if he had wished  to.   We  would  remind  those  in  the
Presenting Officers' Units who decide whether to apply  for  reconsideration
of the advice given by Carnwath LJ in Mukarkar [2006] EWCA Civ  1045,  where
he urges restraint in challenging allowed appeals, and  warns  that  a  too-
ready tendency to do this may thwart  the  wider  legislative  objective  of
achieving a more streamlined system of immigration appeals.

8.  The first thing to note about OM is that the  facts  of  that  case  are
somewhat unusual, and  certainly  very  different  from  the  facts  of  the
present case.  In OM, the appellant was a young girl born in  Jamaica  whose
parents were not married.  Her mother came to this  country  as  a  visitor,
leaving Miss OM in the care of her father, and never  returned  to  Jamaica.
Instead, she stayed on here as a student and then got two  years'  leave  to
remain (the 'probationary period') as the wife of  a  person  settled  here.
In the meantime, Miss OM accompanied her father and paternal grandmother  to
Florida, where they lived for several years.  It would seem (although  there
is some uncertainty about this) that her  father  abused  Miss  OM  and  had
mental health problems, ending up in an  institution.   The  grandmother  in
America and the mother in Britain then decided that Miss OM  would  be  best
off living with her mother, but instead of applying for a  settlement  visa,
Miss OM obtained a six-month visitor's visa.   Before  her  leave  to  enter
expired, an application was made for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
dependant of her mother.

9.  Before making a decision on this, the Home Office asked for evidence  in
writing that the father had given his consent to Miss OM being taken out  of
his care or, in the alternative, a court order permitting the  child  to  be
taken from the USA to reside in the UK.  When this was not forthcoming,  the
application was refused under paragraph 322(9) of HC 395,  i.e.  because  of
"failure by an applicant to produce within a reasonable  time  documents  or
other evidence required by the Secretary of State to establish his claim  to
remain under these Rules."  On appeal, an immigration judge  disagreed  that
there was any need for the evidence requested in OM's case, and went  on  to
allow OM's appeal under paragraph 298(i)(d), which provides  for  indefinite
leave to remain to the granted  where  "there  are  serious  and  compelling
family  or  other  considerations  which  make  exclusion   of   the   child
undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the child's  care."
 The judge felt that the combination of the father's apparent  inability  to
look after the child,  because  of  his  mental  health  problems,  and  the
willingness of the mother and her  husband  in  the  UK  to  look  after  OM
instead, fulfilled the requirements of that rule.

10.  On reconsideration, however, the panel thought that  the  Secretary  of
State  had  been  perfectly  right  to  demand  evidence  that  OM's  father
consented to the child being taken out of his care or, if it was being  said
that he was not capable of giving such consent, better evidence that he  was
mentally ill and evidence that the appellant's  removal  from  the  American
jurisdiction had been sanctioned by a  court.   They  therefore  upheld  the
respondent's decision to refuse the application under paragraph 322(9).

11.  That, we think, is a very far cry from  the  situation  where  a  child
applies for entry clearance for settlement, and is refused  under  paragraph
297 of HC 395.  Very often, as indeed in the instant case, the other  parent
will not have been on the scene for years, and  the  child  will  have  been
living with grandparents or other relatives.   The  question  will  then  be
whether the parent in the  UK  has  been  exercising  'sole  responsibility'
despite the child's being looked after by other carers.  Where the child  is
still living with the other parent, it will be very  difficult  (though  not
impossible) to demonstrate that the  parent  in  the  UK  has  assumed  sole
responsibility.  No doubt, on the other  hand,  the  parent  with  whom  the
child is living may be assumed to be giving consent to the  child's  removal
; otherwise, an application for  entry  clearance  would  hardly  have  been
made.  In the commoner scenario, where the other parent is said not to  have
been involved for years, if ever, in the child's upbringing, it may be -  if
that is so -  that  parental  responsibility  has  been  abdicated  by  that
parent.

12.  Contrast all that with OM.   In  that  case,  the  appellant  had  been
living with her father until she came to the United  Kingdom  for  a  visit.
No application was made for a settlement visa, although it  seems  that  her
mother  and  grandmother  had  already  decided  that  she  was  to   reside
permanently in Britain.   Thus,  there  was  no  opportunity  for  an  Entry
Clearance Officer in America to check whether  OM's  father  wished  her  to
live permanently with her mother, or indeed to decide  whether  OM's  mother
had had sole responsibility or whether OM's exclusion from the UK  would  be
undesirable.  If in fact OM's father was mentally unstable, had served  time
in prison and had even abused OM - all of which were alleged against him  on
OM's appeal - those were matters which an ECO in America would have been  in
a much better position to investigate than the SSHD in London.

13.  Thus it is that we would respectfully agree with the panel of  the  AIT
in OM that the Secretary of State was justified  in  requesting  information
that an ECO could have obtained had  an  application  for  settlement  entry
clearance been made in the USA, as it  should  have  been.   Otherwise,  how
could he be sure that the father had not  been  tricked  into  allowing  his
daughter to come here for a holiday, not suspecting that she would  be  kept
here permanently?  The ratio in OM covers the situation where  a  child  has
come to this country for a temporary purpose and seeks to  stay  permanently
as the dependant of a relative settled here.   The  Secretary  of  State  is
entitled to know whether the parent or guardian  with  whom  the  child  has
been living hitherto consents to this.  If no such evidence is  forthcoming,
the Secretary of State is entitled to  refuse  to  vary  the  child's  leave
under paragraph 322(9) of HC 395.  That is what the  immigration  judge  got
wrong in OM.  On reconsideration, the AIT found  that,  on  the  facts,  the
respondent was right to refuse the application for  indefinite  leave  under
paragraph 322(9).

14.  What the panel in OM go on to say about paragraph  298  of  HC  395  is
strictly obiter, since the judge at first instance ought not  to  have  gone
further than upholding the respondent's  decision  under  paragraph  322(9).
Paragraph 298 was in any event, as noted by the panel,  wholly  inapplicable
to OM's case, since it requires the parent with whom the child is hoping  to
stay permanently to be "present and settled in the  United  Kingdom."   When
OM applied to vary her leave, her mother only had limited  leave  to  remain
as a spouse (the 'probationary period'), and so OM could not have  qualified
for indefinite leave under paragraph 298.  (There is in  fact  provision  at
paragraph 301 for leave to remain "with a view to settlement" as  the  child
of a parent who is herself here "with a  view  to  settlement",  e.g.  as  a
spouse during the probationary period, but this is not referred to in OM).

15.  Paragraph 298(i) of HC 395  is  divided  into  four  sub-subparagraphs,
numbered (a)-(d), dealing in turn with the situations where
   a) both parents are present and settled here ;
   b) one parent lives here and the other is dead ;
   c) the parent here has had sole responsibility ;
   d) the child is to stay with  a  parent  or  another  relative,  and  its
      exclusion would be undesirable.

16.  Paragraph 298(i)(d) contains a further requirement, not  found  in  the
other sub-subparagraphs, that "suitable arrangements have been made for  the
child's care".  We suppose this is to ensure that, where  the  child  is  to
live with a relative other than one of  its  parents,  such  an  arrangement
really is suitable for the  child.   The  panel  in  OM  read  into  that  a
requirement for the written consent of whoever has had  care  of  the  child
abroad, or failing that a court order.  This requirement  is  then  extended
to sub-subparagraphs (b) and (c), which are actually silent about  "suitable
arrangements".   We  would  have  grave  reservations  about  reading   into
paragraph 298(i)(b) and (c) a requirement that "suitable  arrangements  have
been made for the child's care" which is not there,  but  appears  somewhere
else.

17.  But as we say, the remarks  in  OM  about  paragraph  298  are  obiter.
Still less can they be extended to other paragraphs  of  the  Rules  dealing
with the admission of children, such as paragraph 297 in the  instant  case,
where an application was made from abroad for entry clearance.  OM has  even
been cited in a family visit appeal, where  a  child  was  said  not  to  be
eligible to visit one parent in the United Kingdom  without  a  court  order
permitting it to leave the jurisdiction of the  country  where  it  resided.
That is the reductio ad absurdum of  the  perfectly  laudable  object  which
underlies OM, namely the protection of children.

18.  We do not think, however,  that  this  object  is  to  be  achieved  by
reading into  the  Immigration  Rules  requirements  which  are  not  there.
Indeed, the Immigration Rules are perfectly capable  of  achieving  this  as
they stand.  In M & A [2003] EWCA Civ 263,  for  example,  two  children  in
India had applied  under  paragraph  297(i)(a)  of  HC  395  to  join  their
parents, who were both  present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   There  was  no
question here about one parent getting the consent of  the  other.   Indeed,
the panel in OM say nothing about reading any  extra  requirement  into  the
equivalent rule for in-country applications, paragraph 298(i)(a).   But  the
two Indian children were at risk  from  their  parents,  who  had  seriously
abused their other three children in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Court  of
Appeal upheld the refusal of the ECO to issue entry clearance on the  ground
that the children would not be accommodated adequately.   The  accommodation
could not be "adequate" if the children were at risk in it.

19.  The panel in OM make further remarks, this time extending  to  all  the
paragraphs in Part 8 of the Immigration Rules dealing  with  the  settlement
of children.  These paragraphs are said to  imply  a  requirement  that  the
Director of the local Social  Services  Department  must  be  given  details
about children who have come or are coming to this country  for  settlement,
so that checks can be run on the new carers, who might turn  out  to  be  on
the register of sex offenders or the like.  This requirement is  again  said
to  derive  from  the  phrase  in   paragraph   298(i)(d)   that   "suitable
arrangements have been made for the child's care."

20.  Again, we would point out that these remarks are obiter,  and  are  not
to be taken as an authoritative interpretation of paragraphs 296 to  316  of
HC 395.  If the Secretary of State wishes  to  tighten  up  the  Immigration
Rules,  for  example  by  requiring  that  all  children  coming  here   for
settlement must be registered with their local Social  Services  Department,
he is perfectly capable of doing that himself.  It is not for this  Tribunal
to do it for him.  The  Secretary  of  State  certainly  has  shown  himself
capable of tightening  up  the  Rules  about  children  in  the  past.   For
example, a few years ago paragraph 310 permitted a child to settle here  who
had been adopted "in accordance with  a  decision  taken  by  the  competent
administrative authority or court in his country of  origin."   So  a  child
adopted by the order of  a  court  in  India  could  come  here.   Then  the
requirement was added that the country had to be one "whose adoption  orders
are recognised by the United Kingdom."  India is not such a country,  so  as
child adopted there cannot any longer be admitted as an adopted child  under
the Rules : see on this SK ("adoption" not recognised in  UK)  India  [2006]
UKAIT 68.

21.  To sum up, the decision in  OM   is  authority  only  for  the  correct
application of paragraph 322(9) of HC 395, and has  no  general  application
to rules 296-316 about the settlement of children.   Thus,  the  immigration
judge in the instant case made no error of law in not  applying  OM  to  the
appeal before her, which was under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

No  error  of  law  having  been   identified,   the   immigration   judge's
determination allowing the appeal is ordered to stand.

Senior Immigration Judge McKee
24 October 2006
