
  DJ (Bantu-not generally at risk) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 00089

                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL

                                           Date of Hearing : 22 October 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                             22/04/2005

                                   Before:

                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                      Mr N H Goldstein (Vice President)
                                Mr C Thursby



                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and




                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  RESPONDENT

Appearances: Mr M Azmi of Blackmores, Solicitors for  the  appellant;  Mr  A
Sheikh, Home Office Presenting Officer, for the respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This case is designated a Country Guideline  case  for  what  it  says
      about the Bantu and the Bantu subgroup  known  as  the  Mushunguli.  A
      summary of general conclusions is given at paras 75 onwards.

2.    The appellant is  a  national  of  Somalia.  He  appeals  against  the
      determination of Adjudicator, Mr R.R. Hopkins  notified  on  23  April
      2004, dismissing his appeal against a decision  giving  directions  of
      removal following refusal to grant asylum.

3.    The basis of the appellant's claim was that  he  was  a  member  of  a
      Bantu clan called the Mushunguli. He and family  lived  in  a  village
      known as Qallalijo in the agricultural region  surrounding  Jilib.  He
      had been attacked in 1991 when he refused to  fight  for  the  Hawiye.
      From 1992 he and his family were forced to work for the  Hawiye  on  a
      farm under threat of being killed if they refused. He  was  eventually
      able to leave Somali with the help of the Mushunguli community in  the
      USA.

4.    The  Adjudicator  accepted  only  limited  parts  of  the  appellant's
      account as credible. He accepted, albeit with reservations,  that  the
      appellant was a member of the Mushunguli clan and that  he  came  from
      somewhere in southern Somalia. He  accepted  that  he  may  have  been
      stabbed in the leg in 1991 when members of a majority  clan  tried  to
      recruit him to fight in the civil war. However, he did not accept  any
      further parts of his story. In particular he did not  accept  that  he
      and his family had been forced to work against his will  under  threat
      of being killed nor did he accept that the appellant lived as  claimed
      in a village some distance from Jilib.  He concluded:


            '16. The US State Department Report 2002 says  that  there  are
                reports that in the  Middle and Lower Juba Bantus were  used
                as forced  labour  (page  78  in  the  appellant's  bundle).
                Paragraph 6.97 of the latest  CIPU  Report  indicates  that,
                although Bantu have been largely displaced  along  the  Juba
                and Shabelle rivers, they are  usually  able  to  remain  in
                their home areas and to work mainly  as  labourers  for  the
                Somali clans. They can usually retain  about  10%  of  their
                land  for  their  own  use.  In  some  cases  they  work  as
                plantation labourers  in  what  Bantu  elders  described  as
                situations of near slavery.


            17. The situation appears to me  to  be  one  where  the  Bantu
                suffer discrimination in  Somalia. But discrimination is not
                necessarily  persecution.  Also,  Article  3  has   a   high
                threshold. This appellant does not claim he  was  physically
                ill treated. He just says that he was forced to work against
                his will under threat of  being  killed,  a  claim  which  I
                reject. I accept that there have  been  instances  of  Bantu
                having been forced to work for the more powerful clans.  But
                what I am concerned about is whether there is a real risk of
                persecution or of being killed, or of inhuman  of  degrading
                treatment as far as this appellant is concerned.  I  am  not
                satisfied that there is a real risk here.'

  5.  The grounds of appeal made no specific challenge to the  Adjudicator's
      adverse credibility findings. Instead they submitted that having found
      the appellant to be a Mushunguli, a subgroup of the Bantu, and  having
      accepted that in some cases Bantu work as plantation labourers in what
      Bantu elders describe as situations of near slavery,  the  Adjudicator
      had "misapplied the objective material, resulting in an  unsustainable
      decision".

6.    In amplification of the grounds of appeal, Mr Azmi contended that  the
      Adjudicator had erred by minimising the historical repression suffered
      by the Bantu and underplaying the fact that the Bantu had continued to
      suffer abuse at the hand of majority clans.

7.    The Adjudicator's determination was notified on 23 April  2004.   That
      complicates the matter of what background materials we can  take  into
      account, since, following the Court of Appeal judgment  in  CA  [2004]
      EWCA 1165, we cannot have  regard  to  materials  to  hand  since  the
      Adjudicator notified his determination unless he has made  a  material
      error of law.  For reasons given below we do not find there  was  such
      an error. Accordingly we must confine ourselves to materials that were
      before the Adjudicator.  But since we do not consider that in  respect
      of the  Bantu  the  more  recent  materials  present  a  significantly
      different picture, we shall include references to them as appropriate.
      That will also assist us in furnishing (by way of obiter) up  to  date
      guidance.

8.    We remind ourselves here of what is required in order  to  identify  a
      material error of law, a set out in E & R [2004] EWCA Civ  49  and  in
      CA[2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  If it was a  conclusion  that  no  reasonable
      Adjudicator could have reached, then it would be  irrational  one  and
      hence a material error of law. However, it  if  it  was  a  conclusion
      which was within the range of reasonable decisions that could be  made
      on such materials, it cannot be considered a material  error  of  law.
      Thus Mr Azmi can  succeed  only  if  able  to  persuade  us  that  the
      Adjudicator significantly misconstrued the background  materials  that
      were before him relating to the Bantu.

9.    It is essential therefore that we assess what  picture  of  the  Bantu
      emerges from the background materials before the Adjudicator.

10.   The background materials in full on which we have drawn  (those  which
      were before the Adjudicator and others submitted since) are listed  at
      Appendix A.  We should perhaps  mention  at  this  stage  three  other
      matters. Firstly, after completion of the hearing of this case  on  22
      October 2004 we became aware of the existence of an expert  report  on
      the Bantu by Dr Joseph  Mullen  dated  24  October  2004  prepared  in
      respect of another case. We asked the appellant's  representatives  to
      seek permission from the author for its production in this case.  That
      was  done,  with  success.  We  are  grateful   to   the   appellant's
      representatives for their assistance in this regard as it has  enabled
      us, in the context of considering the current situation, to take  this
      report into account. Secondly we have  made  reference  to  a  website
      account of the Bantu entitled `Somali Bantu-Their History and Culture`
      written by Daniel Van Lehman and Omar  Eno.  This  website  is  called
      `culturaloreintation.com`. This account was  before  the  Adjudicator.
      Although we would normally be wary of highlighting a  source  of  this
      type, we note that it is considered by leading commentators on Somalia
      as a helpful source. Thirdly, bearing in mind that  the  appellant  in
      this case was accepted as being a Mushunguli Bantu, we have emphasised
      where relevant references to the specific position of the Mushunguli.



History

11.   The Bantu are said to have their roots in East Africa, the  main  body
      of them having been brought to Somali several centuries ago as slaves.



12.   Until 1991 they were chiefly  involved  in  agriculture  in  the  Juba
      river delta and Shabelle river area.

13.   Although they did not take part in the civil war, and so did not  face
      recriminations after it, the Bantu were scattered by the fighting  and
      many lost their land along the Juba river to the north of Kismayo  and
      in   Middle   Shabelle   to    the    north    of    Mogadishu.    The
      culturaloreintation.net report describes the dire effect on the  Bantu
      of the civil war conflicts:


           ` Because the Bantu were excluded from  the  traditional  Somali
           clan protection network,  bandits  and  militias  were  able  to
           attack the Bantu with impunity. In the process of stealing  food
           stocks, the  bandits  also  robbed,  raped  and  murdered  Bantu
           farmers.


           As the war progressed, control of the lower  Juba  River  valley
           shifted among various warlords, with each wreaking havoc on  the
           Bantu farming communities. In October of 1992 the Bantu began to
           flee  southern  Somali  en  masse  for  refugee  camps   located
           approximately 40 miles from the Somali border  in  Kenya's  arid
           and often hostile North-eastern Province. `


14.   As regards the post-civil war period the report notes:

           'As militia fighting in southern Somalia stabilised in  the  mid-
      1990s, the Bantu who remained in  Somalia  were  once  again  able  to
      resume farming. Since this time, however, armed dominant clan  bandits
      have taken control of the valuable agricultural  regions  of  southern
      Somalia. These bandits extort  protection  money  from  the  Bantu  in
      return for not harming them or allowing other bandits  to  harm  them.
      Today, the Bantu in Somali again exist in a  state  someplace  between
      sharecropping and slavery.`

15.   The 1998 Netherlands delegation report (see Appendix A) mentions  that
      although some displaced Bantu left Somalia for good, many returned  to
      the Juba Valley where they both lived in and outside refugee camps. It
      cites a Nordic fact-finding mission report of 15 February to 14  March
      1997 stating that in addition a large number of Bantu lived in  Middle
      Shabelle where they were free to move about without any problems.

16.   The April 2004 CIPU Report at 6.100-6.101 (which is  in  very  similar
      terms to para 6.91 of the April 2003 CIPU Report  and  likewise  draws
      heavily on the 2002 Joint Report (see Appendix A)  and  on  an  August
      2002 Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) study
      of minorities in Somalia) states:

      `According to the [2000 and 2002  Joint  reports  [  see  Appendix  A]
      conditions for Bantu reportedly vary according to the region in  which
      they live...As stated above Bantu have been  largely  displaced  along
      the Juba and Shabelle rivers. They are usually able to remain in their
      home areas, to work mainly as labourers for the Somali  clans  (mainly
      the Marehan, Ogadeni and Habr Gedir) that have taken their traditional
      land. They can usually retain about 10% of their land  for  their  own
      use...However, in some cases Bantu work  as  plantation  labourers  in
      what Bantu elders describe as situation of near slavery...


      Bantu try to link themselves to the dominant Somali  clans  that  have
      dispossessed them of most of their land, as, for their  own  security,
      they still need their protection. However, in  Bay  and  Bakool  Bantu
      have largely been incorporated into the Rahanweyn clan  structure  and
      are able to retain their land. Bantu that have assimilated  themselves
      with the indigenous clans they  live  with  are  reportedly  known  as
      'sheegato' which means  they  are  not  bloodline  clan  members,  but
      adopted...`


Physical appearance

17.   The Bantu are said to be physically distinct  from  other  Somalis  in
      terms of their Negroid features, particularly  the  hair:  (jareer  or
      kinked for the Bantu; jilec or soft for the non-Bantu).


Location

18.   Although scattered by the civil war  it  remains  the  case  that  the
      Bantu primarily inhabit the interriverine areas of southern Somalia in
      the vicinity of either the Shabelle or Juba Rivers.


Status as a minority

19.   Reference to the Bantu as a  minority  is  contextual.  In  the  wider
      context of Africa, Bantu-speaking peoples make up a major part of  the
      population of nearly all-African countries south of the  Sahara.  They
      are connected with over 300 groups, each  with  its  own  language  or
      dialect. For example, in Kenya they are associated with the Kikuyu and
      in South African with  the  Zulu.  However,  in  Somalia  they  are  a
      minority.

20.   The Bantu are commonly described as  the  largest  minority  group  in
      Somalia. The US State Department report of February 2004 states:

           `Minority groups and low-caste clans  included  the  Bantu  (the
           largest minority group), the  Benadiri,  Rer  Hamar,  Brawanese,
           Swahili, Tumal,  Yibir,  Madhiban,  Hawrsame,  Muse  Dheryo  and
           Faqayaqub. Intermarriage between  these  groups  and  mainstream
           clans  was  restricted.  These  groups  had  limited  access  to
           whatever social services were available,  including  health  and
           education. Members of minority groups continued to be  subjected
           to killings, harassment, intimidation, and abuse by armed gunmen
           of all affiliations`.


21.   The Bantu are not accurately described as  a  `minority  clan`,  since
      they have no tribal lineage system or segmented clan structure in  the
      Somali sense and for the most part they are recognised as  a  grouping
      distinct from and outside Somali clan society.

22.   However, the Bantu are certainly a minority group. That  is  clear  in
      overall numerical terms. Out of  a  population  of  some  7.5  million
      people, the most common estimate for the entire  Bantu  population  in
      southern Somalia is around 600,000. However, there  are  quite  marked
      differences in estimates ranging at the one extreme from the figure of
      2% given by Perouse de Montclos to the (plainly  inflated)  figure  of
      30%-40% given by the Bantu elders consulted by the authors of the 2000
      Joint Report.  Complicating matters, it has been estimated that up  to
      one-third of all Somalis are minorities,  representing  a  variety  of
      cultures, languages and interpretations of the dominant Sunni  Islamic
      religion. Minorities also make up a  considerable  proportion  of  the
      375,000  persons  estimated  as  being  internally  displaced  persons
      (IDPs).

23.   The situation is also subject  to  regional  variation.  As  the  2000
      Joint Report notes, `The Bantu elders with  whom  the  delegation  met
      urged that the Bantu population in Somalia should not be considered as
      a minority population in Somalia,  because,  they  argued,  the  Bantu
      constitute a majority in a number of regions in Somalia`.

24.   What can safely be said  is  that,  even  if  not  in  all  regions  a
      minority numerically, the  Bantu  are  everywhere  in  a  marginalized
      position. The September 2000 report  quotes  Perouse  de  Montclos  as
      stating that the Bantu are:

           `...  generally  despised.  While  some  succeeded   in   making
           themselves respected and in working on  an  equal  footing  with
           their neighbours, they do not belong to Somali lineages and  are
           considered to be second class citizens. ` Dr  Joseph  Mullen  in
           his  October  2004  report  states   that:   `On   occupational,
           ethnological and economic grounds the Bantus have been despised,
           marginalized and oppressed in Somalia`.


      We shall come  back  to  the  issue  of  their  social,  economic  and
      political position below.


Subdivisions

25.   The US State Department report 2003  states that the  Bantu  are  said
      to include the Zigua, Zaramo, Magindo, Makua, Manyasa, Mushunguli  and
      Yao.

26.   The  2000 Joint Report states:

           'The term `Bantu` covers a large number of sub-groups but  these
           groups all consider themselves as belonging to one large  group,
           the Jarer...


           According to Bantu elders the Bantu population is made up  of  a
           number of lineages, some of which live in certain areas and some
           of which are mixed and/or have  resettled  in  other  places  in
           Somalia. Only a few groups are distinguished by their  location,
           such as the Mushunguli, almost all of whom live  in  Lower  Juba
           region. There are a number of well-known Bantu groups  that  are
           not attached and have not been swallowed  up  by  the  non-Bantu
           Somali clans. All of these  Bantu  groups  are  referred  to  as
           lineage groups: Shabelle; Shiidle, Kabole, Mushunguli,  Gabaweyn
           (Garbaweyn), Eyle (Eile), Makne. In the Lower  and  Middle  Juba
           areas there is another group of less well-known  Bantu-lineages:
           Manyasa, Miyau, Majindo, Makua, Mlima, Pokomo and Manyika.


           `The Somali Bantu can be subdivided into distinct groups.  There
           are those who are indigenous to Somalia, those who were  brought
           to Somali as slaves from Bantu-speaking  tribes  but  integrated
           into Somali society, and those who were brought  to  Somalia  as
           slaves but  maintained,  to  varying  degrees,  their  ancestral
           culture,  Bantu  languages  and  sense  of   southeast   African
           identity. It is this last  group  of  Bantu  refugees  that  has
           particularly  suffered  persecution  in  Somalia  and  that   is
           therefore in need of protection through resettlement`.

27.   Elsewhere this report states:

           `Those who trace their origins to an east African tribe refer to
           themselves collectively as Shanbara, Shangama, or Wagosha. Those
           Bantu refugees with very strong cultural and linguistic ties  to
           southeast African refer to themselves as Mushunguli or according
           to their east African tribe, such as Zigua`.



Language and dialect

28.   Generally the Bantu are said to  speak  their  own  language,  but  it
      would appear this is subject to some regional variation. Thus,  whilst
      in the Juba River valley the main language used by Bantu is  Af  Maay,
      some Bantu in traditional villages are said not to understand this  at
      all; instead they speak their ancestral tribal languages from Tanzania
      (primarily  Zigua),  with  Swahili  occasionally  used  as  a   common
      language.

29.   The  2000 Joint report states that:

                  `Some Bantu groups have maintained their own Bantu dialect
           or language while others have completely  lost  their  dialects.
           The Mushunguli of the Lower Juba still have  their  own  dialect
           called 'kiziguua' and the Mushunguli call themselves 'waziguua'.
           Any other Somali will call them Mushunguli`.


30. Generally, most Bantu also speak broken Somalia.


Occupational patterns

31.   The Bantu in southern Somali are typically agriculturalists  but  some
      have found work of diverse trades in cities.

32.   The  2000 Joint report states that:

                  `The   Bantu   communities   in   Somali   are   typically
           agriculturalists, farmers or labourers on farms and  plantations
           in the area between the Shabelle and Juba rivers in central  and
           southern Somalia.`


 33.  According to culturaloreintation.net, Bantu in Somalia exist as:

           `... small holders,  restricted  to  either  low-level  jobs  or
           farming on land cultivated by family members and,  occasionally,
           by a few hired workers. The average  land  area  owned  by  each
           family ranges between 1 and 10 acres. This type of  farming  can
           provide subsistence and  limited  surpluses  to  the  commercial
           market.  Nevertheless,  these  farmers  contribute  the  highest
           percentage to Somalia's staple food stocks, which include maize,
           millet, sorghum, sesame, beans, cotton,  rice,  vegetables,  and
           fruits.  Crops  grown  for  commercial  export  markets  include
           bananas, citrus and vegetables.
      ...
           After independence, Somali authorities adopted a policy designed
           to prevent Bantu people  from  social,  political  and  economic
           development. Over the course of the late Siyaad Barre`s military
           regime in the 1980s, more and more Bantu farmers became landless
           as large government-owned agricultural enterprises  and  members
           of the political elite used unjust  land  registration  laws  to
           displace the smallholder Bantu from their farmers. Expropriation
           of this valuable arable and irrigable farmland  from  the  Bantu
           allowed the new `owners` to exploit the land for cash crops.


           Some of the Bantu have managed to move to urban areas  in  order
           to improve their lives. The Bantu in the cities work in building
           trades, woodworking, vehicle  repair,  tailoring,  and  electric
           machine maintenance.  In  the  refugee  camps,  the  Bantu  have
           engaged  in  construction,  manual  labour,  tree  farming   and
           nurseries, and vegetable gardening.`



Social, economic and political situation

34.   The 2000 Joint Report describes the socio-economic  situation  of  the
      Bantu in Somalia as one in which they are  exploited  economically  by
      Somali majority  clans.  It  quotes  the  Bantu  elders  consulted  as
      maintaining that the Bantu:


                  `... are the most vulnerable and most  seriously  affected
           population in Somali. They stated that, in contrast to other so-
           called minority groups such as the Benadiri  and  Madhiban,  the
           Bantu have no close ties to other Somalis.  While  the  Benadiri
           often intermarry with other Somalis this never  happens  between
           the Bantu and other Somalis.  The  Bantu  are  afraid  to  speak
           freely in Somalia and [they] are the only group that is  totally
           excluded and marginalized  in  political,  social  and  economic
           terms. They claimed that  Bantu  identity  is  being  suppressed
           because the  `Cushistic  Somalis`  want  to  deny  the  original
           ownership of Somali by the Bantu, who are  the  true  indigenous
           people and original inhabitants  of  Somalia....  The  so-called
           Cushistic or Jileec Somalis have, according to the Bantu elders,
           established   a   deliberate   policy   of    suppression    and
           impoverishment of people of Bantu origin in Somalia`.


35.   In terms of political representation both  the  2000  and  2004  Joint
      reports make clear that the Bantu have been dissatisfied with the Arta
      peace conference and subsequent  political  negotiations  in  Nairobi.
      They wanted  a  proportional  number  of  seats  in  the  Transitional
      National Assembly (TNA), but in the end received  only  6  of  the  29
      seats allocated to the so-called `minority groups`, despite being,  in
      their own words, `the majority of the minority`.  The CIPU April  2004
      report cites a June 2003 IRIN news release as noting  that  the  Bantu
      have been represented by  Somali  African  Muki  Organisation  (SAMO),
      which is aligned to the SSA SAMO, itself  aligned with the G8 group at
      the Eldoret/Nairobi peace talks.

36.   It is clear that the Bantu elders consulted by the 2000  Joint  Report
      delegation considered that the Bantu were a  persecuted  grouping.  At
      para 6.4 this report notes:


           `The Bantu elders explained that the Bantu are unarmed  and  are
           victims of serious human  rights  violations.  They  argue  that
           human rights violations against the Bantu population in  Somalia
           are of such a scale that they cannot be compared  to  the  human
           rights  violations  against  other,  non-Bantu,  populations  in
           Somalia. They stated that there is an  important  difference  in
           addressing  human  rights  and  addressing  minority  rights  in
           Somalia because the Bantu population should not be regarded as a
           minority group.


           The Bantu elders considered Somalia  as  a  nation  to  be  more
           racist than South Africa during its apartheid period. They  feel
           they have no assurance from any  future  government  in  Somalia
           that the rights of the Bantu will be protected and they have  no
           trust in a future  government.  They  claimed  that  freedom  of
           expression does not exist for the Bantu  in  Somalia  and  their
           voice is not being heard. Perouse de Montclos comes to a similar
           conclusion when he makes a distinction between the Bantu and the
           so-called Sab castes  (the  Digil,  mainly  the  Tunni  and  the
           Rahanweyne). The camel-herding clans of northern Somali  despise
           the latter, but they are still part of the Somali lineage system
           and they will still be able  to  negotiate  `when  the  hour  of
           reconciliation arrives in Somalia`. Minorities, who are not part
           of the lineage system, the Bantu  and  the  `half-castes`  argue
           that they will never benefit  from  any  compensation  mediation
           procedures amongst the Somali clans``.


37.   However, it must be borne in mind that the  Bantu  elders  in  Nairobi
      have plainly sought to present their case in political terms so as  to
      maximise their voice in the peace negotiations:  as  is  suggested  by
      their unrealistic estimates of Bantu numbers in  Somalia.  We  do  not
      consider  they  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  an  independent  source.
      Moreover,  the  2000  Joint  Report  suggests  that  the   longer-term
      political future might not be as wholly bleak as  the  elders  portray
      it:

           `A UN agency in Nairobi described the land issue in  Somalia  as
           `dynamite`. They pointed out that while the Bantu population has
           so far been the loser in the land issue, they have never  before
           been represented in a Somali Parliament, as they are not in  the
           TNA. The Bantu  population  therefore  now  has  more  political
           influence than ever before in modern Somali history. Also, as  a
           result of the civil war in Somalia a large number of Bantu  fled
           the country and are now living in a diaspora  in  Kenya  and  in
           other countries. This has had the side  effect  that  today  the
           Bantu are better educated than ever before. `


38.   Nevertheless it would be wrong to suggest  that  the  Bantu  have  any
      significant political power. Dr Mullen  in  his  October  2004  report
      states that:

           `Although the Bantu represent a large proportion of agricultural
           labour in the fertile valleys of the Shabelle and  Juba  rivers,
           this  is  not  tantamount  to  stating  that  they  are  in  any
           meaningful majority as they are  de  facto  virtually  powerless
           politically and economically.`


Protection

39.   Of the materials before  us,  The  Home  Office  Operational  Guidance
      Notes: Somalia May 2004 at 3.7.3.4 cited  earlier  represents  perhaps
      the clearest statement of the view that in general Bantu are  able  to
      secure dominant clan protection: `Minority groups will  be  safest  in
      areas where they enjoy the protection of  a  dominant  clan.  This  is
      generally the case with the Bantu group`. However, it is fair  to  say
      that some take the view that Bantu in general are unprotected. That is
      clearly  the  view  of  the  Bantu  elders,  of  the  authors  of  the
      culturaloreintation.net document and also of Dr Joseph Mullen  who  in
      his October 2004 report states:

           `...[the Bantu] are perceived  as  inferior,  socially  excluded
           from mainstream social life of the dominant clans and  regularly
           suffer human rights abuses such as  forced  land  expropriation,
           rape and exclusion from any form of  local  governance.  Usually
           they were attached to a Somali  `noble`  clan,  from  whom  they
           sought protection, but it was a voluntary contract  rather  than
           constituting ownership or bondage rights and without  reciprocal
           obligations for labour offered. For example, the Shiidle...has a
           degree of affiliation or 'adoption' to  the  Hawiye  Abgal  sub-
           clan, the Mobilen, from Jowhar district. There  is  no  evidence
           that this constitutes  protection  and  certainly  not  diya  or
           compensation rights...
           ...
           The Bantu as a minority do not  have  clan  alliances  with  the
           majority clans but rather  a  patron-client  relationship,  with
           unclear reciprocal obligations. What often happens is  that  the
           Bantu is conscripted to fight on behalf of  their  patrons,  are
           placed in the front line since, if they are wounded  or  killed,
           no Diya or compensation money is payable to them. The  Bantu  in
           the Middle Shabelle are reported as having formed  a  protective
           militia for the security of what lands remain under their  care.
           This has been quickly disarmed by the Hawyie  overlords  in  the
           area. The absence of protection in a collapsed or  failed  state
           makes them vulnerable to loss of life, assets and  human  rights
           abuses, including rape.
           ...
           There is strong evidence emerging that the minority  clans  such
           as the Bantu and the Benadiri without an armed militia have been
           singled out for persecution since the fall  of  the  Siad  Barre
           government c.f. CIPU, Africa  Confidential,  Danish  Immigration
           Board, UNOCHA,  Dept of State;  to  quote  the  Immigration  and
           Refugee Board  Ottawa  31.10/02  the  Benadiri  (sic)  `live  in
           conditions  of  great  poverty  and  suffer  numerous  forms  of
           discrimination and exclusion...homes have  been  taken  over  by
           members of the Hawiye militias...campaign of systematic rape  of
           women...` the Amnesty International Report 2002 reports that the
           situation in Mogadishsu was that `fighting continued  throughout
           2001...hundreds of civilians were killed...indiscriminate  force
           was   used...killings   or    reprisal    killings    of    clan
           opponents...expulsions  of   members   of   other   clans...case
           kidnappings as well as detention and torture...women  minorities
           were  particularly  vulnerable`.  This  situation  is  certainly
           applicable to the Jareer/Shiidle and nowhere in  the  literature
           is it unequivocally suggested that a patron client  relationship
           with a more powerful people would lead to protection of  members
           of the Bantu family of peoples.`


40.   We have quoted from Dr Mullen's report at length because it  seems  to
      us to exemplify the case of a country expert who has assessed  country
      conditions in terms of a higher standard of  protection  than  applies
      under the Refugee and Human Rights Conventions: see Horvath  [2000]  3
      WLR 379 and Bagdanvicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605,  [2004]  INLR  163.  Dr
      Mullen may be right to say  that  the  patron-client  relationship  on
      which many Bantu rely for their day-to-day security  lacks  any  clear
      reciprocal obligations and does not extend to the payment of  diya  or
      compensation  money.  However,  even  basing  ourselves  on  the  body
      evidence to which he refers, we do not consider  that  it  establishes
      that the arrangements made by many Bantu with dominant clans  fail  to
      secure them against being exposed to routine  or  systemic  abuses  of
      their fundamental human rights. We would also note that in relation to
      his claim that persecution of Bantu is identified by  several  of  the
      sources on which he relies - e.g. CIPU and the US Department of  State
      - what he appears to mean  is  simply,  to  cite  from  the  US  State
      Department Report  2002, that members of minority groups such  as  the
      Bantu  `continued   to   be   subjected   to   killings,   harassment,
      intimidation, and abuse by armed gunmen of all  affiliations`.  Whilst
      this type of statement, along with ones of a  similar  kind  found  in
      other materials is important evidence  as  to  the  situation  of  the
      Bantu, it is insufficient in itself to show a  consistent  pattern  of
      gross, mass or frequent violations of the basic human rights of  Bantu
      generally.


Our Assessment

41.   It is time to consider what findings regarding  the  Bantu  should  be
      made in the light of the background evidence,  both  that  before  the
      Adjudicator and the larger body of materials before us. On the body of
      material before the Adjudicator was it open to him  to  conclude  that
      the Bantu generally were not at risk?

42.   We do not consider that the background materials demonstrate that  the
      Bantu generally are at persecuted minority group. It is true that  the
      Bantu elders consulted in Nairobi stated that they were and that  that
      many commentators  emphasise  that  the  Bantu  are  marginalized  and
      exploited by Somali  majority  clans.   However,  there  is  an  equal
      emphasis, firstly, on the ability of significant numbers of  Bantu  to
      pursue traditional livelihoods as agriculturalists or new  livelihoods
      in the cities; and, secondly, on the ability of significant numbers of
      Bantu to integrate in some fashion with majority clans. It is in order
      that we examine these two aspects more carefully.


 The forced labour issue

43.   We would accept that if it were the  case  that  the  Bantu  generally
      were in a situation of slavery or near-slavery that would amount to  a
      form of persecution or treatment contrary to Articles 3 and 4  of  the
      ECHR (the latter, of course, prohibits  slavery  and  forced  labour).
      However, we do not consider that the background materials viewed as  a
      whole go that far. It is true (as the Adjudicator noted) that the CIPU
      report for April  2003  stated  that  in  some  cases  Bantu  work  as
      plantation labourers in what Bantu elders describe  as  situations  of
      near slavery.  However,  the  word  used  is  `some`  and  immediately
      beforehand is the sentence: `They can  usually  retain  about  10%  of
      their land for their own use. `(emphasis added).

44.   It is also true that The 2004 Joint Report notes that:


            `According to Abdi Mamow, members of  the  minority  clans  are
           often forced to work for the majority clans.  Members  of  major
           clans are often dependent on the skills possessed by members  of
           minority clans when it  comes  to  farming.  They  are  promised
           either food or money for their work, however, usually no payment
           is given. Minority clans are not in a position to object to this
           practice. If they refuse to work, or  if  they  demand  payment,
           they can be killed.`


45.   It notes too that:

           `Wolken indicated that members of minority groups are subject to
           forced labour by majority clans  in  the  southern  and  central
           regions of Somalia`.


46.   Significantly, however, it adds that ` She was unable to quantify  the
      prevalence of the practice`.

47.   The Home Office  Operational  Guidance  Notes:  Somalia  V6  May  2004
      summarise matters as follows:


           `3.7.3.3. Bantu.  The  Bantu,  the  largest  minority  group  in
           Somali, are an agricultural group found in pockets,  usually  in
           the river valleys of southern Somalia. The Bantu  did  not  take
           part in the civil  war  and  are  therefore  not  in  danger  of
           recriminations or reprisals at the hands of majority  clans  but
           they were displaced by the fighting and often  lost  their  land
           along the Juba River and in the Middle Shabelle region. Many now
           try to link themselves to the dominant Somali clans, where  they
           live in  order  to  obtain  their  protection.  Conditions  vary
           according to the region in which  they  live,  though  they  are
           usually able to remain in their home area,  to  work  mainly  as
           labourers for the Somali clans (the Marehan,  Ogadeni  and  Habr
           Gedir) that have taken their traditional land.


           3.7.3.4. Sufficiency of protection/Internal relocation. Minority
           groups will be safest in areas where they enjoy  the  protection
           of a dominant clan. This is generally the case  with  the  Bantu
           group...`


48.   What is lacking in the background materials  (both  those  before  the
      Adjudicator and the additional ones before us) is anything to  suggest
      that slavery is the common lot of Bantu or that  the  Bantu  routinely
      find themselves subject to work conditions tantamount  to  persecution
      or treatment contrary to Art 3. It may be that in their everyday lives
      Bantu are often subjected to threats of violence and that they do  not
      receive proper if sometimes any payment for their services; but  there
      is little to suggest that they are not able  to  feed  themselves  and
      their families. And although they face a level of threats and dangers,
      it would appear that many have been able to continue living  in  their
      traditional regions getting on with their lives, enjoying, directly or
      indirectly, some level of protection from majority  clan  members  who
      plainly benefit from their agricultural productivity.


Levels of integration

49.   What is the evidence regarding integration?  Plainly  Bantu  generally
      are denigrated by the Somali majority clans. However,  it  is  equally
      clear that a significant number of Bantu have been able to  achieve  a
      degree of integration, albeit in a client relationship, with  dominant
      clans.  It  would  appear  that  complete  integration  such  as  that
      mentioned by the April 2004 CIPU Report at para 6.100 as occurring  in
      Bay and Bakool where Bantu `...have largely been incorporated into the
      Rahanweyne clan structure and are able to retain their land.`, is  the
      exception. However, the 2000 Joint Report states at 6.1:


           `The Bantu elders explained that many Bantu groups would readily
           identify themselves  with  the  non-Bantu  clan  that  they  are
           attached to and a Bantu from such a group will say, for example,
           that he is a Hawadle or an Abgal etc. Such  a  person  considers
           his identity as totally incorporated  into  the  non-Bantu  clan
           with which he is affiliated. ...Migration and intermarriage  can
           also result in a situation  where  a  Bantu  will  not  identify
           himself as belonging to one of the Bantu groups.


           According to Somali sources quoted by IRIN those Bantu that have
           assimilated themselves with the indigenous clans they live  with
           are know as `sheegato`, which means they are not bloodline  clan
           members, but adopted.


           The UNHCR overview distinguishes between three so-called  `Bantu
           groups`: Mushunguli, Swahili and Bajuni. The Eyle are considered
           as a Mirifle sub-clan and the Gabawayn (Garbaweyn) as a separate
           minority group...


           A UN agency in Nairobi stated that the  group  identity  of  the
           Bantu population in Somalia is  stronger  than  ever  before.  A
           person of Bantu origin will  no  longer  automatically  identify
           himself with one of the major Somali clans or sub-clans  as  the
           group identity of the  Bantu  has  generally  been  strengthened
           during the civil war. `

50.   At 6.3.2 it is noted:


           '...A representative of a UN  agency  in  Nairobi  informed  the
           delegation that the Bantu or Jareer population in  Somalia  know
           different levels of integration (or `Somalisation`),  especially
           those living along the Shabelle River in central  Somalia.  Some
           Bantu are employed as plantation labourers and are almost  in  a
           situation of slavery. They are the only workforce available  and
           they have no bargaining power against the main Somali clans, the
           Hawiye along the Shabelle River in the Lower Shabelle region and
           the Darod in Lower Juba. The Bantu are generally  a  resourceful
           people, and in North West Somali (Somaliland) they  are  working
           as construction workers and as watchmen. In the North  West  and
           in North Eastern Somali (Puntland) their position is that of  an
           'under-clan'. They are safe throughout northern Somalia  and  in
           certain cases they could even marry very poor members of one  of
           the majority clans.


           The culturaloreintation.net  report  in  its  historical  survey
           noted that after the 1920s some  of  the  Bantu  groups  `  were
           either assimilated  into  the  indigenous  Bantu/Jareer  of  the
           Shabelle River or incorporated into other Somali clans  such  as
           Biamal, Garre, Jiido, Shiqqal, and so on`.


51.   When discussing the extent to which Bantu populations  still  maintain
      their tribal identities, the  same  report,  after  noting  that  most
      identify with their ceremonial kin grouping, notes that:


           `Other Bantu, who lived in the vicinity of nomadic Somali  clans
           (particularly those residing outside of  the  lower  Juba  River
           Valley) integrated into the Somali nomadic  clan  system,  which
           provided the Bantu with protection and a sense of identity  with
           the nomads.


           ...Many Bantu from the middle Juba River valley lost their  east
           African language and culture.  These  Bantu  have  attempted  to
           integrate, usually as inferior members, into  a  local  dominant
           Somali clan social structure.'


52.   What we derive from this is the following.

53.   It may be that in an unusual case  a  Bantu  could  establish  a  case
      under the Refugee Convention or under the ECHR. Such a case can  arise
      because there are a limited number of tribes or clans of Bantu  origin
      which presently face a real risk of serious harm in  southern  Somalia
      against which they cannot obtain protection. But we stress that such a
      case will be unusual. In assessing  whether  the  appeal  involves  an
      unusual case there are a  number  of  particularly  relevant  factors,
      including geographical location, the nature of a Bantu`s previous  and
      ongoing relationship with the dominant Somali clan  or  clans  in  the
      home area, tribal history in Somalia and the extent to which  language
      and dialect and cultural identity (which can vary from  individual  to
      individual) mark a Bantu out from surrounding clans and groupings.

  54. However the objective  materials  do  not  bear  out  that  for  Bantu
      generally there is a real risk of serious harm. Certainly there  is  a
      level of discrimination, or varying  levels  of  discrimination,  once
      again depending on such factors as tribal clan  history,  geographical
      location, relationship  with  local  dominant  clans,  linguistic  and
      cultural identity etc.  But the evidence is lacking  of  a  consistent
      pattern of discrimination  rising  to  the  level  of  persecution  or
      serious harm. The evidence is also lacking to show that most Bantu are
      unable to obtain adequate protection from  dominant  Somali  clans  in
      their area.

  55. Our reasons for reaching these conclusions are principally three.

56.   Firstly, despite  close  monitoring  by  international  observers  and
      experts over a lengthy period there is no consensus in support of  the
      view that persons of Bantu origin are generally  at  risk  of  serious
      harm, particularly since the immediate aftermath of the  fall  of  the
      Barre government in 1991.


57.   Secondly, it is clear that  in  certain  areas  of  southern  Somalia,
      persons of Bantu origin have been able  over  time  to  co-exist  with
      majority clans. Although as we have seen the price of co-existence has
      sometimes been living in a persecutory situation  of  slavery,  it  is
      equally clear that this has not usually or generally  been  the  case.
      More commonly the conditions under which the Bantu have  had  to  live
      and work, although marked by discriminatory treatment and  some  level
      of threats and intimidation, fall short of amounting to  serious  harm
      or treatment contrary to Arts 3 and 4 of the ECHR.

58.   A third reason, albeit of much less weight, is that persons  of  Bantu
      origin have been able through the maze of political processes  arising
      within Somalia since 1991 to achieve a limited degree  of  recognition
      as  a  distinct  grouping,  possibly  reinforced  by  an  increasingly
      influential diaspora.


The Position of the Mushunguli

59.   As already noted, the appellant in this case was accepted as  being  a
      Mushunguli from somewhere in southern Somalia.

60.   Given our  acceptance  that  in  assessing  Bantu  cases  it  will  be
      relevant  to  take  into  account  factors  such  as  tribal  history,
      relationship with local dominant Somali  clans,  geographic  location,
      linguistic and cultural identity, we need to examine whether  being  a
      Mushungli significantly adds to the risk facing the Bantu as a whole.


61.   In our view there is nothing  to  indicate  that  Mushunguli,  despite
      maintaining a stronger sense of identity than some other  Bantu,  have
      been generally unable to obtain clan  protection  in  the  context  of
      agricultural working in their traditional  areas.  Nor  is  there  any
      evidence that majority clans have specifically targeted the Mushunguli
      or have specifically sought  to  deny  them  the  type  of  protection
      afforded to other Bantu.


The Appellant's particular circumstances

62.   The Adjudicator  specifically  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of
      where his home area was (the appellant said  it  was  a  village  near
      Jilib). Nevertheless we would accept, in light of what it  said  about
      the Mushunguli in the 2000 Joint Report (it  refers  to  `almost  all`
      Mushunguli being from the lower  Juba  area)  that  it  is  reasonably
      likely the appellant was from the lower Juba area. This requires us to
      examine the issue of safety of internal travel, which we do below.

63.   Although finding that the appellant was a Mushunguli, the  Adjudicator
      said nothing to suggest that he  accepted  the  appellant's  claim  to
      speak Af Maay. And on the appellant's own evidence he  did  not  speak
      `kiziguua, which is the dialect of most  Mushunguli. Thus on the facts
      as found by  the  Adjudicator  it  could  not  be  said  that  he  had
      established his Mushunguli identity as a strong one. We  note  further
      that the Adjudicator specifically rejected the appellant's claim  that
      he had been forced by people from a major clan, under threat of  being
      killed, to work as a slave: see para 15. The fact that  the  appellant
      lacks a history of working as a slave reduces in our view  the  degree
      of likelihood that upon return he would  be  required  to  work  in  a
      situation akin to slavery.

64.   Hence, the appellant's particular circumstances suggest that he  would
have fewer difficulties than the other Mushunguli, at  least  those  with  a
strong tribal identity.


Internal travel

65.   Returning to the position of the Bantu generally, it is  necessary  to
      deal next with the issue of the safety of internal  travel.  Where  an
      appellant fails to establish anything beyond that he is  a  member  of
      the Bantu, we do not consider it is open to  him  to  argue  that  the
      Adjudicator should address the issue of whether  he  could  travel  in
      safety from the airport to which he is landed in Somalia to  his  home
      area: if the appellant has not established where his or her home  area
      is, an Adjudicator cannot be expected to consider whether  he  or  she
      can get to it.

66.   However, we would accept that in cases where an Adjudicator  has  made
      a finding about the home area of a  Bantu  appellant  is,  things  are
      different. It becomes necessary to consider  the  evidence  concerning
      whether he would be able to travel in safety from the point of landing
      back in Somalia to that home area.

67.   In this case the  Adjudicator  did  not  make  a  finding  as  to  the
      appellant's home area and no challenge has been made to that  finding.
      We do not consider, strictly speaking therefore, that the  Adjudicator
      can be said to have erred in failing  to  address  the  issue  of  the
      safety  of  internal  travel.  However,  since  we  have  accepted  as
      reasonably likely on facts  as  found  by  the  Adjudicator  that  the
      appellant was from Lower Juba, we will  proceed  to  consider  whether
      this is a factor which should have been seen as placing the  appellant
      at real risk of serious harm on return.

68.   We have already held that the  Adjudicator  properly  found  that  the
      appellant had failed to show he would be  unable  to  obtain  dominant
      clan protection. Assuming that the appellant's home area in this  case
      is Lower Juba, it would be reasonable in our view to infer  from  this
      that he would also be able to arrange with the dominant clan patron(s)
      for a clan militia escort back to his home area,  even  though,  given
      the absence of any family or clan link to the patron, this  will  very
      likely involve some expense. We appreciate  that  we  have  not  heard
      specific argument on this, but in our view it would require compelling
      new evidence to justify the Tribunal taking a different view  than  we
      do here.


Internal relocation

69.   Given that the Adjudicator found that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      show he would be at risk on return,  notwithstanding  that  he  was  a
      Mushunguli Bantu, there  was  no  issue  before  him  as  to  internal
      relocation. However, we note that the Home Office Operational Guidance
      Notes: Somalia V6 May 2004 at 3.7.3.4 states:

           `Sufficiency of protection/internal relocation. Minority  groups
           will be safest in areas where they enjoy  the  protection  of  a
           dominant clan. This is generally the case with the Bantu  group.
           The authorities controlling Somaliland and Puntland regions have
           made it clear that they would  only  admit  to  the  areas  they
           control those who originate from that  territory  or  those  who
           have  close  affiliations  to   the   territory   through   clan
           membership. Internal relocation to these areas  would  therefore
           not be a reasonable option for those claiming to  be  affiliated
           to the Bantu group. Relocation within regions south of  Puntland
           is appropriate only where protection from a dominant clan can be
           secured`.

70.   In our view this aptly summarises the position set  out  in  the  main
      reports  on  Somalia.  Given  that  the  Bantu  have  no   territorial
      affiliations with Somaliland or Puntland, we consider  that  generally
      speaking there will be no viable option of internal relocation  for  a
      Bantu to northern Somalia. But so far as  relocation  within  southern
      Somalia is concerned (where Bantu do have territorial affiliations)  ,
      it would seem that whether such a step is viable  will  depend  on  to
      what extent the evidence indicates that a Bantu would have  more  than
      one area where, along with other local Bantu, he could obtain dominant
      clan protection. Once again,  however,  depending  on  the  routes  of
      internal travel involved, there may also be a question of  whether  it
      is reasonable to expect  someone  in  this  situation  to  arrange  in
      advance  for  majority  clan  militia  protection.  We  consider  that
      normally such arrangements could be made.


Female Bantu

71.   The case before us did not involve a woman member of  the  Bantu,  but
      since we are seeking to provide guidance,  it  is  important  that  we
      address the issue  of  whether  being  female  places  a  Bantu  in  a
      different position as regards risk on return. We bear in mind that  in
      of NG (Risk- Female  Eyle-Internal  Displacement)  Somalia  CG  [2003]
      UKIAT 00011  - previously known as G (Somalia) - it was found  that  a
      woman of the minority Eyle clan (a sub-group of the  Bantu)  would  be
      particularly vulnerable on the basis of her membership of  a  despised
      minority sub-clan, as a woman and as an  internally  displaced  person
      living in a refugee camp in Somalia.

72.   As regards G (Somalia), we note that this was  heard  in  March  2003,
      over  two  years  ago  and  that  we  have  to  consider  more  recent
      developments and background materials on them. But even so, we do  not
      consider that the Tribunal in that case  intended  to  hold  that  all
      female members of the Eyle faced a real risk of  persecution.  Indeed,
      as regards the Eyle generally, the Tribunal had  before  it  a  report
      from the UNHCR on minority groups which  stated  that  there  were  no
      indications that the Eyle were at present targeted by the main  Somali
      clans although insofar as they might live in unstable area they  could
      become victims of armed conflicts and  thereby  minority  status  made
      them vulnerable. But it was specifically accepted by the respondent in
      G (Somalia) that the appellant was not only a woman without a  husband
      or family, but also someone who would have to  go  to  a  camp  as  an
      internally displaced person. Very properly in our  view  the  Tribunal
      considered, in  view  of  the  background  evidence  relating  to  the
      appalling conditions endured by IDPs in IDP camps, that the  appellant
      would be at risk on return.

73.   We are aware that there is a pending Country  Guideline  case  dealing
      with the issue of returnees and lone women returnees. What we say here
      must be subject to what is said in that, but in our view, whilst being
      a woman, even a lone woman, returnee  increases the level of risk  for
      someone of Bantu origin, it would not increase it to such extent  that
      there was a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Articles
      3 or 4 of the ECHR.


Summary of conclusions on this appeal


  74. We have not found that the Adjudicator erred in law in assessing  that
      the background evidence relating to the Bantu did not demonstrate that
      Bantu generally face  on  return  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  or
      treatment contrary to Articles 3 and  4  of  the  ECHR.  Nor  did  the
      Adjudicator err in concluding that the fact that the appellant  was  a
      Mushunguli did not place him in a different position.



Summary of general conclusions


75.   Each case has  to  be  considered  on  its  specific  facts,  but  the
      following is intended  to  give  authoritative  guidance  on  relevant
      issues of a general nature.

      (i)   Bantu generally are not a risk category. Bantu generally do  not
           face a real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to  Art  3
           of the ECHR and they are able to obtain adequate protection from
           dominant Somali clans in their area.


      (ii)  Slavery or near-slavery is not the common lot  of  Bantu.  Bantu
           generally do not face a real risk of treatment contrary to Art 4
           of the ECHR.


      (iii) It will only be in the unusual case that a  Bantu  will  face  a
           real risk of persecution or treatment contrary to Arts 3 or 4 of
           the ECHR on return. In assessing whether a case falls  into  the
           unusual category, it is important to  take  account  of  factors
           such as tribal clan history, geographical location,  the  nature
           of a person's previous relationship  with  the  dominant  Somali
           clan or clans in his  or  her  area  and  the  extent  to  which
           language,  dialect  and  culture  mark  him  or  her  out   from
           surrounding clans and groupings.

      (iv)  Where an appellant can establish not only that s/he is  a  Bantu
           but also that s/he is from a particular area, an issue does then
           arise as to the internal safety of travel; but  normally  it  is
           reasonable to expect that arrangements  can  be  made  with  the
           dominant clan patron or patrons for clan militia escort.

      (v)   Internal relocation is not  generally  available  for  Bantu  in
           northern Somalia, but  may  be  available  in  southern  Somalia
           depending on the accessibility of alternative areas where  there
           is a Bantu community in receipt of dominant clan protection.


      (vi)  Being a female Bantu may increase the level of risk  on  return,
           but not on its own to the level of a real risk under the Refugee
           or Human Rights Conventions. The case of NG (Risk- Female  Eyle-
           Internal Displacement) Somalia CG [2003]  UKIAT  00011  was  not
           intended to establish that all female members of the Eyle face a
           real risk of persecution. In any event, this case supersedes  NG
           (if it has not been superseded already by  the  pending  Country
           Guideline case on returnees and lone women returnees).

      (vii)       The Mushunguli, a Bantu subgroup, are not generally a risk
           category.

76.   Insofar as previous reported and Country Guideline  decisions  dealing
      with the Bantu (e.g. NG) are concerned, this determination  should  be
      seen as superseding them.

77.   For the above reasons this appeal is dismissed.




                                DR H H STOREY
                               VICE PRESIDENT


Appendix A: Background Materials


Report by Netherlands delegation to EU Council on Situation  in  Somalia  in
connection with asylum procedures, 14 Dec 1998.
Joint British, Danish and Dutch fact-finding  missions  to  Nairobi,  Kenya,
Report on minority groups in Somali, 17-24  September  2000  (elsewhere  the
`2000 Joint Report`).
Joint British - Danish fact-finding mission to Nairobi (Kenya)  and  Baidoia
and Belet Weyne (Somalia) 20 May 1  June  2002  (elsewhere  the  2002  Joint
Report).
CIPU Somalia Country Report April 2003.
EIN Country Database: Somalia front sheet September 2003.
Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2003: Somalia 9 July 2003.
US Committee for Refugees, World Refugee Survey 2003: Somalia 29 May 2003.
Amnesty International, Annual Report 2003: Somalia 28 May 2003.
US State Department, Country Reports on Human  Rights  Practices  -  Somalia
2002, 31 March 2003.
CIPU Somalia Country Report October 2003.
Joint  Danish,  Finnish,  Norwegian  and  British  fact-finding  mission  to
Nairobi, Kenya 7-21 January 2004 (elsewhere the `2004 Joint Report`).
UNHCR Position on the Return of Rejected Asylum Seekers to Somalia,  Geneva,
January 2004.
Culturalorientation.net: Somali Bantu-their history and culture.
US State Department, Country Reports  on  Human  Rights  Practices  -  2003,
February 24, 2004.
CIPU Somalia Country Report April 2004.
Home Office, IND Operational Guidance Note: Somalia V6 May 2004.
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Somalia: The situation of  minority
groups and their members 9 August 2004.
UN Office for the Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs  (OCHA),  Somalia:
Humanitarian Update September 2004, 4 October 2004.
Expert report on the Bantu by Dr Joseph Mullen, October 2004.



Appendix B: Tribunal cases of relevance to  the  principal  issues  in  this
case.


NG (Somalia) CG [2003] UKIAT 00011 (previously G (Somalia).
SH (Somalia) [2004] UKIAT 00164
FA (Somali Bajuni female at risk) [2004] UKIAT 00106
SH (Return-Gedo-Burden of proof) Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00164.


-----------------------
      1


