
NH (Female BOCs, exceptionality, Art  8, para 317) British Overseas
Citizens [2006] UKAIT 00085

                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                   Determination
Promulgated:
On 3 October 2006                                        On 26 October 2006

                                   Before

                       Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                                    Senior Immigration Judge Batiste

                                   Between

                                     NH
                                                                   Appellant

                                      V

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUMBAI

                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                     PV
                                                                   Appellant

                                      V

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the 1st Appellant: Manjit S Gill QC instructed by Oliver Abey & Co
For the 2nd Appellant:  Manjit S Gill QC instructed by Oliver Abey & Co

For the Respondent:    Elizabeth Laing instructed by Treasury Solicitor

Female British Overseas Citizens obtained UK citizenship only from  1  April
2003.  Section 12 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  was  passed
to" right an historical wrong, which is  something  which  should  be  taken
into account when making the Huang assessment..

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. These two appeals have been heard  together  because  they  raise  common
   points as to the approach to  be  taken  to  Rule  317  (i)  (f)  of  the
   Immigration Rules (HC395 as  amended)  and  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights.  The two Appellants (called for brevity H and
   V in this determination) have wholly separate claims, have no  connection
   with each other, and are treated, separately, where  appropriate,  within
   this determination. But the same issues arise in both cases.

2. Each of the mothers of each Appellant has acted as the  sponsor  for  her
   son.  Both  are  women  with  East  African  connections  who  have  been
   registered as British citizens under Section 4B British  Nationality  Act
   1981.  That section was inserted by Section 12  Nationality,  Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002 with effect from 30th  April  2003.   Each  Appellant
   claims to be a dependent child of his mother but each was over the age of
   18 at the date of application.  They were both refused  entry  clearance.
   They each appealed.  Both Appellants were successful in their appeals; in
   the case of H to the Adjudicator, and in the case of V to an  Immigration
   Judge.

3. The appeal in H was promulgated on 6th  January  2005.   The  Adjudicator
   (Mr M R Oliver) allowed the appeal under Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
   Respondent (represented throughout in both  cases  by  the  Secretary  of
   State and so referred to in this determination) applied for permission to
   appeal in time. This was granted  on  18th  May  2005.   The  appeal  had
   therefore been pending immediately before 4th April 2005.  Under Rule 62,
   Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI  2005  No.230)
   the appeal falls to be reconsidered by this Tribunal in  accordance  with
   that  rule.   Rule  62(7)  provides  that  in  these  circumstances   the
   reconsideration  is  limited  to  the  grounds  upon  which  the   former
   Immigration Appeal Tribunal granted permission to appeal.

4. In V the appeal was promulgated on 24th October 2005.  Immigration  Judge
   Lingan allowed the appeal in respect of both the  Immigration  Rules  and
   Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The   Secretary   of   State   applied   for
   reconsideration and that was ordered on 8th November 2005.  The case of V
   came on for hearing on 14th February  2006.   The  Deputy  President  who
   heard the case adjourned it and ordered it to be linked to H.

5. The Secretary of State argues there  are  three  issues  which  arise  in
   these cases:

        a) Whether the determination of the  judicial  officers  which  the
           Secretary of State seeks to challenge  in  these  cases  contain
           material errors of law;
        b) Whether the Appellants can rely on Article 8 of the ECHR if they
           cannot satisfy paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules;
        c) Whether there is any merit in an argument  based  on  historical
           injustice and/or discrimination and whether the  applicants  can
           pursue claims based on the shortcomings of the  pre-2002  policy
           or rules.

6. On behalf of the Appellants it is submitted that:

   Having regard to the circumstances of each case and to the history of how
   the  Appellants  came  to  be  in  their  current  position   and   given
   governmental policies and  statements,  the  Adjudicator  or  Immigration
   Judge in each case was entitled to allow the appeals whether  under  Rule
   317 (i) (f) or under Article 8 ECHR or both so no material error  of  law
   was committed by either judicial officer.


The H History

7. The Appellant's  maternal  grandfather  was  registered  in  Kenya  as  a
   British subject and a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies in 1957.
    The Appellant's mother, the sponsor, was born in Nairobi on 14th October
   1959 and was then a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies  ().   The
   sponsor married the Appellant's father an Indian national in 1975.   They
   have four sons.  The oldest born in 1976 now lives in the Seychelles; the
   second son born in 1978 lives in Muscat; the third son born in 1980 lives
   in India.  The Appellant, their fourth son, was born on 6th May 1985.

8. On 27th July 1998 the Appellant's mother obtained  her  British  overseas
   citizen passport.  In August 2003  the  sponsor  applied  for  a  British
   passport.  She was registered as a British citizen with  full  rights  on
   9th September 2003.  Her passport was available in October of that  year.
   She returned to India to support the entry clearance application  of  the
   Appellant and her husband, his father.  On 5th May  2004,  the  Appellant
   and his father, together with the sponsor, were interviewed by the  entry
   clearance officer in Mumbai.  Entry clearance was refused  for  both  the
   Appellant and his father.

9. On 17th May 2004 the sponsor returned to the United  Kingdom.   A  notice
   of appeal was filed for both the Appellant and his  father  on  27th  May
   2004.  The appeals were reviewed.  The Appellant's father was  granted  a
   visa to settle in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  dependent  spouse  of  the
   Appellant's mother on 23rd October 2004.  The review of  the  Appellant's
   appeal changed nothing and his appeal was heard before an Adjudicator  in
   December 2004.


The V History

10. The sponsor of V was born in India on 16th October 1955.   Her  maternal
   grandfather, Mr H K Ruda, had registered as  a  British  citizen  of  the
   United Kingdom and Colonies on 25th March 1953 in Kenya. Mrs V, qualified
   as a  by reason of Section 5 (1) British Nationality Act 1948.

11. The sponsor married the Appellant's father on 24th July 1978.   She  had
   three sons born in 1981, 1983 and 1984.   They  all  reside  in  Nairobi,
   Kenya.  The Appellant, her fourth son, was born on 15th August 1985.   He
   was therefore at the time his appeal was lodged aged 19 years  2  months.
   The sponsor entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in April  2003.   She
   shortly thereafter applied for a British passport which was issued to her
   on 19th August 2003 and gave her full citizenship rights..  The Appellant
   applied for entry clearance as did his father, the sponsor's  spouse,  on
   8th October 2004.

12. The  Appellant  was  interviewed  on  14th  December  2004.   His  entry
   clearance was refused  but  the  Appellant's  father  was  granted  entry
   clearance.  The notice of appeal was filed on 30th  December  2004.   The
   Appellant's father had been granted a visa by the entry clearance officer
   and settled in the UK with the sponsor in April 2005.  The hearing of the
   appeal took place on 11th October 2005 and the Immigration Judge  allowed
   the appeal in respect of both the Immigration  Rules  and  human  rights.
   Thereafter reconsideration was ordered as indicated above.


The Legislative Background

13. Each of the  sponsors  claim  to  British  nationality  arose  from  the
   British Nationality Act 1948 which was effective from 1st  January  1950.
   They each, when born, became citizens of the United Kingdom and  Colonies
   by birth ().  Their rights to settle in the UK  were  restricted  by  the
   Commonwealth Immigration Act 1968.  The Immigration Act  1971  came  into
   force on 1st January 1973.  It introduced  the  concept  of  a  right  of
   abode.  On 14th December 1973 the European  Commission  on  Human  Rights
   decided the East African Asians case.  It decided that  the  Commonwealth
   Immigration Act 1968 was  racially  discriminatory.   The  UK  Government
   entered into a friendly settlement.  A Special Quota Voucher Scheme  (SQV
   Scheme) was introduced to benefit citizens  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
   Colonies whose rights had been restricted by the 1968 Act. But  it  could
   not assist either of the two sponsors since  married women who  were  not
   heads of households were excluded from the Scheme.

14. The Special Quota Voucher  Scheme  had  been  introduced  from  1968  to
   assist both s and subsequently British Overseas Citizens (BOCs).  Each of
   the two sponsors had qualified  as  BOCs  under  the  provisions  of  the
   British Nationality Act 1981. The SQV Scheme was outside the  Immigration
   Rules.  It allowed persons latterly BOCs who had no other citizenship and
   were under pressure to leave their country of residence and  had  nowhere
   else to go to settle in the UK.  The numbers entitled to come to  the  UK
   were limited by quota rules.  From 1975, 5,000  vouchers  per  year  were
   issued.  Waiting lists were always long.  By 1987  those  applying  under
   the  quota  were  expected  to  wait  more  than  five  years  (Macdonald
   Immigration Law and Practice 1st Edition 1983 pg.248 and 2nd Edition 1987
   pg.286).

15. Importantly the SQV Scheme was only available to heads of household  and
   to their dependents.  Such  heads  of  household  were  defined  for  the
   purpose of the scheme as "men who have reached their 18th birthday; women
   over 18 who [are] ... single, widowed, divorced [or] married to a man who
   is incapable of fulfilling the role of  head  of  household  for  medical
   reasons,  e.g.  severely  physically  or  mentally  handicapped.    (This
   includes a woman whose marriage may have been not valid  in  English  law
   but which exists in fact, and a  woman  who  is  living  in  a  permanent
   association with a man)".  The scheme was therefore applied in  a  manner
   which discriminated between men and  women  on  the  grounds  of  marital
   status.  The  scheme  was  abolished  on  5th  March  2002.   There  were
   approximately 500 applications per year at that stage.

16. Section 12 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  amended
   sections 4 and 14 of the British Nationality Act 1981.  The effect was to
   entitle certain British Overseas Citizens to  be  registered  as  British
   citizens from 30th April 2003.  This applied to those who hold  no  other
   nationality and who had not renounced any other nationality.  The mothers
   of both the Appellants qualified for British citizenship  for  the  first
   time as a result of this amendment. They were adversely affected  by  the
   "anomaly" referred to in the next paragraph.

17. The context of this legislative change is of importance in these  cases.
     The  then  Home  Secretary  said  in  a  parliamentary  debate  on  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Bill in the House of Commons  on  5th
   November 2002 in relation to the changes made which subsequently  enabled
   the mothers of the two Appellants to obtain British citizenship:

           "We are talking here about  righting  an  historical  wrong,  in
           terms of what happened back in the late 1960s and early 1980s in
           regard to British overseas citizens ... [who]  found  themselves
           in an anomalous situation ... I wish to put right  that  anomaly
           for British overseas citizens."

18. The Appellants applied to enter the United Kingdom in each case to  join
   their mother a British Citizen settled in the UK  at  the  time  of  each
   application. Each relied on paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules:

           "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave
           to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  ...  other
           dependent relative of a person present and settled in the United
           Kingdom are that the person:
               i) is related to a person present and settled in the  United
                  Kingdom in one of the following ways ...
                       (f)   the son... over the  age  of  18  living  alone
                            outside  the  United  Kingdom   in   the   most
                            exceptional  compassionate  circumstances   and
                            mainly  dependent  financially   on   relatives
                            settled in the United Kingdom; and
           (ii)  is joining... a person who is present and settled  in  the
                 United Kingdom... and
           (iii) is financially wholly or mainly dependent on the  relative
                 present and settled in the United Kingdom; and
           (iv)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  without  recourse
                 to public funds, in accommodation which the sponsor owns or
                 occupies exclusively; and
                       (a)   can, and will,  be  maintained  adequately  and
                            without recourse to public funds and
           (v)   has no other close relatives in his own country to whom he
                 could turn for financial support ...."

19. Each appellant also relied in the alternative in support of their  claim
   on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights which  provides:

           8 (1) Everyone has a right to respect for his private and family
                 life, his home and his correspondence
           (2)   There should be no interference by a public authority with
                 the exercise of this right except  such  as  in  accordance
                 with the law and is necessary in a  democratic  society  in
                 the interest of national security,  public  safety  or  the
                 economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of
                 disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
                 or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.



20. The interrelationship of Article 8 ECHR and the  Immigration  Rules  was
   considered in Huang  and  others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2005] EWCA Civ 105.  Laws LJ said of the Immigration Rules at
   paragraph 57 "the rules have themselves struck the  balance  between  the
   public interest and the private right the search for which is inherent in
   the convention as it has been interpreted by the Strasbourg  Court".   At
   paragraph 56 he  said  "the  adjudicator  has  no  business  whatever  to
   question or pass judgement upon the policy given by the  Rules.   In  our
   judgement his duty, when faced with an Article 8 case where the would  be
   immigrant has no claim under the Rules, is and is only to see whether  an
   exceptional  case  had  been  made  out  such  that  the  requirement  of
   proportionality requires a  departure  from  the  relevant  rule  in  the
   particular circumstances".   At  paragraph  59  it  was  said  "the  true
   position ... is that ... (the adjudicator is required to allow an appeal)
   if, but only if he concludes that the  case  is  so  exceptional  on  its
   particular facts  that  the  imperative  of  proportionality  demands  an
   outcome in the Appellants favour notwithstanding that he  cannot  succeed
   under the Rules"

H

21. The Appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  to  join  his  mother  the
   sponsor on 29th March 2004.  He was then aged 19.   The  application  was
   under paragraph 317(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.  The application  was
   refused.  The ECO was not satisfied that the Appellant was  living  alone
   in the  most  compassionate  of  circumstances  or  that  he  was  mainly
   dependent on the sponsor.

22. In his determination the Adjudicator when  dealing  with  paragraph  317
   found as follows:

      "4.2  Under paragraph 317 the Appellant is clearly the son of a person
           present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.   Having  seen  the
           various financial documents concerning the assistance  given  by
           the sponsor to the Appellant I am satisfied that  he  is  mainly
           dependent on his mother.  By virtue of the  same  documents  and
           the evidence  of  the  sponsor  as  to  her  and  her  husband's
           employment, I am satisfied that the Appellant could and would be
           maintained adequately without recourse to public funds.   Having
           seen the affidavit I am satisfied that he  could  and  would  be
           accommodated without recourse  to  public  funds  and  that  the
           accommodation was exclusively occupied by the sponsor.  Although
           questions have been asked by the respondent as to the assistance
           which could be provided by the Appellant's close relatives still
           in India the arguments were presented to me as  bare  inferences
           from the factual relationship.  The only evidence came from  the
           sponsor.  In those  circumstances  I  find  that  the  Appellant
           cannot turn to his close relatives  for  financial  support.   I
           further find that he is living a life  effectively  on  his  own
           since there is no evidence that the finances or substance of his
           life are in any way intertwined with those of  his  brother  and
           family.
      4.3   There is however one final hurdle which the Appellant in my view
           cannot cross under the Immigration Rules.  I cannot see  how  he
           satisfied the  requirement  that  he  is  living  in  the  "most
           exceptional compassionate of circumstances".  I have no evidence
           to suggest that his  current  life  is  other  than  that  of  a
           supported student living in unexceptional circumstances".


23. The Adjudicator went on to consider Article 8.  He  concluded  that  the
   entry  clearance  officer  had  not  performed  the  relevant   balancing
   exercise.  He found that there was family life between the  Appellant  on
   the one hand and the sponsor and her family in the United Kingdom on  the
   other.  He addressed the issue as to whether it would be  reasonable  for
   the sponsor and her husband to relocate back to India.   The  Appellant's
   parents had only recently settled in the UK.   The  Adjudicator  did  not
   regard it reasonable for them to return to  India.   He  found  that  the
   refusal of the entry clearance  officer  was  an  interference  with  the
   Appellant's Article 8 rights.  He said:

      "4.9  Whether that places the State in breach of  the  obligations  to
           show respect  for  family  life  depends  on  whether  it  is  a
           proportionate response to the counter veiling public interest in
           maintaining an effective immigration policy.  It is my  view  it
           is not.  Although the Appellant is over the age of 18 he is  not
           far beyond it.  He is single, and not engaged.  His relationship
           is not one deemed to be one of the less important but one of the
           greatest.  In all those circumstances I find that the refusal is
           disproportionate and accordingly I find that  the  refusal  does
           place the State in breach  of  its  positive  obligations  under
           Article 8."

24. The respondent points out that the Adjudicator did not consider  whether
   or not the case was  exceptional  as  required  by  Huang.   Nor  did  he
   consider the history of the SQVS.  We note that Huang  was  not  in  fact
   decided until 1st March 2005 nearly three months  after  the  Adjudicator
   heard this appeal.

25. The Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  gave  permission  to  appeal  on  15th
   March.  It considered that there appeared to be an error of law  in  that
   the decision was contrary to the principles in  Mahmood  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2001] 1  WLR  840.   It  is  said  by  the
   respondent that by analogy the Appellant H's case falls to be  considered
   under the third head outlined by Lord  Phillips  of  Worth  Matravers  at
   paragraph 55 of his judgement in Mahmood. He there reached conclusions as
   to the approach of the European Court of  Human  Rights  in  relation  to
   potential conflicts between the respect for family life under  article  8
   and the enforcement of immigration controls vis:

      "(3)  Removal or exclusion of one family member  from  a  State  where
           other members of the  family  are  lawfully  resident  will  not
           necessarily  infringe  Article   8   provided   there   are   no
           insurmountable obstacles to the family living  together  in  the
           country of origin of the family member excluded even where  this
           involves a degree of hardship for some or all of the members  of
           the family."

26. On the other  hand  the  Appellant  H  submits  that  the  Adjudicator's
   approach was in line with Mahmood.  It is suggested that in  essence  the
   Tribunal  has  to  ask  itself  whether,  having  regard   to   all   the
   circumstances, it is reasonable not to  expect  relocation  back  to  the
   country of origin here for the parents rather than the Appellant.  It  is
   said on behalf of the Appellant that the Adjudicator was aware  that  the
   mother had not qualified under the SQVS.  Her right to  settle  had  only
   come about because of section 12 of the  2002  Act.   He  considered  the
   Appellant's case should receive  sympathetic  consideration  outside  the
   Rules.  He was entitled to take into account that it  was  not  a  simple
   case of parents relocating to India. Several  other  relatives  had  been
   granted leave to reside in the UK.  Nor was it an attractive  proposition
   to uproot the family from the UK when they had only recently arrived.  It
   is said the history in context required a different approach to assessing
   the reasonableness of relocation than might be so in other  cases.   This
   was a rational approach and one open to the Adjudicator so  no  error  of
   law was demonstrated. In particular at the time of  the  application  the
   Appellant was not in fact much beyond 18  and  the  relationship  with  a
   parent and child is one of the most important.  The Appellant was also at
   all material times dependent on his mother and father.

V

27. Entry clearance was refused for V by the  ECO  on  14th  December  2004.
   The Appellant was said not to meet the requirements of Rule 317 and  that
   determination was upheld on review.

28. It is clear from the evidence accepted by  the  immigration  judge  that
   the appellant would be joining his mother who was present and settled  in
   the UK and would be  maintained  and  accommodated  without  recourse  to
   public funds. The Immigration Judge was satisfied on  the  evidence  that
   "the sponsor had provided financial support for her family  as  a  whole"
   (paragraph 14 of the determination).  She found that  as  a  student  the
   Appellant was dependent on his mother of a necessity (paragraph  15)  and
   she held that the Appellant's sister could not be relied  on  to  support
   him so there were no close relatives to turn to in India.

29. The Immigration Judge however nowhere deals  with  the  entry  clearance
   officer's note which says "the Appellant stated his sister lived  in  the
   village next door and his aunt and grandmother also  lived  in  the  same
   village.  He was a student and if needed there was no reason why he could
   not support himself.  His description of his house and circumstance  were
   that he lived in reasonable circumstances". The reasoning given  for  the
   conclusion reached that the Appellant  was  "living  alone  in  the  most
   exceptional compassionate of circumstances" is not  adequate.  We  regard
   the judge as having made a material error  of  law  in  approaching  that
   aspect of the test in rule 317 as she did.

30.   The  judge  then  having  concluded  that  the   appellant   met   the
   requirements  of  Rule  317  Immigration  Rules  also  decided  that  the
   requirements of article 8 were satisfied. She refers to  the  legislative
   history we have outlined. She noted that there had been injustice to  the
   sponsor as a result of that. The accepted there was family  life  between
   the appellant and the sponsor. She said given all  the  background  facts
   that the claim was truly exceptional under Huang and allowed  the  appeal
   under article 8. However where an appeal is allowed under the Immigration
   Rules it will rarely be necessary to consider the  article  8  claim  and
   that need not have been done in this case had she been correct  to  allow
   the appeal under Rule 317.


Conclusion

31. We do not consider on the evidence that either appellant could  properly
   be said to  be  "living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
   circumstances". So we agree with the adjudicator in H and for the reasons
   given consider the judge in V was wrong so to decide. But we have further
   considered these cases both in the light of the individual  circumstances
   of each appellant and having regard to  the  legislative  background.  We
   have concluded that in both cases the IJs  were  entitled  to  allow  the
   appeal under Article 8 ECHR and indeed we would have  come  to  the  same
   conclusion.  We are satisfied from the findings  before  the  Adjudicator
   and the Immigration Judge that in each case the Appellant was  wholly  or
   mainly  dependent  on  the  sponsors;  that  each   Appellant   will   be
   accommodated adequately without recourse to public funds in the UK;  that
   each dependent can and will be maintained adequately without recourse  to
   public funds and neither has close relatives in his own country  to  whom
   he could turn  for  financial  support.   In  other  words  most  of  the
   requirements of Rule 317 are satisfied.

32. We note that each Appellant was only just over the age of  18  when  the
   application for entry clearance was made.  The  opportunity  to  make  an
   application prior to  the  18th  birthday  of  each  appellant  was  very
   limited. In each case the  application  was  made  with  the  Appellant's
   father so both the father and the son could join each Appellant's  mother
   as sponsor. In each case there was and is a  strong  family  life.   Each
   mother had only recently obtained citizenship of the UK with the right to
   settle and each had only recently settled in the UK.

33. We are supported in our view that this case is exceptional  in  relation
   to the ages of the Appellants  by  two  factors.  First  the  SQV  Scheme
   adopted an upper age of 25 rather than 18 for family  reunion.   Children
   up to the age of 25 so long as they were  dependent,  as  the  Appellants
   are, could be admitted as part of the family under the scheme even though
   they were over 18.  This SQV Scheme policy was of course  withdrawn  well
   before the mothers in this case were able to secure their rights to enter
   the UK.  But it informs our thinking when considering the application  of
   article 8  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  these  cases  and  the
   Respondent's  past  policies  in  comparable  situations.   Further   the
   September 1998 Home Office IDI deals with cases of re-applicants who  can
   show in the light of DNA evidence that they have been previously  wrongly
   refused.  There an upper age of 25 was  adopted  rather  than  18.   This
   provides an example of how an apparent absolute cut-off age is not always
   mandatory where the Respondent accepts that an error of judgement or fact
   has been made.

34. Each of the Appellants' mothers had  been  a  British  overseas  citizen
   since birth.  As they were females and not head of a household they could
   never have applied to settle in the UK under the  Special  Quota  Voucher
   Scheme. The foundation of any entitlement to come  to  the  UK  had  been
   prevented by racially discriminatory earlier legislation.  The SQVS which
   sought to deal with that position was  itself  discriminatory  on  gender
   grounds against the mother of  each  of  the  Appellants.  There  was  an
   historic discrimination.

35. The first occasion from which either of the  Appellants'  mothers  could
   acquire British citizenship, giving them the right  to  apply  for  their
   dependents to  settle  with  them,  was  on  and  after  1st  April  2003
   subsequent to the passing of  Section  12  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002.  We accept the Appellants' arguments that  part  of  the
   reason behind the passing of Section 12 of  the  Act  was  to  "right  an
   historical wrong".

36. These  facts  as  taken  together  constitute  in  our  judgement  truly
   exceptional circumstances as required in Huang.  The SQVS could not avail
   either  mother.   The  previous  legislation  as   a   whole   had   been
   discriminatory in excluding those with the Appellants mothers' background
   from the possibility of citizenship of the UK.

37. In each case the fathers of the two Appellants  were  able  to  exercise
   their right to join their wives, the Appellants' sponsors, and settle  in
   the  UK.   The  Appellants,  otherwise  wholly  dependent  and  still  in
   education, would have had an absolute right to come to the  UK  had  they
   been under 18 on the date of application.  We  regard  this  history  and
   context as of the  utmost  relevance.   We  agree  with  the  Appellants'
   representatives that the assessment of what is necessary in a  democratic
   society in Article 8 terms should involve  a  consideration  of  all  the
   circumstances including the previous history of any previous wrongful act
   and an understanding of how the convention rights have  to  be  enforced.
   We accept the submission that "in Strasbourg cases the Courts have looked
   at the history of development of legislation in  assessing  what  is  the
   right thing to do in the modern context  when  acknowledgements  of  past
   wrongful treatment are made". We also agree that there is no question  in
   this case of attempting to enforce rights retrospectively.


38. Further we are not here dealing with  family  relationships  which  have
   been  created  after  entry.   The  relationship  in  both  cases  is  of
   longstanding since the birth of each Appellant.  If  each  Appellant  had
   been under the age of 18 then each claim would have been allowed.

39. We accept that the time  taken  for  each  Appellant's  mother  to  make
   application for registration as British citizens and to apply  for  their
   families to come to the UK was reasonable.   Both  Appellants  were  only
   just over the age of 18 and were fully dependent and  living  alone  when
   the applications were made.

40. We accordingly regard these two  cases  as  one  among  the  very  small
   number of cases  which  are  truly  exceptional.  We  consider  that  the
   decisions of the entry clearance officer in each case breached Article  8
   ECHR.  Both the Adjudicator in H and the immigration judge in  V  allowed
   the appeals under Article 8.  The immigration judge in V  need  not  have
   made that finding given her conclusion under Rule 317.  But the  findings
   she made under that Rule do contribute towards the  conclusion  that  the
   Appellant V's case is truly exceptional.  We  accordingly  conclude  that
   decisions that the appeal in respect of human rights in each case  should
   be allowed must stand.  The decision that provisions of Rule 317 are  met
   in the case of V was wrong and is quashed. For the avoidance of doubt  we
   conclude for the reasons given

41. The appeal of H is allowed on Human Rights grounds.

42. The appeal of V is allowed on Human Rights grounds.

43. In the particular circumstances of  these  two  cases  we  exercise  the
   power given by Section 87 (1) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002 and direct that  entry  clearance  be  granted  for  each  of  these
   Appellants.



                                             Mr Justice Hodge OBE, President
                                                             23 October 2006
