

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BA (deprivation of citizenship: appeals) [2018] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 November 2017                        |                                 |
|                                           |.................................|
|                                           |......                           |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     BA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:-

For the Appellant:    Mr Z. Malik,  counsel,  instructed  by  R  Spio  &  Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


  (1) In an appeal under section 40A of the British Nationality  Act  1981,
    the Tribunal  must  first  establish  whether  the  relevant  condition
    precedent in section 40(2) or  (3)  exists  for  the  exercise  of  the
    Secretary of State's discretion to deprive  a  person  (P)  of  British
    citizenship.








  (2) In a section 40(2) case, the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public  good  is  to  be
    given  very  significant  weight  and   will   almost   inevitably   be
    determinative of that issue.


  (3)  In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish whether one  or
    more of the means described in subsection (3)(a), (b) and (c) were used
    by P in order  to  obtain  British  citizenship.  As  held  in  Pirzada
    (Deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017] UKUT 196  (IAC)
    the deception must have motivated the acquisition of that citizenship.


  (4)  In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the fact that the Secretary  of
    State has decided in the exercise of her discretion  to  deprive  P  of
    British citizenship will in practice mean the Tribunal  can  allow  P's
    appeal only if satisfied that the reasonably foreseeable consequence of
    deprivation  would  violate  the  obligations  of  the  United  Kingdom
    government under the Human Rights Act 1998 and/or that  there  is  some
    exceptional feature of the case  which  means  the  discretion  in  the
    subsection concerned should be exercised differently.


  (5)  As can be seen from AB (British citizenship: deprivation: Deliallisi
    considered) (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 451  (IAC),  the  stronger  P's  case
    appears  to  the  Tribunal  to  be  for  resisting  any  future  (post-
    deprivation) removal on ECHR grounds, the less likely it will  be  that
    P's removal from the United Kingdom will  be  one  of  the  foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation.


  (6)  The appeal is to be determined by reference to the evidence  adduced
    to the Tribunal, whether or  not  the  same  evidence  was  before  the
    Secretary of State when she made her decision to deprive.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

1. The appellant was born a Ghanaian citizen in 1965.   He  was  naturalised
   as a British Citizen in 2013.  In his application for naturalisation, the
   appellant produced a Ghanaian passport, in the name of BA.

2. The appellant answered "no" to the entirety of the questions  in  section
   3 of the form, dealing with good character.  He accordingly  denied  that
   he had any criminal convictions and said he had not been engaged  in  any
   other activities which might have indicated that he may not be considered
   a person of good character.

3. In November 2015, the respondent wrote to the appellant to say  that  she
   had reasons to believe the appellant  had  not  told  the  truth  in  his
   application for British  citizenship.  The  respondent  gave  details  of
   information received by her, indicating that before acquiring  indefinite
   leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   subsequently   British
   Citizenship, the appellant had obtained or attempted to  obtain  numerous
   UK drivers' licences and British passports in different identities.

4. The respondent further explained that a  photograph  submitted  with  the
   appellant's application for naturalisation matched the photograph of  the
   appellant bearing the name BA.  Accordingly, documentation said  to  have
   been used by the appellant in the identity of FJR, TA-W  and  SK-W  must,
   according to the respondent, have been false.

5. The appellant's response to the respondent  was  somewhat  singular.   He
   appeared to accept using the three names mentioned by the respondent,  in
   addition to BA.  He also said  he  "got  in  trouble"  in  the  USA,  was
   detained there and subsequently deported.

6. A later response, made on behalf of  the  appellant  by  his  solicitors,
   sought to explain the appellant's actions by reference to "some spiritual
   experience which cleansed him of  destructive  and  oppressive  thoughts,
   causing the deletion of certain facts linked to the traumatic experiences
   of his life... He therefore pleaded with the Secretary of State to assist
   him in his self-help spiritual journey".

7. Unsurprisingly, in February 2017 the respondent wrote  to  the  appellant
   to inform him that she had decided he had  obtained  British  citizenship
   fraudulently and that he should be deprived of it.




   B. The appellant's appeal

8. The appellant appealed under section 40A of the British  Nationality  Act
   1981 ("The 1981 Act").  His grounds of appeal contended that he  had  not
   obtained British citizenship fraudulently.  He also  submitted  that  the
   respondent had failed to carry out an assessment of the best interests of
   his three children, as required by section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
   and Nationality Act 2009.

9. In handwritten representations to  the  respondent,  the  appellant  said
   that he had provided "services to the UK government" and that he




       "was very young at the time of these misdeeds and  just  had  a  hard
      life... at the time of these identity problems I had no status in  the
      UK and it was hard to live without documentation and all that  led  to
      me trying to find a way to live and survive in the UK.  I am  sorry  I
      had to do things the wrong way. I am older now and a parent".

10. The appellant's appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was originally due  to
   be heard on 19 June 2017.   A  week  earlier,  however,  the  appellant's
   solicitors requested an adjournment.  The case was said by them to be  of
   a "sensitive nature which involves national security".  A key witness was
   a police officer,  initial  contact  with  whom  had  been  made  by  the
   solicitors only on 9 June 2017.

11. The appeal was relisted for 7 August 2017.  On 3 August, the  solicitors
   requested a further adjournment.  They said they  remained  in  the  same
   position as they had been on 12 June and that:-

      " We have been unable to take the statement from  the  police  officer
      and we are yet to have a conference with the Home Office which we were
      informed was due to the presenting officer dealing with the case being
      on leave. Unfortunately, these are [matters] that [need] to  be  dealt
      with, from the information received our client assisted the Crown  and
      information that is classified has found its way in the decision  from
      the respondent.  We believe it is in the  interests  of  justice,  the
      Crown and our client as well as his minor children to have 3-4  months
      adjournment with a view to resolving this before it  is  dealt  within
      the courts".


12. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  judge  on  7  August,  Mr
   Siaw, a solicitor appearing for the appellant,  renewed  the  adjournment
   application.  He told the judge that  the  appellant  "had  worked  as  a
   police  informant  and  had  infiltrated  drug  gangs  in  America.   The
   appellant had been told to obtain false identities by his handler".

13. Faced with this, the judge requested  the  presenting  officer  to  take
   instructions from a senior case worker. Having done  so,  the  presenting
   officer objected to any further adjournment.

14. The judge refused to adjourn.   He  noted  that  almost  two  years  had
   passed  since  the  appellant  had  originally  been  notified  that  the
   respondent was considering depriving him of his British citizenship.  The
   judge  also  noted  that  the   appellant's   original   responses   were
   inconsistent with his later representations that he had been fully  aware
   of his false identities but employed them in order to live in the  United
   Kingdom.  The judge  was  "not  confident  that  there  was  a  realistic
   prospect of the appellant obtaining any evidence from  a  police  officer
   which would assist his case.  Accordingly, I refused the application  for
   an adjournment".

15. Having been made aware of the judge's decision to proceed, Mr Siaw  said
   he had no submissions to make. He expressed his  view  that  the  hearing
   should not go  ahead,  in  the  interests  of  justice.   Everything  the
   appellant had done "was because  he  was  working  for  the  Metropolitan
   Police".






   C. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge

16. The First-tier Tribunal judge's findings begin at paragraph  23  of  his
   decision.  In reaching them, the judge said he had  had  regard  "to  the
   recent guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in  Pirzada  (Deprivation  of
   citizenship: general principles)  [2017] UKUT 196 (IAC)."

17. The judge considered it  manifest  that  the  respondent  had  told  the
   appellant she intended to deprive him  of  his  citizenship  pursuant  to
   section 40(3) of the 1981 Act. This provides as follows:-

      "(3) the Secretary of State  may  by  order  deprive  a  person  of  a
      citizenship  status   which   results   from   his   registration   or
      naturalisation if  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
      registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -
               a) fraud,
               b) false representation, or
               c) concealment of a material fact."


18. The judge then set out  the  following  extract  from  the  headnote  of
   Pirzada:-

      "(3) The power under sub-s (3) arises only if the Secretary  of  State
      is satisfied that  registration  or  naturalisation  was  obtained  by
      fraud, false representation or concealment of  a  material  fact.  The
      deception referred to must have motivated the grant of (in the present
      case) citizenship, and therefore necessarily preceded that grant".

19. At paragraph 26, the judge noted that, in  his  written  representations
   to  the   respondent,   the   appellant   had   accepted   making   false
   representations and  using  false  identities  to  obtain  passports  and
   driving licences. The judge concluded that:-


    "I cannot look into any reasons why the appellant  may  have  done  so.
    Nor am I concerned with whether the  appellant  could  be  regarded  as
    being of good character, if, as is claimed, he was acting at  the  time
    as a police informant".

20. At paragraph 27, the judge noted that:-

      "As clarified in Pirzada, I can only consider whether the Secretary of
      State had information from which he was satisfied that the appellant's
      naturalisation  was  obtained  by  fraud,  false   representation   or
      concealment of  a material fact".

21. The judge noted that it was not  disputed  the  appellant  had  answered
   "no" to the question in the application form "Have you  ever  engaged  in
   any other activities which might indicate that you may not be  considered
   a person of good character?". The judge was satisfied that, in  answering
   that question in the negative, the appellant had committed  a  deception,
   involving the concealment of material facts.  That concealment  had  been
   deliberate and related to the fact that over a long period of  time,  the
   appellant had "used false identities and had  obtained  or  attempted  to
   obtain false passports or driving licences".

22. At paragraph 29, the judge said he was satisfied  that  the  appellant's
   deception in concealing his use of false identities  had  "motivated  the
   grant of his citizenship".  Plainly, the judge thought, the use of  false
   identities to deceive government  departments  was  "obviously  something
   that might indicate [the appellant] may not be  considered  a  person  of
   good character".  That was so, according to the judge,  "irrespective  of
   any motivation on the appellant's part".

23. The judge also noted the respondent's guidance, which  stated  that  the
   decision maker will "normally refuse an application where the person  has
   attempted to  deceive  or  otherwise  been  clearly  dishonest  in  their
   dealings with another department of government".

24. The judge, accordingly, concluded at paragraph 31  that  the  respondent
   had properly exercised her discretion under section 40(3)  and  that  her
   decision was in accordance with the law.

25. So far the appellant's other  grounds  of  appeal  were  concerned,  the
   judge said the following:-

      "32. In relation to the other grounds of appeal, whilst the effect  of
      the decision is that the appellant has  no  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom, no removal notice has been issued  and  therefore  the
      appellant does not have  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  at  present.
      Accordingly, the decision to deprive the appellant of his  citizenship
      does not amount to an interference with his private or family life and
      Article 8 ECHR is not engaged at this stage."




   D. The appellant's grounds of challenge

26.  The appellant applied for permission to appeal against the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal judge.

27. Permission was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  all  grounds.
   These included the contention that the Tribunal  had  "misunderstood  the
   nature of its appellate jurisdiction and  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
   consider and determine material  matters".  In  particular,  the  grounds
   alleged that the judge had fallen into error in paragraph  26,  where  he
   had said he could not look into any reasons why the appellant  might  had
   made false representations and used false identities and that  the  issue
   whether the appellant was a police informant was a matter with which  the
   judge was not concerned.

28. In support of his grounds, the appellant made reference to the  decision
   of the Upper Tribunal in Arusha and Demushi (deprivation of citizenship -
   delay [2012] UKUT 80(IAC) ("Arusha").  The decision of the Upper Tribunal
   in Pirzada was said to be inconsistent with Arusha, which did not  appear
   to have been discussed by the Upper Tribunal  in  Pirzada.   The  grounds
   submitted that Arusha should be followed.

29. So far as paragraph 32  of  the  judge's  decision  was  concerned,  the
   grounds argued that the finding that Article 8 was not  in  play  in  the
   appeal was contrary to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Deliallisi
   (British Citizen: deprivation appeal; Scope). [2013] UKUT 439  (IAC),  as
   confirmed in AB (British Citizenship: deprivation; Deliallisi considered)
   (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 451 (IAC).




   E. The Secretary of State's position

30. At the beginning of the hearing on 21 November, Mr Clarke  informed  the
   Upper Tribunal that, following discussions within the  Home  Office,  the
   respondent's position was that, insofar as there is  a  conflict  between
   the decisions in  Arusha  and  Pirzada,  the  respondent  considers  that
   Pirzada should not be followed.

31. Mr Clarke further informed us that the respondent was now  of  the  view
   that, as held by the Tribunal in Deliallisi and AB, an  appellant  in  an
   appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act may raise Article 8 of the  ECHR
   as a ground of appeal.

32. Accordingly, Mr Clarke conceded that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal judge in the present case was materially wrong in law and should
   be set aside.




   F. Discussion


   (a) The legislation

33. Sections 40 and 40A of the  1981  Act,  so  far  as  relevant,  read  as
   follows:

      "40. Deprivation of citizenship
                    1)  In  this  section  a   reference   to   a   person's
                       "citizenship status" is a reference to his status as-
                          (a) a British citizen,
                    .....
                    2) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
                       of a citizenship status if the Secretary of State  is
                       satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public
                       good.


                    3) The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person
                       of  a  citizenship  status  which  results  from  his
                       registration or naturalisation if  the  Secretary  of
                       State   is    satisfied    that    registration    or
                       naturalisation was obtained by means of -
                                (a) fraud,
                             (b) false representation, or
                             (c) concealment of a material fact.


                    ...


                     (5) Before  making  an  order  under  this  section  in
                       respect of a person the Secretary of State must give
                       the person written notice specifying-


                       (a) that the Secretary of State has decided to  make
                       an order,
                       (b) the reasons for the order, and
                       (c) the  person's  right  of  appeal  under  section
                       40A(1) ...
                 ...








       40A. Deprivation of citizenship: appeal


                    (1) A person who is given notice under section 40(5)  of
                      a decision to make an order in respect of  him  under
                      section 40 may appeal against that  decision  to  the
                      First-tier Tribunal.


                    ..."




   (b) The scope of a deprivation appeal: Arusha, Deliallisi and Pirzada


34. The problematic findings in Pirzada, which the respondent  is  satisfied
   are incorrect, occur in the following passage  in  paragraph  9E  of  the
   decision:-

      "...  The grounds of appeal are... limited by the formulation of s  40
      and must be directed to whether the Secretary of State's decision  was
      in fact empowered by that section.  There is no  suggestion  that  the
      Tribunal has the power to consider whether it is satisfied of  any  of
      the matters set out in sub-ss (2) or (3); nor is there any  suggestion
      that the  Tribunal  can  itself  exercise  the  Secretary  of  State's
      discretion".

35. It would appear that the Tribunal in Pirzada was  not  referred  to  the
   decision in Arusha or, for that matter, the decision in Deliallisi.

36. In Arusha, at paragraph 11 of its determination and reasons,  the  Upper
   Tribunal cited, with approval, what the First-tier Tribunal in that  case
   had said about the nature and scope of an appeal under section 40A of the
   1981 Act:-


      "13. In our judgment, the absence of prescribed grounds can only  mean
      that the Tribunal is to have a wide ranging power to consider, by  way
      of appeal, not a review, what the decision  in  the  appellant's  case
      should have been.  The Tribunal has to ask itself 'does  the  evidence
      in the case establish that citizenship was obtained by fraud?'  If  it
      does then it has to ask 'do the other circumstances of the case  point
      to discretionary deprival?'


      14. As this is an appeal not a review, the Tribunal will be  concerned
      with the facts as it finds them and not with the Secretary of  State's
      view of them. In terms of  the  proof  of  fraud,  the  Tribunal  will
      consider any evidence, whether or not available to  the  Secretary  of
      State at the time he made his  decision,  which  is  relevant  to  the
      determination of that question."


37. We consider it is  necessary  to  set  out  in  detail  what  the  Upper
   Tribunal said in Deliallisi.  Having set out paragraphs 13 and 14 of  the
   First-tier Tribunal's decision in  Arusha,  the  Tribunal  in  Deliallisi
   explained in some detail  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  Arusha  was
   essentially correct in its conclusion regarding the scope of the appeal:-

   "30.      It  is  apparent  from  [13]  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
       determination, that that Tribunal held, in effect, that the  section
       40A appeal is a full merits-based appeal, involving an appellate re-
       examination of  the  discretionary  decision  under  section  40  to
       deprive a person of British citizenship.  Although the determination
       of the First-tier Tribunal in Arusha & Demushi was mentioned by  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  case  of  the  present  appeal,  this
       important finding went  unnoticed.   As  a  result,  the  First-tier
       Tribunal came to the conclusion that, because  section  40A,  unlike
       section 86 of the  2002  Act,  contains  no  provision  allowing  or
       permitting an appeal to  succeed  if  discretion  should  have  been
       exercised differently, the Tribunal was required to construe section
       40A as excluding such a possibility.


   31.      The correct approach is, we find, precisely the opposite of that
       taken by the First-tier Tribunal in  the  present  appeal.   If  the
       legislature confers a right of appeal against a decision,  then,  in
       the absence of express wording limiting the nature of  that  appeal,
       it should be treated as requiring the  appellate  body  to  exercise
       afresh any judgement or discretion employed in reaching the decision
       against which the  appeal  is  brought.   We  acknowledge  that,  in
       certain circumstances, the subject  matter  or  legislative  context
       may, nevertheless, compel a  restricted  reading  of  the  enactment
       conferring the right of appeal; but courts and tribunals should  not
       be over-ready to find such exceptions, and should do so  only  where
       it is plainly demanded, in the interests of coherent decision-making
       or other cogent considerations of public policy.


   32.   In  this  regard,  the  following  passage  from  Jacobs,  Tribunal
       Practice and Procedure (2nd Edition) is helpful:-


          "4.116 If the appeal is against a decision based on  an  exercise
                  of judgment, the question arises whether the tribunal  is
                  limited to deciding if the judgment was exercised wrongly
                  or is  allowed  or  required  to  exercise  the  judgment
                  afresh.


            4.117 The approach to identifying the scope  of  the  appeal  in
                  these  cases  was  set  out  by  Etherton  J  in  Banbury
                  Visionplus  Ltd  v  Revenue  and  Customs   Commissioners
                  [[2006] STC 1568].  The position is this.  The  scope  of
                  the appeal may be made  clear  in  the  language  of  the
                  statute that  allows  the  appeal.   In  the  absence  of
                  express provision, any limitation on  the  scope  of  the
                  appeal must be apparent from the nature of  the  decision
                  or the legislative context, [[2006] STC 1568 at [44]].


            4.118 The general approach of  the  courts  has  been  that  the
                  judgment must  be  exercised  afresh  on  appeal  [As  in
                  Secretary of State for Children, Schools and  Families  v
                  Philliskirk [2009], ELR  68  at  [19]].   Otherwise,  the
                  right of appeal would be rendered illusory [Lord  Goddard
                  CJ in Stepney Borough Council v Joffe [1949] 1 KB 599  at
                  602] or unduly restricted [Lord Parker CJ  in  Godfrey  v
                  Bournemouth Corporation [1969] 1 WLR 47 at 51].


            4.119 However, there are cases in which this  approach  has  not
                  been  taken.   John  Dee  Ltd  v   Customs   and   Excise
                  Commissioners [[1995] STC 941, as  explained  in  Banbury
                  Visionplus Ltd v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2006]
                  STC 1568 at [39]-[44]]  is  an  example.   There  it  was
                  permissible to require security 'Where it appears to  the
                  Commissioners requisite to do so for  the  protection  of
                  the revenue'.  Statute  provided  for  a  general  appeal
                  'with respect to... the requirement of security'.   Neill
                  LJ explained the Court of Appeal's decision:


                       'It seems to me  that  the  'statutory  condition'...
                       which the Tribunal has to determine in  an  appeal...
                       is whether it appeared to the Commissioners requisite
                       to  require  security.   In  examining  whether  that
                       statutory condition is satisfied the tribunal will...
                       consider whether the commissioners had acted in a way
                       in which no reasonable panel of  Commissioners  could
                       have acted or whether they  had  taken  into  account
                       some irrelevant matter or had  disregarded  something
                       to which they should have given weight.  The tribunal
                       may also have to consider whether  the  commissioners
                       have erred on a point  of  law  [[1995]  STC  941  at
                       952]'.


                  One factor that influenced the decision in this  case  was
                  that the tribunal  was  under  no  duty  to  protect  the
                  revenue; that statutory responsibility was imposed on the
                  Commissioners [[1995] STC 941 at 952].  It is  not  clear
                  to what extent that factor affected the outcome.


            4.120 A fresh exercise of the  judgment  is  also  excluded  if,
                  exceptionally, a right  of  appeal  is  given  against  a
                  decision  that  involves  a  discretion  which  is   non-
                  justiciable.  This may be because the discretion involves
                  a consideration of a number of unrelated factors with  no
                  indication, in the legislation or the context,  of  which
                  were relevant.  Or  it  may  be  because  the  discretion
                  involves non-legal judgments on considerations of policy,
                  finance   or   social   matters.    In   these    limited
                  circumstances, the right  of  appeal  does  not  allow  a
                  tribunal to substitute its  exercise  of  discretion  for
                  that of the decision-maker.  It is limited to  challenges
                  to the  legality  of  the  decision  on  judicial  review
                  grounds.  [See  the   decision   of   the   Tribunal   of
                  Commissioners in R(H) 6/06 (especially at [24] and  [39])
                  analysing  the  decision  of  an  earlier   Tribunal   of
                  Commissioners in R(H) 3/04].


            4.121 If discretion (or any other judgment) has to be  exercised
                  afresh on appeal, the way in which it was exercised below
                  is not binding,  but  must  be  taken  into  account  for
                  whatever it is worth.  As Lord Atkin explained in Evans v
                  Bartlam: [[1937] AC 473]


                       '... where  there  is  a  discretionary  jurisdiction
                       given to the Court or judge the judge in Chambers  is
                       in no way fettered by the previous  exercise  of  the
                       Master's discretion.  His own discretion is  intended
                       by the rules to determine the parties' rights: and he
                       is entitled to exercise it as though the matter  came
                       before him for the first time.  He will,  of  course,
                       give the weight it deserves to the previous  decision
                       of the Master: but he is in no way bound by it [[1937
                       AC 473 at 478]."


   33.      In the case of section 40 of the 1981 Act, it cannot possibly be
       said that the discretionary decision to deprive a person of  British
       citizenship involves a discretion  which  is  non-justiciable.   The
       decision clearly involves important considerations of public policy;
       but so too do very  many  of  the  discretionary  decisions  of  the
       respondent taken under the immigration rules,  as  against  which  a
       "full" right of appeal exists, by reason of  sections  84(1)(f)  and
       86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act.  The Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the
       First-tier  Tribunal  routinely  has  to   balance   public   policy
       considerations against individual rights  and  other  interests,  in
       reaching decisions in such appeals; and in doing  so  it  will  have
       regard to the importance attached by the respondent to public policy
       interests, in a particular case.


   34.      Accordingly, unlike the First-tier Tribunal, we  do  not  regard
       the absence in section 40A of the 1981 Act of the  relevant  wording
       found in sections 84 and 86 of the 2002 Act as limiting the scope of
       section 40A.  There is, in our  view,  no  ambiguity,  obscurity  or
       absurdity in the wording of that section, such as might call for the
       application of Pepper v Hart [1993] AC 593 principles.  But, even if
       there were,  Ms  Naik's  researches  reveal  that  Parliament  quite
       clearly intended section 40A to be construed in the way we have just
       described.  During the passage of  the  Bill  for  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which inserted section 40A into the
       1981 Act, the Minister of State, Lord Filkin, gave this assurance to
       Lord Avebury (Hansard, 8 July 2002, column 508):-


   "The Noble Earl, Lord Russell,  suggested  that  the  only  appeal  is  a
       judicial review.  We do not believe that  that  is  the  case.   The
       appeal against deprivation is a  full  appeal  on  the  merits.   We
       believe that perhaps the JCHR [Joint Committee on Human Rights] does
       not have that clearly in sight or perhaps we have  not  made  it  as
       clear as we could have done.


   The appellate body will be able  not  only  to  remove  [sic;  presumably
       'review'] the legality of the Secretary  of  State's  decision,  but
       also to hear arguments at his discretion on whether or not the right
       to  deprive  should  have  been  exercised  differently.   The  bill
       proposes no restrictions on the issues which might be raised  in  an
       appeal  either  to  an  Adjudicator  or,   where   that   body   had
       jurisdiction, to the Special Immigration  Appeals  Commission.   The
       appellate body will be able to  hear  argument  not  only  that  the
       Secretary of State has failed to observe the statutory requirements,
       but also that his discretion whether to  deprive  should  have  been
       exercised differently."


   If a  search  for  the  legislature's  intentions  were  necessary,  Lord
       Filkin's words could not be clearer.


   35.      Having identified the nature of  the  overarching  scope  of  an
       appeal  under  section  40A,  it  is  possible   to   identify   the
       significance of issues such as the operation of the ECHR and of  the
       respondent's policy on deprivation, as disclosed in the  Nationality
       Instructions ("the NIs").


   36.      The fact that the respondent has  reached  a  decision,  in  the
       exercise of her discretion, by reference  to  her  published  policy
       regarding deprivation  of  citizenship  is  a  matter  to  which  an
       appellate tribunal might  have  regard,  in  deciding  whether  that
       discretion should be exercised differently.  This  is  part  of  the
       wider principle, extrapolated from  Evans  v  Bartlam  (see  above),
       whereby the way in which discretion was  exercised  by  the  primary
       decision-maker, whilst not binding, must nevertheless be taken  into
       account by the appellate tribunal.  In cases of  the  present  kind,
       the application by the respondent of her policy on deprivation  must
       be taken as indicating where, as a general  matter,  the  respondent
       considers the balance falls to be struck, as  between,  on  the  one
       hand,  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   the   integrity   of
       immigration control and the rights flowing from British citizenship,
       and, on the other, the interests of the individual concerned and  of
       others likely to be affected  by  that  person's  ceasing  to  be  a
       British citizen.  As in similar appeals governed by  the  2002  Act,
       the appellate tribunal must give the respondent's policy due weight,
       bearing in mind  that  it  is  the  respondent  -  rather  than  the
       judiciary  -  who  is  primarily  responsible  for  determining  and
       safeguarding public policy in these areas.


   37.      So far as the ECHR is concerned, in most  cases  (including  the
       present) the provision most likely  to  be  in  play  is  Article  8
       (respect for private and  family  life).   If,  on  the  facts,  the
       appellate tribunal is  satisfied  that  depriving  an  appellant  of
       British citizenship would constitute a disproportionate interference
       with the Article 8 rights of that person or any other  person  whose
       position falls to be examined on the principles identified in Beoku-
       Betts [2008] UKHL 39, then plainly  the  tribunal  is  compelled  by
       section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 to re-exercise discretion  by
       finding in favour of the appellant.   However,  the  fact  that  the
       scope of a section 40A appeal is wider than Article 8 means that, in
       a  case  where  Article  8(2)  is  not  even  engaged,  because  the
       consequences of deprivation are not found to  have  consequences  of
       such gravity as to engage that  Article,  the  Tribunal  must  still
       consider whether discretion should be exercised differently."

38. One thing we would add to that analysis is to emphasise  the  fact  that
   the respondent has been  charged  by  Parliament  with  making  decisions
   concerning deprivation of citizenship.  In  a  section  40A  appeal,  the
   respondent's view should normally be  accorded  significant  weight:  see
   Lord Carlile of Berriew v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2014] UKSC 60; Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
   [2016] UKSC 60. In the majority of cases, the weight will  be  such  that
   the Tribunal will have no proper  basis  for  exercising  its  discretion
   differently. This does not, however, mean the Tribunal is  absolved  from
   the duty of deciding that issue.

39. The passage in paragraph 9E of Pirzada quoted at paragraph 34 above  is,
   accordingly, not to be followed.

40. As both Deliallisi and AB make clear, the task  of  the  Tribunal  in  a
   section 40A appeal will be to decide, on the facts before it  (which,  it
   should be emphasised, may not be the same as the  facts  upon  which  the
   respondent  made  her  decision),   what   the   reasonably   foreseeable
   consequences of deprivation might be. In this regard,  it  is  useful  to
   recall what the Upper Tribunal said in AB:-

      "58.  Before embarking on an analysis of the evidence, it is necessary
          to establish the legal parameters.  With one exception, to  which
          I will turn in due course, Ms Naik  submitted  that  the  correct
          basis was as set out by the Upper Tribunal in Deliallisi (British
          citizen: deprivation appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC).   In
          that case, the Tribunal held that an appeal under section 40A  of
          the 1981 Act  requires  the  Tribunal  to  consider  whether  the
          Secretary of State's discretionary decision to deprive  a  person
          of British citizenship should  be  exercised  differently.   That
          consideration will involve (but not be limited to) ECHR Article 8
          issues,   as   well   as   whether   deprivation   would   be   a
          disproportionate interference with  a  person's  EU  rights.   In
          carrying out its task, the Tribunal is  under  no  obligation  to
          assume that the person concerned will be removed from the  United
          Kingdom in consequence of the deprivation decision.  The Tribunal
          is, however, required to  determine  the  reasonably  foreseeable
          consequences of deprivation which may, depending  on  the  facts,
          include removal.


      59.   Mr Jarvis told me that the Secretary of State does not  consider
          that a deprivation appeal can ever encompass the  possibility  of
          removal.  He did not, however, elaborate upon this view and I see
          no reason why, as a matter of law, the reasonable  foreseeability
          test, elucidated in Deliallisi, should be circumscribed  in  this
          or, indeed, any other way.


      60.   Having said that, it seems to me the facts of the  present  case
          are indicative of why, in practice,  the  reasonably  foreseeable
          consequences of deprivation are  often  unlikely,  as  a  general
          matter, to  include  removal.   Even  in  a  case  where,  unlike
          Deliallisi, the Secretary of State has not expressed an intention
          to grant leave, immediately upon deprivation  taking  place,  the
          factual matrix (including the availability of rights of challenge
          to possible future decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State)  will
          often  preclude  the  Tribunal  from  identifying  removal  as  a
          reasonably foreseeable consequence of  deprivation,  viewed  from
          the vantage point of the hearing of the deprivation appeal. "

41. The important point Pirzada illuminates is that, before one reaches  the
   question of discretion and Article 8 ECHR issues, the  Tribunal  must  be
   satisfied that the circumstances for  exercising  discretion  exist.   In
   other words, in an appeal against a section 40(2)  decision,  deprivation
   must be "conducive to the public good".  In an appeal against  a  section
   40(3)  decision,  the  registration  or  naturalisation  must  have  been
   obtained by means of one or  more  of  the  three  actions  described  in
   paragraphs (a) to (c).

42. In the case of section 40(2), the matter on which  the  respondent  must
   be satisfied - involving "the public good" - is one in respect  of  which
   the respondent's conclusion will almost inevitably be  determinative.  In
   other words, it is very hard to see how, on a particular  set  of  facts,
   the Tribunal could find that deprivation would not be  conducive  to  the
   public good if, on those facts, the Secretary of State has  decided  that
   it would.


43.  Nevertheless, as with criminal deportation, a  finding  that  something
   may be in the public interest or conducive to the public good will not be
   necessarily dispositive of the overall  appeal.   The  Tribunal  will  be
   required to allow the appeal, notwithstanding such a finding,  if  to  do
   otherwise would violate the United Kingdom's obligations under the  ECHR.
   The Tribunal would also have to exercise its discretion differently  from
   that of the respondent, if some particular  (we  would  venture  to  say,
   exceptional) feature of the case necessitated it.

44. In the case of section 40(3), the  matter  of  which  the  Secretary  of
   State must be satisfied is  much  more  hard-edged.  The  fact  that  the
   subsection speaks of the Secretary of State being "satisfied" that  fraud
   etc was employed does not mean the question for the  Tribunal  is  merely
   whether the Secretary of State was rationally entitled to conclude as she
   did. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Al-Jedda [2013] UKSC
   62, the Supreme Court was not disposed to say more than that the  use  of
   the word "satisfied" in section 40(2) and (3)  "may  afford  some  slight
   significance", although the Court found it difficult to  articulate  what
   that significance might be (Lord Wilson at paragraph 30). We consider the
   Tribunal  is  in  a  position  to  take  its  own  view  of  whether  the
   requirements of subsection (3) are satisfied.   If  they  are,  then  the
   points made in paragraph 43 above will apply in this class of case  also.
   The Tribunal will be required to place significant  weight  on  the  fact
   that the Secretary of State has decided, in the public interest,  that  a
   person who has employed  deception  etc  to  obtain  British  citizenship
   should be deprived of that status. Where statelessness is not  in  issue,
   it is likely to be only in a  rare  case  that  the  ECHR  or  some  very
   compelling feature will require the Tribunal to allow the appeal.




   (c) Summary


 45. It may be convenient to set out the following summary of  the  position
   concerning appeals under section 40A of the 1981 Act:

       (1)  The Tribunal must first establish whether the relevant condition
          precedent exists for the exercise  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
          discretion to deprive a person (P) of British citizenship.


       (2) In a section 40(2) case, the fact that the Secretary of State  is
          satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good  is  to
          be given very significant weight and  will  almost  inevitably  be
          determinative of that issue.


       (3)  In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish whether one
          or more of the means described in subsection (3)(a), (b)  and  (c)
          were used by P in order to obtain British citizenship. As held  in
          Pirzada, the deception must have motivated the acquisition of that
          citizenship.


       (4)  In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the fact that the Secretary
          of State has decided in the exercise of her discretion to  deprive
          P of British citizenship will in practice mean  the  Tribunal  can
          allow P's appeal only if satisfied that the reasonably foreseeable
          consequence of deprivation would violate the  obligations  of  the
          United Kingdom government under the Human Rights Act  1998  and/or
          that there is some exceptional feature of the case which means the
          discretion  in  the  subsection  concerned  should  be   exercised
          differently.


       (5)  As can be seen from AB, the stronger P's  case  appears  to  the
          Tribunal to be for resisting any future (post-deprivation) removal
          on ECHR grounds, the less likely it will be that P's removal  from
          the United Kingdom will be one of the foreseeable consequences  of
          deprivation.


       (6)  The appeal is to be determined  by  reference  to  the  evidence
          adduced to the Tribunal, whether or  not  the  same  evidence  was
          before the Secretary of  State  when  she  made  her  decision  to
          deprive.




       G. Next steps

 46.    At the hearing of 21 November, after informing the  representatives
      that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge would be set  aside
      and re-made by the Upper  Tribunal,  we  went  into  private  session,
      pursuant to a direction under rule 37 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, in order to hear the evidence of a witness.   We
      then made directions regarding the re-making stage.






                                                             Mr Justice Lane
                                                                   President

                                                             22 January 2018
