
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


 Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2012                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                              MRS JUSTICE LANG
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                               Ms Nazia Ahmed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovich, instructed by Slough Immigration Aid
Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
Interested party:      Mr A Weiss, AIRE Centre




1.   The spouse  of  an  EEA  national/Union  citizen  does  not  acquire  a
    retained right of residence upon divorce unless the EEA national was in
    the United Kingdom and exercising Treaty rights  at  the  date  of  the
    lawful termination of the marriage: Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 followed.

2.   The principles established by the Court of Justice in Zambrano Case  C-
    34-/09 [2011] ECR 1-0000 and subsequent cases dealing with  Article  20
    of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European  Union  (TFEU)  have
    potential application even where the EEA national/Union  citizen  child
    of a third-country national is not a national of the host Member State:
    the test in all cases is whether the adverse decision would require the
    child to leave the territory of the Union.

3.   Notwithstanding inability to satisfy new regulation  15A(3)(c)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as  amended  with
    effect from 16 July 2012, the parent of a child of an EEA national  who
    has been employed in the UK when the child was also residing  here  can
    have a derived right  of  residence  under  Article  12  of  Regulation
    1612/68 (now Article 10 of Regulation No 492/2011)  even though the EEA
    national parent is no longer  a worker in the UK at the time the  child
    commences education:  see  Case  C-480/08  Teixiera  [2010]  EUECJ,  23
    February 2010.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This case,  which  concerns  a  third-country  national  woman  seeking
    rights of residence following her divorce from an EEA national by  whom
    she had two children both  also  EEA  nationals,  raises  a  number  of
    questions: (1) Did she retain an EEA right of residence given  that  at
    the date of her divorce her husband was not in the UK?;  (2)  Does  she
    have a Zambrano-style derived right of residence based on the  position
    of  her  EEA  national  children  notwithstanding  that  they  are  not
    nationals of the host Member State (the  UK)?;  (3)  Does  she  have  a
    derived right of residence either  under  new  regulation  15A  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Areas)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations) or under Article  12,  Regulation  1612/68  based  on  her
    eldest child having commenced full-time education?; and  (4)  Does  the
    fact that her  children  are  EEA  nationals  mean  that  the  decision
    refusing to grant her a  residence card violates her right  to  respect
    for family life under Article 8 ECHR? On each of these issues  the  law
    has been fast-changing and interactive and so it  is  necessary  to  go
    into greater detail  than  is  normally  appropriate.  We  express  our
    gratitude to the representatives - Ms Asanovich, Mr Weiss and Mr Deller
    - for their largely helpful submissions, both written and oral.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  In September 2003 she  married
    Khurshid Ahmed in Karachi.  He travelled to Germany and obtained German
    nationality.  In March 2004 the  couple  moved  to  the  UK  and  on  7
    November 2005 she was issued with  a  residence  card  valid  until  21
    September 2009.  Their relationship ran into difficulties and some time
    in 2006 he left the matrimonial home.  He purported to divorce her by a
    talaq issued in Karachi on 13 March 2007.  Later, in 4 April  2009,  he
    obtained a decree absolute in the UK.  She was granted custody  of  her
    two children, A, born on 14 November 2005, and I, born on 3 July  2007.
    Both children are German nationals.  On 18 September 2009 the appellant
    applied for permanent residence on the basis that upon her divorce  she
    had retained a right of residence under regulation 10(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  She produced evidence to show that she had  worked  as  a
    self-employed carer between 2007 and June 2011.

3.   On 11  March  2010  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  her  permanent
    residence.  The reason given was that the  evidence  she  had  provided
    failed to show that her former husband was exercising Treaty rights  in
    the UK at the time of the divorce.  The  grounds  of  appeal  submitted
    that to have refused the appellant on the basis that  her  husband  was
    not exercising Treaty rights at the time her divorce became  final  was
    to  rely  on  a  misinterpretation  of  Article  13(2)   of   Directive
    2004/38/EC:  it  was  sufficient,  it  was  submitted,  for  the  Union
    citizen/EEA national husband  to  have  been  present  in  the  UK  and
    exercising Treaty rights at the time the marriage broke down as long as
    a divorce followed.  It was also submitted that the appellant met three
    out of the four conditions set out in Article  13(2)/regulation  10(5).
    Foremost was that she had been the victim of domestic violence (Article
    13(2)(c)), regulation 10(5)(iv)), but it was also  the  case  that  her
    marriage had lasted at least three years prior to  divorce  proceedings
    during which she and her spouse had resided in the UK for at least  one
    year (Article 13(2)(a), regulation 10(5)(i)) and that she  has  custody
    of children  of  her  Union  citizen  /EEA  national  husband  (Article
    13(2)(b), regulation 10(5)(ii)).  The decision  was  also  said  to  be
    contrary to the appellant's Article 8 rights.

Relevant legal provisions

4.   The legal provisions to which reference is made  above  and  below  are
    set out in an Annex to our determination. As regards provisions set out
    there in the 2006 Regulations, it  is  to  be  noted  that  these  were
    amended with effect from 16 July  2012  by  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Amendment Regulations SI No. 1547. By virtue of the fact
    that we go on to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    re-make it ourselves, we are obliged to decide the appeal ex nunc under
    the amended Regulations: see Schedule 1.

5.       Given, however, the central focus in submissions of Article  13  of
    the Directive it will assist to set out its text here also:
         "Article 13 Retention of the right of residence by  family  members
         in the event of divorce, annulment of marriage  or  termination  of
         registered partnership
         1.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment of the Union citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.
             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).
         2.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:
             (a)   prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce   or   annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host Member State; or
             (b)  by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred
                  to in point 2(b) of Article  2  or  by  court  order,  the
                  spouse or partner who is not a national of a Member  State
                  has custody of the Union citizen's children; or
             (c)    this   is   warranted   by    particularly    difficult
                  circumstances, such as having been a  victim  of  domestic
                  violence while the marriage or registered partnership  was
                  subsisting; or
             (d)  by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to
                  in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse
                  or partner who is not a national of a Member State has the
                  right of access to a minor child, provided that the  court
                  has ruled that such access must  be  in  the  host  Member
                  State, and for as long as is required.
         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).
         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on personal basis."
Grounds

6.   In a determination sent on 22  July  2010,  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge M A Khan dismissed the appeal.  He concluded  that  the  relevant
    date for deciding whether there was a retained right of  residence  was
    the date of divorce and (whether that date was taken as March  2007  or
    August 2009)  the evidence failed to establish that at  that  time  the
    appellant's husband was in the country. The  judge  also  rejected  the
    appellant's Article 8 grounds of appeal.

7.   The appellant sought permission to appeal  against  the  FtT  decision,
    principally on three grounds: (i) that the  judge's  interpretation  of
    regulation 10(5)(b) (that she had to show her ex-husband "was  residing
    in the United Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations at the  date
    of the  termination  [of  the  marriage  or  civil  partnership]")  was
    incompatible with Article 13 of the Directive; (ii) that the judge  had
    failed to address the issue of Article 12 of the Directive;  and  (iii)
    that the judge had also failed to deal  with  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    although this was raised  at  the  hearing.   Although  permission  was
    originally granted on grounds (ii) and (iii) only, on  19  August  2010
    UTJ Allen granted it on ground (i) as well.  In  the  meantime,  on  29
    July 2010, the respondent sent a Rule 24 notice stating  that  she  did
    not oppose the appellant's appeal.  It was said that in summary the FtT
    judge "had applied the wrong standards in regards  to  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 at para 31", but that at a  substantive  hearing
    the respondent would maintain her position under Article 8.

Appellant's skeleton arguments

8.   Prior to the hearing the appellant's representatives submitted  several
    skeleton arguments, the latest dated 12 December  2012.  In  these  the
    appellant submitted that despite being consistent  with  the  Court  of
    Appeal interpretation set out in Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552, the  judge's
    interpretation of regulation 10(5)  and  Article  13(2)  was  erroneous
    because:

    (i)  the conditions specified under subparagraphs 13(2)(a)-(d)  contain
         no reference whatsoever to the presence or  otherwise  of  the  EEA
         national in the host Member State at the point of legal termination
         of the relationship; had there been such  a  requirement  it  would
         have been simple enough to expressly state it;


    (ii)     such  an  interpretation  would  be  contrary  to  the  Treaty
         objective  of  abolition  of  obstacles  to  free  movement,   with
         reference to Article 2 of the Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the
         European Union (TFEU) and recital  5  of  the  Directive.   It  was
         argued that:


             "The object of Article 13  could  not  have  been  to  legally
             safeguard only those who managed a swift and amicable  divorce
             while in a new Member State,  but  to  legally  safeguard  all
             those whose marriage is no longer subsisting and  they  belong
             to one of the four groups identified in Article 13";


    (iii)    the judge's interpretation also disregarded the context of the
         provisions of Article 13(2) in relation to domestic violence, which
         European institutions  have  condemned  as  a  violation  of  human
         dignity (see EU Guidelines on violence against women and girls  and
         combating all forms of discrimination against them, General Affairs
         Council 8 December 2008;  Opinion  of  the  European  Economic  and
         Social Committee on "Eradicating domestic violence  against  women"
         (2012/C351/05 at 5.1.1); European Parliament Resolution of 5  April
         2011 on priorities and outline of a  new  EU  policy  framework  to
         fight violence against women;  EU  project  Daphne  III).   It  was
         submitted that:

             "To interpret Article 13(2) so as to require the EEA  national
             who had perpetrated domestic violence to be present in the  UK
             in order for the victims to avail themselves of the protection
             intended by the retained right of residence  would  place  the
             perpetrator in a position  of  control  over  the  victim  and
             potentially expose [them]  to  recurrence  of  violence  which
             would be contrary to the purpose of the provision.  This would
             also be at odds with  the  stated  commitment  of  the  EU  to
             prevent exposure to  recurrence  of  violence  by  effectively
             permitting blackmail related to immigration status,  a  common
             feature of abuse."
    (iv)     the judge's interpretation would deprive Article 13(2) of real
         practical effect because its meaning across the  Union  would  vary
         depending on national legislation  on  divorce/annulment:  in  some
         countries reliance on the right would be excessively  difficult  or
         impossible, e.g. in Ireland it  is  impossible  to  divorce  unless
         there has been effective separation during at least the four  years
         of marriage; in Malta until July 2011 divorce did not exist at all,
         only legal separation or annulment;


    (v)  if the judge's interpretation was correct, then UK provisions  for
         protection of victims of domestic violence as set out in para  298A
         of the Immigration Rules would afford  greater protection to third-
         country nationals than that provided to  EEA  nationals  and  their
         family members by the Directive.


9.   The grounds give five  examples  of  persons  who  would  be  denied  a
    retained right of residence by the approach adopted by the judge:

    a)    those  whose  estranged  spouse  leaves  the  host  Member  State
         immediately after the breakdown of the marriage;


    b)   those unable to  commence  divorce  proceedings  for  a  prolonged
         period due to the psychological effects of domestic abuse;


    c)   those involved in custody proceedings pending  divorce  which  may
         take  different  and  longer  periods  of  time  "if  there  is  an
         impossibility of relying on a retained  right  of  residence  while
         those proceedings are pending [that  would]  run  contrary  to  the
         principle of family unity, protection of family life and  the  best
         interests of the child";


    d)   those whose EEA spouse has  stopped  working,  is  in  receipt  of
         benefits, but not subject to an expulsion measure  which  would  be
         disproportionate;


    e)   a victim of domestic violence whose husband was, as  a  result  of
         criminal  proceedings  following  on  from  assault  on  his  wife,
         sentenced to a significant prison sentence during which the  decree
         absolute was issued and who, on present  authority,  would  not  be
         exercising Treaty rights whilst in prison.

10.  The grounds also raised an issue regarding the  judge's  decision  that
    the appellant failed because she could not prove her husband was not in
    the UK exercising Treaty rights: "It cannot have been the intention  of
    the Directive to require proof of the  EEA  national  to  have  been  a
    qualified person at the time of the divorce..."

11.  The grounds also  contain  several  observations  about  the  perceived
    effect of Amos.  First, it is argued that  Amos  was  wrongly  decided.
    If, as Amos suggests, there were a requirement to prove  that  the  EEA
    national was exercising Treaty rights immediately before  the  divorce,
    "such a requirement would follow from the first  paragraph  of  Article
    13(2) and be applicable to all the four groups  of  persons  who  would
    qualify.  Nothing  in  the  first  paragraph  suggests  that".   It  is
    submitted that Amos needs revisiting as it did not touch on  the  issue
    of purpose, context and effect of Article 13(2) but concentrated unduly
    on the wording.  It was also argued that the material issue in Amos was
    not whether the appellant needed to prove that  the  EEA  national  was
    exercising Treaty rights at the time of divorce, and the Court did  not
    have argument on the point.

12.  Second, it is contended  that  the  UT  in  the  instant  case  is  not
    necessarily bound by Amos as that case  did  not  concern  a  right  of
    residence retained on the basis of domestic violence.

13.  The skeleton argument goes on to request that if the  Tribunal  is  not
    minded to depart from Amos, it should make an order  for  reference  to
    the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU).

14.  As to what decision should be re-made (if the Tribunal agreed that  the
    judge erred in law), the grounds contend that (1) the  UT  should  find
    the appellant had a right to be granted a permanent residence  card  on
    the basis of her previous retained right of residence coupled with  her
    self-employment since 2007; (2) the appellant was entitled  to  succeed
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds on the basis that she  had  been  in  the  UK
    since March 2004 and the eldest of her two children had been in the  UK
    for 7 years and so would satisfy EX 1(a)  of  the  current  Immigration
    Rules (as amended by HC 194 etc.) as well as Article 8 on the basis  of
    leading cases.

AIRE Centre Skeleton Argument

15.  Having been involved in assisting the appellant  with  certain  aspects
    of her appeal since 2010, the AIRE  Centre's  skeleton  argument  of  4
    December 2012  unsurprisingly  covered  very  similar  ground  to  that
    covered in Ms Asanovich's skeleton arguments. Its  submissions  focused
    on regulation 10(5) and  its  perceived  incompatibility  with  Article
    13(2) of the Directive; the need  for  a  three-part  analysis  of  the
    relevant provision ("applying a literal,  teleological  and  contextual
    interpretation"); and on the meaning of divorce in this context:

         "In the AIRE Centre's view,  the  correct  interpretation  is  that
         where a third-country national has been exercising residence rights
         as the spouse  of  an  EU  citizen  under  Directive  2004/38,  the
         marriage has broken down and the third-country  national  expresses
         an intent to pursue a divorce or divorce proceedings  are  pending,
         the third-country national will retain her residence under  Article
         13(2), both before and after the divorce is finalised. There has to
         be a degree of flexibility in how this is applied, in light of  the
         inherent trauma that victims of domestic violence frequently suffer
         and the difficult choices they will have to  make  in  relation  to
         ending their marriages".


16.  It was pointed out that Article 15(3) of Directive 2003/86/EC  (on  the
    right to  family  reunification  for  third-country  nationals  legally
    residing in the Union), albeit not one to which the UK  has  opted  in,
    provides for family reunification in the event  not  just  of  divorce,
    widowhood  and  death  of   first-degree   relatives,   but   also   of
    "separation". It was said that the drafters of regulation 10(5)(b)  had
    not adhered to the EU norm of  uniform  interpretation:  if  the  Union
    citizen/ EEA national spouse must be exercising Treaty  rights  on  the
    date of the divorce,  the  retained  right  of  residence  will  remain
    dependent on the vagaries of national divorce law and practice. A table
    was supplied which had been provided by lawyers at the firm  White  and
    Case outlining the divorce laws in the 27 Member States. This was  said
    to demonstrate such vagaries.

17.  The AIRE Centre's skeleton shared Ms Asanovich's view that  recital  15
    and its insistence on guarding against abuse in the context of  divorce
    demonstrated that the purpose of Article 13(2) generally is to  protect
    the family life and dignity of third-country national spouses  in  case
    of (inter alia)  divorce,  and  the  purpose  of  Article  13(2)(c)  in
    particular is to protect third-country  national  victims  of  domestic
    violence from abuse at their spouse's hands.   The  importance  of  the
    right to human dignity highlighted in this recital was  also  enshrined
    in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and was reflected in the case  law
    of the European Court of Human Rights: in Bevacqua and  S.  v  Bulgaria
    App. no. 71127/01 (2008) the Court found a violation of Article 8 where
    the Bulgarian authorities failed to take adequate measures to protect a
    mother and child  from  domestic  violence;  see  also  Opuz  v  Turkey
    (Application no. 33401/02) (2009).

18.  As had Ms Asanovich's skeleton argument, the  AIRE  Centre's  submitted
    that certain questions should be submitted  to  the  Court  of  Justice
    regarding the issue of acquisition of retained rights of residence upon
    divorce.

Respondent's Skeleton Argument

19.   The  respondent's  position  was  that   no   literal,   teleological,
    contextual or other interpretation as suggested by  the  appellant  and
    the AIRE Centre can avoid the simple, unambiguous point that a right of
    residence can only be "retained" if it is held at  the  material  time.
    Here this must mean on legal  termination  of  the  marriage.   In  the
    alternative, even on a teleological approach, there  is  no  reason  to
    believe that it was the intention of the  Directive  to  create  a  new
    right of  residence  for  victims  of  domestic  violence  simpliciter,
    irrespective of the duration of the marriage or length of residence  in
    the  UK,  the  whereabouts  of  the  abusive  spouse,  or  whether  the
    claimant's home country could offer protection and  safety.   If  there
    were anomalies that arose under the Directive,  they  should  be  dealt
    with under other protective provisions:  where  relevant,  the  Refugee
    Convention or Article 8 of the ECHR.

20.  As regards the proposed "contextual  approach"  urged  jointly  by  the
    appellant's representatives and  the  AIRE  Centre,  it  was  wrong  to
    suggest that the purpose of the Directive was to  protect  particularly
    vulnerable people.  Whilst it is  accepted  that  victims  of  domestic
    violence may encounter difficulty in securing  a  divorce  in  some  EU
    states, this cannot override the fact that Article 13(2)  unambiguously
    concerns retention of rights "on  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
    termination of a registered partnership".
21.  As regards the alleged unfair difference in  treatment  of  victims  of
    domestic violence depending on whether they  are  ex-spouses  of  Union
    citizens/ EEA nationals on the one hand or third-country  nationals  on
    the other, the provision in the  Immigration  Rules  for  third-country
    national victims of domestic violence was not an  unfettered  grant  of
    leave to victims as it was subject to other requirements.

22.   Accordingly,  the  respondent  submitted  there  was  no  need  for  a
    reference  as  the  provisions  of  Article  13  were  acte  clair  and
    regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations was a  correct  transposition  of
    them.

23.  The respondent reserved her position on Article 8 to the hearing.

Submissions at the Hearing

24.  Several matters were discussed at the outset of the hearing. Mr  Deller
    reconfirmed at the outset of the hearing  the  respondent's  acceptance
    that the FtT judge has erred in law in his treatment of Article 8.

25.  We raised with the parties the issue of what date  we  should  take  as
    being the date of divorce in this case.  Mr Deller submitted  it  could
    only be the 2009 divorce in the UK.  Ms  Asanovich  said  it  was  very
    difficult to be definite because it depended on the domicile of her ex-
    husband at the time when he attempted to divorce the appellant by talaq
    in Karachi in 2007.  She accepted there were evidential difficulties in
    the way of asserting that the Karachi divorce in March 2007 was  lawful
    under English law but maintained that it did not matter, as  on  either
    date the appellant met the requirements of Article 13(2).

26.  We also  informed  the  parties  that  notwithstanding  Ms  Asanovich's
    abandonment in her latest skeleton  argument  of  earlier  reliance  on
    Article 12, Regulation 1612/68, we considered that article was  engaged
    by the facts of the case and we expected the parties to address  it  in
    their oral submissions.

27.  With regard to the state of the evidence as to when the appellant's ex-
    husband  left  the  UK,  we  were  referred   to   various   items   of
    correspondence, including a letter from UKBA to  Slough  CAB  dated  13
    December 2007.  From these it is clear that her ex-husband left the  UK
    some time in December  2006.There  was  no  evidence  to  show  he  had
    returned nor has it even been suggested that he has.

28.  In relation to the issue of whether the appellant had a retained  right
    of residence, Ms Asanovich argued that the wording of Article  13  made
    clear that the right is acquired when an applicant  meets  any  one  of
    four conditions ((a)-(d)) set  out  in  Article  13(2).   There  is  no
    requirement for the  EEA  national  spouse  to  be  present  or  to  be
    exercising Treaty rights still.  Where time periods  are  relevant  the
    Directive specifies them - as with the condition in Article 13(2)(a) to
    have been married three years.  By contrast, in the first paragraph  of
    Article 13(2) no time limit is specified.  She accepted that it was not
    relevant that the appellant had previously had  a  residence  card,  as
    such a document did not prove the existence  of  the  underlying  right
    throughout its duration.

29.  Ms Asanovich argued  that  the  reading  of  Article  13(2)  which  she
    advocated  was  the  only  one  consistent  with  the  EU  approach  to
    interpretation by reference to context and purpose.  Article  13(2)(a)-
    (d) were clearly designed to protect the interests of family  life  and
    the best interests of the child.  The latter were objectives identified
    in recitals 5  and  15  of  the  Directive  now  reinforced  by  rights
    enshrined in the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights.  Article  27  of  the
    Directive, which states that "Member States  may  adopt  the  necessary
    measures to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right conferred  by  this
    Directive in the case of abuse of rights or fraud, such as marriages of
    convenience", must encompass abuse of family members, e.g. by means  of
    domestic violence.  The interpretation argued for by  Mr  Deller  would
    reward procrastination (in claiming a divorce) and  amount  to  a  wife
    beater's charter, enabling abusers to keep their victims in a situation
    of fear and dependency.  The drafters were aware that divorce  laws  in
    Member States varied  a  great  deal.   She  adverted  to  the  general
    examples given in her skeleton argument of  anomalies  created  by  the
    respondent's approach to Article 13(2).

30.  As regards the  effect  of  Amos,  it  did  not  address  the  domestic
    violence clause which should be seen as sui generis.  The focus of this
    clause was clearly domestic violence  during  the  marriage:  that  was
    enough to trigger the retained right of residence.

31.  As regards Article 12, Regulation 1612/68, Ms Asanovich  said  that  in
    the light of the discussion as the outset of the hearing she wished  to
    withdraw the position she had  taken  in  her  latest  skeleton,  which
    abandoned this ground,  and  resubmit  the  argument  made  in  earlier
    pleadings that the Upper Tribunal  should find that the appellant has a
    derived right of residence as the primary carer of  her  two  children,
    both of whom are enrolled in  education  and  who  do  not  lose  their
    Article 12 Regulation 1612/68 right of  residence  just  because  their
    father has departed from the UK.

32.  As regards Article 8, Ms Asanovich urged us to take  into  account  the
    appellant's  recent  witness  statement  of  11  December  2012.    The
    appellant had been working until June 2011, she had not  been  able  to
    get work since.  Neither she  nor  the  children  had  any  links  with
    Germany, albeit the children were German nationals.  The appellant  had
    been in the UK over eight and a half years; of that all but  two  years
    had been lawful - she had lawful stay up to  21  September  2009.   Her
    eldest child had been in the UK for over 7  years;  both  her  children
    were in education.  The children had no meaningful links with Pakistan.
     If the appellant had made her application on or after 9 July 2012, she
    would have been  able  to  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  the  new
    Immigration Rules at Appendix FM dealing with the right to private life
    for parents of a child in the UK over 7 years.  In this respect the new
    Rules were essentially a codification of existing case law  on  Article
    8: on the latter see cited as an example EA (Article 8 - best interests
    of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).  Even  if  Zambrano  (Case  C-
    34/09) [2011] ECR 1-0000 principles  could  not  assist  the  appellant
    directly, it was clear that in fact the children, despite being  German
    nationals, had no links with Germany; if they had to  move  there  they
    would have to learn a new language;  they  would  be  denied  effective
    enjoyment of their rights as Union citizens.  Even if  the  appellant's
    was not an Article 20 (Zambrano) case, Article 20 was still a  relevant
    factor in the Article 8  assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim.   The
    children were integrated into UK society and were doing well at school.
     The primary point of reference when it came to  their  best  interests
    was their mother, but their mother believes she  will  be  isolated  in
    Pakistan.

33.  Mr Weiss's submissions broadly concurred with those  of  Ms  Asanovich.
    He urged the Tribunal to resist the idea that  there  was  a  dichotomy
    between a literal and a teleological interpretation of Article 13.   On
    a literal approach, the meaning of Article 13 was  not  clear  at  all,
    especially as to the meaning of divorce, which was in reality a process
    by which a marriage  irretrievably  breaks  down.   He  emphasised  the
    importance, when seeking to interpret Article  13,  of  the  fact  that
    retained rights of residence were for those who had previously acquired
    rights of residence as family members under Article 3.  The validity of
    regarding the conditions  set  out  in  Article  13  as  being  met  by
    fulfilment of Article 13(2) (a)-(d) alone was reinforced by the evident
    fact, illustrated by the appellant's case, that the same  person  could
    meet more than one of them.  The more conditions a person met, the less
    a literal reason was justified.

34.  Mr Weiss said interesting light was shed by figures made  available  by
    UKBA in response to a Freedom  of  Information  request  regarding  the
    number of refusals and grants made in respect  of  persons  claiming  a
    retained right of residence.  From a position  where  there  were  more
    refusals than grants, the picture changed significantly in  the  second
    quarter of 2010 when only a  very  small  number  were  refused.   This
    suggested that the Secretary of State had come to recognise,  at  least
    partially, that her previous interpretation had been  too  restrictive.
    There had certainly been a change of policy by the Secretary  of  State
    in relation to dealing with  applicants  who  were  unable  to  produce
    evidence to prove their former spouse was in the UK  exercising  Treaty
    rights.   Previously  she  had  undertaken  to  assist  with  obtaining
    evidence only where there had been domestic violence.   Now  she  would
    assist even where there had been an acrimonious divorce -  as  long  as
    the applicant could show she had taken reasonable steps to  obtain  the
    information herself.

35.  Mr Weiss submitted that the appellant's approach to  interpretation  of
    Article  13(2)  was  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  the  Charter   of
    Fundamental  Rights  was  now  part  of  primary  EU  law.   Article  1
    stipulated that the right to human dignity was inviolable.

36.  As regards the Directive, it was clear from  the  language  of  Article
    13(2) that the drafters intended to vest rights to  certain  categories
    of persons independently of  the  Union  citizen  from  whom  they  had
    derived them originally.


37.      Mr Weiss submitted that we should  find  that  Zambrano  principles
    did apply to the appellant's case.  The test in Zambrano and subsequent
    Court of Justice rulings may be whether the impugned measure requires a
    Union citizen to leave the territory of the EU as a whole; but that had
    to subject to what was practical.  The  two  Belgian  children  in  the
    Zambrano case could have gone to France or some other EU  Member  State
    but that did not prevent  the  Court  of  Justice  finding  that  their
    parent's removal would violate their Article 20 rights.

38.  As regards Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68,  the  application  of  the
    established jurisprudence of the Court of  Justice  in  such  cases  as
    Teixeira [2010] EUECJ C-480/08 (23 February 2010) to the facts  of  the
    appellant's case should be regarded as straightforward.  Even  if  that
    was not so, the recent concession made by the Department  of  Work  and
    Pensions in the case of Czop [2012] EUECJ C-147/11 (06 September  2012)
    made clear that there did not need to be a temporal overlap between the
    Union citizen parent being in work  and  his  or  her  child  being  in
    education.

39.  Mr Weiss also sought to adopt Ms Asanovich's submissions on Article 8.

40.  For the respondent Mr Deller reiterated the respondent's position  that
    the language of Article 13(2) was unambiguous.  He agreed with Mr Weiss
    that retained rights only  accrued  to  those  who  had  acquired  them
    previously, but disagreed that they could accrue to those who had  lost
    them prior to the conditions set out in subparagraphs (a)-(d)  arising.
    He accepted that there were criticisms that could be  levelled  against
    the social policy effects of the Directive, but if these were  lacunae,
    they should not be filled by judicial interpretation.  There would also
    be lacunae if the interpretation advised by the appellant and the  AIRE
    Centre was adopted.

41.  Mr Deller asked us to reject the argument that  the  domestic  violence
    condition  at  Article  13(2)(c)  had  to  be  given  a   sui   generis
    interpretation.  Article 13(2) set out a complete  code  of  those  who
    could retain rights of residence: all four  subcategories  set  out  in
    subparagraphs  (a)-(d)   were   subject   to   the   same   overarching
    requirements.  It was regrettable, he accepted, that the  Secretary  of
    State's  refusal  decision  failed  to  focus  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's ex-husband had ceased to meet the requirements of Article 7
    upon departure from the UK (and that the appellant in  consequence  had
    no extant right to  retain)  and  there  should  also  have  been  some
    explanation for why no consideration had been given  to  revocation  of
    the appellant's residence card once it was known her husband  had  left
    the UK in December 2006.  But these shortcomings did not impact on  the
    underlying inability of the  appellant  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    either regulation 10 or Article 13.

42.  Mr Deller said that in relation to Article 12  of  Regulation  1612/68,
    his position was that  the  government  had  recently  taken  steps  to
    implement the  principles  established  by  the  CJEU  in  Teixeira  by
    introducing a new provision into  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  at  para
    15A(3).  The text of the new provision made clear that it remained  the
    case that the child had to be in the UK whilst the EEA national  parent
    was exercising Treaty  rights.   Hence  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant benefitted from Article 12, Regulation 1612/68.

43.  Mr Deller submitted that although the decision at issue in this case  -
    refusal of a permanent residence card - was not a removal decision,  it
    would appear, on JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 principles, that the
    Tribunal should  consider  the  case  on  the  basis  that  a  putative
    consequence of the  refusal  decision  is  that  the  respondent  would
    proceed to direct her removal to Pakistan.  That said, the  appellant's
    Article 8 circumstances now were  stronger  than  they  were  when  the
    refusal decision was made over two years ago.  Among the factors in her
    favour were that she had been accepted in the  past  as  having  an  EU
    right of residence as a family member; she would  appear  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the new Immigration Rules, had she  made
    her application on July 9 2012 or thereafter; her  children  are  Union
    citizens; it has been accepted that she has been a victim  of  domestic
    violence.  Whilst he would  leave  the  matter  for  the  Tribunal,  he
    accepted the appellant's Article 8 case was a strong one.

44.      Mr Deller contended that the facts of the appellant's case did  not
    engage Zambrano principles.

45.  Both parties sought more time to make submissions  on  the  Article  12
    Regulation 1612/68 issue.  We refused their application. Albeit  stated
    in the appellant's latest skeleton argument to be abandoned, the  issue
    had been raised by them in an earlier skeleton argument  produced  well
    before the hearing and the  respondent  was  in  receipt  of  that.  In
    addition the parties had time during breaks in the hearing to  consider
    the issue further mindful of  our  indication  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing that we considered this issue to be live  before  us.  We  were
    satisfied they had been able to assist us sufficiently.

Error of Law

46.  The respondent has already conceded in a Rule 24  notice  that  in  her
    view the FtT erred in law in respect of Article 8 ECHR  and  Mr  Deller
    confirmed that this remained the view of the  respondent.   All  things
    considered we are satisfied that the FtT decision was vitiated by legal
    error both in respect of its treatment of Article 8  (failure  to  take
    into account  key  relevant  factors  when  conducting  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise; application of too onerous a burden of  proof)  and
    in respect of its failure to address the Article 12, Regulation 1612/68
    question.

Discussion

47.  The appellant relies on multiple grounds: her  position  under  Article
    13 of the Directive; under primary EU law based on Zambrano principles;
    under Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68; and  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

Article 13 of the Directive

48.  We deal  first  with  Article  13  first  because  success  under  this
    provision would afford the appellant the highest  level  of  protection
    and second because both Ms Asanovich and Mr  Weiss  accepted  that  the
    appellant was shut out by the plain wording of regulation 10(5)(a)-(b),
    which imposes  a  requirement  that  the  EEA  national  spouse  was  a
    qualified person at the date of the termination of  the  marriage.  If.
    notwithstanding adverse national law provisions,  the  appellant  could
    show she had a retained rights of residence under the  Directive,  then
    she would also be entitled to permanent residence through a combination
    of (1) the period when it is not in dispute that  she  was  in  the  UK
    whilst still married to her ex-husband when he was in the UK exercising
    Treaty rights (7 November 2005 - December 2006);  and  (2)  the  period
    since her divorce during which (it is not disputed)  she  has  been  in
    self-employment between 2007 and June 2011: see Article 18.

49.  The issue of the interpretation of Article 13 was  dealt  with  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Amos.  Although the central issue in that  case  was
    whether the appellant had acquired permanent residence,  resolution  of
    that issue required the Court, inter alia, to decide  whether  the  two
    appellants had  a  retained  right  of  residence.  The  Court's  legal
    analysis of the provisions in Article 13 and regulation 10 dealing with
    retention of rights on divorce was set out in emphatic terms  in  paras
    29-31.

         "29. Thus the requirements  of  the  Directive  applicable  to  the
             appellants were as follows:


             (1)  At all times while residing in this country  until  their
                  divorce, their spouse must have been  a  worker  or  self-
                  employed  (or  otherwise  satisfied  the  requirements  of
                  Article 7.1).


             (2)  Their marriages had to have lasted at least three  years,
                  including one year in this country.


             (3)  They must be able to show that they are workers or  self-
                  employed persons or otherwise satisfy the requirements  of
                  the penultimate paragraph of Article 13.2.


         30.   The  Regulations  are  consistent  with  these  propositions.
             Regulation 10(5)  provides  that  a  "family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence" must in a case  such  as  the
             present appeals satisfy the following conditions:


             (a)  His or her divorce from the EEA national.


             (b)  He or she was residing in the UK in accordance  with  the
                  Regulations at the date of the divorce.  He  or  she  will
                  have been so residing if regulation 14  applied,  i.e.  if
                  the EEA national spouse was a  "qualified  person",  i.e.,
                  for present purposes, a worker or self-employed person (as
                  to which see the definitions in regulations 2 and 6).


             (c)  He or she  is  a  worker  or  self-employed  person,  and
                  therefore satisfies paragraph (6).


             (d)   3  years'  marriage,  including  at  least  one   year's
                  residence in the UK.


         31.  Provided these conditions continue to be  satisfied,  after  5
             years' continuous residence in the UK a non-EEA national  will
             be entitled to a permanent right of residence under regulation
             15(1)(f)."
    Indeed, it was precisely because the Court considered  itself  able  to
    regard the above propositions as ratione decidendi that it  decided  to
    decline the appellants' request to make an order for reference  to  the
    Court of Justice: see para 32.
50.  From the above it is clear that the Court concluded in particular  that
    in order to retain a  right  of  residence  under  Article  13  it  was
    necessary for the ex-spouse to be in the UK exercising Treaty rights at
    the time of the divorce.  Given that that conclusion was  part  of  the
    ratio of the case, it is binding on us.

51.  Ms Asanovich and Mr Weiss have argued  that  we  should  disregard  the
    authority of Amos because it was per incuriam or  was  decided  without
    the benefit of relevant argument and submissions  as  to  the  need  to
    apply a teleological  approach  to  interpretation.   Whilst  we  would
    accept that several arguments raised before us were not  raised  before
    the Court in Amos, that does not  suffice  to  make  its  decision  per
    incuriam or otherwise demonstrate that its reasoning was invalid.  This
    is not the first time representatives have asked the Upper tribunal  to
    disregard Amos, but in our view it should be the last.

52.  We note further that since the judgment in Amos the Upper Tribunal  has
    followed and applied it in several reported cases, HS  (EEA  revocation
    of retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 165  (IAC)  and  Idezuna  (EEA  -
    permanent residence) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00474 (IAC) in particular.  In
    all of these it has regarded regulation 10 as a faithful  transposition
    of Article 13. We are not persuaded to depart from this line of cases.

53.  Even if we did not consider ourselves bound by  Amos  or  persuaded  by
    recent Upper tribunal case law, we would still not  have  accepted  the
    appellant's approach.

54.  In our judgment, the structure of Article 13 leaves no room  for  doubt
    as  to  the  correct  construction  of  Article  13(2).    The   second
    subparagraph of Article 13(1) states that: "Before acquiring the  right
    of permanent residence, the persons concerned must meet the  conditions
    laid down in points (a), (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1)." Both Article
    13(1) and (2) begin with the proviso, "Without prejudice to the  second
    subparagraph..." The second subparagraph of Article  13(2)  also  makes
    clear that a right of residence under the Directive "remains subject to
    the requirement" for the Union citizen to be exercising Treaty rights:

         "Before acquiring the right of permanent residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4)".


55.  As Burnton LJ observed in Amos at para 28:


         "Article 18 is also pertinent. It  confers  a  right  of  permanent
         residence on a divorced non-national,  to  whom  Article  12(2)  or
         13(2) applies, after 5 years' legal residence. It does not  require
         the non-national to have lived "with" the EEA national during  that
         period. (Again, this is obvious in an Article 12(2) case, since the
         national spouse has died.)"


    Hence it is only those family members of persons who continue  to  meet
    the conditions of Article 7 who are entitled to  acquire  the  retained
    right.  There is nothing to suggest mere possession at some time in the
    past suffices.  Put simply, to qualify for any kind of retained  right,
    that right must continue to have existed up until the event giving rise
    to possible retention.

56.  We entirely reject the notion that  subparagraphs  (a)-(d)  of  Article
    13(2) set out conditions which are in  themselves  sufficient  to  give
    rise to  a  retained  right  of  residence.   It  is  clear  that  they
    presuppose that potential recipients  continued  to  have  a  right  of
    residence as a family member up until the issue of retention arose.

57.  We also entirely reject  the  argument  that  Article  13(2)(c)  -  the
    domestic violence clause - is  sui  generis  and  can  create  a  free-
    standing retained right of residence outwith the conditions set out  in
    Article 13(1)-(2).  The clauses set out in (a)-(d) are plainly intended
    to be subcategories subject to the same overriding  conditions  as  are
    referred to in the opening  words  of  Article  13(2)  and  its  second
    subparagraph.

58.  Ms Asanovich and Mr Weiss contend that such a reading would be at  odds
    with EU principles of interpretation which require  a  teleological  or
    "context and purposes" approach.  Consistent with  that  approach  they
    argue that the reference in Article 13(1) to "divorce" must be taken to
    mean de facto not de jure divorce.

59.  We have no difficulty with their general description of  EU  principles
    of interpretation or of the deployment of them by the Court of  Justice
    in such cases as Teixeira.   We  have  great  difficulty,  however,  in
    accepting that their proposed approach to Article 13(1) or 13(2)  would
    be consistent either with existing Court of Justice jurisprudence or  a
    literal, teleological or contextual approach.  Our start point must  be
    the ruling of the Court of Justice in Diatta  v  Land  Berlin  Case  6-
    267/83 [1985] (EUECJR), in which the Court has continued to endorse  in
    subsequent case law.  This case establishes that a spouse continues  to
    enjoy an EU right of residence as the family member of a Union  citizen
    notwithstanding the fact that the couple may be living apart  or  their
    relationship be problematic.

60.  One consequence of the Diatta v Land Berlin principle is that a  spouse
    does not cease to have the protection of  a  right  of  residence  just
    because her (or his) relationship breaks down or she  (or  he)  becomes
    the victim of domestic violence.  If the reference in Article 13(2)  to
    termination by divorce were to be  understood  as  meaning  termination
    from the date of breakdown of the  relationship,  then  it  would  mean
    granting retention of a right which was still in existence.

61.   The  significance  of  the  Diatta  v  Land   Berlin   principle   for
    interpretation of Article 13 and the corresponding domestic  regulation
    was addressed several years ago by the AIT in  OA (EEA - retained right
    of residence) Nigeria (Rev 1) [2010] UKAIT 00003. (OA was considered in
    Amos and although the Court of Appeal at para 25 found fault  with  one
    proposition in OA  - that the former spouses would have  to  show  they
    were working for a continuous period of 5 years  prior  to  a  divorced
    family member's applications for the right of permanent residence -  it
    made no adverse comment on the AIT's  analysis  of  the  issue  of  the
    meaning of divorce). The Tribunal stated:


         "35.     The relevant provision for deciding  whether  there  is  a
             retained right of residence in the first place is, of  course,
             reg  10(5)(a)  which  states  that  a  person  satisfies   the
             conditions in this paragraph if "he  ceased  to  be  a  family
             member of  a  qualified  person  on  the  termination  of  the
             marriage or civil partnership of the  qualified  person".  The
             IJ's opinion was that the term  "terminated"  meant  effective
             breakdown of a marriage.  There  are  several  reasons  why  I
             consider this to be an erroneous construction.


         36.  First, it is plainly contrary to the judgment of  the  ECJ  in
             Diatta v Land Berlin and it would take the most cogent reasons
             to seek to depart from an ECJ ruling,  especially  given  that
             the Citizens Directive did not signal any departure  from  the
             approach taken in that case. Dr Onipede sought to  argue  that
             the ECJ in Diatta was only ruling on the issue of marriage law
             in Germany and that  it  did  not  necessarily  preclude  that
             "termination" could mean something other than lawful ending of
             a marriage. However, he was not able to point to any  evidence
             to support that contention and it flies in  the  face  of  the
             clear fact that the ECJ was seeking to  provide  a  Community-
             wide definition of Articles 10 and 11 of Regulation  (EEC)  No
             1612/68 which accords certain rights to the spouse of a worker
             who is a national of a Member State and who is employed in the
             territory of another Member State. The Advocate General  noted
             and agreed with the Commission's view that in relation to  the
             argument that Article 10  and  11  required  not  just  lawful
             marriage but cohabitation in a common dwelling, the  Community
             legislature cannot have intended to make the exercise  of  the
             right to free movement  subject  to  a  requirement  which  is
             derived from family law which varies according to  the  Member
             States. The Advocate General considered that in  order  for  a
             person to show that he was residing with a worker the  marital
             relationship should not be considered to  be  dissolved  until
             there had been a "judicial decision which has  become  final".
             The Court's language  was  to  similar  effect:  "the  marital
             relationship cannot be regarded as dissolved so long as it has
             not been terminated by the competent authority".


         37.  It is for this reason that it does not assist to examine  what
             meaning in given in UK law  in  other  contexts  to  the  term
             "spouse". Even if it is not always defined domestically  as  a
             person in a lawful marriage ( Sch 1 Pt 1 of the Rent Act  1977
             as amended by the Housing Act  1988  states  that  "[f]or  the
             purposes of this paragraph, a person who was living  with  the
             original tenant as his or her wife or husband shall be treated
             as the spouse of the original tenant: see  Ghaidan  v  Mendoza
             [2004] UKHL 30), this and related terms as they arise  in  the
             2006 EEA Regulations have to be given a Community law,  not  a
             national law, interpretation and the ECJ has already  given  a
             definitive ruling, which it has not departed from since Diatta
             v Land Berlin.
         38.  Second, there is  nothing  in  the  wording  of  the  Citizens
             Directive  or  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  to  suggest   that
             termination  should  have  the  wider,  more  diffuse  meaning
             canvassed by Dr Onipede. To the contrary, Art 12 (2) refers to
             "divorce" ("divorce, annulment of marriage or  termination  of
             the registered  partnership  referred  to  in  point  2(b)  of
             Article 2"). And one of the ways in which a person can qualify
             under reg 10(5) of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  is  by  being
             someone who satisfies the condition in para 6 (which  concerns
             family members who are themselves workers or self employed  or
             self-sufficient persons) and:


                  '(d)     either -


                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership the marriage or civil partnership had
                           lasted for at least three years and  the  parties
                           to the marriage or civil partnership had  resided
                           in the United Kingdom for at lest one year during
                           its duration'. (Emphasis added)


         39.  The reference to "proceedings" can only mean legal proceedings
             relating to divorce and intended to result by operation of law
             in the "termination" of the marriage. (Here too the wording in
             Art 12(2)(a) of the Citizens Directive is very similar, "prior
             to initiation of  the  divorce  or  annulment  proceedings  or
             termination of the registered partnership...")


         40.  Furthermore, the only other event which is seen by reg  10  to
             justify a person acquiring a retained right of residence has a
             similar  clear-cut  terminus  in  a  temporal  sense:   death.
             Likewise, on the  IJ's  construction  the  references  in  reg
             10(5)(d) (ii)-(iii) to "former spouse" would  lose  any  sharp
             definitional   edges   and   become   contingent   for   their
             interpretation on assessing the fine detail of the process  of
             breakdown.


         41.   Third,  Dr  Onipede's  approach,  because  it  would  require
             defining "spouse" in terms of a  purely  factual  relationship
             based on cohabitation and other personal ties, would mean that
             it would be very difficult  (and  intrusive)  in  practice  to
             ascertain when the break occurred.


         42.  Fourth, to construe termination to mean  "lawful  termination"
             also best furthers the principle  of  legal  certainty,  since
             persons affected will have the security of knowing that  their
             status as family members will not be contingent on being  able
             to show living together under the same roof  or  cohabitation,
             matters which by their nature will sometimes be very difficult
             to pinpoint in time.


         43.  Fifth, to construe "termination" as meaning lawful termination
             is consistent with the object and  purpose  of  the  Citizen's
             Directive  of  legally  safeguarding  the  rights  of   family
             members, since it ensures that a family member can continue to
             qualify as a family member even if  for  whatever  reason  the
             couple do not continue to live under  the  same  roof  or  who
             separate. On Dr Onipede's construction, a person  would  cease
             to be able to count any period of residence (for the  purposes
             of qualifying for a retained right of residence) from the date
             of the breakdown of his or her marriage, which will  often  be
             some significant period of time before the date of divorce.
         44.  Sixth, it is clear from Art 13 of the same Directive that  the
             Community  legislature  saw  only  a   specified   number   of
             circumstances as giving rise to a retained right of residence.
             Recital 15 states  that  family  members  "should  be  legally
             safeguarded in the event of the death of  the  Union  citizen,
             divorce, annulment of marriage or termination of a  registered
             partnership. It is only in  respect  of  "such  circumstances"
             that measures should be taken to ensure family members already
             residing in the territory of  the  host  Member  State  retain
             their right of residence exclusively on a person basis.


         45.  The IJ thought that construing termination to mean termination
             by means of legal proceedings relating to divorce would  leave
             family members "unreasonably  unprotected"  because  it  would
             leave  unprotected  all  family  members  who  have   suffered
             breakdown  of  a  relationship  with  an   EEA   national   in
             circumstances similar to this appellant. It must  straightaway
             be  acknowledged  that  such  an  approach  does  leave   some
             protection gap. But as already noted, so does his approach. It
             is not a case where one approach seeks  to  ensure  protection
             whereas the other does not; both may do. At  its  highest  the
             IJ's argument based on  "protection"  only  shows  that  under
             either  interpretation  there  will  be  winners  and  losers.
             Furthermore, the lack of protection he has in mind is only  in
             respect of the lack of the ability to acquire a retained right
             of residence. As the example of Diatta  v  Land  Berlin  makes
             clear, the breakdown of a relationship with a spouse does  not
             as such place  a  family  member  outside  the  protection  of
             Community law; it depends on the particular circumstances. But
             in order to benefit from Community rights of residence of  all
             kinds the family member must meet certain conditions. Examples
             of a protection gap of this kind  cannot  justify  seeking  to
             rewrite Community legislation or case law."

         We concur.

62.      Ms Asanovich and Mr Weiss have pointed to  a  number  of  anomalies
    which are said to flow from the approach  to  interpretation  taken  in
    Amos.  As already noted, such argument can get nowhere because  we  are
    bound by Amos. But even if we were not we would  still  not  accede  to
    such argument. We accept that the approach taken in Amos does result in
    some hard cases where public policy consideration might appear to point
    in a different direction.  However, as already pointed out, in relation
    to the divorce clause, some of the examples given do not factor in  the
    Diatta v Land Berlin principle which entails that just because a spouse
    encounters domestic violence problems does not mean they cease to  have
    an EU right of residence.

63.  In any event, as highlighted in OA, it is clear that hard  cases  would
    also arise if the approach to interpretation advocated by Ms  Asanovich
    and Mr Weiss were adopted such that a right of residence  was  retained
    from the date of breakdown of the relationship.   This  approach  would
    preclude a range of applicants from being able to meet the precondition
    set out in Article 13(2(a)) of having to show the marriage has lasted 3
    years.  (Of course, it is technically possible  to  envisage  that  the
    Directive might mean one thing by divorce in Article 13(1) and  another
    in 13(2), but if that were so the Directive would surely have made that
    clear.)

64.   Ms  Asanovich  and  Mr  Weiss   highlight   that   the   approach   to
    interpretation adopted in Amos creates wholly untenable consequences in
    certain countries where divorce  laws  are  strict,  e.g.  Ireland  and
    Malta.  However, in our view, there are no such consequences.   Persons
    in such countries who cannot get a divorce or cannot get  one  until  a
    considerable time has elapsed do not need the protection of Article 13.
     They already have  it  under  Diatta  v  Land  Berlin  principles  and
    continue to have it until the point of legal divorce.   For  every  day
    their marriage continues to exist  formally  (assuming  it  was  not  a
    marriage of convenience  ab  initio)  they  accrue  more  time  towards
    gaining a permanent right of residence either  outright  or  later,  if
    they are able to  meet  the  conditions  of  Article  13(2)  through  a
    continuation of residence  whilst  married  and  a  retained  right  of
    residence on divorce: see  Article  18.   Further,  Article  13  covers
    annulment as well as termination in any event.

65.  Given that we have held that to acquire a retained right  of  residence
    under both the Directive 2004/38/EC and under the 2006  Regulations  it
    is necessary  for  an  ex-spouse  to  show  that  her  (or  his)  Union
    citizen/EEA national spouse was exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  at
    the time of the divorce (in the form of  a  legal  termination  of  the
    marriage), it is clear that the appellant cannot show she acquired such
    a right. Whether one takes the time of her divorce as being March  2007
    (the Karachi divorce) or August 2009 (the UK  divorce),  the  date  was
    subsequent to that on which her ex-spouse left the UK (December 2006).

Zambrano

66.  Any doubt as to the territorial scope of  the  Zambrano  principle  has
    been resolved by the subsequent Court of Justice cases of Case C-434/09
    McCarthy v SSHD [2011] All ER (EC) 729, Case C-256/11 Dereci and Others
    [2012] All ER (EC) 373, Case C-40/11 Ilida v Stadt Um KC/C-40/11 [2012]
    ECR 1-0000 and Cases C-356/11 and C-357/11 O, S and L, 6 December  2012
    and by the Court of Appeal decision in Harrison (Jamaica)  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1736.



67.  From these binding authorities it is clear that:

    (1)  a violation of Article 20  of  the  Treaty  only  arises  where  a
         refusal decision would lead to a situation where  a  Union  citizen
         child would have to leave the territory of the Union;


    (2)  there would be no deprivation of the enjoyment of the substance of
         the Article 20 right  simply  because  a  departure  from  a  Union
         territory might deny economic benefits or fail  to  keep  a  family
         together.  The  Zambrano  principle  only  applies  in  exceptional
         circumstances;


    (3)  the mere fact that there has been an interference with family life
         does not entail that there has been  a  deprivation  of  a  genuine
         enjoyment of the rights set out in Article 20 TFEU.

68.  We accept that nothing said by the Court  of  Justice  in  any  of  the
    Article 20 TFEU cases excludes the potential  application  of  Zambrano
    principles to third-country national parents if the practical effect of
    a refusal decision is that the children  are  obligated  to  leave  the
    territory of the Union as a whole, notwithstanding  that  the  children
    are not, as in Zambrano, citizens of the host member  state.  That  was
    also the stated position of Mr  Deller,  Ms  Asanovich  and  Mr  Weiss.
    Ordinarily in such a case it would be necessary for applicants to prove
    that the children concerned were prevented from living in the territory
    of their  host  Member  State  (of  nationality)  together  with  their
    parent(s) and that may not be easy to do, given that  for  a  child  to
    have acquired citizenship of a Member State his  or  her  third-country
    national parent will often have lived there lawfully in  the  past.  In
    the appellant's case, however, there is no suggestion of  the  children
    being able to live with the father and Mr Deller said that he  accepted
    that it was not realistic to expect that she could live in Germany with
    her children. He also accepted that for her and her children there  was
    no alternative Union territory location other than the UK.  In our view
    Mr Deller was right to make that concession. The appellant did not have
    any immigration status in Germany nor could she rely in Germany on  any
    EU right of residence (to our understanding she would only be  entitled
    to reside in Germany as a matter of EU law if  able  to  show  (as  she
    clearly could not) that she was a self-sufficient parent in  accordance
    with the principles set out by the Court of Justice in Chen [2004]  ECR
    1-9925).  Accordingly, in our judgment the appellant is able to rely on
    her children's Article 20 right of Union citizenship under the  Treaty.



69.  We accept that our  decision  entails  considering  the  refusal  of  a
    residence card as indicative of an intention to remove, but  note  that
    this was also how Mr Deller asked us to regard it in the context of our
    Article 8 ECHR consideration and it seems to us there is no  principled
    basis for taking a different view in this respect from  that  taken  in
    respect of human rights law: see JM (Liberia).  Mr Deller's  concession
    that the decision adumbrated an intention to remove to Pakistan was not
    dependent on whether EU law or human  rights  law  provisions  were  in
    play.

New regulation 15A of  the  2006  Regulations  and  Article  12,  Regulation
    1612/68

70.  It is not in dispute that (1) between March 2004 and December 2006  the
    appellant's ex-spouse had  been  employed  in  the  UK;  (2)  that  the
    appellant's eldest child, A, was born in the UK on 14 November 2005  at
    a time when the appellant's ex-spouse was exercising Treaty rights; (3)
    that her eldest child has commenced full time primary school education;
    and (4) that the appellant has always been the primary carer of her two
    children, exclusively  so  since  some  time  in  2006.  Prior  to  the
    amendments made to the 2006 Regulations with effect from 16  July  2012
    by the Immigration (European Economic Area) Amendment Regulations  2012
    the appellant's claim to a derived right  of  residence  based  on  her
    oldest child's right of access to education would have to  rely  solely
    on the direct effect of Article 12, Regulation 1612/68  as  established
    by Court of Justice decisions  such  as  Teixeira.  But  as  Mr  Deller
    acknowledged, the recent amendment seeks to transpose this  right  into
    domestic law. That is confirmed by  the  13  July  2012  UKBA  document
    entitled  Changes  to  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 which states:

         " New regulation 15A sets out the conditions which  a  person  must
         satisfy in order to qualify for a derivative right of residence  on
         the basis of the ECJ judgments in Chen and Ibrahim and Teixeira."

71.  This document goes on to identify as one  of  the  categories  provided
    for in regulation 15A "primary  carers  of  children  of  EEA  national
    workers or former workers where that child is in education in the  UK".
    Regulation 15A(4) states that a person (P) qualifies for  a  derivative
    right of residence if (a) P is the primary carer of  a  person  meeting
    the criteria in (3) ("the  relevant  person");  and  (b)  the  relevant
    person would be unable to continue to be educated in the United Kingdom
    if P were required to leave". Regulation 15A(3) concerns a  person  who
    is the child of an EEA national who "resided in the United Kingdom at a
    time when the EEA national parent was residing in the United Kingdom as
    a worker" (15A(3)(b)) and "is in education in the  United  Kingdom  and
    was in education there at a time when the EEA national  parent  was  in
    the United Kingdom" (regulation 15A(3)c)).

72.  Mr Deller submits that notwithstanding the amendments made to the  2006
    Regulations the appellant cannot derive a right of residence  from  her
    eldest child under them because she cannot meet the requirement set out
    at regulation 15A(3)(c). On reflection we are inclined to agree. Whilst
    from the evidence on  file  as  to  the  appellant's  former  husband's
    previous history of working in the UK before he left in  December  2006
    we are satisfied that the  appellant  meets  regulation  15A(3)  (b)  -
    because the eldest child was born in 2005 and resided in  the  UK  when
    her father was residing in the UK as a worker - we are not able  to  be
    satisfied that she meets regulation 15A(3)(c).  The  latter  manifestly
    requires a temporal overlap between the child being  in  education  and
    the EEA national parent being in the UK and we find  it  impossible  to
    construe it otherwise. Contrary to this requirement  the  oldest  child
    only began education after her EEA national father left the UK.

 73. However, this is only the end of  the  matter  if  the  new  regulation
    affords at least the same scope of protection as Article 12, Regulation
    1612/68. In our judgment it clearly does not. In Teixeira the Court  of
    Justice made plain that it is not necessary for  the  child  to  be  in
    education in the  UK  at  a  time  when  the  EEA  national  parent  is
    continuing to meet the condition that he is exercising Treaty rights in
    the host Member State.  Having  at  paragraphs  50  and  73  reiterated
    previous jurisprudence that Article 12 applied as much to  the  primary
    carer of the child of a former migrant worker as to  the  child  of   a
    current migrant worker, at para 75 the Court stated that:

         "Consequently, the answer to Question 2(c) is  that  the  right  of
         residence in the host Member State of the parent who is the primary
         carer for a child of a migrant  worker,  where  that  child  is  in
         education in that State, is not conditional on one of  the  child's
         parents having worked as a migrant worker in that Member  State  on
         the date on which the child started in education".

74.  The Court's conclusions closely  followed  those  of  Advocate  General
    Kokott's Opinion in Teixeira (European  citizenship)  [2009]  EUECJ  C-
    480/08_O (20 October 2009) which had stated at para 40, with  reference
    to the facts of the Moritz case  in  Joined  Cases  389/87  and  390/87
    Echternach and Moritz [1989] ECR 723:

         "Contrary to  the  view  taken  by  some  of  the  parties  to  the
         proceedings, the exercise of  the  right  of  access  to  education
         cannot,  therefore,  in  any  way  be  predicated  on  the  child's
         retention throughout the period of its  education  of  its  special
         right of residence under Article 10(1)(a) of Regulation No 1612/68,
         and thus on its continuing right to settle with a parent who  is  a
         migrant worker. (29) If that were not the case, children of  former
         migrant workers, in particular, would for the most  part  lose  the
         right of access to education under Article 12, since the parent who
         'has been employed' in the host Member State will  frequently  have
         left that State after having  been  employed  there,  and  it  will
         therefore no longer be possible for  that  parent  simply  to  live
         there with the child in a common family home."


75.  This position was confirmed by the Court in Czop at para 26:

         "It is also apparent from the case-law that it is  sufficient  that
         the child attending educational courses in the  host  Member  State
         moved there when one  of  his  parents  was  exercising  rights  of
         residence there as a migrant worker. The child's right of residence
         in that State in order to  attend  educational  courses  there,  in
         accordance  with  Article  12  of  Regulation   No   1612/68,   and
         consequently the right of  residence  of  the  parent  who  is  the
         child's primary carer cannot therefore be subject to the  condition
         that one of the child's parents was working as a migrant worker  in
         the host Member State on the date on which  the  child  started  in
         education (Teixeira, paragraph 74)."

76.  In MDB and Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1015 the Court of Appeal confirmed the principles  established
    by Ibrahim and Teixiera. Accordingly we consider that the appellant has
    a derived right of residence based directly on Article  12,  Regulation
    1612/68.  The attempt by the drafters of the amended  2006  Regulations
    to give a national law basis for a derivative right of residence  drawn
    from Ibrahim and Teixiera is to be welcomed; but on our analysis it has
    not taken sufficiently careful note of the scope given to this right by
    the Court of Justice.

77.  Furthermore and in any event, there is a  governmental  concession  (to
    which Mr Weiss made reference) acknowledging that a child does not have
    to be in education at a time when the EEA national parent  was  working
    in the UK. This was made by the Department of Work and  Pensions  (DWP)
    in the context of the Case C-147/11 Czop litigation. In a letter  dated
    23 May 2012 addressed to the  Upper  Tribunal  (Administrative  Appeals
    Chamber) relating to the references then pending in Czop and  Punakova,
    Solicitors for the DWP Legal Group stated that:

         "In Ms Punakova's case, the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  Ms
         Punakova had a right of residence as the primary carer of  a  child
         in education, given that her partner Mr  B  (an  EU  national)  had
         worked in the UK and their child had installed himself  in  the  UK
         whilst his father was working. Paragraph 17 of the Upper Tribunal's
         reference noted that there was no  evidence  that  Mr  B  had  been
         working at the time their child entered education. However,  having
         considered the position further the Secretary  of  State  does  not
         consider that there is any EU law requirement to that effect..."

78.  Accordingly we are satisfied that the appellant has a derived right  of
    residence on the basis of Article 12 Regulation 1612/68.

Article 8

79.  Even if we are wrong in the conclusion to which we  have  come  on  the
    application  of  Zambrano  principles  and  Article  12  of  Regulation
    1612/68, we would still allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  As
    regards jurisdiction, we have already noted we  are  entitled  to  deal
    with Article 8 in this type of appeal: see  JM  (Liberia).  As  regards
    merits, however, we must make it clear that we do not allow it  because
    we think she satisfies all the  requirements  of  the  new  Immigration
    Rules.  She does not quite.

80.      We do accept (as  Mr  Deller  himself  at  one  point  appeared  to
    accept), that  the  appellant  does  meet  all  the  relevant  material
    requirements of the new Rules, including that relating  to  immigration
    status. Whilst Appendix FM as the parent of a child only arises if  the
    parent can meet the immigration status requirement, but  this  is  made
    subject to an exception (EX.1).

         Immigration status requirement
         E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

         (a)  as a visitor;

         (b)  with valid leave granted for a period of 6 months or less,
             unless that leave was granted pending the outcome of family
             court or divorce proceedings;

         (c)  on temporary admission or temporary release (unless paragraph
             EX.1. applies).

         E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of
         immigration laws, (disregarding any period of overstaying for a
         period of 28 days or less), unless paragraph EX.1. applies.


     EX.1 states:

         Section EX: Exception
         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a)  (i)      the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                  (aa)     is under the age of 18 years, or was under the
                      age of 18 years when the applicant was first granted
                      leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb)     is in the UK;

                  (cc)     is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                      continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                      preceding the date of application ;and

              (ii)     it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                leave the UK; or

         (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in
             the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK.


81.  In the appellant's case her eldest child has been in the UK  since  her
    birth in November 2005 and so meets the requirement at EX.1  (cc).  For
    reasons given below we do not consider that it would be  reasonable  to
    expect this child to leave the UK.

82.  Nonetheless, whilst meeting all the material requirements  of  the  new
    Rules, the appellant cannot meet the temporal requirements of  the  new
    rules. The new Rules only apply to decisions made on or  after  9  July
    2012 and  the  appellant's  application  was  made  in  2010:  see  the
    "Implementation" section of HC194.

83.  Nonetheless, we accept that in relation to whether the decision was  in
    accordance with the law (as distinct from the Rules: see MF (Article  8
    -  new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC))  it  would  not   be
    proportionate for the appellant to face the threat of removal from  the
    UK posed by the refusal decision.  She has been in the UK for  8  years
    and has been in the UK lawfully up until her application for  permanent
    residence.  She has been in self-employment for some  four  years.  She
    has been the victim of  domestic  violence.   Her  children  are  Union
    citizens in education.   She  has  a  derived  EU  right  of  residence
    pursuant to Article 12 Regulation 1612/68. The eldest child has been in
    the UK for over seven years. If the appellant's  case  were  considered
    under the new Rules now in force, she would succeed.

84.  The fact that the appellant's  children may also be (dual) citizens  of
    Pakistan, have some family ties there, appear to have cultural  if  not
    also linguistic affinities with that country and also  appear  able  to
    continue their education there, are not factors that we consider should
    outweigh the weighty factors identified in the foregoing paragraph.  As
    Mr Deller himself acknowledged,  even  without  reference  to  the  new
    Rules, the appellant's case under Article 8 is a formidable one.

Outcome

85.  On the  basis  of  current  authority,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    appellant's possession of an EU right of residence under Article 20  of
    the Treaty or Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 entitles  her  to  legal
    residence within the meaning of Directive 2004/38/EC, although we  note
    (as did Mr Weiss) that this is one of the  questions  currently  before
    the Court of Justice in the  order  of  reference  made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Alarape and Another (Article 12, EC  Reg  1612/68)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 413 (IAC).   Given  that  on  our  findings  the  appellant
    succeeds in her appeal in establishing that she continues to have an EU
    right of residence (albeit under Article 20  of  the  Treaty  (Zambrano
    principles) and also under Article 12, Regulation 1612/68 and not under
    the Directive), it would serve no purpose to adjourn the case until the
    ruling of the Court in Alarape.  Even if  (as  now  might  seem  likely
    given the opinion of Advocate General Bot in Case  C-529/11  Alarape  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department   15  January  2013  [2013]
    EUECJ C-529/11)) the ruling of the Court in that case is that EU  right
    of  residence  derived  from  EU  instruments  other   than   Directive
    2004/38/EC do not count  for  the  purposes  of  accruing  a  right  of
    permanent  residence  under  that  Directive,  it  is  clear  that  the
    respondent is duty bound to grant the appellant a right to  reside  for
    so long as her children remain in the UK and/or  remain  in  education.
    The fact,  therefore,  that  she  does  not  qualify  for  a  permanent
    residence card under the Directive or under the 2006 Regulations is not
    a proper reason to dismiss her appeal.

86.  For the above reasons, we conclude:

     The FtT materially erred in law and its decision is set aside.

     The decision we remake is that the appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on
    the s.84 (1)(d) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ground
    that the decision breaches the appellant's right of residence under  EU
    law.




     The fact,  therefore,  that  she  does  not  qualify  for  a  permanent
    residence card under the Directive or under the 2006 EEA Regulations is
    not a proper reason to dismiss her appeal.


     The appellant's appeal is also allowed on Article 8 grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
ANNEX

RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS

A.   Regulations 10, 14, 15  and  19(3)-(5)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (changes/additions  made  by   2012
    amendments shown in bold)

         10.  (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
                right of residence"  means,  subject  to  paragraph  (8),  a
                person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph  (2),  (3),
                (4) or (5).


           ...


           (5)    A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-


                (a)    he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                    or  of  an  EEA  national  with  a  permanent  right  of
                    residence on the termination of the  marriage  or  civil
                    partnership of the qualified person;


                (b)    he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                    with these Regulations at the date of the termination;


                (c)    he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


                (d)    either-


                    (i)    prior to the initiation of  the  proceedings  for
                        the  termination  of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                        partnership the marriage or civil  partnership  had
                        lasted for at least three years and the parties  to
                        the marriage or civil partnership  had  resided  in
                        the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
                        duration;


                    (ii)    the  former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                        qualified person or  of  an  EEA  national  with  a
                        permanent right of residence has custody of a child
                        of the qualified person;


                    (iii)   the  former  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
                        qualified person or  of  an  EEA  national  with  a
                        permanent right  of  residence  has  the  right  of
                        access to a child of the qualified person or of  an
                        EEA national with a permanent  right  of  residence
                        under the age of 18 and where a court  has  ordered
                        that such access must  take  place  in  the  United
                        Kingdom; or


                    (iv)   the continued right of residence  in  the  United
                        Kingdom of the person is warranted by  particularly
                        difficult circumstances,  such  as  he  or  another
                        family member having  been  a  victim  of  domestic
                        violence while the marriage  or  civil  partnership
                        was subsisting.


           (6)    The condition in this paragraph is that the person-


                (a)    is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                    national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
                    sufficient person under regulation 6; or


                (b)    is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                    paragraph (a).

                       ....


         14   Extended right of residence


             (1)  A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person.


             (2)  A family member of a qualified  person  residing  in  the
                  United Kingdom under paragraph (1) or of an  EEA  national
                  with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 is
                  entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so long as he
                  remains the family member of the qualified person  or  EEA
                  national.


             (3)  A family member who has retained the right  of  residence
                  is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so long as
                  he remains a family member who has retained the  right  of
                  residence.


             (4)  A right to reside under this regulation is in addition to
                  any right a person  may  have  to  reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom under regulation 13 or 15.


             (5)  A person who otherwise satisfies  the  criteria  in  this
                  regulation will not be entitled to a right  to  reside  in
                  the  United  Kingdom  under  this  regulation  where   the
                  Secretary of State has made a  decision  under  regulation
                  19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1).


         15   Permanent right of residence


             (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
             the United Kingdom permanently-


                  (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                      in accordance with these Regulations for a continuous
                      period of five years;


                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                      an EEA national but who has  resided  in  the  United
                      Kingdom with the  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
                      these Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
                      years;


                  (c)  a worker  or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                      activity;


                  (d)  the family member of a worker or self-employed person
                      who has ceased activity;


                  (e)  a person who was the family member  of  a  worker  or
                      self-employed person where-


                      (i)  the worker or self-employed person has died;


                      (ii)      the  family   member   resided   with   him
                           immediately before his death; and


                      (iii)     the  worker  or  self-employed  person  had
                           resided continuously in the United Kingdom for at
                           least the two years immediately before his  death
                           or the death was the result  of  an  accident  at
                           work or an occupational disease;








                  (f)  a person who-


                      (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                           with these Regulations for a continuous period of
                           five years; and


                      (ii)     was, at the end of  that  period,  a  family
                           member who has retained the right of residence.


             (1A) Residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  a
                  derivative  right  of  residence   does   not   constitute
                  residence for the purposes of this regulation.


             (2)  The right of permanent residence  under  this  regulation
             shall be lost only through absence from the United Kingdom for
             a period exceeding two consecutive years.


             (3)  A person who satisfies the criteria  in  this  regulation
                  will not be entitled to a permanent right of residence  in
                  the United Kingdom where the Secretary of State has made a
                  decision under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1).


         "15A. Derivative right of residence


             (1)  A person ("P") who is  not  entitled  to  reside  in  the
                  United Kingdom as a result of any other provision of these
                  Regulations and who satisfies the  criteria  in  paragraph
                  (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this regulation is entitled  to  a
                  derivative right to reside in the United  Kingdom  for  as
                  long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.


             (2)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


                  (a)  P is the primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  ("the
                      relevant EEA national"); and


                  (b)  the relevant EEA national-


                      (i)  is under the age of 18;


                      (ii)     is residing in the United Kingdom as a self-
                           sufficient person; and


                      (iii)    would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
                           Kingdom if P were required to leave.


             (3)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


                  (a)  P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA  national
                      parent");


                  (b)  P resided in the United Kingdom at a  time  when  the
                      EEA  national  parent  was  residing  in  the  United
                      Kingdom as a worker; and


                  (c)  P is in education in the United Kingdom  and  was  in
                      education there at  a  time  when  the  EEA  national
                      parent was in the United Kingdom.


             (4)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


                  (a)  P is the  primary  carer  of  a  person  meeting  the
                      criteria in paragraph (3)  ("the  relevant  person");
                      and


                  (b)  the relevant person would be unable to continue to be
                      educated in the United Kingdom if P were required  to
                      leave.


             (5)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-


                  (a)  P is under the age of 18;


                  (b)  P's primary carer is entitled to a  derivative  right
                      to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  virtue   of
                      paragraph (2) or (4);


                  (c)  P does not have leave to enter,  or  remain  in,  the
                      United Kingdom; and


                  (d)  requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent
                      P's  primary  carer  from  residing  in  the   United
                      Kingdom.


             (6)  For the purpose of this regulation-


                  (a)  "education" excludes nursery education; and


                  (b)  "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person who
                      falls to  be  regarded  as  a  worker  by  virtue  of
                      regulation 6(2).


             (7)  P is to be regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  of  another
                  person if


                  (a)  P is a direct relative or a legal  guardian  of  that
                      person; and


                  (b)  P-


                      (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for
                           that person's care; or


                      (ii)     shares equally the responsibility  for  that
                           person's care with one other person  who  is  not
                           entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                           result  of   any   other   provision   of   these
                           Regulations and who does not have leave to  enter
                           or remain.


             (8)  P will not be regarded as  having  responsibility  for  a
                  person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole
                  basis of a financial contribution  towards  that  person's
                  care.


             (9)   A  person  who  otherwise  satisfies  the  criteria   in
                  paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5) will not be entitled  to  a
                  derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom where the
                  Secretary of State has made a  decision  under  regulation
                  19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1).".


    12.  Regulation 19(3)-(5) provide:


             (3)  Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a person who has  been
                  admitted to, or acquired a right to reside in, the  United
                  Kingdom under these Regulations may be  removed  from  the
                  United Kingdom if-


                  (a)  he does not have or ceases to have a right to  reside
                      under these Regulations; or


                  (b)  he would otherwise  be  entitled  to  reside  in  the
                      United  Kingdom  under  these  Regulations  but   the
                      Secretary of State has decided that  his  removal  is
                      justified on the grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                      security  or  public  health   in   accordance   with
                      regulation 21.


             (4)  A person must not be removed under paragraph (3)  as  the
                  automatic consequence of having  recourse  to  the  social
                  assistance system of the United Kingdom.


             (5)  A person must not be removed under paragraph  (3)  if  he
                  has a right to remain in the United Kingdom by  virtue  of
                  leave granted under the 1971 Act  unless  his  removal  is
                  justified on the grounds of public policy, public security
                  or public health in accordance with regulation 21.


B.   Articles 7, 12, 13,14, 16 17, 18 and recitals 5 and 15 of the  Citizens
    Directive

             Article 7 Right of residence for more than three months


         1.   All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on  the
             territory of another Member State for a period of longer  than
             three months if they:


             (a)  are workers or self-employed persons in the  host  Member
                  State; or


             (b)  have sufficient resources for themselves and their family
                  members not to become a burden on  the  social  assistance
                  system of the host Member State  during  their  period  of
                  residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance  cover
                  in the host Member State; or


             (c)  - are enrolled at  a  private  or  public  establishment,
                  accredited or financed by the host  Member  State  on  the
                  basis of its legislation or administrative  practice,  for
                  the principal purpose of  following  a  course  of  study,
                  including vocational training; and


                  - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the  host
                  Member State and assure the relevant  national  authority,
                  by means of a declaration or by such equivalent  means  as
                  they may choose, that they have sufficient  resources  for
                  themselves and their family members not to become a burden
                  on the social assistance system of the host  Member  State
                  during their period of residence; or


             (d)  are  family  members  accompanying  or  joining  a  Union
                  citizen who satisfies the conditions referred to in points
                  (a), (b) or (c).


         2.   The right of residence  provided  for  in  paragraph  1  shall
             extend to family members who are not  nationals  of  a  Member
             State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen in  the  host
             Member State, provided that such Union citizen  satisfies  the
             conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).


         3.   For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen who is  no
             longer a worker  or  self-employed  person  shall  retain  the
             status of worker or  self-employed  person  in  the  following
             circumstances:


             (a)  he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                  illness or accident;


             (b)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  having been employed  for  more  than  one  year  and  has
                  registered as a job-seeker with  the  relevant  employment
                  office;


             (c)  he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  completing a fixed-term employment contract of less than a
                  year  or  after  having  become  involuntarily  unemployed
                  during the first twelve months and has registered as a job-
                  seeker with the relevant employment office. In this  case,
                  the status of worker shall be retained for  no  less  than
                  six months;


             (d)  he/she embarks on vocational training. Unless  he/she  is
                  involuntarily unemployed, the retention of the  status  of
                  worker shall require the training to  be  related  to  the
                  previous employment.


         Article 12 Retention of the right of residence by family members in
         the event of death or departure of the Union citizen


         1.   Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the  Union
             citizen's death or departure from the host Member State  shall
             not affect the right of residence of  his/her  family  members
             who are nationals of a Member State.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2.   Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,  the  Union
             citizen's  death  shall  not  entail  loss  of  the  right  of
             residence of his/her family members who are not nationals of a
             Member State and who have been residing  in  the  host  Member
             State as family members for at least one year before the Union
             citizen's death.


         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall  be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).


         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
             exclusively on personal basis.


         Article 13 Retention of the right of residence by family members in
         the event of divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of
         registered partnership


         1.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment of the Union citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).


         2.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  citizen's
             family members who are not nationals of a Member State where:


             (a)   prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce   or   annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in the host Member State; or


             (b)  by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred
                  to in point 2(b) of Article  2  or  by  court  order,  the
                  spouse or partner who is not a national of a Member  State
                  has custody of the Union citizen's children; or


             (c)    this   is   warranted   by    particularly    difficult
                  circumstances, such as having been a  victim  of  domestic
                  violence while the marriage or registered partnership  was
                  subsisting; or


             (d)  by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to
                  in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse
                  or partner who is not a national of a Member State has the
                  right of access to a minor child, provided that the  court
                  has ruled that such access must  be  in  the  host  Member
                  State, and for as long as is required.


             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence,  the  right
             of residence of the persons concerned shall remain subject  to
             the requirement that they are  able  to  show  that  they  are
             workers or self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient
             resources for themselves  and  their  family  members  not  to
             become a burden on the social assistance system  of  the  host
             Member  State  during  their  period  of  residence  and  have
             comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the  host  Member
             State, or  that  they  are  members  of  the  family,  already
             constituted in the host Member State, of a  person  satisfying
             these requirements. "Sufficient resources" shall be as defined
             in Article 8(4).


             Such family members shall  retain  their  right  of  residence
             exclusively on personal basis.


         Article 14 Retention of the right of residence


         1.   Union citizens and their family members shall have  the  right
             of residence provided for in Article 6, as long as they do not
             become an unreasonable burden on the social assistance  system
             of the host Member State.


         2.   Union citizens and their family members shall have  the  right
             of residence provided for in Articles 7, 12 and 13 as long  as
             they meet the conditions set out therein.


             In specific cases where there is  a  reasonable  doubt  as  to
             whether a Union citizen or his/her  family  members  satisfies
             the conditions set out in Articles 7, 12 and 13, Member States
             may  verify  if   these   conditions   are   fulfilled.   This
             verification shall not be carried out systematically.


         3.   An expulsion measure shall not be the automatic consequence of
             a Union citizen's or his or her family  member's  recourse  to
             the social assistance system of the host Member State.


         4.   By way of derogation from  paragraphs  1  and  2  and  without
             prejudice to  the  provisions  of  Chapter  VI,  an  expulsion
             measure may in no case be adopted against  Union  citizens  or
             their family members if:


             (a)  the Union citizens are workers or self-employed  persons,
                  or


             (b)  the Union citizens entered  the  territory  of  the  host
                  Member State in order to seek employment.


             In this case, the Union citizens and their family members  may
             not be expelled for as long as the Union citizens can  provide
             evidence that they are continuing to seek employment and  that
             they have a genuine chance of being engaged.














         CHAPTER IV Right of permanent residence
         Section I Eligibility
         Article 16 General rule for Union citizens and their family members


         1.   Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host Member State shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there. This right  shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.


         2.   Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family  members  who  are  not
             nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with  the
             Union citizen in the host Member State for a continuous period
             of five years.


         3.   Continuity of residence shall not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total of six months  a  year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of  twelve  consecutive  months
             for  important  reasons  such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,
             serious illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in
             another Member State or a third country.


         4.   Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be  lost
             only through absence from the host Member State for  a  period
             exceeding two consecutive years.


         Article 17 Exemptions for persons no longer  working  in  the  host
         Member State and their family members


         1.   By way of derogation from Article 16, the right  of  permanent
             residence in the host Member State  shall  be  enjoyed  before
             completion of a continuous period of five years  of  residence
             by:


             (a)  workers or self-employed persons who, at  the  time  they
                  stop working, have reached the age laid down by the law of
                  that Member State for entitlement to an old age pension or
                  workers  who  cease  paid   employment   to   take   early
                  retirement, provided that they have been working  in  that
                  Member State for at least the preceding twelve months  and
                  have resided there continuously for more than three years.


                  If the law of the host Member State  does  not  grant  the
                  right to an old age pension to certain categories of self-
                  employed persons, the age condition  shall  be  deemed  to
                  have been met once the person concerned  has  reached  the
                  age of 60;


             (b)   workers  or  self-employed  persons  who  have   resided
                  continuously in the host Member State for  more  than  two
                  years and stop working there  as  a  result  of  permanent
                  incapacity to work.


                  If such incapacity is the result of an accident at work or
                  an occupational disease entitling the person concerned  to
                  a benefit payable in full or in part by an institution  in
                  the host Member State, no condition shall be imposed as to
                  length of residence;


             (c)  workers or self-employed persons who, after  three  years
                  of continuous employment and residence in the host  Member
                  State, work in an employed or  self-employed  capacity  in
                  another Member  State,  while  retaining  their  place  of
                  residence in the host Member State, to which they  return,
                  as a rule, each day or at least once a week.


         ...


         Article 18 Acquisition of  the  right  of  permanent  residence  by
         certain family members who are not nationals of a Member State


         Without prejudice to Article 17, the  family  members  of  a  Union
         citizen to whom Articles 12(2) and 13(2)  apply,  who  satisfy  the
         conditions laid down therein, shall acquire the right of  permanent
         residence after residing legally for a period of  five  consecutive
         years in the host Member State.


         Recital 5


         (5)  The right of all Union citizens  to  move  and  reside  freely
             within the territory of the Member States should, if it is  to
             be  exercised  under  objective  conditions  of  freedom   and
             dignity, be also granted to their family members, irrespective
             of nationality. ..."


         Recital 15:


         (15)     Family members should be legally safeguarded in the  event
             of the death of  the  Union  citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of
             marriage or termination of a registered partnership. With  due
             regard for family life  and  human  dignity,  and  in  certain
             conditions to guard against abuse, measures  should  therefore
             be taken to ensure that in such circumstances  family  members
             already residing within the territory of the host Member State
             retain their right of  residence  exclusively  on  a  personal
             basis.

C.  Article 12, Regulation 1612/68

Article 12 of Regulation  No  1612/68,  now  Article  10  of  Regulation  No
492/2011, states:

    "The children of a national of a  Member  State  who  is  or  has  been
    employed in the territory of another Member State shall be admitted  to
    that  State's  general  educational,  apprenticeship   and   vocational
    training courses under the same conditions as  the  nationals  of  that
    State, if such children are residing in its territory.


    Member States shall encourage all efforts to enable  such  children  to
    attend these courses under the best possible conditions."

