
RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|on 1st, 2nd and 5th September                 |                             |
|and 1st and 30th October 2008                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Senior Immigration Judge P. R. Lane
                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                     RN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Henderson, Counsel, instructed by I.A.S.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kovats, Counsel, instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor.

   1. Those at risk on return to Zimbabwe on account  of  imputed  political
      opinion are no longer restricted to those  who  are  perceived  to  be
      members or supporters of the MDC but include anyone who is  unable  to
      demonstrate support for or loyalty to the regime or Zanu-PF.  To  that
      extent the country guidance in HS is no longer to be followed.  But  a
      bare assertion that such is the case will not suffice,  especially  in
      the case of an appellant who  has  been  found  not  credible  in  his
      account of experiences in Zimbabwe.


   2. There is clear evidence that teachers in Zimbabwe  have,  once  again,
      become targets for persecution. As many teachers have  fled  to  avoid
      retribution, the fact of being a teacher or having been a  teacher  in
      the past again is capable of raising an enhanced risk, whether or  not
      a person was a polling officer, because when encountered it  will  not
      be known what a particular teacher did or did not do in another area.


   3. It is the  CIO,  and  not  the  undisciplined  militias,  that  remain
      responsible for monitoring returns to Harare airport.  In  respect  of
      those returning to the airport there is no  evidence  that  the  state
      authorities have abandoned any attempt to  distinguish  between  those
      actively involved in support  of  the  MDC  or  otherwise  of  adverse
      interest and those who simply have not demonstrated  positive  support
      for or loyalty to Zanu-PF. There is  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
      assessment made in HS of those who would be identified at the  airport
      of being of sufficient interest to merit further interrogation and  so
      to be at real risk of harm such as to infringe either Convention.

   4. Although a power sharing agreement has been signed between  Mr  Mugabe
      on behalf of Zanu-PF and Mr Tsvangirai  on  behalf  of  the  MDC,  the
      evidence presented does not demonstrate that the agreement as such has
      removed the real risk of serious harm we have  identified  for  anyone
      now returned to Zimbabwe who is not able to demonstrate allegiance  to
      or association with the Zimbabwean regime.

   5. General country conditions and living conditions for  many  Zimbabwean
      nationals have continued to deteriorate since the summer of 2007. Some
      may be subjected to a complete deprivation of the basic necessities of
      life, for example access to food aid,  shelter  and  safe  water,  the
      cumulative effect of which is capable of enabling a claim  to  succeed
      under article 3 of the ECHR. But that will not always be the case  and
      each claim must be determined upon its own facts.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the determination of the Tribunal to which each member of  the
      panel has contributed. We should say at the outset that  the  Tribunal
      has made an order under section 11 of the Contempt of Court  Act  1981
      that prevents the disclosure of the identity of some of the sources of
      the material which we take into account and to which we refer in  this
      determination.  Where we refer to a witness or an organisation by name
      that is because they have not sought anonymity and are content  to  be
      identified.


   2. Because of the way in which events evolved as the  hearing  progressed
      it was necessary to amend that order by way of extending its scope. It
      may be helpful to explain why before progressing any further.

   3. At the close of proceedings on 5th September 2008  we  indicated  that
      if, before the Tribunal's  determination  was  promulgated,  an  event
      occurred that was  capable  of  indicating  a  fundamental  change  in
      country conditions, the Tribunal would reconvene the hearing to enable
      the parties to advance such additional  evidence  and  submissions  as
      might be thought to be appropriate.

   4. Subsequently we became aware of reports in the media that an agreement
      had been reached between Mr Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai regarding a power
      sharing  arrangement  for  the  future  governance  of  Zimbabwe.   We
      considered that to be a development of such potential importance as to
      require us to allow the parties such an opportunity to comment.

   5. The hearing was reconvened on 1st October. After  hearing  submissions
      from both parties to the appeal we decided that there was at  least  a
      real possibility that the power sharing agreement had the potential to
      alter significantly the political landscape in Zimbabwe and that  this
      was a matter the Tribunal should deal with in this  determination.  In
      order to allow all concerned to address this  issue  the  hearing  was
      adjourned for one final day, on 30th October 2008. As we had  resolved
      to address the impact of  the  power  sharing  agreement,  we  invited
      submissions on materials relating to the agreement  (in  the  form  of
      press reports) that the Tribunal had identified, as well as permitting
      the parties to adduce evidence regarding the issue. In following  this
      course we were mindful of the stance adopted  by  the  respondent,  as
      described below at paragraph 28 of this determination.

   6. On the 30th October the Tribunal reconvened.  We  heard  further  oral
      evidence from the only witness to have given  oral  evidence  for  the
      respondent, Mr Mark Walker, Senior Executive Officer  in  the  Country
      Specific Asylum Policy  Team  with  responsibility  for  Zimbabwe.  We
      consider that evidence in detail below, at  paragraphs  152  and  199.
      That oral evidence was limited to the adoption of  a  further  witness
      statement to which was exhibited a collection of reports of interviews
      recently carried out with representatives of organisations in Zimbabwe
      who were thought to be in a good  position  to  comment  upon  current
      country conditions. We will consider this additional evidence, and our
      approach to it, in greater detail later in this determination. But  it
      was to preserve the anonymity of most of those participating in  those
      interviews that the scope of the order was extended.

The appellant's claim

   7. The appellant, who was born  on  20th  June  1969,  is  a  citizen  of
      Zimbabwe. She arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd January  2006  and
      claimed asylum the following  day.  Although  she  held  no  political
      beliefs and had engaged in no political activities,  she  had  in  the
      past worked as a teacher and, as  someone  not  actively  involved  in
      supporting Zanu-PF, she said she would be assumed to be a supporter of
      the opposition, particularly because  she  would  be  returning  after
      spending some time in the United Kingdom. Also, she feared retribution
      from a former boyfriend who had been violent towards her  and  towards
      her mother after her departure from Zimbabwe.

The appellant's appeal

   8. The appellant appealed against the removal decision  that  accompanied
      refusal of her asylum claim  on  13th  March  2006.  That  appeal  was
      dismissed by Immigration Judge Phillips following a  hearing  on  27th
      April 2006.

   9. Reconsideration of that decision was ordered because  the  immigration
      judge had declined to determine the appellant's appeal on human rights
      grounds, explaining that,  as  the  refusal  letter  stated  that  the
      respondent had suspended involuntary returns of failed asylum  seekers
      to Zimbabwe, he considered it inappropriate to deal with  the  grounds
      of appeal argued on human rights grounds. That, plainly, was an  error
      of law: see JM v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402. The immigration judge  was
      required by section 86(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002 to determine any matter raised as a ground of appeal  and  it
      was a material error because it did not follow  that  because  he  had
      dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds the appeal could not succeed on
      human rights grounds either. The full written  reasons  given  by  the
      Tribunal for finding that the immigration judge made a material  error
      of law are set out below in the First Appendix.

  10. The scope of the reconsideration that was to follow was made clear  in
      the written reasons given by the  Tribunal  following  a  first  stage
      reconsideration hearing. Although the Tribunal identified  a  material
      error of law such as to require the substitution of a  fresh  decision
      to allow or to  dismiss the appeal, that  error  did  not  infect  the
      findings of fact made by the immigration judge and so  those  findings
      were preserved. (See the Second Appendix.)


  11. As the Tribunal has become aware of new evidence  tending  to  suggest
      that country conditions in Zimbabwe had continued to deteriorate,  the
      reconsideration of this appeal was identified as  a  suitable  vehicle
      for the Tribunal to give country guidance in respect of Zimbabwe.  But
      issues  regarding  the  scope   of   the   reconsideration   and   the
      appropriateness of taking this opportunity to update country  guidance
      have been raised by the parties. Mr Henderson, who  appeared  for  the
      appellant, sought to widen the scope of the  reconsideration  so  that
      all issues of fact should be at large,  notwithstanding  what  we  say
      above. Mr  Kovats,  for  the  respondent,  submitted  that  given  the
      fluidity of events in Zimbabwe it was not appropriate at this time for
      the Tribunal to update the country guidance presently available.

  12. We shall deal with  these  issues  before  examining  in  detail  this
      appellant's case and the evidence offered in support of her  claim  to
      be a refugee. Before doing so, something needs to be  said  about  the
      existing country guidance on Zimbabwe.

   The status of existing country guidance

  13. The most recent country guidance  is  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
      Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094, published in November 2007. A  summary
      of the Tribunal's conclusions in HS is set out in  the  head  note  as
      follows:


        1. Failed asylum seekers do not, as such,  face  a  risk  of  being
           subjected, on return to Zimbabwe, to persecution or serious ill-
           treatment. That will be the case whether the return is voluntary
           or involuntary, escorted or not.


        2. The findings in respect of risk categories in SM and Others (MDC
           - Internal flight - risk categories) Zimbabwe  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
           00100, as adopted, affirmed and supplemented  in  AA  (Risk  for
           involuntary  returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00061  are
           adopted and reaffirmed. The Tribunal identifies one further risk
           category, being those seen to  be  active  in  association  with
           human rights  or  civil  society  organisations  where  evidence
           suggests that the particular organisation has been identified by
           the authorities as  a  critic  or  opponent  of  the  Zimbabwean
           regime.


        3. The process of screening returning passengers is an intelligence
           led process and the CIO will generally have identified from  the
           passenger manifest in advance,  based  upon  such  intelligence,
           those passengers in whom there is any  possible  interest.   The
           fact of having made an asylum claim abroad is not something that
           in itself will give rise to adverse interest on return.


        4. The Tribunal adopts and reaffirms the findings in AA in  respect
           of  the  general  absence  of  real  risk  associated  with  any
           monitoring of returnees that might take place after such persons
           have passed through the airport and returned to their home  area
           or re-established themselves in a new area.


        5. Country conditions have continued to  deteriorate  but  are  not
           generally such as to bring about an infringement  of  Convention
           rights for returnees or to require  the  grant  of  humanitarian
           protection.

  14. The Court of Appeal refused HS permission to appeal on the papers  and
      the application was renewed orally. As can be seen from what was  said
      by Buxton LJ in  HS  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  915,  the
      appellant in HS sought to argue that the Tribunal was wrong to proceed
      on the basis that, the hearing being a reconsideration rather  than  a
      fresh appeal, disputed findings of fact made by the immigration  judge
      that were not infected by the error of law giving rise to the need for
      reconsideration  should  not  be  revisited.   This  was  an  argument
      awaiting consideration before the House of Lords on appeal from MT, RB
      & U v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 808, a case now being  referred  to  as  RB
      (Algeria).  Buxton LJ summarised that argument as follows:

           "... I am fairly confident in saying that the essential  way  in
           which the argument of the appellants in  MT  departed  from  the
           previous jurisprudence was that they contended that, in  a  case
           involving human rights convention issues,  an  appellate  court,
           even if within the domestic legal  order  its  jurisdiction  was
           limited  to  issues  of  law,  should  nonetheless  review   the
           conclusions reached on matters of fact by  the  lower  court  in
           order to determine whether those were  correct:  as  opposed  to
           being limited to simply considering  whether  those  conclusions
           had been reached by methods that exhibited irrationality."


  15. Although the Master of the Rolls had rejected that argument, the House
      of Lords has granted permission to  appeal  against  that  conclusion.
      That meant the Court of Appeal accepted that if the appeal was  upheld
      by the House of Lords then the grounds relied upon by the appellant in
      HS could be redrawn so as to assert a challenge to  findings  of  fact
      unrestrained by the need to demonstrate irrationality or other failure
      to meet the Wednesbury test. As a  consequence,  Buxton  LJ  concluded
      that it was not appropriate:


           "... to go ahead with what is  bound  to  be  an  extensive  and
           burdensome enquiry only to find out that the  legal  basis  upon
           which that enquiry has been placed turns out to be mistaken".

  16. For those reasons the application for permission to appeal against the
      decision of the Tribunal in HS has been stayed:


           "... solely on the basis that the proper role  of  an  appellate
           court, in relation to the assessment of facts  as  a  Convention
           matter, must remain in doubt at least until the House  of  Lords
           has pronounced on RB (Algeria). ..."




  17. We have dealt with all this in some detail because two questions arise
      to be addressed. First,  what  is  the  relevance  of  the  unresolved
      challenge to the country guidance in HS? Secondly, in view of what  we
      say below about the preservation of the disputed findings of fact made
      by the immigration judge, is the Tribunal now entitled to shut out the
      attempt to revisit the factual basis upon which the  appellant  argues
      her case?

  18. We are satisfied that no difficulty arises because of  the  unresolved
      challenge to HS. The starting point is that HS  remains  in  place  as
      country guidance to be followed unless the  evidence  put  before  the
      Tribunal shows good reason to depart from it. see: Practice  Direction
      18 and OM (AA(1) wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00077.

  19. In any event, the appellant's appeal does not depend solely  upon  the
      challenge to HS being pursued elsewhere. In this appeal the main focus
      has moved away from an assessment of risk on return to Harare  airport
      at the hands of Immigration Officers, CIO officers or  other  officers
      of the state and has been placed instead upon  what  happens  after  a
      person has passed through the airport and entered into Zimbabwe. It is
      about what difficulties the appellant is likely to experience when she
      returns to her home area, or tries to re-establish  herself  elsewhere
      in Zimbabwe, that the evidence put before us was concerned.

  20. Paragraph 4  of  the  summary  of  findings  in  HS  reproduced  above
      indicates that the Tribunal did consider that issue. But the appellant
      now relies upon extensive evidence that has become available since  HS
      was determined to establish that the  conclusions  reached  in  HS  no
      longer represent the position and  so  should  be  revisited  and  the
      guidance updated.

  21. In short, it is the appellant's case that  whereas  in  the  past  one
      would be at risk on return if identified as a member or  supporter  of
      the Movement for Democratic Change ("MDC") or as an active  critic  or
      other opponent of the regime, in today's Zimbabwe  anyone  who  cannot
      positively demonstrate that they are a supporter of the ruling  party,
      Zanu-PF, or otherwise aligned with the interests of the  regime,  will
      be at risk of persecutory ill-treatment. That is because no longer  do
      those relied upon by the regime to maintain its hold on power  content
      themselves with repression of those identified as  supporters  of  the
      opposition. They now seek to repress  by  violent  and  discriminatory
      means anyone who is a seen as a potential supporter of the opposition.



  22. Mr Henderson, in his oral  submissions,  explained  that  it  was  not
      suggested that the appellant would be at risk simply on the  basis  of
      being a failed asylum seeker removed from the United  Kingdom.  It  is
      said that she would be at risk on account of the drastic and  dramatic
      deterioration in country conditions. He said that she faces  the  same
      risk as any other ordinary  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  who  is  unable  to
      demonstrate support for or allegiance with Zanu-PF or the  regime  but
      to a greater extent because, as a person  returning  from  the  United
      Kingdom after having made an unsuccessful asylum claim, she  would  be
      perceived to be a supporter of the MDC and at risk on that account.

  23. In his submissions, Mr Henderson argued that, by inference, that  must
      mean that there will be an enhanced level of risk for  those  returned
      to Harare airport after having made an unsuccessful claim  for  asylum
      in the United Kingdom. Those who enforced the will of  Mr  Mugabe  and
      Zanu-PF throughout the country did so at the direction  of  the  state
      authorities. Thus, there was no longer any reason to  believe  that  a
      more sophisticated distinction would be drawn between those  returnees
      about whom something was known  to  suggest  they  might  be  members,
      activists or supporters of the MDC and those about whom  nothing  more
      was known than that they were returning as failed asylum seekers  from
      the United Kingdom. He submitted that it was clear from  the  evidence
      now available that such persons would be seen as potential  supporters
      of the MDC and therefore as a threat to the regime and at risk on that
      account on arrival at the airport, just as they would be on return  to
      their home areas.

  24. The second question to be addressed is whether, should  the  challenge
      in RB (Algeria) succeed, the determination of  this  appeal  would  be
      flawed because  it  is  based  upon  findings  of  fact  made  by  the
      immigration judge which the appellant continues to challenge.

  25. We are satisfied that would not be the case. Mr Henderson accepts that
      whether or not the appellant's factual account is accepted entirely or
      just to the extent accepted by the immigration judge,  the  nature  of
      her appeal remains unchanged. He is  entirely  correct  to  make  that
      concession. This means that even if it were to be the  case  that  the
      Tribunal  should  have  revisited  those  findings  and  should   have
      concluded that the  appellant's  account  be  accepted  in  full,  the
      outcome would not be different and so any error would  not  have  been
      material.

  26. It follows from all this that the country guidance  provided  in  this
      determination is  based  mainly  upon  fresh  evidence  about  current
      country conditions in Zimbabwe so  that  it  stands  apart  and  quite
      separate from HS and does not depend  upon  that  determination  being
      upheld in any challenge that might be given permission to  proceed  in
      the Court of Appeal.

Is this an appropriate time for country guidance in respect of  Zimbabwe  to
be reconsidered?

  27. Mr Kovats, upon instructions, took an unusual position in  respect  of
      his participation in the reconsideration of this appeal. He  submitted
      that country conditions in Zimbabwe were volatile and extremely  fluid
      and were likely to change significantly within the  coming  months.  A
      political agreement between the regime and the opposition may  or  may
      not be reached. The standoff may persist or deteriorate into  a  civil
      war. The respondent  had  given  an  undertaking  not  to  re-commence
      removals to Zimbabwe until the challenge to HS had been resolved. That
      meant that any country guidance now offered was likely to  be  out  of
      date before it could be acted upon.


  28. For those reasons Mr Kovats had instructions to limit  the  extent  to
      which he would participate in the appeal. Mr Kovats  chose  his  words
      carefully and we must make clear our approach to the position  he  has
      adopted.

  29. Mr Kovats said that he did not seek to dispute any of  the  statements
      of fact made by  the  country  witnesses  giving  evidence  about  the
      country conditions. He did not intend to cross examine those witnesses
      at all. But he made clear that he did not concede the appeal and would
      be advancing submissions upon the evidence adduced on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.

  30. But such witnesses are called by the appellant either as experts or as
      persons who are very well informed about such matters and who are well
      placed to give evidence about them. The purpose of  doing  so  is  not
      simply to  enable  them  to  put  facts  before  the  Tribunal.  These
      witnesses are called to either to express an expert opinion or to give
      evidence as someone who is well informed. Mr Kovats  has  not  put  to
      those witnesses the respondent's case where  it  is  contrary  to  the
      views expressed and so that evidence goes unchallenged.

  31. That does not mean, of course, that the Tribunal is  bound  to  accept
      all that such witnesses say. But,  in  the  case  of  the  two  expert
      witnesses in particular, absent any reason to believe those  views  to
      be incorrect, the Tribunal  is  likely  to  accept  that  unchallenged
      evidence as made out, although before doing so will have regard to the
      submission advanced by both representatives. We bear in mind also what
      was said recently by the European Court of Human Rights in NA v United
      Kingdom 25904/07:

           "In assessing such material, consideration must be given to  its
           source,  in  particular  its   independence,   reliability   and
           objectivity. In respect of reports, the authority and reputation
           of the author, the seriousness of the investigations by means of
           which they were compiled, the consistency of  their  conclusions
           and their  corroboration  by  other  sources  are  all  relevant
           considerations (see Saadi v. Italy, cited above, � 143)."


      and that one of the expert witnesses in particular, Professor  Ranger,
      has given consistent evidence in the country guidance litigation  over
      recent years and (although on a limited number of matters his evidence
      has not been accepted) his  authority,  integrity  and  reputation  is
      unquestioned.


  32. We do not agree with the submission advanced by Mr Kovats that now  is
      not the time to issue current country guidance in respect of Zimbabwe.
      It is common ground and not disputed by the respondent that there  has
      been during much  of  2008  a  significant  deterioration  in  country
      conditions for what might be termed ordinary Zimbabweans. As is  clear
      from what we say below, there has been a sufficient  change  in  those
      country conditions  to  require  a  departure  from  existing  country
      guidance.    That  there  continues  to  be  change  in  the   country
      conditions is not a reason for the Tribunal to avoid giving guidance.

  33. It is no doubt true that country conditions in Zimbabwe are in a state
      of flux and there may well  be  further  changes.  We  are  satisfied,
      however, that in  the  circumstances  it  is  right  to  give  country
      guidance in this case, not just because of the passage of  time  since
      HS but also  because  the  events  of  2008  demand  an  authoritative
      assessment from the Tribunal in the form of country  guidance.  We  do
      not purport to be able to predict the future and it may well  be  that
      events in Zimbabwe will change swiftly and fundamentally. All  we  can
      do is to assess the situation on the basis of the evidence  before  us
      and give country  guidance  pursuant  to  Practice  Direction  18  and
      section 107(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
      which makes that guidance authoritative, to the extent that subsequent
      appeals depend upon the same or similar evidence as  that  before  us.
      In taking this approach we have regard to what the Tribunal said about
      the giving of country guidance in  the  context  of  volatile  country
      conditions: see KG (Review of current situation) Nepal CG [2006] UKAIT
      00076.


   The appellant's claim and the scope of the reconsideration


  34. The findings of fact made by the immigration judge who  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal as  well  as  the  written  reasons  given  by  the
      Tribunal for finding a material error of law in the determination  and
      giving directions as to the scope of this reconsideration are set  out
      in full at annexes 1 and 2 post. It is therefore necessary to set  out
      here only a brief summary.


  35. The appellant was born and lived until her departure from Zimbabwe  in
      a village near Plumtree in the province of Matabeleland  South,  close
      to the border with Botswana. Between 1998 and 2003  she  worked  as  a
      teacher in the local primary school. As such she was wary  of  the  so
      called War Veterans who would come to the school advancing  their  pro
      Zanu-PF propaganda, harassing teachers  and  others  to  secure  their
      support for the regime and to ensure that children at the school  were
      not receiving any pro MDC messages from the  teachers.  Generally  the
      appellant was able to avoid their attentions but  on  three  occasions
      she was made to attend rallies held at the school  where  people  were
      required to chant slogans and sing songs in support of the  regime  or
      the ruling party.


  36. But this harassment was  not  alone  what  led  to  her  leaving  this
      employment. In her initial witness statement the appellant explained:

           "I finished teaching in 2003. Although I enjoyed my job  it  was
           becoming frustrating, as sometimes we would not be  paid  for  a
           month or more at a time. We would queue at  the  bank  for  many
           hours to receive payment, but often there would be no money left
           and we would not be paid. Also, the War Vets would come  to  our
           rooms and tell us threateningly that if they find out  that  any
           teacher is telling the children anything against the  government
           they would find the teacher and kill them."

  37. Having given up her job as  a  teacher  she  returned  to  her  former
      occupation of selling fruit and vegetables with her mother in order to
      support herself. Soon afterwards she  formed  a  relationship  with  a
      local man, to whom we shall refer as her boyfriend, as this is how  he
      was described in evidence. All was fine  until  2005  when  he  became
      violent and aggressive towards her. When the appellant sought  to  end
      the relationship he refused to accept that.  It  was  the  appellant's
      account that they had fallen out because she had  disapproved  of  his
      activities as a War Veteran and that after he had  raped  her  several
      times he brought two friends who raped her also. After  the  appellant
      reported this multiple rape to the police, who did nothing in response
      to that complaint, the appellant's home was burnt down while  she  was
      staying with her mother and as a result the appellant  went  to  South
      Africa where she stayed while her mother raised  the  money  from  the
      sale of livestock to pay an agent to arrange for her  journey  to  the
      United Kingdom some six months later. The  appellant  added  that  her
      former boyfriend went to her mother and beat her in order to  discover
      her whereabouts in South Africa. The appellant feared  that  he  would
      find her should she return home and she would continue  to  suffer  at
      his hands.


  38. The immigration judge did not believe that the  appellant's  boyfriend
      was a War Veteran, nor that the appellant had been  the  victim  of  a
      multiple rape by the boyfriend and his friends by way  of  retribution
      after  the  appellant  had  sought  to  end  the   relationship.   The
      immigration judge rejected as untrue also  the  account  of  her  home
      being burnt down. But he did  not  reject  the  fact  of  the  abusive
      relationship nor the appellant's account of her mother being beaten by
      the appellant's former boyfriend soon after  the  appellant  had  left
      Zimbabwe.

  39. The grounds upon which the appellant sought  reconsideration  did  not
      seek to challenge  those  findings  of  fact  and  nor  was  any  such
      challenge pursued at the  first  stage  reconsideration  hearing.  The
      Tribunal found in those circumstances that there was no reason at  all
      to disturb those findings of fact, as they were not  infected  by  the
      error of law found in the determination. The Tribunal  said  that  the
      scope of the reconsideration was limited to what was said at paragraph
      6 of its written reasons, which we reproduce below:


           "What the immigration judge has not done is to make any findings
           as to whether the appellant would be at risk of being  subjected
           to ill-treatment such as to infringe article 3 of ECHR either on
           account of being forcibly returned as a failed asylum seeker  or
           because she would be at risk from her abusive  former  boyfriend
           if he was able to locate her upon her return, should  he  be  so
           motivated to do so, and whether there would be a sufficiency  of
           protection from the police against any such  criminal  acts  the
           appellant might be unfortunate enough to be threatened with."

  40. Mr Henderson submitted that the findings of fact should be  set  aside
      entirely. This is because the appellant was aggrieved about not  being
      believed about the multiple rape by the friends of her  boyfriend  and
      had now given  an  explanation  for  not  seeking  medical  assistance
      afterwards. She would have to give evidence anyway about  the  claimed
      risk from  her  former  boyfriend  and  it  would,  he  submitted,  be
      artificial to exclude evidence about the claimed rape.


  41. in DK (Serbia) and others v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1747  the  Court  of
      Appeal said this:
        1.  As  far  as  what  has  been  called  the  second  stage  of  a
           reconsideration is concerned, the fact that it  is,  as  I  have
           said, conceptually a reconsideration by the same body which made
           the original decision, carries with it a number of consequences.
           The most important is  that  any  body  asked  to  reconsider  a
           decision on the grounds of  an  identified  error  of  law  will
           approach its reconsideration  on  the  basis  that  any  factual
           findings  and  conclusions  or  judgments  arising  from   those
           findings which are unaffected by the error of law  need  not  be
           revisited. It is not a rehearing: Parliament chose  not  to  use
           that concept, presumably for good reasons. ...
        1. It follows that if there is to be any challenge to  the  factual
           findings, or the judgments or conclusions reached on  the  facts
           which are unaffected  by  the  errors  of  law  that  have  been
           identified, that will only be other than in the most exceptional
           cases on the basis of new evidence or new material as  to  which
           the usual principles as to the reception of such  evidence  will
           apply, as envisaged in rule 32(2) of the  Rules.  It  is  to  be
           noted that this rule imposes the obligation on  the  parties  to
           identify  the  new  material  well  before  the  reconsideration
           hearing. This requirement is now underlined in the new  Practice
           Direction 14A. This sets out in some detail what is required  in
           such a notice.
  42. These requirements have not been met. We take as  our  starting  point
      the facts as found by the immigration judge. This means that we accept
      that the appellant worked as a teacher between 1998 and  2003,  giving
      up that employment both because she,  like  all  teachers,  was  being
      harassed by the War Veterans as she has described and because she  was
      not being paid. We accept also that she suffered at the  hands  of  an
      abusive boyfriend although we adopt the findings  of  the  immigration
      judge that led him to reject her claim that her boyfriend  was  a  War
      Veteran or that the relationship ended in the  circumstances  claimed.
      The appellant has established  also  that  her  former  boyfriend  was
      violent towards the appellant's mother on the single occasion when  he
      went to enquire about where she had gone soon after her departure from
      Zimbabwe in 2005. But the appellant's claim that her boyfriend and his
      friends raped her as a group and burnt down her house  in  retribution
      is also rejected.


  43. This means that the findings of fact are preserved. But there  is  now
      before the Tribunal a good deal  of  more  recent  evidence  than  was
      before the immigration judge from which it is clear that  the  country
      conditions, so far as they relate to an assessment of the  appellant's
      asylum and human rights claim, have changed significantly. That  being
      the case, and with the agreement of the parties,  we  shall  determine
      the appellant's appeal not simply on  human  rights  grounds,  as  was
      directed at the first stage reconsideration hearing, but  upon  asylum
      and humanitarian protection grounds as well.

  44. Thus, the appellant is  someone  who  has  lived  her  whole  life  in
      Zimbabwe  in  a  village  near  Plumtree,  a  rural  area   in   South
      Matabeleland, where she worked until 2003  as  a  teacher,  thereafter
      supporting herself by selling fruit  and  vegetables.  She  has  never
      disclosed support for any political  party  and  left  Zimbabwe  after
      being beaten and abused by her former  boyfriend  about  whom  nothing
      more is known since he ill-treated the appellant's mother  soon  after
      her departure in 2005.

  45. When the appellant left Zimbabwe she had a number of relatives  living
      there. But now only a few remain. Her father still lives in a village,
      near to the one where the appellant lived, with his  second  wife  and
      their children. But he is unemployed  and  without  means  to  support
      himself and the  appellant  would  not  be  made  welcome  there.  The
      appellant's mother and sisters have moved to South Africa  where  they
      are living in difficult circumstances. The appellant's sister says  in
      a witness statement that while  in  Zimbabwe  they  were  in  fear  of
      violence from officials, members and  supporters  of  Zanu-PF,  theirs
      being  an  area  that  had  demonstrated  support  for  the  MDC.  The
      appellant's brother has also moved to South Africa although  his  wife
      and children remain in the village.

The oral evidence

  46. We heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  a  number  of
      witnesses who spoke not  about  the  specific  circumstances  of  this
      particular appellant but about the situation  in  Zimbabwe  generally.
      The first of  those  witnesses  was  Mr  Wilf  Mbanga,  a  well  known
      journalist who is editor of "the Zimbabwean", a newspaper published in
      the United Kingdom and available in Zimbabwe. He had provided  written
      evidence to the Tribunal in HS. Next, we heard evidence from Mr Hebson
      Makuvise, who is the Chief Representative of the  MDC  in  the  United
      Kingdom and Ireland and who represents the party in Europe  also.  The
      two  country  experts  who  have  each  prepared  reports  for   these
      proceedings and who attended to give oral evidence  were  Witness  66,
      who was a legal practitioner in Zimbabwe before settling in the United
      Kingdom in 2002 and Professor Terrance Ranger, who has given  evidence
      in all the recent Zimbabwe country guidance cases.

   The appellant's evidence


  47. The appellant adopted her two previous written statements, the  effect
      of which we have summarised above and confirmed that the circumstances
      described by her sister, P, in her statement were  as  she  understood
      them to be. She confirmed that she had worked as a teacher in Zimbabwe
      between 1998 and 2003. Although she  had  left  that  employment  both
      because of the harassment she was experiencing from the  War  Veterans
      and because she was not getting paid, she remained living in the  same
      area where she had worked as a teacher and had not, on  that  account,
      experienced any difficulty thereafter. When asked why, then, she would
      be at risk as a former teacher should she return today, she  explained
      that teachers were looked on as supporters of the MDC and the  reports
      she had seen show that teachers are now being harassed and  have  real
      problems.


  48. The appellant said that she would not feel able  to  seek  work  as  a
      teacher should she have to return, because  she  would  fear  for  her
      safety for the reasons she had explained. She would be unable to  work
      selling fruit and vegetables as she had done before  because,  as  was
      the case for her sister, this would not be possible because there  are
      no fruit and vegetables left to sell. She has no home to return to and
      no family support either. Her understanding is that one needs a  Zanu-
      PF card in order to access any food at all. She would be  in  a  worse
      situation than everyone else  because  she  had  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom to claim asylum and that would be held against her.

  49. She was asked why she thought she would be treated worse  than  others
      because of that. She explained that it was known that most  Zimbabwean
      people in the United Kingdom campaign  for  the  MDC  and  for  Morgan
      Tsvangirai. Her evidence was that she believed President Mugabe had in
      fact lost the last elections, even if he is still in power, and he  is
      not happy about that. It is because he nearly lost power  that  he  is
      taking steps to ensure he does not do so in future.


  50. The appellant confirmed also that she had  had  no  contact  with  her
      former boyfriend since leaving Zimbabwe in July 2005 and  nothing  had
      been heard of him since he went to her mother two  months  after  that
      seeking information as to her whereabouts.

   The evidence of Mr Wilf Mbanga


  51. Mr Mbanga is a journalist and has been for forty  years.  He  has  met
      Robert Mugabe and many of those prominent in his regime and was  asked
      to establish a state  news  agency  following  independence  in  1980.
      However, he  became  disenchanted  with  the  rampant  corruption  and
      attempts by ministers to restrict his editorial independence  and,  in
      1998, he established an independent newspaper which was published  and
      available within Zimbabwe.   As  a  consequence  of  his  journalistic
      endeavours he was arrested in 2001 on what he describes as a  "trumped
      up" charge after which he left the country, never to  return.   He  is
      now based in  Southampton  and  is  the  editor  of  "The  Zimbabwean"
      newspaper, which he described as  the  largest  independent  newspaper
      available in Zimbabwe.


  52. Against that background, and in view of  his  profession  and  current
      occupation, the Tribunal accepts  that  Mr  Mbanga  is  a  person  who
      monitors the situation in Zimbabwe closely and  has  a  long  standing
      professional interest in events and developments in that  country.  On
      the other hand, Mr Mbanga, although very well informed, is plainly  an
      advocate for change in Zimbabwe and cannot be  regarded  as  a  wholly
      objective witness.

  53. Mr Mbanga  adopted  as  part  of  his  evidence  the  written  witness
      statement dated 26th August 2008 prepared for  these  proceedings.  He
      confirmed that the two witness statements prepared for his evidence to
      the Tribunal in HS were true also. He is able  to  monitor  events  in
      Zimbabwe, even though he has himself been away for some years, because
      he has reporters working within Zimbabwe and receives also reports  of
      secret briefings by CIO officers and even some  ministers  and  senior
      army officers.

  54. Speaking of the recent elections in March of this year, Mr Mbanga said
      that it was not possible for the regime to rig the results as had been
      done in the past because, following pressure from  the  South  African
      Development Community ("SADC"), the results of voting at each  polling
      station were to be posted outside and there were  sufficient  election
      observers to prevent them being tampered  with.  That  was  why  local
      observers were targeted for retribution after the elections.  He  went
      on to say in his statement:

           "We understand that Mugabe was shocked at the first results.  He
           had been told there would be no problem. The regime had  assumed
           that people were sufficiently compliant from  past  abuses  that
           they would not vote for the MDC. He was  most  shocked  to  find
           that rural areas had voted for the MDC. The regime thought  that
           the people were sufficiently intimidated by an  implicit  threat
           and that the results could  anyway  be  rigged.  They  bargained
           against the camera phones used to photograph the  local  results
           and the bravery of people."


  55. Mr Mbanga described what happened immediately after the first round of
      the voting:


           "After the first round election, Mugabe wanted  to  cut  a  deal
           that would protect himself, and the MDC were prepared to do  it.
           The military junta went to Mugabe and said it was not a decision
           solely for him to make.  They said that "we will make sure there
           is a rerun and we will implement a campaign that will  guarantee
           you win the rerun".  The  military  commanders  were  frightened
           men.  They were concerned at talk of a deal that  would  include
           an amnesty for Mugabe but not an amnesty for them.  They were on
           record that they would never salute Morgan Tsvangirai."


  56. Mr Mbanga says that it was the military commanders who instructed  the
      Electoral Commission not to release the results  of  the  presidential
      election and who arranged for the counting exercise to be moved  to  a
      secret location where the vote could be rigged. It took four weeks for
      the outcome to be massaged so as to deny Mr  Tsvangirai  the  outright
      victory he had won so as to ensure the need of  a  run  off  vote.  Mr
      Mbanga believes that the long drawn out talks now taking place with  a
      view to reaching a power sharing agreement between the parties  are  a
      sham with no prospect of success. He said that the  Zimbabwean  regime
      is allowing them to take place simply because they  provide  the  time
      for Zanu-PF to entrench its position but  meanwhile  steps  are  being
      taken to eliminate the ability of the MDC to constitute  an  effective
      opposition or a real threat to the Zanu-PF hold on power:


           "Mugabe will not cede power completely because he  is  terrified
           of ending up in The Hague.  I do not think he is ready  even  to
           accept the role of ceremonial president, which would  offer  him
           some protection.  More importantly the leaders of  the  security
           forces are terrified of ending up at  The  Hague  and  will  not
           accept Mugabe ceding power.  They are ready  to  annihilate  the
           MDC to remove the threat to the regime.  They would  be  pleased
           if the MDC took up weapons.


           The army is still deployed along with the  militia.   A  lot  of
           rural areas are still  no-go  areas  for  the  MDC.   Internally
           displaced people and those who fled  to  neighbouring  countries
           who have since tried to return have been punished or "fined"  by
           local chiefs for fleeing.   I  am  currently  in  South  Africa.
           Large numbers have fled here, taking the risk  of  a  xenophobic
           violence in preference to the  activities  of  the  militias  in
           Zimbabwe.


           Even in urban areas, torture centres remain in place.   Wherever
           Mugabe did not win, local people have simply  been  beaten.   We
           have carried horrible pictures of injuries.   They  have  poured
           poison into open wounds.   People  have  been  forced  to  drink
           insecticide (the first time poison has been used  like  this  on
           any scale in Zimbabwe).  Some have been found  with  their  eyes
           gouged out.  Victims have been refused entry to hospitals"


      And Mr Mbanga detects a change in  the  groups  of  people  now  being
      targeted:


           "Those who can organise and report on abuses have been  abducted
           and tortured and in many cases  killed.   Previously,  the  more
           serious ill-treatment was inflicted mainly on activists, but now
           ordinary voters face serious violence.   If  the  assumption  is
           that most people in an area are MDC  then  anyone  in  the  area
           faces  being  beaten  up.   They  sometimes  beat  up  the  Zanu
           supporters  by  mistake  where  they  could  not   prove   their
           affiliation to Zanu - the militias are not that careful."

      According to Mr Mbanga, there has been no let up in the violence as  a
      consequence of Mr Mugabe securing his reappointment as President:

           "The  violence  and  intimidation  continues  indeed,   it   has
           increased in recent days as compared to the  period  immediately
           following the establishment of the talks.  This is  designed  to
           send a message to the MDC about what will happen if they do  not
           concede Mugabe retaining executive power."


  57. Mr Mbanga says this about his understanding of the view taken  by  the
      Zimbabwean regime of people returning from the United Kingdom:


           "The regime views the Zimbabwean community in the UK (by which I
           mean those who live in the UK rather than temporary visitors) as
           pro MDC.  That does not of course mean that every Zimbabwean  in
           the UK is pro MDC ...
           ...


           The reason there is such an intensive CIO operation aimed at the
           UK community is because it is known to be overwhelmingly pro MDC
           and providing resources to the MDC.   The  CIO  have  a  lot  of
           information  about  UK  activities   but   it   is   second-hand
           information ...
           ...


           In Zimbabwe all those who are merely  viewed  as  potential  MDC
           voters are now targeted ..."




  58. Dealing with the so called "no go areas" that have been said  to  have
      arisen in some parts of Zimbabwe, Mr Mbanga said:


           "The position is even worse in rural areas.  People  are  beaten
           and killed without the world knowing about it.   Zanu  has  made
           huge no-go areas for Harare based monitors.  Even ambulances are
           turned away by the militia.  Nobody will know about how you  are
           treated and you are at the mercy of the lawless militia.   Since
           the first round, the militia have beaten people up openly in the
           streets of Harare.  So what chance do people have upon return to
           their rural home?
           ...


           Anyone not seen as loyal to Zanu is now at  much  greater  risk.
           The attitude is "if you are not one of us, you are one of them".
             The  risk  to  someone  who  sought  asylum  from  Britain  is
           correspondingly greater.
           ...


           Criminal elements are taking  advantage  of  the  situation  and
           threatening people with being denounced as sell-outs if they  do
           not provide bribes and food.  Mobs are roaming about  inflicting
           casual violence.  Anyone  who  stands  out  from  the  crowd  or
           appears different is at particular risk.
           ...


           People continue to believe that someone from the  UK  will  have
           access to funds ..."


  59.  Notwithstanding  what  we  say  above  about  our  approach  to   the
      objectivity  of  this  witness,  this  part  of  his  evidence  is  of
      particular significance. This represents  an  assertion  or  something
      offered by this witness as a statement of fact as to what is happening
      in  Zimbabwe  today  and  this  evidence  goes  unchallenged  by   the
      respondent.


  60. In his oral evidence Mr Mbanga  said  that  it  is  precisely  because
      people outside Zimbabwe are believed to be  potential  MDC  supporters
      that they have been  disenfranchised.  The  Tribunal  notes  that  the
      constitutional arrangements of Zimbabwe allow  for  postal  votes  and
      these are used by significant numbers of civil servants  but  are  not
      available for those ordinary citizens who have left the country.

  61. The evidence provided by Mr Mbanga is in line with much of  the  other
      evidence before the Tribunal and there is no reason to suppose that he
      has given a description of conditions in Zimbabwe that  is  inaccurate
      or unreliable.


   The evidence of Mr Hebson Makuvise


  62. Mr Makuvise is the Chief Representative  of  the  MDC  in  the  United
      Kingdom and Ireland and he represents the party in Europe also. He has
      held that appointment since September 2006. In his  oral  evidence  he
      adopted his  witness  statement  made  in  August  2008  in  which  he
      described the contribution made by the  United  Kingdom  wing  of  the
      party as "central to the struggle against Mugabe":


           "The MDC in the UK is the most vibrant centre of  opposition  to
           Mugabe in the world outside of Zimbabwe.  The UK wing sent  over
           35000  USD  to  Zimbabwe  to  fund  campaigning  for  the  March
           elections.  If it were not for the UK wing, I am confident  that
           the MDC would not now have the majority in parliament which  has
           led to an MDC speaker  being  elected.   It  was  the  resources
           provided by the UK wing that enabled MDC candidates to  campaign
           vigorously in areas that it had previously  regarded  as  no  go
           areas.  Mugabe knows this.
           ...


           The regime is well aware of the importance of the  community  in
           Britain and the support that it provides the  MDC.   The  regime
           puts great efforts into spying on the community in  the  UK  and
           infiltrating the MDC in the UK.  It has succeeded in the past to
           a very senior level before the  infiltrators  were  exposed  and
           expelled."


  63. In his oral evidence Mr Makuvise said that Robert Mugabe  believes  in
      retribution. Zanu-PF thrives on violence and people  are  still  being
      beaten for having voted for the MDC. We understood his evidence to  be
      not that individuals were identified as having voted for the  MDC  but
      that the people targeted were those living within a community that had
      demonstrated support for the MDC through the outcome of  the  vote  in
      that constituency.


  64. This witness told us also that  he  expected  this  to  continue.  For
      example, there would be a by-election  following  the  election  of  a
      Speaker in Parliament. His constituency is in a rural area  which  has
      already been sealed off to the opposition to ensure that Zanu-PF  will
      take back that seat from the  MDC.  As  for  the  current  postion  in
      Zimbabwe, Mr Makuvuse said this:

           "The current position is that the talks  have  stalled  and  the
           violence continues.  The election of the Speaker is as I said, a
           reflection of  the  hard  work  of  the  UK  wing  in  providing
           resources to fight the elections, but it cannot stop the  forces
           maintaining the state sponsored  violence.   The  torture  camps
           have not been dismantled.  Illegal roadblocks remain  in  place.
           Nothing has fundamentally changed, nor  will  it  change  unless
           Morgan Tsvangirai is the dominant figure in  a  new  government.
           Developments in Parliament will not change control  of  the  so-
           called security forces.  Their  commanders  are  resisting  real
           change; they know their crimes  against  humanity  justify  them
           being sent to the Hague so they do not want Mugabe to let go."

  65. As is the case with  the  previous  witness,  Mr  Makuvise  cannot  be
      regarded as a wholly objective witness. Plainly  he  has  a  political
      agenda to promote and does not seek  to  suggest  otherwise.  But  his
      evidence chimes  with  much  of  the  evidence  before  us  that  does
      originate from other well established sources and we accept him to  be
      a witness of truth who has not sought to exaggerate or  embellish  his
      evidence in order to support his cause.

  66. Mr Kovats did not cross  examine  this  witness  but  in  his  closing
      submissions argued that it would be plain to all from  the  amount  of
      the contribution made by  the  UK  wing  of  the  MDC,  including  the
      Zimbabwean  authorities,  that  this  did  not   indicate   that   all
      Zimbabweans in the United Kingdom supported the MDC. This  is  because
      there were tens of thousands of Zimbabweans in the United  Kingdom  so
      that US$35,000 did not represent an expression  of  committed  support
      from that community as a whole.

  67. We do not accept that submission. It takes no account of the fact that
      this was not the sole contribution made to the MDC  by  those  in  the
      United Kingdom but an additional contribution on top  of  the  regular
      monthly remittance upon which the MDC in  Zimbabwe  depends.  We  deal
      with the news reports as a body of evidence below, but in this respect
      might usefully refer here to one of those reports. An article  in  the
      Independent (online version) on 28th June 2008 discussed the  interest
      shown by the CIO in MDC operations in the United Kingdom:

           "MDC officials said a key target of the CIO  operation  appeared
           to be the money between �5,000 and �10,000 a  month,  which  was
           being sent from the UK to back Mr Tsvangirai's campaign until he
           withdrew from the ballot last week.  With inflation in  Zimbabwe
           running at three million per cent hard  cash  is  vital  to  buy
           campaign essentials such as fuel and printing supplies."

  68. Also, a large number of Zimbabweans in  the  United  Kingdom  will  be
      living in difficult financial circumstances and  will  have  relatives
      remaining at home to support before  financial  contributions  can  be
      made to the MDC. By any view the financial support provided to the MDC
      in Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom is significant and we find  it  is
      improbable that the regime does not recognise that.

  69. As Mr Makuvise acknowledged, although many Zimbabweans in  the  United
      Kingdom, if not most of them, will support the aims and objectives  of
      the MDC, there are also Zimbabweans present in the United Kingdom  who
      support and are aligned with Zanu-PF or the regime in power.

Evidence of Witness 66 ("W66")

  70. The first of two country experts to give evidence to the Tribunal  was
      W66 whose identity is protected under the terms of the confidentiality
      order referred to above. We cannot set out here much  in  the  way  of
      detail about his association with Zimbabwe and his status as a country
      expert because to do so would serve to identify him. It is  sufficient
      for us to record that he has given evidence to the Tribunal in earlier
      country guidance cases and that  his  qualification  to  offer  expert
      opinion is not challenged by the respondent.


  71. W66 adopted a witness statement prepared for these proceedings and  in
      addition gave oral evidence. He confirmed also that he believed to  be
      correct all that he had said in the two earlier witness statements  or
      reports prepared for the Tribunal in HS.

  72. W66 says that violence has continued to  be  experienced  in  Zimbabwe
      during the last year and has in fact escalated:

           "Brutal attacks on MDC personnel in  particular  continued  well
           past the middle of 2007 and virtually every day there  were  new
           reports of people being detained and  tortured  disappeared  and
           even murdered.  However, as a result of intense pressure  within
           and outside of Africa, including within  the  African  Union  in
           general and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) in
           particular, as the March 2008 elections approached South African
           President Thabo Mbeki was mandated in the latter half of 2007 to
           endeavour to bring a situation about under  which  the  election
           results would be broadly acceptable to the people of Zimbabwe in
           terms of  democratic  standards.   A  crucial  impetus  to  this
           process was the continued  meltdown  of  the  Zimbabwe  economy,
           massive employment, further collapse of public services,  almost
           incomprehensible levels of inflation, a continued mass exodus of
           those able to get to South Africa in particular, and so on.


           To understand recent developments it is necessary to examine the
           lead-up to the elections held at the end of March 2008  and  the
           holding of elections, what happened afterwards beginning  around
           the middle of April up to and after the June 27 run off, and the
           present situation at the time this report is being  drawn.   The
           overall  picture  is  that  there  has   been   a   catastrophic
           deterioration in the human rights situation  in  Zimbabwe  since
           the middle of last year."

  73. W66 described in detail the talks  that  were  held  with  a  view  to
      securing free and fair elections and the scepticism of  the  MDC  that
      any such outcome could be achieved but noted that the weeks leading up
      to the March 2008 elections were  relatively  peaceful  with  the  MDC
      being able to campaign as they had not before.


  74. It soon became clear that the two MDC  factions  had  won  a  combined
      majority in Parliament. But the presidential election results were not
      released, as we have noted above, and weeks passed  during  which  the
      MDC claimed victory in that election also. W66 described in his report
      the scale of the violence that followed:

           "It  was  while  the  country  and  the  world  waited  for  the
           presidential results to be released that a maelstrom of violence
           was unleashed against those perceived to have voted for the MDC,
           and a veritable orgy of destruction began.  It soon became clear
           that this was a deliberate strategy adopted by the ruling  junta
           (i.e. Mugabe and his security chiefs, including the director  of
           the CIO, which constitute the Joint  Operational  Command  (JOC)
           running the country) so that the results of the run-off election
           would not be in doubt...... it became obvious that the delay  in
           releasing the results was to manipulate the figures as  much  as
           possible to reduce the  gap  between  (Tsvangirai's)  total  and
           Mugabe's, but more importantly  to  give  time  for  Zanu-PF  to
           regroup and campaign for the run-off...
           ...


           It is impossible to know the full extent  of  the  human  rights
           violations during the three months up to the  end  of  June,  or
           subsequently, but from all the major  reports  it  appears  that
           well over 160 people were killed and  more  than  five  thousand
           beaten and tortured.  Tens  if  not  hundreds  of  thousands  of
           persons have been internally displaced as a direct result of the
           post-March violence, these numbers now added  to  the  estimated
           half a million previously displaced  in  2005  as  a  result  of
           Operation Murambatsvina and the many tens of thousands  of  farm
           workers displaced by the land  seizures  which  began  in  2000.
           Along with these  physical  attacks  widespread  destruction  of
           property occurred especially in rural areas but  also  in  urban
           suburbs.  The majority of victims killed  injured  or  displaced
           were middle ranking ordinary MDC members or perceived supporters
           or members of their families and whole communities and  villages
           branded as MDC were targeted in the most brutal  fashion.   Many
           people of no particular political persuasion but were caught  up
           in the violence suffered."


  75. W66 said that although the police, CIO and the army were  involved  in
      coordinating  and  directing  the  overall   strategy,   the   attacks
      themselves were mostly carried out by Zanu-PF supporters, particularly
      the youth members, together with the youth militias or so called green
      bombers and War Veterans:


           "The pattern  which  emerged  was  that  the  party  supporters,
           militias and "war  veterans"  were  often  led  by  more  senior
           persons drawn from the ranks of genuine war veterans, along with
           government soldiers.  Camps of armed Zanu-PF  supporters,  youth
           militias and "war veterans" were set up across the country  both
           in rural and urban areas, and a witch hunt ensued against a wide
           range of opposition elements.   Additionally,  specific  torture
           camps were set up in many areas, both rural and urban.  The  aim
           of this onslaught was to ensure Mugabe's  victory  in  the  run-
           off..."


  76. W66 detected a geographical pattern of this violence also, based  upon
      the  changing  political  landscape  emerging  from  the  March   2008
      elections. At first, the attacks  were  in  areas  where  Zanu-PF  had
      traditionally predominated and into which the MDC had made significant
      inroads. Then the attacks moved to the main urban areas, traditionally
      centres of MDC support.


  77. Nor did it seem to W66 that there  was  any  reason  to  suppose  that
      violence would taper off following the conclusion  of  the  drawn  out
      electoral process that started in March of this year:

           "There can be no doubt at all, therefore,  that  compared  to  a
           year ago  the  human  rights  situation  has  deteriorated  very
           significantly indeed.  While it is true that there has been some
           lessening of  attacks  since  the  election  was  finalised  the
           prognosis must be that there is small room for optimism or  that
           there will be  a  significant  improvement  at  any  time  soon.
           Forces were unleashed which it appears are to a  degree  out  of
           control, with reports  of  continuing  violence;  war  vets  and
           militias still operate in  many  parts;  although  the  21  July
           Memorandum of Understanding envisaged a  cessation  of  attacks,
           this has failed to materialise.  Part of  the  reason  could  be
           that the formations used to spearhead the attacks on the MDC and
           anyone identified with it have not received  the  "spoils"  they
           were promised when their services were required... The regime is
           refusing to negotiate itself out of power and it is very  likely
           that the MDC and anyone regarded as anti-Zanu-PF  will  continue
           to face very real danger...


           Since after the March elections when violence  again  broke  out
           openly it has done so at a new and higher  levels  of  intensity
           and over a wider area, with an ever larger cast of victims.   At
           the time this report is being prepared the level of  attacks  is
           lower than in June, but continues at a high level, as  does  the
           climate of fear.  Zimbabwe, therefore, despite any  attempts  by
           the major parties to form a negotiated settlement, remains in an
           extremely volatile and  precarious  state  for  anybody  who  is
           believed to be an MDC sympathiser.  Anyone who is not clearly  a
           loyalist is clearly a "traitor" - this was the case to  a  large
           extent before and is now  even  more  so.   Retribution  against
           those voters and communities who betrayed Mugabe  in  March  has
           not and will not simply evaporate because of the talks, whatever
           their outcome may eventually be; the Memorandum of Understanding
           has already failed to halt the violations, and has shown  itself
           to be no panacea for the human rights crisis which has  engulfed
           the country. The huge numbers of  internally  displaced  persons
           who are the victims of the violence illustrate what has happened
           while their continued inability, or  reluctance  or  refusal  to
           return to their home areas also reflects the  ongoing  level  of
           fear, violence and instability in the country as a whole."

  78. We find  this  part  of  the  expert  evidence  to  be  of  particular
      significance. It indicates that the violence continues not only  after
      the conclusion of the electoral process but after, and in  breach  of,
      the Memorandum of Understanding that was supposed  to  bring  about  a
      cessation of that violence. It is important to have  regard  to  W66's
      expert opinion that the campaign of violence  against  those  seen  as
      potential supporters of the  MDC  will  not  evaporate,  whatever  the
      outcome of the talks now being conducted.


  79. W66 went on to say that:


           "... the policy and strategy behind the  regime's  attacks  goes
           well beyond focusing on known individual supporters  and  former
           MDC strongholds; there is an ever widening general  campaign  of
           terror against virtually the whole population,  including  those
           communities previously regarded as loyal but who  voted  against
           Mugabe in March."


      W66  said  that  in  his  opinion  even  if  a  failed  asylum  seeker
      experienced no problem at the airport he or she would do so on  return
      to his or her home area because:


           ... anything  which  might  draw  attention  to  an  individual,
           suggesting they are an MDC sympathiser or unsympathetic to Zanu-
           PF, could  mark  them  for  special  treatment  in  the  present
           climate."

  80. In response  to  questions  from  the  Tribunal,  W66  said  that  the
      appellant may well encounter road blocks when seeking to  travel  from
      Harare to her home area by bus or other means of transport. If so, she
      would be required to produce proof of  identification  to  demonstrate
      that she was from the area she was seeking to access. Those  operating
      the roadblock would be looking for some proof of support for  Zanu-PF.
      What was required could vary. It may be enough to have relatives  from
      the area who could vouch for you. W66 made clear that this is what  he
      expected to be the case rather than what he knew it to be.


  81. We  observe  here  that  there  can  be  found  within  the  extensive
      documentary evidence put before us other accounts of the means used by
      those manning road blocks to establish whether a person  is  loyal  to
      the ruling party. For example, a person who was unable  to  produce  a
      Zanu-PF card might be asked to sing the latest Zanu-PF campaign songs.
      An inability to do so would be taken as evidence of disloyalty to  the
      party and  so  of  support  for  the  opposition.  Clearly,  a  person
      returning to Zimbabwe after some years living in  the  United  Kingdom
      would be unlikely to be able to pass such a test.


  82. Finally,  this  witness  spoke  of  the  difficulties  experienced  by
      Zimbabweans in need of assistance in accessing  food  aid.  Government
      distribution efforts were deployed as a political tool, favouring  its
      own supporters.  There  had  been  a  ban  since  June  of  this  year
      preventing NGOs from distributing food and, although there  were  very
      recent reports that the ban had been lifted, he did not expect that to
      make any real difference in fact.

  83. As was the case with the other  witnesses  apart  from  the  appellant
      herself, Mr Kovats did not seek to cross examine this witness  on  his
      evidence but did seek to elicit some information that the witness  was
      thought able to provide that had not been dealt with in his statement.
      Mr Kovats made clear that in doing  so  he  was  not  challenging  any
      statement of fact asserted by the witness.

  84.  These  questions  concerned   the   circumstances   surrounding   the
      appointment of an MDC MP as speaker. It was W66's  understanding  that
      this appointment would lead to a by-election because upon  appointment
      the speaker was regarded as no longer having a constituency.   Another
      consequence of the appointment was, of course, that the MDC would lose
      a vote in Parliament unless they secured that seat in the by-election,
      a date for which has not yet been set.

  85. This witness observed, as did a number of other sources made available
      to the Tribunal, that  the  scale  and  extent  of  the  abuses  being
      perpetrated upon whole communities within Zimbabwe is very  likely  to
      be under-reported. That is because much of the violence is going on in
      rural areas under control of the militias and other representatives of
      the regime and access is denied to those who are unwelcome. Roadblocks
      have been established to control and  limit  freedom  of  movement  of
      displaced persons and access to areas where these forces  are  seeking
      to eliminate the MDC  vote  so  as  to  reverse  the  changes  in  the
      political landscape that began to emerge in the March elections.

  86. He made clear also his opinion that the  "formal"  state  authorities,
      including the CIO and the security forces:

           "... (were) very much involved through  the  JOC,  in  planning,
           launching  and  co-ordinating  the  initial   onslaught,   which
           gathered a momentum of its own, without the necessity of day  to
           day hands-on involvement of the leadership".


      This, he said, has led to shocking levels of brutality:


           "... those perceived as not being loyal to the regime are  still
           in danger; it is a society where a person is guilty until proved
           innocent... Although this scenario has existed  in  the  country
           for years now it has recently reached unprecedented proportions.
           Thus while there is no doubt that specific  MDC  activists  were
           targeted, so too were  whole  communities,  villages  and  areas
           which voted the wrong way.  The brutality levelled  against  and
           mutilations of victims has  been  particularly  shocking;  women
           have been targeted along with  men,  the  old  as  well  as  the
           young...


           Torture camps  have  become  notorious  places  for  the  severe
           beating of anyone against whom the slightest finger of suspicion
           is pointed; victims have been forced to denounce others  who  in
           turn become victims and denounce others, and so the violence has
           spread."

  87. W66 made clear also that he was of the view  that  those  returned  to
      Zimbabwe from the United Kingdom would face a heightened risk on  that
      account:


           "There has been no let up in the  blame  which  the  regime  has
           placed on Britain, a central plank of  all  anti-MDC  propaganda
           being that they are puppets of the UK...


           Even if a returnee from the UK was not identified  as  a  failed
           asylum seeker at the airport, then it is now more likely than it
           was a year ago that he/she would become  known  as  such  later,
           wherever that person might settle.   Because  of  the  state  of
           terror, anybody coming  back  could  be  in  a  more  vulnerable
           position than even ordinary persons who are  desperately  trying
           to maintain an invisible profile.  I say this  because  anything
           which might draw attention to an individual, suggesting they are
           an MDC sympathiser or unsympathetic to Zanu-PF could  mark  them
           out for special treatment in the present climate ... I say  this
           because they will have all the problems of ordinary  people  who
           are not accepted as genuine loyalists, and then some."


  88. The evidence of W66 is significant and goes unchallenged by any  cross
      examination. As we will explain below, it is in line with a large body
      of documentary evidence before the Tribunal, which we consider  below,
      and is consistent with that of the other country expert who has  given
      oral evidence to us.


  89. It is of particular  significance  in  that  it  identifies  important
      changes that have arisen in Zimbabwe since the summer of 2007 when the
      Tribunal in HS  examined  the  country  evidence  then  available.  In
      particular, W66 has described how the violence is being  delivered  by
      various groups of people on behalf of  the  regime  who,  having  been
      directed as to the task by the formal  state  authorities,  have  been
      left to carry it out as they see fit. This has led to an escalation in
      the scale and  extent  of  the  brutality  involved  as  well  as  the
      categories of victims, which is demonstrated also by the many  reports
      from NGOs and others to which we have  been  referred.  The  basis  of
      identification of those targeted has changed from  the  individual  to
      the collective  and  from  the  gathering  of  information  as  to  an
      individual's acts in support of the MDC to the targeting of those  who
      simply are unable to demonstrate support for Zanu-PF or loyalty to the
      regime of Robert Mugabe.

  90. It is, then, the expert evidence of this witness, unchallenged by  any
      cross examination on behalf  of  the  respondent,  that  the  militias
      unleashed to secure the regime's hold on power do  regard  Zimbabweans
      living in the United Kingdom as a community predominately comprised of
      MDC supporters. Thus, absent any reason to  suppose  the  contrary,  a
      person returning from the United Kingdom as  a  failed  asylum  seeker
      faces a real risk of being regarded as disloyal to  the  ruling  party
      and liable to be ill-treated in precisely the same way as members of a
      community identified in a geographical sense as such.


The Evidence of Terence Ranger, Emeritus Professor, Oxford University.


  91. The Tribunal accepts that Professor Ranger is well placed  to  express
      an expert view on country conditions in Zimbabwe. He has more than  45
      years of familiarity with the country. He has known Robert Mugabe  and
      other senior leaders of ZANU-PF throughout that  time.  He  has  spent
      periods teaching at the University of Zimbabwe, most recently  between
      January 1998 and June 2001. He has visited Zimbabwe every year between
      1980 and 2006 and would  have  continued  to  do  so  but  for  health
      problems.  He maintains regular contact with human rights activists in
      Zimbabwe, some of whom have visited him in the United Kingdom. He  has
      written  widely  upon  events  in  Zimbabwe  and   has   devoted   his
      professional attention  to  the  development  of  conditions  in  that
      country for many years.


  92. In reaching the positive assessment that we  do  of  the  evidence  of
      Professor Ranger we bear in mind that  in  HS  the  Tribunal  did  not
      accept his opinion in respect of all key issues about which he offered
      evidence as an expert witness. But that does not  diminish  the  value
      the Tribunal attaches to his opinion and, as we  have  explained,  the
      views he expresses in his current evidence are supported  by  a  large
      body of documentary evidence, as well as some other oral evidence.


  93. Professor Ranger adopted as part of  his  evidence  a  written  report
      prepared  for  these  proceedings  dated  26th  August  2008.  Of  the
      President of Zimbabwe he says this:

           "Robert Mugabe, a very  able  but  introverted  man,  has  dealt
           ruthlessly with opposition throughout his career.  He did so  in
           Mozambique during the 1970s; he did so in  Matabeleland  in  the
           1980s; he did so in breaking the  challenge  of  Edgar  Tekere's
           Zimbabwe Unity Movement; he did so during the presidential  run-
           off campaign between March and June this year; and the  evidence
           suggests he is prepared to do so again should the current  talks
           break down."


  94. We find these observations to be of  real  significance  because  they
      demonstrate that Mr Mugabe, and those who advise him and  act  in  his
      name, have a real propensity,  demonstrated  repeatedly,  to  see  off
      opposition to the ruling party's continuing hold on power by resorting
      to ruthless violence against those perceived to be his  opponents  who
      are of a sufficient threat to merit such treatment. As  the  professor
      puts it:


           "What we have been seeing this year is the  worst  violence  for
           years but it falls into and repeats long established patterns."

   All this is done in the name of independence from the old colonialism:


           "... George Charamba, Mugabe's publicity secretary, laments that
           "a mere X on a piece of paper, all done  in  time  shorter  than
           life  creating  ecstasy,  can  steal  a  free  people,  steal  a
           heritage, steal a  freedom,  steal  a  land,  steal  a  future".
           Maybe, he says, we should have had to "shoot - yes shoot  -  the
           ballot box for the  preservation  of  your  independence".   The
           presidential run-off was announced as the people's "last chance"
           to avoid a resumption of revolutionary war  and  Mugabe  himself
           declared that he was prepared to go back into  the  bush  if  he
           were again  defeated at the polls."


  95. Professor Ranger gives a similar account as does W66 of the  elections
      in March. It was because the votes were posted  outside  each  polling
      station that large scale vote rigging was  very  difficult.  The  best
      that could be achieved, after weeks of delay, was to deprive  the  MDC
      of the outright  victory  they  claimed  to  be  entitled  to  in  the
      Presidential elections so that there would have to be a run off vote:


           "But  these  locally  posted  results  allowed  militia   gangs,
           soldiers and CIO to identify targets.  By early May  many  press
           reports were appearing of  retaliations.   On  May  8,  (a  news
           report) described how the worst violence  in  Zimbabwe's  recent
           political history had taken place in Mapondera  village.   There
           the posted result showed that 70 people had voted  for  the  MDC
           and only 10 for ZANU/PF.  Militia  attacked  at  night,  telling
           people that "you made us lose and you have to  pay  for  it  ...
           They pulled out husbands and wives, separated  them  and  killed
           them on the spot; then they proceeded to the school  where  they
           killed four teachers.
           ...


           Another vivid and disturbing report had  been  filed  earlier...
           This described how nurses and patients were dragged out of Louis
           Guidotti hospital in Mutoko.  They were addressed by  armed  men
           with the same message: "This is your last chance.  You messed up
           when you voted. Next time you must get it right or you die."


  96. Asked to address the position of teachers in Zimbabwe,  the  professor
      explained that, once again, they have become targets. This is  because
      many had acted as polling officers and were accused of  favouring  the
      MDC. A report in the state sponsored Herald  newspaper  asserted  that
      many teachers who had rigged the poll had fled the country  to  escape
      "the long arm of the law". The evidence indicates that 2,700  teachers
      had fled, dozens of schools had closed and 123 teachers  were  charged
      with election fraud offences. On April 30th 2008 the Institute for War
      and Peace Studies published a report entitled "Zimbabwe: Teachers fall
      victim to rural violence" in which an account was  given  of  teachers
      being subjected to "hate speech" and assaults.


  97. In his report Professor Ranger reviewed  the  widespread  accounts  of
      serious violence perpetrated after the first round of voting in  March
      2008. He said that, in his opinion, there could be no doubt as to  the
      objectivity of the reports he refers to. It seemed that  the  violence
      was concentrated in areas traditionally viewed as Zanu-PF strongholds.
      A Human Rights Watch report dated June 2008 said:

           "For the first time in  its  history,  ZANU/PF  either  suffered
           heavy losses or won by much narrower margins than it expected in
           its "strongholds" in the parliamentary elections.  For  example,
           in Mashonaland Central, one of  the  areas  of  rampant  ZANU/PF
           violence, ZANU/PF actually won 16 of the 18 contested  House  of
           Assembly seats.  In Mashonaland East, another area that has seen
           high levels of the ZANU/PF violence (almost  50%  of  the  cases
           documented by Human Rights Watch)  ZANU/PF  won  19  of  the  23
           contested House of Assembly seats.  However, closer scrutiny  of
           the  polling  station  results  indicate  that  the   MDC   made
           significant inroads in each of these provinces, losing  by  much
           narrower margins than ZANU/PF had expected."

  98. Professor Ranger regards as accurate the view  expressed  in  the  HRW
      report that the range of people targeted has broadened and  it  is  no
      longer just those who are identified as MDC members or  supporters  in
      fact who are at risk:


           "In these and other areas  the  report  stresses  that  "ZANU/PF
           supporters and their allies have not found it necessary to prove
           that a person voted for the MDC before meting out  "punishment".
           Instead  they  have  examined  results  posted  outside  polling
           stations to identify areas where people voted for MDC  in  large
           numbers, even if the MDC had lost to ZANU/PF  in  those  areas".
           They beat men "simply  because  they  believed"  they  were  MDC
           supporters...."

  99. The professor referred next to a report published in June 2008  by  an
      organisation whose identity is protected by the Tribunal's  order  and
      so is referred to simply as Source H. This organisation said that it:


           "...found "a phenomenal escalation of electoral violence".   The
           nature of the violence had changed  "to  more  extreme  physical
           systematic and retributive acts".  There was a "chilling craving
           to inflict physical harm, to eliminate,  to  disenfranchise,  to
           displace and to starve ...  features  that  are  reminiscent  of
           scorched earth strategies [in] a  well  coordinated  program  of
           violence".  And by early June "post  election  and  pre  run-off
           violence had reportedly transformed into a full  state-sponsored
           retributive violence with visible  involvement  of  the  police,
           army, prison officers and CIO operatives".  The report  found  a
           "resort  to  liberation  war  strategies  characterised  by  the
           setting up of liberation war style bases, use of  war  language,
           fist pointing, hate speech and hate  politics".   It  emphasised
           that so much damage had been done to social  relations  that  it
           would be very difficult to restore anything like normality.  ...
           Illegal roadblocks were still in place;  people  returning  home
           from the towns were being beaten and fined; several murders were
           reported..."


 100. Turning next to a consideration of  the  re-run  of  the  Presidential
      poll, from which Mr Tsvangirai withdrew in the face of  the  scale  of
      the violence being suffered by his supporters, Professor  Ranger  said
      that there had been no let up in the violence in the days  before  the
      run-off vote so that African observers could see for  themselves  what
      was taking place. As a result, the election was declared  illegitimate
      even by those who had been allowed to observe it.


 101. According to Professor Ranger, Mr Mugabe sought to lay the  blame  for
      all this violence with the British government. On 19th June  2008  the
      Chronicle newspaper  carried  a  report  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Mugabe
      delivered in Matabeleland South, which is,  of  course,  the  province
      where the appellant lived throughout her time in Zimbabwe:

           "The British realised that they could not argue with us  on  the
           land issue and hatched a plan to rope in their allies  into  the
           dispute by fabricating excuses such as  allegations  that  there
           was no democracy in  Zimbabwe,  no  rule  of  law,  no  freedom.
           Hakuna democracy.  Was there freedom when ma British ruled  this
           country?  Did they give you democracy? We had no vote at all ...
            We figured that the only way we can now win,  the only language
           which the settlers and the British understand is the language of
           the bullet ... Britain are the creators of the MDC to fight  the
           revolutionary party of Mugabe and Nkomo."

 102. The professor then addressed the question of whether the signing of  a
      Memorandum of Understanding by Mr Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai, leading to
      talks concerning power sharing (which talks at the time had failed  to
      produce agreement) would lead to an end to  the  violence.  There  was
      ample evidence that the violence has continued. Some  of  the  militia
      bases established in the  election  based  campaign  of  violence  and
      retribution have been dismantled but  others  have  not.  An  emerging
      worry was that ZANU/PF youth in some of the militia camps are refusing
      to disband, claiming that they have not been paid and  threatening  to
      reward themselves by looting. Professor Ranger  referred  to  a  Human
      Rights Watch report published just last month:

           "The report describes abuses by ZANU/PF. that continue  to  take
           place despite ongoing  negotiations  between  the  two  parties.
           Hundreds of MDC activists who fled the  violence  in  the  weeks
           before the July 7 runoff remain in hiding while war veterans and
           youth militia continued to  terrorise  villagers  in  the  rural
           areas ... Thirty two people were killed since  the  two  parties
           signed the Memorandum of Understanding.  The government has made
           little attempt to dismantle the torture camps and bases that  it
           established  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the   March   29
           elections.  The continued existence of  these  camps  and  armed
           ZANU/PF supporters, youth militia and "war veterans" raises  the
           possibility of further violence and  highlights  the  precarious
           nature of the human rights situation  in  the  country.   Abuses
           continue to take place  with  almost  total  impunity.   Serious
           crimes are committed without investigation, prosecution or legal
           redress or compensation instead the police have embarked all  on
           a witch-hunt of elected MDC MPs with at  least  12  facing  what
           Human Rights Watch believes to be politically motivated criminal
           charges."

 103. This is important evidence  because,  again,  it  indicates  that  the
      recent wave of politically targeted violence was designed  not  simply
      to deliver a particular outcome in  the  run-off  vote  but  to  visit
      retribution for what had already occurred and to change the  political
      landscape on a continuing basis.


 104. The evidence indicates that the government continued to deny food  and
      medicines to perceived  supporters  of  the  MDC  and  the  continuing
      violence, repression and suspension of  humanitarian  aid  by  Zanu-PF
      shows, according to Professor Ranger, the absence  of  good  faith  in
      which Mr Mugabe and Zanu-PF are participating in the current talks.

 105. Professor Ranger told us that it was  the  Joint  Operational  Command
      ("JOC") that was responsible for the central direction of the violence
      being perpetrated in Zimbabwe today and the more informal militias who
      were delivering it to the people:

           "As for the militia, they have provided the enforcement  muscle,
           working out of camps in the countryside and bases  in  the  high
           density areas.  Some of the appalling atrocities committed  have
           unfortunately been the work of local "activists" taking  revenge
           on their neighbours, with whom they will not have to live.   But
           much has been the work of young  uniformed  militia  men.   Some
           have been indoctrinated by the patriotic  history  doctrines  of
           ZANU/PF and a generational tension has been reported to me  from
           many areas of Zimbabwe."

 106. These are the sort of people with whom the appellant will have to deal
      should she be challenged upon her return to her home  area  about  her
      affiliations. Professor Ranger said:


           "The situation in Zimbabwe is transformed since the first  round
           election.  No part of Zimbabwe is safe; many  are  no-go  areas.
           It is clear from  the  reports  I  have  summarised  above  that
           violence has been directed not only against  MDC  activists  and
           members but against anyone whose loyalty to ZANU/PF is  suspect.
           That will obviously be the  case  for  someone  who  has  sought
           asylum from Britain."

 107. We find of particular significance that this expert  evidence  to  the
      effect that, in the current climate, a failed asylum seeker  returning
      to Zimbabwe would "obviously" on that account be regarded as  disloyal
      and that violence is directed  at  those  regarded  as  disloyal  goes
      unchallenged by cross examination.


 108. In his oral evidence Professor Ranger told  us  that  he  was  himself
      familiar with the part of  Zimbabwe  where  the  appellant  lived.  He
      described it as most certainly a rural area. He said it was like  "the
      back of beyond". Its remoteness is indicated by the fact that there is
      no radio or TV transmission available there.


 109. He confirmed  also  that  there  were  still  very  large  numbers  of
      displaced people in Zimbabwe who were afraid to return to  their  home
      areas. No-go areas had been established by  Zanu-PF  where  entry  was
      regulated to ensure Zanu control. There were road  blocks  and  curfew
      arrangements that may be encountered.

 110. The appellant's area had been one hotly contested in the elections. It
      was from this province that a number of the MDC- M  faction  MPs  were
      returned.

 111. It is Professor Ranger's view that the position facing someone such as
      the appellant upon return to Zimbabwe today is worse than it has  been
      in recent years:

           "When I wrote my country case report last year I warned that the
           situation was bad.  The evidence I have adduced now  shows  that
           it is very much worse.  For Matabeleland things are  worse  than
           they have been since the 1980s; in the rest of the country  they
           are worse than they  have  been  since  the  guerrilla  war  and
           martial law in the 1970s."

 112. We accept the expert opinion of Professor Ranger. As we will  identify
      below, it is in line with the other expert evidence  and  there  is  a
      wide range of documentary evidence from many  respected  sources  that
      confirms what he says. His evidence goes unchallenged other than by Mr
      Kovats' submissions, which are summarised below but which, we find, do
      not undermine the professor's evidence.

Evidences of witnesses not called to give oral evidence

 113. We consider next the evidence  of  a  number  of  witnesses  who,  for
      various reasons mainly of a geographical or practical nature, were not
      called to give oral evidence but who have provided witness  statements
      specifically for these proceedings. The respondent  did  not  seek  to
      resist the introduction of this evidence.


 114. The first of these is Witness 4 ("W4") of Source D, a well  known  and
      respected organisation with a long history of working in Zimbabwe.  W4
      himself has also a long association with the country, as is  clear  by
      the observation he makes at paragraph 3 of his statement in  which  he
      feels able to say this:

           "I  am  personally  mature  enough  to  remember  the   war   of
           liberation. Nothing compares in brutality to what the regime has
           done to its people since March 2008.


           Civilians  were  of  course  often  victims  in  the   war   for
           independence  between  Rhodesian  soldiers   and   the   Freedom
           Fighters.  However,  this  situation  is  wholly  different   as
           ordinary people have been systematically targeted in a  military
           campaign. The most primitive and uncivilised methods and tactics
           have been used. (A religious representative organisation  )  has
           issued a public statement in June describing it as a  "reign  of
           terror that has been unleashed on the country."


 115. W4 described how the violence has continued "more  or  less  unabated"
      even after the run-off election. Those seeking to  return  to  a  home
      area they had left face very real difficulties:


           "We are aware of people who fled their local  areas  during  the
           election period and tried to return having been beaten and worse
           for having fled.  The fact that they  fled  has  been  taken  as
           evidence that they are disloyal and working with the enemies  of
           the state.  Given that those who have fled are perceived  to  be
           disloyal, it  is  also  easy  for  them  to  become  victims  of
           extortion.


           Those who seek refuge in the UK and US are seen  as  much  worse
           than  those  who  fled  internally  or  even   to   neighbouring
           countries.  They are perceived as showing  allegiance  to  those
           countries that are seeking to overthrow the regime."


 116. This is further cogent evidence that those returning to Zimbabwe after
      having claimed asylum in the United Kingdom are now at risk on  return
      to their home areas in  Zimbabwe,  or  in  most  areas  of  relocation
      (subject to what we say  about  this  below),  of  being  regarded  as
      disloyal and  so  as  legitimate  targets  for  retribution  and  ill-
      treatment at the hands of the various militias who continue to seek to
      protect and preserve the ruling party's hold on power.


 117. This witness, who in view of the nature of the organisation  he  works
      with is in a very good position to know, says that food aid  is  being
      used as a political tool by the regime:

           "Without a Zanu-PF party card there is no access to food.  Those
           with sufficient foreign currency and access have been  going  to
           South Africa to get food.   Bartering  for  food  is  no  longer
           taking place on any scale as most people do not have  any  items
           to barter with.  You cannot barter if you  have  nothing.   Some
           emergency food aid does arrive into the country but it does  not
           find its way to  the  people  it  is  intended  for.   The  food
           shortages apply to both urban  and  rural  areas.   The  current
           harvest is the worst harvest  since  independence.   A  loaf  of
           bread cost approximately 400 billion Zimbabwean dollars.  I have
           not eaten bread for months."


 118. Witness 2 ("W2") of Source F is another  person  whose  views  command
      respect and deserve to be given weight. We do  not  seek  to  disagree
      with what Mr Henderson says in his skeleton argument:


           "W2 has repeatedly been identified as the  most  reliable  human
           rights reporter in Zimbabwe and described by the Court of Appeal
           in AA1 as a "much respected representative"  (para  64)  of  the
           organisation identified  by  (the  respondent)  as  the  British
           Embassy's main NGO contact."

      W2 has prepared a statement for these proceedings in which he  recalls
      that he had expressed his concern in a  report  he  prepared  for  the
      Tribunal in 2007 that anyone not perceived  to  be  loyal  to  Zanu-PF
      would be viewed as a "sell-out" and so at risk. He now says this:


           "Regrettably,   the   campaign   unleashed   against    ordinary
           Zimbabweans considered unsympathetic to the regime has more than
           fulfilled these fears.  The  extent  of  the  violence  and  the
           targeting of ordinary Zimbabweans not  seen  as  supporting  the
           regime is well off the scale in comparison to what went  before.
           ... Ordinary Zimbabweans are targeted simply  because  they  are
           assumed to be against the regime and liable to vote to the MDC.
           ...
           ... The violence  now  seems  to  be  wholly  unrestrained  even
           compared to what was seen in previous years.  It is carried  out
           with complete impunity and very obviously.  This has assisted in
           manifesting  terror  in  the  population.   The   situation   is
           exceptionally  insecure  because  the  threat  to  the  regime's
           existence following the March elections is very real."


      W2 confirms the point made by other witnesses that  it  is  no  longer
      simply those identified as MDC activists who are at risk:


           "They know from the polling data from the first round  that  the
           majority of a particular community is  pro  MDC  and  they  have
           attacked whole communities as a result.  One of the elements  of
           the new situation is that people who were no more than suspected
           MDC voters have been  receiving  severe  violence  of  the  sort
           previously experienced more by activists."

 119. Dealing  specifically  with  the  position  of  someone  returning  to
      Zimbabwe after having spent a period of  time  living  in  the  United
      Kingdom, W2 said:


           "Someone returning to Zimbabwe now after seeking asylum  in  the
           UK would return to a substantially more dangerous situation even
           than 2007.  It has been demonstrated over the last  five  months
           that the mere suspicion that someone supports and would vote for
           the MDC is sufficient to lead to  severe  violence  without  the
           person having been active in any way.  It is  simply  enough  to
           live in a majority MDC area, without having acted as a  sell-out
           by going to the UK to join the refugee community there.


           Travel within Zimbabwe carries particular risks for  anyone  who
           cannot demonstrate adherence to Zanu-PF (which someone  who  has
           sought asylum in the UK will not be able to do for that  reason,
           unless they have proved  they  are  Zanu-PF  or  are  very  well
           connected).  The extent of the violence  and  the  targeting  of
           whole communities is,  as  I  indicated,  a  new  phase  in  the
           deterioration in Zimbabwe.  A person who has been in the UK  for
           years is unlikely to be as streetwise about how to minimise risk
           from militia in this new situation and such a person would be in
           a lot of trouble.


           I said before that even if someone  is  not  identified  at  the
           airport as having sought asylum in the UK, they could not simply
           return home anonymously because to simply appear in a  new  area
           after several years of absence would attract questions.  That is
           especially  true  now  in  light   of   the   polarisation   and
           militarisation I referred to above."

 120. This witness identifies, as have others, the suspicion that arises  in
      respect of a person who is known to have come back  to  Zimbabwe  from
      the United Kingdom.


           "The xenophobia against the UK has  reached  new  heights.   The
           regime has seen the effectiveness of international pressure from
           the UK, including bringing Zimbabwe to the Security Council  and
           the condemnation of the G8.  The regime is now in real danger of
           losing power.  The attacks on the UK are relentless.  Among  the
           cases I have seen have been people who were  attacked,  tortured
           and told to go back to England.  These were  rural  villagers  -
           they had not been to the UK and most probably did not know where
           it was.


           In the current atmosphere, people who have sought asylum in  the
           UK may be accused of being British sympathisers or  even  spies.
           The militia inflicting the violence locally are very brutal  and
           very unsophisticated although they are directed by sophisticated
           people.  They are encouraged by the government to  believe  that
           it is Britain that is creating Zimbabwe's problem is  that  they
           are hungry because of the UK and the UK is controlling  the  MDC
           as a means of controlling Zimbabwe.   It  is  crude  propaganda,
           untrue and  irrational  but  you  can  see  the  impact  on  the
           irrational local militia and the propaganda is  churned  out  by
           the state-controlled media as well as their commanders  and  the
           party so there is no alternative perspective."

 121. The argument that those returned to  Zimbabwe  after  having  made  an
      unsuccessful claim for asylum in the United Kingdom would be  regarded
      as spies or saboteurs sent to destabilise the  country,  often  called
      "Blair's spies", was considered by the Tribunal in HS and rejected  as
      being unfounded. The CIO, being  the  organisation  who  would  assess
      returnees,  was  described  as   a   sophisticated   organisation   of
      professional  intelligence  officers.  They  acted  on  the  basis  of
      intelligence obtained not least  from  the  extensive  investment  the
      regime had made in infiltrating the MDC in the  United  Kingdom.  Such
      professional intelligence officers would not believe that  the  United
      Kingdom, if minded to send  spies  to  Zimbabwe,  would  do  so  in  a
      category of those returning  who  were  bound  to  attract  attention,
      unlike  ordinary  travellers  who  would  pass  through  the   airport
      unhindered.


 122. But the answer to that reasoning is now found in the  final  paragraph
      of the extract from the evidence of W2 set out above. It is no  longer
      the professional security staff at Harare airport  who  are  the  main
      concern for returnees.  It  is  the  ill-disciplined,  irrational  and
      unpredictably violent militias to be confronted  upon  return  to  the
      home area.

 123. In our view,  the  evidence  indicates  that  those  groups  act  with
      unprecedented brutality towards a broad range of people on  the  basis
      of suspicions of disloyalty and that they have been  indoctrinated  to
      believe that the United Kingdom, and those associated with it, are the
      source of Zimbabwe's problems today. It is plainly the case  that  the
      Zimbabwean community in the United Kingdom is an area of solid support
      for the MDC. It would, in our view, be  naive  to  assume  that  those
      tasked with eliminating potential support  for  the  MDC  in  Zimbabwe
      would not be aware of that. There is a large  body  of  evidence  that
      membership of a community perceived to support the MDC  is  sufficient
      to mark a person out for violent harassment or worse treatment.  It is
      not hard to see how anyone returning from the United Kingdom would  be
      associated with the hysterical propaganda that continues to be peddled
      to these various groups or militias  who  appear  to  be  acting  with
      impunity.

 124. W2 also speaks of discriminatory exclusion from access to food on  the
      basis of supposed political affiliation:

           "There is no longer the hope of obtaining  food  from  NGOs  for
           those denied government food aid because they do not have a Zanu-
           PF  card.   Despite  the  MOU  (Memorandum   of   Understanding)
           providing for humanitarian assistance, the regime has  continued
           to obstruct it. NGOs are being permitted to assist those on ARVs
           but have not been permitted to provide general  food  aid.   The
           NGOs are told they  must  re-register  but  there  is  no  clear
           procedure for registering. "

The documentary evidence from NGOs and Human Rights Organisations

 125. There is a very large body of such  evidence  put  before  us  by  the
      appellant's representatives. We have had regard to all  that  we  have
      been referred to but the extent of  this  material  is  such  that  we
      cannot discuss it  all  in  this  determination.  What  follows  is  a
      consideration of what must be only a sample of this evidence.  But  we
      are entirely satisfied that the part of this category of the  evidence
      to which we now refer is representative of the whole.


 126. A report from the Institute for War & Peace in  May  2008  noted  that
      "huge masses" of people from Plumtree, which  is  near  to  where  the
      appellant lived in Zimbabwe, were crossing illegally the  border  into
      Mozambique fleeing from "political violence". Homes had been destroyed
      and fathers  beaten  in  front  of  their  children  by  ruling  party
      supporters and War Veterans. That  report  was  published  before  the
      outcome of the run-off vote but must be viewed in the light of what is
      now known about the road blocks and no-go  areas  established  by  the
      militia to control the movement of displaced persons.

 127. Solidarity Peace Trust ("SPT") published a report in May 2008 in which
      it noted a significant increase  in  violence  immediately  after  the
      first round elections in March:

           "It was clear to the State by 30 March that they  had  lost  the
           presidential  and  parliamentary   elections.    Media   reports
           indicate that in the early  days  of  April,  Mugabe  considered
           conceding defeat, but that by around 3 April the  hardliners  in
           his party, together with  the  Joint  Operational  Command,  had
           decided that there would be no such concession, and  that   ZANU
           PF would remain in power by brute force."

 128. That report gives an indication of the scale of the violence.  650 out
      of 700 people interviewed spoke of post election  violence,  SPT  said
      those:


           "... are likely to represent a very small  percentage  of  those
           who are in  fact  suffering  violations  at  this  time.   ZADHR
           estimate only a tiny fraction of victims is managing  to  travel
           to a major centre for medical support, with others being treated
           in rural clinics and hospitals, or not  being  treated  at  all,
           either because they are too injured to travel or  because  their
           efforts to reach help are being obstructed.  There  are  reports
           of ambulances being turned back from accessing these  districts,
           and of severely affected districts being under curfew where  any
           movement out of the area is almost impossible owing to army  and
           police roadblocks.  Nobody is being  allowed  to  leave  certain
           areas where violence is very bad without written permission from
           the war vets and police controlling these areas."

 129. Included in the SPT report are a series  of  photographs  of  campaign
      posters used by Zanu-PF during  the  March  elections.  These  include
      slogans such as:

           "TO PUNISH AND FOREVER SILENCE "PUPPET SANCTION-MONGERS"


           "ZIMBABWE WILL NEVER BE A COLONY AGAIN!"


           "TO DEFEAT PUPPETS, BUSH, BROWN AND THEIR SANCTIONS"

      making clear that anti British rhetoric was very much part of the Zanu-
      PF campaign message and that it attempted to associate the  opposition
      very clearly with the British in the eyes of its own supporters.


 130. A Zimbabwe Crisis report in May  2008  said  that  hundreds  of  rural
      schools had  been  closed  because  "most  teachers  have  fled  local
      violence":


           "War veterans and militias have reportedly unleashed a reign  of
           terror in the countryside, and although many victims are said to
           be opposition supporters, ordinary teachers have also borne  the
           brunt.
           ...
           Teachers have  long  been  regarded  as  community  leaders  and
           opinion formers, particularly in the rural areas, and often they
           have found themselves  the  target  of  militias  loyal  to  the
           governing party."


 131. Human Rights Watch ("HRW") has published a detailed report  concerning
      the March 2008 elections. Its title, "Bullets for each of you",  taken
      from what had been said to communities thought likely  to  have  voted
      for the opposition, gives  an  indication  of  its  conclusions.  Once
      again, clear evidence was found by those compiling this report that it
      was not simply MDC activists or supporters who were at risk:


           "ZANU-PF supporters and their allies have not found it necessary
           to prove that a person voted  for  the  MDC  before  meting  out
           "punishment". Instead they have examined results posted  outside
           polling stations to identify areas where people voted for MDC in
           large numbers, even if the MDC lost to ZANU-PF in those areas."

      And, according to HRW, the reasons for this went beyond the short term
      objective of punishing people for having voted in the  elections  that
      are now a fact of history:

           "...it is being used to change the political landscape of  rural
           areas by effectively displacing and thereby disenfranchising the
           voting rights of known MDC members and supporters."


 132. There is evidence also that the militias set up under the direction of
      the formal state authorities to act during  the  election  period  are
      taking on a momentum of their own. As  it  is  put  by  a  SPT  report
      published more recently, in July 2008,  there  may  be  difficulty  in
      "putting the genie back into the  bottle".  This  gives  rise  to  the
      prospect of criminally motivated attacks been carried out by those who
      had been provided with impunity to visit violence upon  those  thought
      to be potential supporters of the opposition.


 133. Included in this  volume  of  evidence  prepared  by  the  appellant's
      representatives is the  travel  advice  published  by  the  Foreign  &
      Commonwealth Office for British citizens contemplating  travelling  to
      Zimbabwe. The  following  advice  was  current  when  the  bundle  was
      prepared just a few days before the hearing:

           "We advise against all but essential travel to Zimbabwe at  this
           time.  The situation  remains  unpredictable  and  incidents  of
           violence across  the  country  continue:  it  could  deteriorate
           further without warning."
      The updated advice is:

           "We advise  against  all  travel  to  high  density,  low-income
           suburban areas at any time; and  all  but  essential  travel  to
           rural Mashonaland, rural Manicaland  and  farming  areas.  There
           have been a number of serious incidents in rural areas and it is
           dangerous for farmers or agricultural workers  to  visit  former
           properties or other agricultural areas.   You should  also avoid
           areas where War  Veterans  are  active.  The  situation  remains
           unpredictable and  incidents  of  violence  across  the  country
           continue: it could deteriorate further,  without  warning.   See
           the Political Situation and Local Travel sections of this advice
           for more details."

      And both versions add:

           "You are strongly advised to have your own contingency  plan  in
           place for how you would leave at short notice  and  ensure  your
           travel documents are up  to  date  and  readily  available.  You
           should keep a low profile, exercise a high  degree  of  caution,
           monitor local media for developments and avoid all  areas  where
           demonstrations may be held, or where there are large  gatherings
           of people.  See the Political Situation and the General  (Living
           in, or travelling to, Zimbabwe) sections of this advice for more
           details."
 134. As Mr Kovats points out, correctly, this is advice offered to  British
      citizens and not to nationals of the country concerned.  But  it  does
      represent an acknowledgement of the volatility of country  conditions.
      And it is  hard  to  see  how  anyone  can  be  confident,  whether  a
      Zimbabwean national or a visitor, that an area of intended destination
      is one where War Veterans are currently active.


  The stated position of the United Kingdom Government


 135. At this point, before going on to  discuss  the  large  collection  of
      recent news reports compiled by the appellant's representatives, it is
      convenient to consider the  public  statements  of  ministers  of  the
      government of this country relating to the current country  conditions
      in Zimbabwe. This evidence is put before the Tribunal on behalf of the
      appellant to support the submission that the position adopted  by  the
      respondent  before  the  Tribunal,  that  it  is  safe  to  recommence
      involuntary  returns  of  failed  asylum  seekers  to   Zimbabwe,   is
      irreconcilable with the public statements of senior  ministers.  Where
      such statements have been made in Parliament they must, it is said, be
      taken to represent the position of the government.


 136. Of events in Zimbabwe following the first round of voting in March  of
      this year, Mr David Miliband, Foreign  Secretary,  made  this  written
      ministerial statement, delivered to Parliament by the  Foreign  Office
      minister Lord Malloch-Brown on 15th July 2008:

           "We believe that dialogue between  the  parties  provide  a  way
           forward for Zimbabwe's crisis.  But we need to  be  clear  about
           the basis on which dialogue can be  developed.   At  present  we
           have one party that won a popular mandate in  the  Parliamentary
           elections of 29 March at but whose members and  supporters  have
           been intimidated by the violence unleashed on them by the  state
           and ZANU-PF militia.  And we have another party that has refused
           to cede power and that has used the  full  force  of  the  state
           security apparatus to intimidate its  citizens  and  turned  the
           presidential run-off into a farce."

      And on 10th July 2008  the  Prime  Minister  addressed  the  House  of
      Commons thus:

           "Let me first draw the House's attention to the unprecedented G8
           statement on Zimbabwe.  In the face of the deepening tragedy  in
           Zimbabwe - the intimidation and deaths, the violation  of  human
           rights, the detention of political prisoners - the  G8  made  it
           clear that we  do  not  accept  the  legitimacy  of  the  Mugabe
           government and that the UN Secretary General should now  appoint
           a special envoy both to report on  the  deterioration  of  human
           rights and to support regional mediation efforts to bring  about
           change.


           With worldwide sanctions and the worldwide arms embargo that  we
           propose, our aim is that there would be no  safe  haven  and  no
           hiding place for the criminal cabal that  surrounds  the  Mugabe
           regime.


           I hope that United Nations members - even those that in the past
           have not supported such action on Zimbabwe - will  realise  that
           in terms of humanitarian aid,  this  is  an  emergency,  that  a
           criminal cabal is running a country without legitimacy, and that
           the people of that country need  relief  from  the  miseries  to
           which they are subjected."

      And on 2nd July he had said:

           "it is indeed time for Mugabe to step down, and he has blood  on
           his hands after what happened during the election  campaign,  in
           which so many people died and were displaced."

      And on 23rd June:

           "Our thoughts are with the people of Zimbabwe, who are facing an
           unprecedented  level  of  violence  and  intimidation  from  the
           regime.  The whole world is of one view:  that  the  status  quo
           cannot continue.

           The international community must  send  a  powerful  and  united
           message: that we will  not  recognise  the  fraudulent  election
           rigging and the violence and  intimidation  of  a  criminal  and
           discredited cabal."


 137. If nothing else, these public statements  do  confirm  that  which  is
      asserted by the Mugabe regime: regime change in Zimbabwe is  a  policy
      advocated by the British government. On  8th  July  2008  the  Foreign
      Officer minister told Parliament that:


           "... unlike six months ago, there is now no doubt that Mr Mugabe
           and  those  around  him  have  committed  crimes  which  deserve
           referral to the ICC (International Criminal Court)."

      Having earlier said, on 3rd July:

           "In his determination to cling to power, Mugabe  has  turned  on
           his own people."

      And appeared to recognise that in Zimbabwe there was :

           "... abuse that is sometimes targeted and sometimes anarchic and
           random."

      And on 10th June 2008, speaking in Parliament  about  an  incident  in
      which the British diplomatic staff had become involved in Harare:

           "the incident last week is never the less mild compared with the
           terrible violence that ordinary Zimbabweans are subjected to."

 138. Winding up the 3rd July  debate upon Zimbabwe, the Under-Secretary  of
      State for International Development, recognising that  "conditions  in
      the country are desperate", said of the ban introduced by  the  Mugabe
      regime in June affecting the ability of NGOs to distribute food aid:


           "The banning of non-governmental organisations has affected  1.5
           million people and it demonstrates that Mugabe is  using  hunger
           as a political weapon with a callous disregard for human life."


 139. There is more to the same effect. On 25th June 2008 another  minister,
      the Sports Minister Mr Andy Burnham, delivered a  written  ministerial
      statement explaining the decision to cancel the proposed tour  by  the
      Zimbabwean cricket team:


           "the Zimbabwean government has ceased to observe  the  principle
           of the rule of law: they have  terrorised  their  own  citizens,
           including the ruthless and  violent  suppression  of  legitimate
           political opposition."

      And, more significantly still, the Under Secretary  of  State  of  the
      Foreign Office said in Parliament on 24th June 2008:

           "As my right hon. Friends the Foreign Secretary  and  the  Prime
           Minister have said, the violence,  suspension  of  aid  and  the
           ongoing murder and  intimidation  of  ordinary  Zimbabweans  are
           unacceptable.  The regime lost all vestiges of  legitimacy  long
           ago.  We continue to work through the EU, U.N. and African union
           to press for solutions to  the  current  electoral  crisis  that
           reflect the will of the people as they voted on 29 March."

 140. In considering these statements by ministers, the Tribunal  recognises
      that the government is not concerned only, as is  the  Tribunal,  with
      the limited question of whether a person can assert as a  legal  right
      that he or she should not be required to return to  their  country  of
      nationality.  It  is  not  hard  to  see  that  there  may   well   be
      circumstances in which a person fails to establish such a right  as  a
      matter  of  law  yet  where  the  government  may  still  consider  it
      inappropriate to return a person to their country of origin in view of
      the difficult country  conditions  currently  prevailing.  But  it  is
      difficult  to  reconcile  the  comments  set  out   above   with   the
      respondent's position as expressed by Mr Walker,  that  because  those
      Zimbabweans living in the United Kingdom would not have been  able  to
      vote in the elections they would not likely to be assumed  to  be  MDC
      supporters on return to Zimbabwe and targeted on that account.

News reports


 141. As with the NGO reports, the appellant's representatives have compiled
      a collection of a large number of news reports. Such is  their  number
      that we cannot discuss in this determination all of those or even  the
      reports  to  which  Mr  Henderson   specifically   referred   in   his
      submissions. But we have taken note of all of that material  and  what
      we set out below is indicative and  representative  of  this  body  of
      material as a whole.


 142. A report in "Zimbabwe Today" dated 9th April 2008 refers both  to  the
      fact that government food aid was being delivered only to  those  seen
      to be "accredited Zanu-PF supporters"  and  to  the  fact  that  youth
      militias and  War  Veterans  had  erected  road  blocks  and  required
      motorists to produce Zanu-PF membership cards.  A Times online  report
      published between the first round of voting in March 2008 and the run-
      off presidential that followed said:

           "Unwilling to allow Mr Mugabe to slope  off  to  retirement  and
           immunity, the  military  has  taken  the  reins,  unleashing  an
           orchestrated campaign of terror  against  opposition  activists,
           election observers and ordinary voters in an attempt  to  secure
           Mr Mugabe's victory in a second-round poll.  The  results  lists
           posted  outside  polling  stations  that  made  massive  rigging
           impossible are now being used to target those areas  that  voted
           the wrong way.


           Areas across Matabeleland, Masvingo,  Masvingo  and  Manicaland,
           which swung away from the ruling  Zanu (PF) party for the  first
           time, have found themselves at the forefront of the brutality.
           ...


           On Tuesday in Matabeleland South, to the east of Bulawayo, youth
           militia armed with AK-47's stopped traffic  and  ordered  people
           off buses, rounding them up and  forcing  them  at  gunpoint  to
           chant slogans in praise of the ruling party.  If they could not,
           they were beaten."

 143. A BBC news report of 21st April 2008 observed that:


           "Most worryingly, President Mugabe and his  Zanu-PF  party  have
           unleashed  a  campaign  of  violence  against   those   ordinary
           Zimbabweans, 60% of them, who  in  spite  of  everything,  voted
           against him"

      The same is confirmed by an IRIN report dated 9th May 2008:

           "Hunger is giving a brutal edge to the alleged work of  militias
           implementing Operation Mavhoterapapi (who did you vote for?),  a
           campaign launched by President Mugabe's  ZANU-PF  government  in
           the wake  of  the  ruling  party's  loss  of  its  Parliamentary
           majority for the first time since independence in 1980.


           The post-election crackdown, allegedly orchestrated  by  police,
           soldiers  and  veterans  of  the  liberation  war,  has  led  to
           widespread reports of torture, the razing of houses and  killing
           of livestock, perpetrated mainly against people in  rural  areas
           suspected of voting  for  the  opposition  party,  Movement  for
           Democratic Change."


 144. There are very many reports of the public utterances of Robert Mugabe,
      blaming the  United  Kingdom  government  for  the  economic  problems
      suffered by Zimbabwe and for seeking "illegal  regime  change".  There
      are a large number of news reports  describing  the  sheer  scale  and
      extent of the brutality being meted out, with  hands  and  feet  being
      chopped off, eyes gouged and very serious beatings resulting  in  life
      threatening injuries, sometimes accompanied  by  attempts  to  prevent
      access to medical treatment.

 145. A Voice of America report on 13th June  2008  spoke  of  rural  areas,
      including in the appellant's  home  province  of  Matabeleland  South,
      being cut off by militias and War Veterans while violent attacks  were
      carried out against those targeted. On 14th June 2008 Reuters  carried
      a report  of  an  article  in  the  Chronicle  newspaper  in  Zimbabwe
      publishing comments by General Chiwenga, who was  coordinating  Robert
      Mugabe's re-election campaign. He said  that  Western  forces  led  by
      Britain were trying to seize control of Zimbabwe and that it was:

           "imperative to Zimbabweans to remain resolute in defending their
           sovereignty" after freeing themselves from  British  occupation,
           oppression and exploitation at independence in 1980.


 146. An indication that the run-off vote was never going to be the  end  of
      the Zanu-PF regime, whatever its outcome, is found in a  Times  online
      report dated 17th June 2008:


           "Robert Mugabe gave warning yesterday that  he  would  not  cede
           power if he loses next week's election by the opposition in  his
           most explicit statement  yet  of  his  refusal  to  respect  the
           result.


           State-controlled media reported his comments to supporters at an
           election rally, the latest in a series of increasingly  menacing
           threats as Zimbabwe counts down to the June 27 presidential run-
           off poll.  Mr Mugabe's military-backed regime has been  carrying
           out a campaign of violence aimed at wiping  out  the  opposition
           vote.


           "We fought for this country, and a lot of blood  was  shed,"  Mr
           Mugabe told his supporters. "We are not going  to  give  up  our
           country because of a mere X.  How can a ballpoint fight  with  a
           gun?"


           The warning came a day after he declared "We are ready to go  to
           war".  Evidence, say observers, of mounting concerns that he may
           not have done enough to secure the vote.


           Mr Mugabe's threat coincided with a sudden worsening in violence
           in the townships around Harare, as mobs of hundred of Zanu  (PF)
           youths marched through the streets at night, chanting war songs,
           dragging people out of their homes  and  beating  them  up  with
           sticks, iron rods and axes.  Until then the terror campaign  had
           been confined largely to rural areas where security  forces  and
           militia groups have conspired to create "no-go  zones",  banning
           aid organisations and all outsiders to prevent  them  witnessing
           the intimidation.


           The level of violence has increased dramatically in the past two
           weeks, moving  from  beatings  and  torture  to  mutilation  and
           killing, with several victims burnt alive and others shot."


      And the much published comments of Robert Mugabe, as reported  by  the
      Telegraph on 21st June 2008:


           "The MDC will never be allowed to  rule  this  country  -  never
           ever," Mr Mugabe, 84, told  a  meeting  of  business  people  in
           Bulawayo.


           "Only God who appointed me will remove me, not the MDC, not  the
           British."


 147. Recent reports support that which has been said by the country experts
      in this appeal.  It  is  said  repeatedly  that  it  is  the  military
      commanders of the JOC who have taken power in  Zimbabwe  and  who  are
      masterminding the campaign  of  violence  designed  to  eliminate  the
      possibility of any challenge to the continuing authority of the regime
      and its hold on power. Unlike Robert Mugabe, there was no  amnesty  on
      offer to protect them in the proposals under which the  President  was
      asked to relinquish power after the first round of voting.


 148. There is to be found within this material much to  support  the  views
      expressed by both country experts that there has been a broadening  of
      the range of  people  targeted  by  the  regime  beyond  simply  those
      actually identified as supporters or activists for the MDC. A Guardian
      report of 24th June 2008 said:

           "The campaign of intimidation that was once aimed at the second-
           tier activist for the Movement for  Democratic  Change  has  now
           been turned on everyone else."


      And  a  report  from  the  Daily  Mirror  referred  to  such   violent
      intimidation taking place in the area  of  Plumtree,  from  where  the
      appellant originates. Having described the beating of a  teacher,  who
      had been hung from a tree by his wrists the report said:


           "The  teacher  was  just  one  more  victim  of  the   malignant
           psychopaths Robert Mugabe has unleashed  on  his  own  citizens.
           Children as young as five have been beaten  with  hammers  while
           women are led  away  to  camps  where  they  are  systematically
           raped."

      There are other similar reports  of  young  women  being  raped  after
      having been taken to camps established by the youth militias, such  as
      that carried by Times online on 6th July 2008 and IRIN which said that
      rape was being used as a deplorable weapon against those "perceived as
      not supporting ZANU-PF".


 149. There is material here,  also,  to  support  the  assertion  that  the
      violence was not limited to secure the outcome delivered in  the  run-
      off vote but that it is continuing while the MDC is  still  considered
      to represent a viable opposition  to  the  regime.  Voice  of  America
      reported on 23rd July 2008:


           "Although Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe's ZANU-PF  party  has
           agreed to talks with  the  opposition  Movement  for  Democratic
           Change on a possible power-sharing  arrangement,  the  country's
           political  violence  and  intimidation  continue.   ...  ZANU-PF
           militia are still patrolling vast parts of the country."


      And a more recent Voice of America report dated 14th August 2008, said
      that War Veterans continued to be active in Tshitshi district in rural
      Plumtree, which is close to the appellant's home area in Zimbabwe.

   The respondent's case


 150.  The  respondent's  case  was  not  put  to  the  witnesses  in  cross
      examination  other  than  briefly  to  the  appellant  herself.   That
      challenge was limited to  the  suggestion  that  sufficient  time  had
      elapsed since her departure that it was  improbable  that  her  former
      boyfriend would still have any interest in her, even if he remained in
      the area, and now that  the  elections  were  over  the  risk  of  the
      appellant encountering the sort  of  difficulties  we  have  discussed
      above was very much reduced. It was suggested to the appellant that if
      she were to return to Zimbabwe she would be in  no  worse  a  position
      than anyone else.


 151.  Only one witness was called for the  respondent.  That  was  Mr  Mark
      Walker.

 152. Mr Walker is a Senior Executive Officer in the Country Specific Asylum
      Policy Team, UK Border Agency. His day to day responsibilities include
      country policy on Zimbabwe. He has given evidence to the  Tribunal  in
      recent country guidance cases and submits two statements,  dated  26th
      August  and  1st  September  2008  respectively,  that  set  out   the
      respondent's case from information supplied to  him.  He  makes  clear
      that he does not have direct knowledge of all that information but, as
      it is provided to him by colleagues  in  the  UK  Border  Agency,  the
      Foreign Office and the British Embassy in Harare, he  believes  to  be
      correct all that he says in the witness statement that he  adopted  as
      his evidence before us.

 153. In his earlier statement Mr Walker dealt first with  the  respondent's
      position in respect of the  risk  on  return  faced  by  returnees  on
      arrival at Harare airport:

           "It is the opinion of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department  that  the  conclusions  of  this  tribunal  in  "HS"
           (AA/02471/2006) continue accurately  to  reflect  the  treatment
           that failed asylum seekers would encounter at Harare airport  if
           they were to be returned to  Zimbabwe,  whether  voluntarily  or
           involuntarily.  SSHD accepts that in the absence of  significant
           numbers of involuntary returns since  2005,  any  assessment  of
           risk to involuntary returnees in the future must to some  extent
           be speculative.  However, that was true even at the time that HS
           was heard, and the Tribunal in that case had to rely in part  on
           the  logicality  of  the  reasoning   behind   the   appellant's
           assertions about the way that the Zimbabwean security  apparatus
           would work if involuntary returns were to take place.


           SSHD  accepts  that  the  country  situation  in  Zimbabwe   has
           continued to deteriorate since HS was  heard  and  deplores  the
           violence that has surrounded the parliamentary and  presidential
           elections there.  But that violence is targeted  at  actual  and
           perceived  supporters  of  the   political   opposition   within
           Zimbabwe, mainly with a view to affecting the way they voted  in
           the elections or to punish them for not voting for Robert Mugabe
           or ZANU-PF.   It  is  SSHD's  opinion  that  the  government  of
           Zimbabwe  would  not  assume  that  all  failed  asylum  seekers
           returned from the UK would be  opposition  supporters  and  that
           returning failed asylum seekers would not as such  be  any  more
           likely to be targeted for mistreatment than any other Zimbabwean
           returning to Zimbabwe.  In particular  in  the  context  of  the
           recent elections, as Zimbabwean electoral law does  not  provide
           the inclusion on the electoral roll of  those  who  are  outside
           Zimbabwe, there would be no reason why such returnees  would  be
           targeted for retributory violence."

 154. Four things might be noted about that extract. First, it is  concerned
      with reception at Harare airport  by  official  agents  of  the  state
      rather than the reception to be faced on return in the returnee's home
      area or elsewhere. Second, the respondent here  accepts  that  adverse
      interest is now extended to those  who  are  simply  perceived  to  be
      supporters of the opposition. Third, it assumes that  the  purpose  of
      the post election violence was restricted to delivering to Mr Mugabe a
      successful outcome in the  run-off  vote,  whereas  the  evidence  now
      before the Tribunal demonstrates  that  the  real  purpose  went  much
      further and explained  why  violence  has  persisted  even  after  the
      signing of the Memorandum of Understanding. Finally, it  assumes  that
      because a returning failed asylum seeker could not have voted  in  the
      March or June elections such  persons  would  not  be  assumed  to  be
      supporters of the MDC.


 155. That reasoning is based also upon the understanding that the  violence
      that persists in Zimbabwe after the electoral process has concluded is
      retributory in its nature. But as can be seen from what has  been  set
      out above, the evidence establishes that there is  a  broader  agenda.
      The reason for the continuing violence is not  just  to  punish  those
      thought to have voted for the MDC for having done so but to  eliminate
      the possibility of any future challenge.


 156. With regard to  the  relevance  of  the  poor  country  conditions  in
      themselves, Mr Walker said this:

           "It is SSHD's opinion that despite the  poor  and  deteriorating
           humanitarian  situation  in  Zimbabwe,   taking   into   account
           information in the latest UK Border  Agency  Country  of  Origin
           Information Service Country  Report  on  Zimbabwe  ...  and  (a)
           letter from the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  (exhibited  to
           the statement) general country conditions are not such that they
           would  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary  Zimbabwean  who  has  no
           individual protection needs reach the high threshold of  article
           3 of ECHR. However, every case is considered  on  an  individual
           basis and this does not preclude a finding that the UK's Article
           3 obligations may be engaged in some cases."

 157. We agree that each case must be considered on its own merits and that,
      for the reasons that we set out below, it is possible to see that some
      Zimbabweans may  now  be  living  in  conditions  of  such  cumulative
      difficulty as to reach the high threshold of article 3 of the ECHR.


 158.  Mr Walker pointed out that since September 2006  the  respondent  has
      enforced the return to Zimbabwe of  fifty  Zimbabweans  who  had  been
      refused leave to enter the United Kingdom and he is aware of no report
      suggesting that any of those returnees had been  mistreated.  However,
      only one failed asylum seeker has been returned since 2005.

 159. Arrangements with the  International  Office  for  Migration  ("IOM"),
      discussed in detail by the Tribunal in HS  will  remain  in  place  to
      assist returnees in  resettlement.  Mr  Walker  referred  to  a  table
      exhibited to his statement containing  comments  recorded  by  IOM  in
      respect of the returnees helped. These were consistently positive  but
      Mr Walker accepts that these are  not  direct  quotes  but  rather  an
      indication of the experience  of  return  as  identified  by  the  IOM
      representative.  Having  considered  these  in  detail  the   Tribunal
      considers that they add very little either way.

 160. Mr Walker sets out in his statement the response to enquiries made  of
      other governments about their practice  and  experience  of  returning
      immigration offenders to Zimbabwe.  The United States of  America  has
      continued to remove such persons to Zimbabwe, 26 in 2007 and 21 so far
      this year, sending escorts where necessary. However, it is  not  clear
      how many agreed to a voluntary return, in which case they  would  hold
      their own travel documents and be  indistinguishable  from  any  other
      traveller.

 161. Canada does not presently remove failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe and
      has not done since 2002 and does not monitor how other  returnees  are
      treated. Denmark has suspended such removals as well.

 162. In his later statement Mr Walker set out the results of enquiries made
      of other countries.  Sweden  had  no  statistics  concerning  enforced
      returns of failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe but in was known that one
      person returned voluntarily this year although none did  during  2007.
      Norway has not carried out any returns over the last  year  and  there
      had been no voluntary returns in 2008. There was  no  suspension  upon
      removals to Zimbabwe in place from  Germany  but  very  few  had  been
      returned, one in 2006 and one in 2007. There were  no  forced  returns
      from Belgium either but they handle a  very  small  number  of  asylum
      claims from Zimbabwean claimants.

 163. As for ordinary travel in and out of Zimbabwe, the Tribunal  is  aware
      that at about the time of HS British Airways ceased operating  flights
      to Harare airport, citing  commercial  reasons.  Mr  Walker  has  made
      enquiries of Air Zimbabwe  and,  although  they  declined  to  confirm
      passenger numbers, he calculates by reference to the type of  aircraft
      used and the frequency  of  the  flights  now  operated  between  this
      country and Zimbabwe, that the maximum capacity is just  under  31,000
      passengers a year. In addition there  are  about  30  indirect  flight
      routes between the United  Kingdom  and  Zimbabwe  each  week  but  no
      information is available as to passenger numbers making that journey.

 164. Finally, Mr Walker quotes in his earlier statement  details  from  the
      Zimbabwe Tourism Authority's  "Tourism  Statistics  1st  half  Report,
      2008" which show that the number of tourists from the  United  Kingdom
      fell from 15,378 in the first half of 2007 to 10,066 in the first half
      of 2008.

 165. Exhibited to Mr Walker's second statement is a letter from the Foreign
      and Commonwealth Office dated 22nd August 2008. In that letter is  set
      out an description of the difficult living conditions  encountered  by
      ordinary Zimbabweans. We shall examine that later in the determination
      when dealing with that aspect of the appellant's  case.   Noting  that
      state sponsored violence and intimidation against MDC  supporters  was
      "a significant feature of the  recent  election  period",  the  letter
      continues:

           "More recently, the level of political violence and intimidation
           has  fallen.   For  instance,  the  groups  of   ZANU-PF   youth
           previously prevalent  in  the  northern,  wealthier  suburbs  of
           Harare disbursed almost immediately.  The situation has remained
           tense, particularly in the parts of Mashonaland and  Manicaland,
           where the ZANU-PF leadership is exceptionally  vicious.   Access
           to the rural areas has remained restricted  by  roadblocks  with
           groups of ZANU-PF youth still present in  those  areas  and  the
           main bases still in place.  Attacks, abductions and  arrests  of
           perceived MDC activists are still occurring around the  country,
           but at a lower level than April - June.


           While  there  is  a  current  downward  trend  in  violence  the
           situation remains unpredictable and incidents of violence across
           the country continue.  It could also deteriorate further without
           warning."

 166. We do not find surprising that the presence of  Zanu-PF  youth  groups
      has declined in the more wealthy suburbs of Harare. Those are unlikely
      to be areas within which much support would be found for the  MDC.  We
      have seen evidence of the "high walls" behind  which  people  live  in
      these suburbs, an expression  which,  as  we  understand  it,  extends
      beyond the protection of bricks and  mortar  so  as  to  involve  also
      security measures that are not available outside such  areas.  On  the
      other hand, it is difficult  to  see  how  a  confident  view  can  be
      expressed concerning declining levels  of  violence  within  areas  to
      which access  has  been  restricted  by  those  who  are  said  to  be
      responsible for that violence.


 167. Two further documents accompanied this second statement. The first was
      a news report concerning the hostile and disrespectful reception given
      to Mr Mugabe at the opening of Parliament, now effectively  controlled
      (in theory at least) by the MDC. That report confirmed also that  five
      MDC MPs had been arrested and detained in custody.  The other document
      is a BBC news report concerning the announcement of the lifting of the
      ban,  imposed  in  June,  that  prevented  NGO's   involved   in   the
      distribution of food aid from carrying out those activities.


 168. Mr Walker's evidence in chief was  limited  to  the  adoption  of  his
      witness statements. In cross examination he expressed the view that he
      doubted very much that the  Zimbabwean  regime  would  deduce  from  a
      contribution of US35,000 that most Zimbabweans living  in  the  United
      Kingdom must be supporters of the MDC. We have dealt with that part of
      the respondent's case above.

 169. It was suggested to Mr Walker  in  cross  examination  that  what  has
      changed in Zimbabwe, and this was described as "a new phase"  emerging
      this year, was that areas containing  a  sizeable  proportion  of  MDC
      supporters have had indiscriminate violence perpetrated upon them.  Mr
      Walker said he believed that to be the case.

 170. In HS the Tribunal in finding an absence of real risk for returnees to
      Harare airport, found that as a matter of logic failed asylum  seekers
      would not be assumed by CIO officers to be spies or saboteurs sent  by
      Britain. Taking up this point, Mr Henderson asked Mr Walker:

           "We are in a new situation  now.  We  have  to  address  when  a
           returnee returns home. How she would fare at the hands of  local
           Zanu-PF militia. Is it your analysis that she can  take  comfort
           in the logic of that militia?"


      To which he replied:


           "No;"


      an answer which Mr Henderson recognised was a very fair one.

 171. The Tribunal recognises that  Mr  Walker  is  a  witness  of  complete
      integrity who gives evidence in a fair and objective  manner  and  who
      does not seek to sweep aside the difficulties the respondent faces  in
      resisting this appeal. He acknowledged, for example, that the evidence
      clearly indicated that the categories of those at risk in Zimbabwe had
      broadened, saying that the guidance  offered  by  his  department  was
      being revised and that:


           "The range of people at risk appears to have widened."


 172. Mr Walker produces the Country of Origin  Information  Report  ("COIR)
      for Zimbabwe published in August 2008. He was invited  to  comment  on
      the section commencing at paragraph 10.04, which we reproduce below:


       10.04      Noting the events that followed the 29 March elections,  a
             member of staff working for  the  British  Embassy  in  Harare
             described the situation in the run up to the presidential run-
             off in June 2008.


            "Despair and fear infects us working at the  British  Embassy...
             Living through such a period is taking chunks out  of  us.  In
             June we held our annual reception  to  celebrate  the  Queen's
             Birthday, and give some aid and comfort to our  community  and
             friends here. Some of the guests could  not  attend,  as  they
             were being held  as  political  prisoners.  Others  have  been
             savagely beaten since the party. It hurts to see such  cruelty
             close up.


            "Every day we see the latest victims of  torture  and  murder  -
             sometimes photos, sometimes face-to-face. The  latest  man  to
             die horribly  is  a  driver  called  Gift  Mutsvungunu,  whose
             'crime' was to move the furniture of a previous murder victim.
             Gift was abducted. His eyes were gouged out and he was burned.
             Only then was he killed. His torture was sub-human. It's  only
             motive was the sadistic fury of ZANU-PF's revenge on  the  MDC
             for its 29 March election victory. It is shredding  us  inside
             to see such horrors,  particularly  when  all  we  can  do  is
             document what we see and hope for eventual justice."  (Foreign
             and Commonwealth Office blog, 18 July 2008) [13n]


       10.05      The FCO blog went on to note that:


            "...we feel that our  little  bubble  of  diplomatic  safety  is
             contracting. The state-sponsored papers are loaded with hatred
             every day. We are accused of causing the crisis,  of  ordering
             the MDC to commit murder, of racism. When we  venture  out  of
             the Embassy, we are  treated  as  suspicious  people.  We  are
             questioned and sometimes even threatened. We  feel  reasonably
             confident that the police will do us no harm. But we see ZANU-
             PF militias on the  streets  -  young  thugs  pumped  up  with
             alcohol and drugs..." (Foreign and Commonwealth  Office  blog,
             18 July 2008) [13n]


            Nine days later, the FCO blog noted:


            "Zimbabwe has become a country where you can be snatched on your
             way to work and your body will be found  some  days  later  at
             times. A person walking to  the  neighbourhood  shops  to  buy
             bread can be diverted to a ruling party political rally or  to
             put up campaign posters."  (Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
             blog, 27 June 2008) [13n]


      Mr Walker observed that this  was  not  the  stated  position  of  the
      Foreign Office but comments  by  individuals,  a  so  called  "Foreign
      Office Blog". But it has been considered to be of sufficient relevance
      to warrant inclusion in the COIS report and is further evidence before
      the Tribunal of the escalation and randomness of violence in Zimbabwe.


 173. Other than the evidence of Mr Walker, the Tribunal can look only to Mr
      Kovats' skeleton argument and oral submissions to assess the case  put
      forward by the respondent. In the former, he says:


           "The  respondent  does  not   underestimate   the   difficulties
           currently faced by Zimbabweans.  She accepts both that there has
           been, and continues to be,  appalling  violence  perpetrated  by
           supporters of Mr Mugabe, and  that  the  economic  situation  is
           dire.


           Nevertheless, for the reasons set out in Mr Walker's  statement,
           the Secretary of State submits that failed asylum  seekers  from
           the  United  Kingdom  are  as  such  neither  at  real  risk  of
           persecution nor  at  risk  of  suffering  inhuman  or  degrading
           treatment  which  would  lead  to  the  grant  of   humanitarian
           protection."


 174. This, it is submitted, is because the primary reason for the  violence
      was to enable Mr Mugabe to  claim  victory  in  the  elections.  Those
      elections are now over  and  the  level  of  violence  has  decreased.
      Although millions of Zimbabweans had left, millions  do  remain.  Each
      case, submits Mr Kovats, should be examined on its individual  merits.
      There will be some in the United Kingdom who are in fact supporters of
      Zanu-PF who plainly are not entitled to  the  grant  of  international
      protection.


 175. Mr Kovats emphasised the unpredictability of events in Zimbabwe today.
      The evidence indicated that the level of violence has reduced from the
      level reported in the period leading up to the run-off vote.  But,  in
      our view there is sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the level of
      violence now  taking  place  is  significantly  under  reported  as  a
      consequence of the establishment of no go areas and road blocks by the
      militias that have restricted access to areas where that  violence  is
      taking place.

 176. Similarly, Mr Kovats points to the very recent reports  that  the  ban
      restricting the activities of NGOs activities in the  distribution  of
      food aid, introduced in June of this year, has been lifted.  But  such
      information as is available suggests that this will not  enable  those
      activities to resume unhindered as there are registration requirements
      to be met and on-going obligations upon the NGOs to liaise with  local
      authorities in respect of how they propose to act.

 177. Mr Kovats submitted that the documentary evidence disclosed a range of
      views as to everyday life in Zimbabwe today. But he was able to  refer
      us only to one news report containing a positive response  to  enquiry
      (at page 371 of appellant's bundle B, Tab A):

           "A number of people who fled the village are now back"


           "There are still a few pockets of enmity  here  and  there,  but
           generally, we  are  living  together  as  one  people.  We  have
           forgiven each other as brothers."


      Those comments stand in some isolation from the  very  large  body  of
      reports to the contrary. Indeed, later in  the  very  same  report  is
      found this:


           "Hundreds of MDC officials and supporters have not  returned  to
           their homes fearing retribution from militias loyal to the fist-
           waving president.


           ...


           The MDC spokesperson for Manicaland, Pishai Muchauraya said self
           styled war veterans were still waging a violent campaign against
           his party supporters in the province."

      This does, of course relate to MDC officials and supporters but is  to
      be considered in the context of the clear evidence to the effect  that
      those who seek to support the  regime  in  its  determined  effort  to
      retain power have abandoned any real attempt  to  distinguish  between
      those who are supporters of the opposition and those who are unable to
      demonstrate positive support for Zanu-PF or the Zimbabwean regime.

 178. We were referred also to the Solidarity  Peace  Trust  report  on  the
      elections, which we have mentioned above. Mr Kovats relies  upon  this
      as indication that since the March 2008 first round  voting  there  is
      said to have been a shift in the identification of those  targeted  as
      victims of violence. An analysis of statistics compiled about  victims
      spoken to by SPT led to the conclusion that:


            "This  indicates  a  clear  strategy  of  targeting  leadership
           figures and opinion makers in the wake of the elections.  Sadly,
           families  including  parents  and  children  of  candidates  and
           position holders have not been spared in these attacks."


 179.  Mr  Kovats  referred  us  also  to  a  later  report  from  the  same
      organisation dated 29th July, which is after the date of  the  run-off
      vote. Again, he  submitted  this  was  evidence  of  a  more  specific
      targeting of the violence upon those associated with the MDC and their
      families.  But this is based upon the information available to SPT who
      do not claim to have had access to the areas where many were  excluded
      by the militias and must be considered in the light of the evidence we
      have about the significant underreporting of such events.

  The Legal Test


 180. It is unnecessary to go through an elaborate exercise in definition of
      the standard of proof.  The question is one of real risk. The Court of
      Appeal (AA (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  149)  approved  the
      approach taken by the Tribunal  in AA (Risk for involuntary returnees)
      Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00061:


           "The issue is whether the evidence establishes a real risk.  The
           Appellant does not need to show a  certainty  or  a  probability
           that all failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will  face
           serious ill-treatment upon return. He needs to  show  only  that
           there is a consistent pattern of  such  mistreatment  such  that
           anyone returning in those circumstances faces  a  real  risk  of
           coming to harm even  though  not  everyone  does.  So  is  there
           evidence pointing to  a  substantial  number  of  cases  in  the
           context of general evidence showing that involuntarily  returned
           failed asylum seekers are at real risk  of  being  subjected  to
           serious ill-treatment on that account alone?"


 181. Here, the consistent pattern of mistreatment is not  that  applied  to
      returned failed asylum seekers because, with one  exception,  no  such
      persons have been returned since 2005. Therefore  inferences  must  be
      drawn from the evidence as  a  whole.  As  the  Tribunal  said  in  AA
      (Involuntary returns to Zimbabwe) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00144:


           "... the Appellant needs to establish a real risk to returned
           asylum seekers. He does not need to show that all, or nearly
           all, returned asylum seekers are harmed. He needs only to show
           that all returned asylum seekers are at real risk. He can do
           that, as a matter of logic (and in our judgement as a matter of
           law) by any evidence that properly leads to the conclusion in
           question."
 182. With regard to the assessment of claims under article 3 of  the  ECHR,
      based upon adverse conditions generally, it can be seen  that  similar
      phraseology was approved in NA v UK [2008] ECHR 616.


Additional evidence and submissions following the power sharing agreement.

 183. Despite the doubts and reservations expressed after the signing of the
      Memorandum of Understanding, the talks  that  took  place  between  Mr
      Mugabe and the opposition did result in what has been described  as  a
      power sharing  agreement.  Understandably,  this  was  met  with  high
      expectations for resolution of the problems that have beset  Zimbabwe.
      After all, if that agreement eventually leads to the establishment  of
      a government of national unity, with the MDC playing a full role as an
      equal partner in the government of Zimbabwe, it would be difficult  to
      see how its supporters could be at any continuation of risk.  Further,
      the establishment of such a government, with Mr  Tsvangirai  as  Prime
      Minister, would unlock access to huge monetary and other aid  that  is
      needed to start the process of rebuilding Zimbabwe's shattered economy
      and so improving living conditions for ordinary citizens.


 184.  As we have mentioned, at the resumed hearing on  30th  October  there
      were two further sources of evidence upon which  both  representatives
      made submissions. There was a collection of  news  reports  about  the
      power  sharing  agreement  and  a  number  of  reports  of  interviews
      conducted by Embassy staff in Harare with  organisations  said  to  be
      able to comment upon the situation "on the ground" consequent  to  the
      signing of that agreement on 15th September 2008. We deal  first  with
      the news reports.

 185.  The  first  of  those  was  a  BBC  news  report  of  15th  September
      headed:"Zimbabwe rivals in historic pact":

           "Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe has signed a historic power-
           sharing deal with his long time rival, opposition leader  Morgan
           Tsvangirai.


           ...


           Mr Tsvangirai said the agreement  provided  the  best  hope  for
           Zimbabwe and called on President  Mugabe  to  work  together  to
           implement the deal.


           And President Mugabe said the leaders would have  to  "walk  the
           same route".


 186. But in addressing the large audience before  whom  the  agreement  had
      been signed President Mugabe said this:


           "... frontline states against  colonialism  in  the  region  had
           helped Zimbabwe gain independence, and now they  had  helped  to
           confront problems caused by a former colonial power - Britain  -
           wishing to continue to interfere in its affairs."


 187.  In view of what he had been saying throughout the  election  campaign
      about the MDC being puppets of the West,  that  was  not  a  promising
      start. It soon became clear that the agreement, which has  been  since
      widely criticised for having left too much unresolved, did not provide
      a clear framework for delivering the actual division of power.


 188. We have explained above why we find that it  is  the  JOC  and  senior
      military  and  police  officers  who  were  largely  responsible   for
      unleashing the recent abuses, because  they  feared  that,  unlike  Mr
      Mugabe who was likely to be granted  immunity  from  any  prosecution,
      they would be at risk of precisely that should  the  MDC  acquire  any
      real power. This much is made clear from the  evidence  we  have  from
      many informed sources.  See,  for  example,  what  we  say  about  the
      evidence of Mr Mbanga at paragraphs 55 and 194 of this  determination;
      Mr  Makuvise  at  paragraph  62;  Witness  66  at  paragraph  86;  the
      Solidarity Peace Trust report considered at  paragraph  127.  And  the
      British government has made clear its view that those responsible  for
      the violence in Zimbabwe should be called to  account:  see  paragraph
      136. Those concerns were shown to be well founded by the reports  that
      followed. For example in a BBC report published just  two  days  after
      the agreement was signed, under a headline  "Zimbabwe  victims  demand
      justice" we see this:

           "As the deal was announced last week, Zimbabwe's  long-suffering
           civil society and the Human Rights Forum put out a statement  of
           demands.  These demands included:


           No amnesty for: (a) crimes against humanity, torture  and  other
           international crimes (b) rape and other sexual based crimes  (c)
           corruption and other crimes of greed


           No extinguishing of civil claims against the perpetrators or the
           state.  No guarantee of job security for those found responsible
           for gross human rights violations and corruption."

 189.  In a BBC report dated  18th  September,  under  a  headline  "Deal  a
      humiliation,  says  Mugabe"  Mr  Mugabe  is  quoted  as  saying   when
      addressing a Zanu-PF meeting:


           "If we hadn't blundered in the March elections  we  wouldn't  be
           facing this humiliation."

      making clear his view that the elections could and should, if properly
      managed, have delivered a different result. This, in our view, is very
      relevant to how Zanu-PF would approach any future elections.


 190.  On 24th September  a Voice of America news item  reported that:


           "Political violence is on the rise again in Zimbabwe despite the
           signature less than two weeks ago of an agreement to establish a
           unity government in which power would  be  shared  by  the  long
           ruling ZANU-PF party of President Robert Mugabe and the Movement
           for Democratic  Change,  now  in  majority  in  Parliament,  MDC
           officials said.
           ...


           Some of that violence has been taking place in Mbare, a populous
           Harare suburb where according to MDC sources  some  61  families
           were attacked by ZANU-PF militia members in full view of  police
           at the Matapi station, who took no action.
           ...


           Witnesses said two truckloads of ZANU-PF militia  including  the
           notorious Chipango gang  associated  with  ZANU-PF  invaded  the
           police station singing songs  denouncing  the  MDC  and  beating
           party members while the police passively looked on."

      And in an Independent on line report of 25th September a  spokesperson
      for the National Constitutional Assembly, a forum for  trades  unions,
      NGOs and church organisations, said that  he  feared  that  the  power
      sharing agreement was designed simply to absorb the MDC rather than to
      share power with it:

           "We will be happy if it fails.  The people were running Mugabe's
           torture camps in the June election are now the same ones who are
           explaining the agreement to people in the rural areas.


           "They are saying it gobbles the MDC up into Zanu-PF," he added.
           ...


           MDC  spokesperson  Nelson  Chamisa  said  on   Wednesday   night
           political violence was continuing in some parts of the  country.
           He gave details of three separate incidents, and added  that  no
           arrests had been made despite reports to the  police.   "Zanu-PF
           torture bases are still operational in Mbare and other parts  of
           the country, but the police are not doing anything to  dismantle
           them."


 191. Reports continued to emerge to the  effect  that  there  was  no  real
      chance that the agreement would result in a genuine sharing  of  power
      in a government of national unity. A Times on  line  article  of  26th
      September said:


           "Mr Mugabe and his party have shown contempt for the  deal  from
           the outset.  In a televised speech  the  octogenarian  President
           insisted that Zanu (PF) remained in the driving seat  and  would
           not tolerate any nonsense from our new partners."


 192.  MDC spokespersons, party secretary Mr Dube complained that:


           "Torture camps run by Zanu-PF are still operational and there is
           no concealment."

      And other news articles published after the  power  sharing  agreement
      was signed indicated that far from ceding any  power,  representatives
      of Zanu-PF were seeking to dilute such positions of influence  as  had
      been won by  the  MDC.  There  were  reports  that  "special  interest
      representatives" nominated by Zanu-PF, with full voting  rights,  were
      placed on councils control of which had been won by  the  MDC  at  the
      local elections.

 193. As time went on it became apparent that Mr Mugabe  had  allocated  all
      key ministries to Zanu-PF and, in particular, had retained control  of
      both the army and the interior ministry and so control of the  police.
      This led to  the  MDC  spokesperson  saying  on  1st  October  of  the
      continuing talks:


           "At the end of the meeting it emerged we are still poles  apart,
           with  Zanu-PF  insisting  on  taking  all  the  key  ministries,
           literally rendering the opposition peripheral in government,  in
           fact a situation where we would be in but out of government."


 194.  The Tribunal has had regard also to an article  written  by  Mr  Wilf
      Mbanga, published on 13th October 2008:


           "Despite  the  country  collapsing  around  him   and   millions
           suffering from hunger and disease, there is method  in  Mugabe's
           madness.  He is positioning himself  for  the  next  election  -
           determined to reverse  his  humiliation  at  the  hands  of  the
           electorate on March 29.  He will never forgive  Zimbabweans  for
           rejecting him.


           This is why he has insisted on retaining control  of  the  power
           ministries, while giving MDC the service ministries.   He  needs
           the police and the army, home affairs and defence ministries, to
           seal off the rural  areas,  disrupt  the  MDC's  activities  and
           thrash and threaten its supporters.  In addition,  home  affairs
           is responsible for the conduct of  elections.   He  needs  local
           government to retain control of the  chiefs  and  keep  them  on
           side.  He needs information to maintain his stranglehold on  the
           media, keeping people in the dark - as  is  the  wont  of  every
           dictator. ...


           His henchmen, the military chiefs, have  a  particularly  vested
           interest in keeping control over the police -  most, if not all,
           of them  could  and  certainly  would  be  arrested  in  an  MDC
           controlled police force on a wide range of charges, from  crimes
           against humanity to theft and corruption."

      Furthermore, as Mr Tsvangirai is reported to have told supporters at a
      rally in Harare on 12th October that he would not be part  of  a  deal
      that did not give the  MDC  control  of  both  the  Finance  and  Home
      Ministries it is hard to see where there is room for compromise.


 195. It can be seen from this material that Mr Mugabe  and  his  supporters
      appear determined to retain control of the instruments used previously
      to deliver the "right" result at any future elections. And the  recent
      news  reports  indicate  that  such   elections   may   well   be   in
      contemplation. This is for two reasons. First there are now six vacant
      seats in Parliament. There is  said  to  be  provision  in  the  power
      sharing agreement for  continuity  in  that  where  a  by-election  is
      necessary only the party holding the seat that  becomes  vacant  would
      put up a candidate. But even if that provision were honoured, it would
      apply to only three of the six seats and, in view  of  the  very  slim
      majority that is presently held by  the  combined  MDC  factions  when
      voting together it is not hard to  see  the  importance  of  any  such
      elections.


 196. Secondly, as it has become increasingly clear that the  power  sharing
      agreement is unable on its own to produce a national unity  government
      acceptable to all concerned there have been calls for fresh  elections
      generally. We refer to a  BBC report headed "MDC seeks  new  election"
      published on 21st October:



           "New polls are "the only way forward", Movement  for  Democratic
           change spokesman Nelson Chamisa told the BBC.


           Neighbouring Botswana has also called for new elections, after a
           regional summit on Zimbabwe was postponed.
           ...


           At a summit in Swaziland to discuss the deadlocked power-sharing
           agreement was postponed for a week after the MDC  insisted  that
           its leader Morgan Tsvangirai be granted a passport."


 197.  Drawing all this together, considered in the context of the  evidence
      as a whole, we conclude that the agreement signed on 15th September in
      Harare has not resulted in the Mugabe regime ceding any real power  to
      the MDC.


 198. Of course it always remains possible that the worsening chaos  of  the
      Zimbabwean economy and the pressure from the international  community,
      which stands ready to pump massive aid into the country but not  until
      there is real change, will bring about just that. But we have to reach
      our conclusions upon the basis of the evidence that  is  available  to
      us. That evidence leads us to find that the  power  sharing  agreement
      signed on 15th September has not resulted in any significant change in
      the political situation in Zimbabwe and that the real intention of the
      regime appears to be to claw back control of parliament and to  retain
      the presidency by keeping in place and by continuing to  exercise  the
      militias and party machinery that were deployed  following  the  March
      elections.


 199. We consider next the new evidence introduced by Mr Walker.  We  should
      say that Mr Henderson submitted with some vigour  that  this  material
      should not be admitted. He gave a number of reasons for excluding this
      evidence. It was served late and those instructing him had just  three
      working days to consider a response, which was  insufficient  to  make
      the sort of enquiries of the organisations concerned in Zimbabwe  that
      were carried out last time such questionnaires were relied upon in the
      previous Zimbabwe country guidance litigation. Two of  the  informants
      were anonymous and so no assessment  of  their  reliability  could  be
      made. The subject covered by this evidence took it outside  the  scope
      of the direction made by the Tribunal limiting any further evidence to
      the issue of the power sharing agreement.

 200. We decided to admit this material but in doing so recognise  all  that
      Mr Henderson says and agree with his submission that those concerns go
      to the weight to be  given  to  this  evidence.  But  we  do  find  it
      difficult to understand why he seeks to diminish the relevance of this
      material  because,  in  our  view,  it  is  largely  helpful  to   the
      appellant's case in any event. Our ultimate concern must  be  to  base
      our assessment on as full a picture of events in Zimbabwe as possible,
      within the constraints of the procedures we have adopted.

 201.  As we have indicated above, the point of this evidence is said to  be
      that, whereas the press reports we  have  just  examined  are  largely
      concerned  with  the  political  situation,  this  material   collects
      together the views of people or organisations working in Zimbabwe  who
      are in a position to comment upon the situation  "on  the  ground"  in
      Zimbabwe today. As the  interviews  were  conducted  after  the  power
      sharing agreement was signed  any  effects  of  that  agreement  might
      reasonably be expected to be reflected in those interviews. Mr  Kovats
      submits that three things can be drawn from the new material:

        a. There has been a reduction in the level of violence in  Zimbabwe
           since the time of the run off poll;
        b. Although it  is  accepted  that  food  aid  distributed  by  the
           government of Zimbabwe is used as a political  tool  to  advance
           its own agenda, that distributed  by  NGOs  is  not  subject  to
           political discrimination;
        c. The political situation could change rapidly. As Mr Kovats  puts
           it: Zimbabwe is holding its breath.

 202.  It is correct  to  say  that  the  level  of  reported  human  rights
      violations has reduced since the height of  the  violence  during  the
      period leading up to and immediately after the run off vote.  But  the
      militias and Zanu-PF groups, encouraged by state agents,  have  sealed
      off the areas in which the have focused their attentions  and  we  are
      satisfied that has been done specifically to prevent access  by  those
      who would report such events. It is  also  correct  to  say  that  the
      absolute ban upon NGOs' food relief programs has been lifted but it is
      clear also that these organisations do not in  general  have  anything
      approaching the freedom they need to carry out these aid operations as
      they would wish. There is evidence  before  us  that  one  reason  for
      limiting the scope of these aid operations is to  restrict  access  to
      areas in which abuses continue to be perpetrated by those  seeking  to
      maintain the current regime in power.


 203. Turning to the interview summaries themselves, we find  there  further
      evidence to support, rather than to diminish,  the  concerns  we  have
      expressed above. Some of the interview summaries express more positive
      assessments than others but they include the following:

      The European Commission:


           "Currently there are very few (if any) gross violations of human
           rights in terms of assaults,  murders  etc  but  the  threat  of
           repetition of this  violence  remains.  Perpetrators  are  still
           deployed to rural areas and there  is  an  atmosphere  of  fear,
           intimidation and mistrust."


           "The police .... Have  not  generally  taken  steps  to  protect
           victims... In some  cases  the  police  have  been  perpetrators
           themselves."


           "... It is likely to be very difficult for [voluntary  returnees
           from  the  United  Kingdom]  to  return  to  their  communities,
           particularly in the rural areas. The environment  remains  quite
           tense, and there is likely  to  be  suspicion  about  returnees'
           political affiliation. It is likely  that  they  would  find  it
           harder than others to get access to food and services."

      Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum:


           "the police are not doing anything to protect  the  victims  and
           have even been perpetrators themselves.


           We have regular reports of discrimination on  the  part  of  the
           government in distributing aid.


           Returnees  would  come  back  to  a  situation  of  uncertainty,
           economic disaster, hunger and poverty.  They would not  be  able
           to rely on social or health or education services,  unless  they
           could afford to go privately.  The local authorities are  likely
           to be suspicious of them, just by the fact of having been to the
           UK.  They might well be labelled sell-outs  or  MDC  supporters.
           They would be disadvantaged if they tried to get access  to  GMB
           food,  land  or  BACOSSI  distributions.   In   certain   areas,
           depending on the profile/activism of the returnee and the  local
           presence of Zanu-PF supporters/youth militia, they might  be  at
           risk of physical harm.  Returning to  urban  areas  is  probably
           safer than to rural areas.   It  is  hard  to  predict  how  the
           central authorities  would  react  -  some  returnees  might  be
           welcomed back to prove that the government is reformed and ready
           to welcome back its citizens.  Others might be arrested."

      Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights:


           "Overtly, there has been a reduction in the  level  of  violence
           compared to the electoral period, but this might  give  a  false
           picture because many of the internally displaced people have not
           yet returned home.  In addition, the structures of state control
           remain in place.  After the signing of the  deal  there  was  an
           easing of the situation but in the last couple of weeks, we have
           seen  authorities  returning  to  their  usual   attitudes   and
           behaviour."


      Witness 4 of Source D:

           "There are  signs  of  hate  speech  starting  again  e.g.  over
           sanctions and MDC being puppets of the West.  And in rural areas
           things are still tense.  The deal has not changed  realities  on
           the ground.  Some of the celebrations over the  signing  of  the
           power-sharing  agreement  were  broken  up.   People  are  still
           fearful and suspicious, and afraid of retribution if  they  show
           support for MDC.  An MDC event in Makoni  to  explain  what  was
           happening was disrupted by soldiers, who wanted to  make  people
           attend a rival ZANU-PF meeting."

      Source R:

           "[Source R] continues to get reports of beatings and torture  of
           MDC supporters around the country e.g. 15 people were treated in
           Buhera, Manicaland on 1  October.   Structures  of  control  and
           intimidation are still in place (made up of army, war vets,  CIO
           and rogue elements of the police) but the  bases/structures  are
           more active in some places than others.  In some areas, the ZANU
           PF activists are telling the MDC to forget the agreement, as  it
           will not be implemented.  In addition there is a purge  exercise
           going on among ZANU PF local structures to  ensure  only  Mugabe
           loyalists attend the Congress in December."

  General Conclusions


 204. The history of Zimbabwe demonstrates that Robert Mugabe and  those  he
      looks to in order  to  support  his  regime  have  consistently  acted
      ruthlessly to suppress all effective opposition. As recognised in  SM,
      those identified as active opponents of the regime  or  supporters  of
      the MDC have been at real risk of violent retribution from  agents  of
      the state, both formal in the sense of the  police  and  the  security
      services and informal as characterised by the so called  War  Veterans
      (although many of those calling themselves such are not) and the youth
      militias. Persons targeted have not been simply those in positions  or
      leadership. Even what are described as low level members or supporters
      of the MDC have been at risk when identified as such by  those  tasked
      with suppressing opposition to the regime.


 205. The Tribunal found in HS that the  well  resourced,  professional  and
      sophisticated intelligence service that is the CIO would  distinguish,
      when dealing  with  those  returning  as  deportees  from  the  United
      Kingdom, between those deportees in whom there was some reason to have
      interest and those who were of no  adverse  interest  simply  on  that
      account. This was an  intelligence  led  process  informed  by  record
      keeping in Zimbabwe and information from operatives sent to the United
      Kingdom to infiltrate MDC groups active  there.  The  risk  categories
      were clearly identified and there was evidence that those not  falling
      into such were able, generally, to pass through  the  airport  without
      real difficulty.

 206. There can be no doubt that those  falling  into  the  risk  categories
      identified and reaffirmed in HS  continue  to  face  a  real  risk  of
      persecutory ill-treatment on return.

 207. The fresh evidence now before the Tribunal demonstrates  clearly  that
      there has been a major shift in the respective  roles  of  the  formal
      agents of the state, such as the army, the police and the CIO  on  the
      one hand and on the other  the  less  formal  representatives  of  the
      regime deployed in the form of the so  called  "War  Veterans",  youth
      militias and the groups of people who simply regard themselves as Zanu-
      PF supporters.

 208. There can be little doubt either that Mr Mugabe expected to  win  both
      the parliamentary and the presidential elections in March 2008.  Given
      the political history, there can be no other credible explanation  for
      the relatively peaceful pre-election period and the fact that the  MDC
      was able to campaign relatively freely. The reasons for such misplaced
      confidence were based upon the harsh brutality used against  opponents
      at previous elections and the belief  that  the  electorate  had  been
      "tamed".

 209. Because the voting results were displayed outside each polling station
      there was a limit to the extent to which the vote could be rigged. The
      parliamentary vote was announced, leaving Zanu-PF without  a  majority
      for the first time since independence. In  the  weeks  of  delay  that
      followed the presidential  vote  was  "massaged"  but  this  could  be
      achieved only to the extent that Mr Tsvangirai was denied the outright
      victory he claimed to have secured, so as to require a run-off vote.

 210. The evidence demonstrates also, and this is  of  significance  to  our
      findings, that Mr Mugabe considered accepting the outcome of the first
      round but was persuaded not to by those who stood behind him  such  as
      the commanders of the JOC and senior representatives of  the  CIO  who
      are also members of the JOC.  They feared that  should  the  MDC  take
      power they would  themselves  be  called  to  account  for  their  own
      misdeeds without the protection of the amnesty that would be  expected
      to be made available to Mr Mugabe. We are satisfied that it was  these
      officers who  promised  to  deliver  the  second  round  vote  in  the
      presidential elections  to Mr Mugabe and it is they  who  orchestrated
      what followed.

 211. The aim was to delay the run-off until the opposition  vote  had  been
      annihilated. How this was sought to be achieved is set out  in  detail
      above, in our consideration of the evidence. The  fresh  evidence  now
      before the Tribunal demonstrates clearly that there has been  a  major
      shift in the way in which the formal agents of the state, such as  the
      army, police and CIO deployed the less formal representatives  of  the
      regime in the form of the so called "War Veterans", youth militias  or
      "green bombers" and groups of youths who simply regard  themselves  as
      Zanu-PF supporters.


 212.  This  change  in  the  approach  of  the  Zimbabwean  regime  in  its
      determination to suppress dissent and preserve  its  authority  echoed
      the state sponsored displacement of hundreds of  thousands  of  people
      known as Operation Murambatsvina. President Mugabe, or those acting on
      his behalf, recognised that support for the MDC was centred in certain
      urban areas and so reasoned that within those communities were  to  be
      found  significant  numbers  of  MDC  supporters  or,   perhaps   more
      accurately, significant numbers of people who, given the  opportunity,
      were likely to vote for the MDC in any election that was held, even if
      they engaged in no  activities  such  as  to  identify  themselves  as
      supporters of the MDC. Thus the target of the operation was not simply
      those identified as opposition supporters but whole communities within
      which such people might reasonably expected to be found.

 213. But now the operation to ensure a Zanu-PF victory in the run-off  vote
      was delivered to its target not principally by  soldiers,  police  and
      CIO officers but by the youth  militias  and  the  War  Veterans.  The
      evidence indicates  that  these  groups  were  directed  as  to  their
      establishment in camps in the rural  areas  and  bases  in  the  urban
      districts by the formal agents of state but,  once  established,  were
      left to carry out their task as they saw fit.

 214. It has been said that these  groups  were  motivated  by  promises  of
      payment for seeing off any chance of a real challenge by the  MDC  and
      that as no such payment has been forthcoming they  are  now  rewarding
      themselves by looting. The evidence does not clearly establish whether
      that is so or whether the motivation was and continues to  be  support
      for Zanu-PF or indoctrination  against  the  opposition,  said  to  be
      puppets of the former colonial masters who were now seeking to rob the
      nation of hard won independence.


 215.  What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  it  has  been  established   by
      overwhelming evidence that in  deploying  these  militias  the  regime
      unleashed against its own citizens a  vicious  campaign  of  violence,
      murder, destruction, rape and displacement  designed  to  ensure  that
      there remains of the MDC nothing capable of mounting  a  challenge  to
      the continued authority of the ruling party.


 216.  This  campaign  has  been  rolled  out  across  the  country  not  by
      disciplined state forces but by the loose collection of  undisciplined
      militias who have delivered  a  quite  astonishingly  brutal  wave  of
      violence to whole communities thought to bear responsibility  for  the
      "wrong" outcome of the March 2008 poll. It  is  precisely  because  of
      that that any attempt to target specifically those who have chosen  to
      involve themselves with the MDC has  been  abandoned.    In  our  view
      there can be no doubt at all from the evidence now before the Tribunal
      that those at risk are not simply those who are seen to be  supporters
      of the MDC but anyone who cannot demonstrate positive support for Zanu-
      PF or alignment with the regime.

 217. We are reinforced in that conclusion by the  reports  that  even  some
      Zanu-PF supporters have  suffered  beatings  when  confronted  by  the
      militias and when they have been unable to demonstrate their loyalty.

 218. The evidence demonstrates  also,  in  our  view  clearly  and  without
      ambiguity, that the aim of the violence was not limited to  delivering
      for Mr Mugabe victory in the run-off vote, but to ensure that the  MDC
      support base was sufficiently dismantled as to ensure that  it  ceased
      to exist in any meaningful way as to remain a threat to Zanu-PF's hold
      on power. That explains why, notwithstanding the  talks  taking  place
      following the Memorandum  of  Understanding  and  the  fact  that  the
      elections are, for now at least, concluded,  the  violence  continues.
      Although this violence is not at the levels seen during the summer  of
      this year, everything remains in place for it to be  repeated,  should
      the regime deem this necessary.

 219. We are satisfied also that the militias have established no  go  areas
      and road blocks to ensure that abuses that  continue  in  rural  areas
      where the MDC had made inroads into the  Zanu-PF  vote  go  unreported
      wherever possible and so that displaced  people  are  not  allowed  to
      return to their home areas.

 220. For these reasons we do not see that there can be said to be an end in
      sight to  the  real  risk  of  violence  being  perpetrated  on  those
      identified as disloyal  to  the  regime  and  therefore  as  potential
      supporters of the MDC.

 221. As we have  seen, by the time  the  hearing  was  reconvened  on  30th
      October such a power sharing agreement had been reached but,  for  the
      reasons given above, that has not led us  to  a  different  conclusion
      from that we reached at the  conclusion  of  the  first  part  of  the
      hearing when we initially reserved our decision.

 222.  Even though a form of agreement has now been reached in these  talks,
      it remains to be seen whether that will bring about any  reduction  in
      the level of risk to those not able to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF.
      After all, the Memorandum of  Understanding  that  was  signed  by  Mr
      Mugabe on behalf of his party  and  the  regime  contained  assurances
      about the cessation of politically related violence but that  has  not
      been delivered. It is not readily apparent how the  militias  and  War
      Veterans who have been meting out violence would be disbanded  without
      genuine commitment by Mr Mugabe  and  his  senior  supporters  to  the
      sharing of power. It is evident from  the  failure  to  implement  the
      power sharing agreement that no such intention presently exists.

 223. For these  reasons  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  power  sharing
      agreement has given rise in itself to any significant  change  on  the
      ground in Zimbabwe, so far  as  international  protection  issues  are
      concerned. There is, moreover,  no  evidence  to  show  that,  in  the
      absence  of  more  effective  foreign  political  or  other  political
      pressure, the position is likely to change spontaneously.

 224. A number of questions need to be addressed:

        a. On the basis of the current evidence, what is the extent of  the
           category of persons at risk in Zimbabwe today?
        b. Is a failed asylum seeker returning from the United  Kingdom  at
           risk on that account alone?
        c. Does that risk arise equally in the returnee's home area and  in
           a place of re-establishment within Zimbabwe where he or  she  is
           not previously known?
        d. Does the returnee face a real risk of persecution or  article  3
           ill-treatment on return to Harare airport (or any other airport)
           at the hands of immigration  officers,  CIO  officers  or  other
           "formal" state agents?
        e. Do country conditions in themselves give rise  to  a  real  risk
           that a returnee will have to  live  in  conditions  sufficiently
           poor as to infringe article 3?

 225. The answer to the first of those questions will be apparent from  what
      we have said above. A person who is unable to demonstrate that he is a
      member or supporter of Zanu-PF or otherwise  loyal  to  or  associated
      with the regime when asked to do so  by  any  of  the  various  groups
      deployed across the country by the Zimbabwean regime to  maintain  its
      authority and hold on power will be at real risk of being subjected to
      ill-treatment amounting to persecution and serious  harm  such  as  to
      infringe article 3 of the ECHR.


 226. That risk arises throughout the  country,  in  both  urban  and  rural
      areas. A person may be faced with the need to demonstrate such loyalty
      to the ruling party in varying circumstances. The youth militias, "War
      Veterans" and other groups put together under  the  direction  of  the
      state authorities have  established  camps  or  bases  throughout  the
      country from which they operate. Although the evidence  suggests  that
      some of those camps or bases have closed down after the run  off  vote
      in July of this year it is plain that many remain and that they are to
      be found throughout  the  country  in  both  rural  and  urban  areas.
      Ordinary Zimbabwean citizens may encounter these groups at road blocks
      set up to establish no go areas or simply when at home as the militias
      move into areas thought to harbour MDC support.

 227. The means by which loyalty to the regime may be demonstrated will vary
      depending upon who is demanding it.  Production of a Zanu-PF  card  is
      likely to suffice where  an  individual  is  confronted  with  such  a
      demand, for example at a road block. But even that may not protect the
      holder from serious harm in rural areas where the adverse interest  is
      in the community as a whole because the area is one in which  the  MDC
      made inroads in the Zanu-PF vote at the March 2008 elections.

 228. People living in high density urban areas will face the same risk from
      marauding gangs of militias or War Veterans as do those living in  the
      rural areas, save that the latter are  possibly  at  greater  risk  if
      their area has been designated as a no go area by the militias.

 229. The evidence suggests that those  living  in  the  more  affluent  low
      density urban areas or suburbs are likely to avoid such  difficulties,
      the relative security of  their  homes  and  their  personal  security
      arrangements being sufficient to keep out speculative visits. Many  of
      those with the means to occupy such residences are in  general  likely
      to be associated with the regime and so not a target on the  basis  of
      doubted loyalty. Others may enjoy such a lifestyle as a  result  of  a
      more circumspect relationship with the regime falling short of  actual
      association,  but  which  is,  nevertheless,  such  as  to  give   the
      appearance of loyalty.

 230. It remains the position, in our judgement, that a person returning  to
      his home area from the United Kingdom as a failed asylum  seeker  will
      not generally be at risk on that account alone, although in some cases
      that may in fact be sufficient to give rise to a real risk. Each  case
      will turn on its own facts and the  particular  circumstances  of  the
      individual are to be assessed as a whole. If such a person (and as  we
      explain below there may be a not  insignificant  number)  is  in  fact
      associated with the regime or is  otherwise  a  person  who  would  be
      returning to a milieu where loyalty to the regime is assumed, he  will
      not be at any real risk simply because he has spent time in the United
      Kingdom and sought to extend his stay by making a false asylum claim.

 231. But, apart from in those circumstances, having  made  an  unsuccessful
      asylum claim in the United Kingdom will make it very difficult for the
      returnee to demonstrate the loyalty to the regime and the ruling party
      necessary to avoid the risk of serious harm at the hands  of  the  War
      Veterans or militias that are likely to be encountered either  on  the
      way to the home area or after having returned there. This is  because,
      even if such a person is not returning to one of the areas where  risk
      arises simply  from  being  resident  there,  he  will  be  unable  to
      demonstrate that he voted for Zanu-PF and so he may be assumed to be a
      supporter of the opposition, that being sufficient to give rise  to  a
      real risk of being subjected to  ill-treatment  such  as  to  infringe
      article 3.

 232. And, regardless of  the  political  opinion  or  associations  of  the
      individual, or the absence of any at all, the persecution involved  in
      the infliction of such ill-treatment will be for a  reason  recognised
      by the Convention. This is because it is inflicted  on  the  basis  of
      imputed political opinion.

 233. In our view the level of risk is not  reduced  by  the  failed  asylum
      seeker returning not to his home area  but  to  another  area  instead
      where he is unknown. As a newcomer to  the  area,  he  would  be  very
      likely to encounter enquiries from those representatives of the regime
      in control of the area as to his background, history and associations.
      In such an area the same risk arises of being faced with a  demand  to
      demonstrate loyalty to the ruling party and it may be that  the  level
      of risk is perhaps enhanced because, as a newcomer, he  would  attract
      interest as to his background and suspicion of having  been  displaced
      already on account of being  found  to  be  disloyal  or  a  potential
      supporter of the opposition to the regime.

 234. For these reasons, a person not able to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF
      or with the regime in some form or other will be at real  risk  having
      returned  to  Zimbabwe  from  the  United  Kingdom  having   made   an
      unsuccessful asylum claim. That will be regardless of the mechanics of
      his return. Those with whom he would have to deal in his home area  or
      other place of relocation would be concerned, once he  had  failed  to
      demonstrate any links with Zanu-PF, not with the method  by  which  he
      had been returned from the United Kingdom but  simply  with  the  fact
      that his having made an asylum claim here demonstrated  him  to  be  a
      disloyal person who had not supported the party in the  elections  and
      as a potential supporter of the MDC.

 235. The risk on return to the  airport,  during  the  process  of  passing
      through immigration control, is a different matter and can be assessed
      as a discrete issue. The Tribunal explained in HS why a failed  asylum
      seeker would not be at risk at the  airport  on  that  account  alone.
      There is no evidence before us as to how  failed  asylum  seekers  are
      treated at the airport because removals of such persons have not  been
      taking place for some years.  There  is  a  distinction  to  be  drawn
      between how a returnee would be treated at the airport and the  likely
      reception in his area of residence because in the former case he would
      be dealt with by the "official" or "formal" agents of the state rather
      than the War Veterans and youth militias he would have to deal with in
      his home area.

 236. No fresh evidence has been put before  us  as  to  procedures  at  the
      airport and  there  is  insufficient  reason  to  suppose  that  those
      procedures have changed since the position as it was found to be in HS
      other  than  that  the  resources  available  to  those  charged  with
      monitoring movements through the airport must be seen to be under  the
      same pressures of hyperinflation as affect all other public  services.
      It must be assumed that failed asylum seekers returned from the United
      Kingdom, whether escorted or not and whether or not holding their  own
      travel documents, would be identifiable as such  by  the  CIO  at  the
      airport. This is because they will be identifiable as  deportees  from
      the passenger manifest and are  not  expected  to  lie  if  asked  the
      reasons for their return.

 237. Unlike the untrained and ill-disciplined mobs that  make  up  the  War
      Veterans and youth militias who have been motivated by  the  political
      rhetoric and extravagant rantings against  the  MDC  and  its  alleged
      association with the United Kingdom, as we have discussed  above,  the
      CIO is, as  the  Tribunal  has  observed,  a  well  trained  and  well
      resourced professional intelligence organisation. It is true that  the
      CIO has been involved also  with  the  deployment  of  those  militias
      across the country and so is closely involved  with  the  strategy  of
      seeking out for ill-treatment not simply perceived supporters  of  the
      MDC but all those who might not be able to demonstrate support for the
      regime. But that simply reinforces the distinction to be drawn between
      the two. We referred above to the evidence of Witness 2 who noted that
      distinction also, saying:

           "The militia inflicting the violence locally are very brutal and
           very unsophisticated although they are directed by sophisticated
           people."

      W2 spoke also of the irrationality of the militias, not importing that
      characteristic to the CIO and others who directed them.


 238.  We have, then, a very large body of compelling evidence of  the  risk
      to those returning from  the  United  Kingdom  after  having  made  an
      unsuccessful asylum claim at the hands of the militias,  War  Veterans
      and Zanu-PF groups to be encountered in Zimbabwe,  if  such  returnees
      are unable to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF or  to  the  regime.  But
      there is no evidence at all that there has  been  any  change  of  the
      approach taken at the airport by those monitoring  arrivals  from  the
      United Kingdom.


 239. There is good reason to explain why the violence has been directed  at
      a wider category of persons in and around the country: to ensure  that
      the less sophisticated groups tasked with doing so will catch  up  all
      those who are to be targeted. But that does not support the suggestion
      that therefore a broader category of persons would be targeted at  the
      airport as well. Indeed, as the CIO has been instrumental  in  putting
      in place the mechanisms for ensuring that newcomers to an area will be
      subject to much more careful and rigorous scrutiny than before,  there
      is no reason to suppose that any purpose has been seen in changing the
      arrangements at the airport.

 240. Drawing all this  together  we  see  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
      conclusions reached in HS about risk on return while  passing  through
      the airport. The  CIO  would  have  adverse  interest  only  in  those
      deportees about whom something was known as to bring them  within  the
      risk categories identified in HS.

 241. But having passed through the airport without any real difficulty,  as
      will be the case for very many deportees about whom there  is  nothing
      known to excite the interest  of  the  CIO,  we  recognise  that  many
      returnees will experience very real  difficulty  upon  return  to  the
      areas of residence or other relocation.  That does  not  mean  that  a
      bare assertion of Zimbabwean nationality and the claimed inability  to
      demonstrate ZANU-PF membership  or  loyalty  to  the  regime  will  be
      sufficient to establish a right to be recognised as a refugee.

 242. The evidence upon which this decision is based is mostly in the public
      domain and so is available to be  placed  before  the  authorities  in
      other countries as well as in the United Kingdom.  We  are  told  that
      some  four  million  Zimbabweans  have  left  that  country  to   live
      elsewhere. If a person is able to do so and now travels to the  United
      Kingdom to claim asylum here he will need to explain  why,  if  he  is
      indeed a refugee, he did not  seek  international  protection  in  the
      country to which he had fled initially: see section  8(4)  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.  Similar  issues
      may arise under section 8(5) or (6).

 243. And it may be difficult to  reconcile  the  nature  and  cost  of  the
      journey to the United Kingdom with the economic deprivations  suffered
      by many Zimbabweans in their  country  of  nationality  or  subsequent
      place of residence. That may raise questions  as  to  whether  such  a
      claimant was in fact aligned with or otherwise viewed as loyal to  the
      regime so as to be able to  avoid  the  consequences  of  the  chaotic
      disarray in the economy that other Zimbabweans have had to deal  with,
      so as to preserve the means to finance such a journey. As can be  seen
      from the discussion below, the economic  conditions  under  which  the
      majority of Zimbabweans other than those favoured by  the  regime  are
      stark. Most ordinary Zimbabweans not prospering under the patronage of
      the  regime  have  very  little  left  in  the  way  of  resources  or
      possessions.


 244. What this means is that each case will turn on its own  facts.  We  do
      not say that most Zimbabwean claimants will be unable  to  demonstrate
      the loyalty to  the  regime  that  will  be  necessary  to  avoid  the
      persecutory ill-treatment meted out to those who cannot. The  evidence
      indicates that there are large numbers of Zimbabweans who are  members
      or supporters of Zanu-PF or who voted for that party at the elections,
      whether that was because of expedience or genuine support for the aims
      and objectives of the party.

 245. Many such persons will no doubt have contemplated migration to  escape
      the economic catastrophe of their country, even if  because  of  their
      demonstrated support for the  party  they  have  had  access  to  some
      services such as the food aid that has been denied to  others.  Whilst
      it is entirely understandable that in  such  dire  circumstances  many
      should seek economic opportunities abroad, that does not give rise  to
      a sound claim to be in need of international protection.

 246. So, this will be a question of fact to be resolved in each case.  This
      may come down to a simple assessment of credibility.  But  immigration
      judges are well accustomed to making such judgements. An appellant who
      has been found not to be a witness of truth in respect of the  factual
      basis of his claim will not  be  assumed  to  be  truthful  about  his
      inability to demonstrate loyalty  to  the  regime  simply  because  he
      asserts that. The  burden  remains  on  the  appellant  throughout  to
      establish the facts upon which he seeks to rely.

 247. But care must be taken in respect of such an appellant who has  chosen
      to put forward a wholly untruthful account in support  of  his  claim.
      The standard of proof he must meet is not  a  demanding  one.  As  was
      pointed out in GM & YT (Eritrea) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  833,  per
      Buxton LJ at paragraph 31:

           "In every case it is still necessary to  consider,  despite  the
           failure of the applicant to help himself by giving a true or any
           account of his own experiences, whether there  is  a  reasonable
           likelihood of persecution on return."

Country conditions and article 3 of the ECHR.

 248. We consider next whether the general country conditions  in  Zimbabwe,
      which are accepted to have deteriorated  further  since  the  Tribunal
      considered the evidence in the summer of 2007, are  now  so  bad  that
      there would be an infringement of the appellant's rights under article
      3 of the ECHR if she were required to return.


 249. We do accept that discriminatory exclusion from access to food aid  is
      capable itself of constituting persecution for a reason recognised  by
      the Convention.

 250. The collapse of the economy and agricultural  production  has  led  to
      severe food shortages. The supermarket shelves are empty so that  even
      those who do have money to spend find it difficult to  buy  food.  For
      the many others without work or  access  to  any  means  of  financial
      support access to food  aid  is  essential.   The  evidence  does  now
      establish also that the government of Zimbabwe has used its control of
      the distribution of food aid as a political tool to  the  disadvantage
      of  those  thought  to  be  potential  supporters  of  the  MDC.  This
      discriminatory deprivation of food to perceived  political  opponents,
      taken  together  with  the  disruption  of  the  efforts  of  NGOs  to
      distribute food by means of the ban introduced in June  2008,  amounts
      to persecution of those deprived access to this essential support.


 251. There is no doubt at all that the country conditions in Zimbabwe today
      are, for many of its citizens, harsh, and extremely  difficult.  There
      are many reports in the evidence before us that demonstrate the extent
      of the difficulties now facing ordinary Zimbabweans in their  everyday
      living conditions. In the letter from  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
      Office produced by Mr Walker to which we referred above can  be  found
      this assessment:

           "The humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe is  a  major  cause  for
           concern for the international community.  Zimbabwe is  suffering
           from a major  economic  crisis.   Unofficial  estimates  suggest
           inflation could now be as high as 100  million%.   The  economy,
           and particularly agricultural production, has shrunk by over 50%
           since 1996.  Gold production is at  its  lowest  levels  for  90
           years.  Electricity is severely restricted, blackouts are common
           and water shortages last four days at  a  time  in  some  areas.
           Basic food and fuel are difficult to obtain, with people turning
           to the black market where prices are too high for the  majority.
           For example, a teacher's monthly salary is less than the cost of
           a 10 kg bag of maize meal - which  would  last  a  small  family
           about a week.  The worst hit are the elderly  caring  for  grand
           children orphaned by the country's AIDS epidemic.


           There has been a significant deterioration of  the  food  supply
           situation in  Zimbabwe  over  recent  years.   Factors  such  as
           drought and floods, low crop performance and limited  irrigation
           have been exacerbated by the sharp economic decline.  The annual
           crop and food assessment indicates that this year's harvest  was
           one of the worst in living  memory  and  Zimbabwe  is  facing  a
           deficit of over 1 million metric tons in cereals.  In  addition,
           Zimbabwe is suffering as a result of HIV and AIDS.  The pandemic
           claims an estimated 2300 lives a week."

 252.  It is not hard to add to the list  of  catastrophes.  The  heath  and
      education services have  collapsed.  There  is  very  little  economic
      activity and for many no real prospect of employment. Even where  work
      is available, the sheer scale of inflation  means  that  the  cost  of
      travel to and from work often renders the effort pointless.


 253. Mr Henderson refers in his skeleton argument and  closing  submissions
      to the approach taken by the Tribunal to this issue in HS  and  argues
      that the fresh evidence demonstrates that the  regime  does  now  bear
      responsibility for the desperate living  conditions  endured  by  many
      "ordinary" Zimbabweans, even if the Tribunal found that not to be  the
      case in 2007. This is relevant to the  article  3  threshold  in  this
      respect.

 254. As Mr Henderson takes this as his starting point, we  reproduce  below
      what was said by the Tribunal in this regard in HS:



          55. Article 3 of the European Convention provides that:

                 "No one shall be subjected to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
                 degrading treatment or punishment."

          56. In submitting that there would be an infringement of  article
              3 Mr Henderson relies upon what was said  by  Lord  Brown  at
              paragraph 24 of his speech in R (Bagdanavicius) v SSHD [2005]
              UKHL 38. He said that it was important:


                 "to grasp the distinction in non-state agent cases  between
                 on the one hand the risk of serious harm and on  the  other
                 hand the risk of treatment contrary to article 3. In  cases
                 where the risk "emanates from intentionally inflicted  acts
                 of the public authorities in the  receiving  country"  (the
                 language of para 49 of D v United Kingdom 24 EHRR 423, 447)
                 one can use those terms interchangeably: the  intentionally
                 inflicted acts would without more constitute the proscribed
                 treatment. Where, however, the risk emanates from non-state
                 bodies, that is not so: any  harm  inflicted  by  non-state
                 agents will not constitute article 3  ill-treatment  unless
                 in addition the state  has  failed  to  provide  reasonable
                 protection."


          57. Although Mr Henderson asserts in his skeleton  argument  that
              it  is  not  in  dispute  that   the   present   humanitarian
              catastrophe "emanates from the intentionally inflicted  acts"
              of President Mugabe's regime, that is not so.  As  Mr  Kovats
              makes clear in his submissions, the respondent's position  is
              that the food shortages,  interruption  in  water  and  power
              supplies, and the other consequences of the collapsed economy
              may well be the result of governmental incompetence and  crop
              failures due to the lack of farming expertise and drought but
              it is  not  the  purpose  of  governmental  policy  to  visit
              deprivation upon the people of Zimbabwe.


          58. We do not accept that the current economic  crisis  and  near
              collapsed   infrastructure   is   a   deliberate,    intended
              consequence of the actions of the government. Subject to what
              we say below  about  Operation  Murambatsvina,  the  evidence
              simply does not establish that the current country conditions
              are  the  intended  aim  as   opposed   to   the   unintended
              consequence, of government policy.

          59. We do accept that  poor  living  conditions  are  capable  of
              raising an issue under article 3  if  they  reach  a  minimum
              level of severity. See:  Pancenko v  Latvia  No  40772/98.  A
              similar view was taken by the House of Lords in R v  SSHD  ex
              parte Adam, Limbuela and Tesema [2005] UKHL 66. At  paragraph
              7 Lord Bingham said:

                    "...  Treatment  is  inhuman  or  degrading  if,  to   a
                    seriously detrimental extent, it denies the  most  basic
                    needs of any human being. As in all article 3 cases, the
                    treatment, to be  proscribed,  must  achieve  a  minimum
                    standard of severity, and  I  would  accept  that  in  a
                    context such  as  this,  not  involving  the  deliberate
                    infliction of pain or suffering, the threshold is a high
                    one. ...... But I have no doubt that the  threshold  may
                    be crossed if a late applicant  with  no  means  and  no
                    alternative means of support, unable to support himself,
                    is, by  the  deliberate  action  of  the  state,  denied
                    shelter, food or the most basic necessities of life. .."

          60. This concept of a varying threshold to engagement of  article
              3, dependant upon the responsibility of the  receiving  state
              for the circumstances complained of,  is  analogous  to  that
              discussed below in the context of the risk  of  ill-treatment
              faced  by  deportees  to  Zimbabwe  at  the  hands  of  those
              concerned with their reception at Harare airport. But we have
              found that the difficult living conditions  are  not  visited
              upon the people  of  Zimbabwe  generally  by  the  deliberate
              actions of the state. Other than those  who  have  been  made
              homeless and displaced to areas where they  have  no  support
              mechanisms to fall back on  as  a  consequence  of  Operation
              Murambatsvina, citizens of Zimbabwe face such difficulties as
              they  have  to  confront  as  a  consequence  of   ill-judged
              political initiatives, economic mismanagement  and  unusually
              bad weather conditions affecting further the capacity of  the
              country to produce crops.


          61. That being the case the appellant faces a high  threshold  in
              seeking to establish that the act of the  United  Kingdom  in
              returning her to Zimbabwe will expose her to a real  risk  of
              having to  live  in  circumstances  that  will  represent  an
              infringement of her rights protected by article 3.


          62. The country conditions, poor as they are,  do  not  establish
              that the generality of  those  returning  to  Zimbabwe  today
              would be subjected to conditions that are sufficiently  grave
              as to infringe  article  3.  Even  if  conditions  were  life
              threatening, that in itself would not enable the appellant to
              rely  upon  article  3  to  resist  removal.  That  much   is
              established from what might be referred to as the  article  3
              health cases. As can be seen from N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL  31,
              there would be no infringement even where:

                 "in almost all these cases stopping the treatment will lead
                 in a very short time to a revival of all the symptoms  from
                 which the patient was originally suffering and to an  early
                 death."

          63.  Further, the  evidence  does  not  establish  that  everyone
              presently living in Zimbabwe is doing so in the conditions of
              near complete deprivation that some evidently  are.  The  WHO
              report referred to in paragraph 46 above notes that 5 million
              Zimbabweans  are  unable   to   meet   their   minimum   food
              requirements.  That  means,   of   course,   that   something
              approaching a similar number  are  able  to.  We  have  heard
              evidence of how people survive which we discuss later in this
              determination. Support, both material and financial,  can  be
              and is provided to some  by  relatives  living  abroad.  Many
              houses  have  been  demolished  and  many  people  have  been
              required to relocate to areas they might not have chosen, but
              many are not subjected to those difficulties. There  is  free
              movement across borders with some neighbouring countries  and
              we have before us accounts of those who  make  regular  trips
              across the border to buy goods or to trade.

          64. We  find  that  returnees,  whether  deportees  or  voluntary
              returnees, do not all  face  living  conditions  sufficiently
              severe to reach the article 3 threshold. This does  not  mean
              that each such claim must fail. Each case must be  considered
              on its own facts. That is acknowledged  by  the  respondent's
              own Asylum Policy Instruction on discretionary leave:

                 "There may be some extreme cases (although such  cases  are
                 likely to be rare) where a  person  would  face  such  poor
                 conditions if returned - e.g. absence  of  water,  food  or
                 basic shelter - that removal could be a breach of the  UK's
                 Article 3 obligations..."

 255. We take a similar view to the extent that each case will  fall  to  be
      decided on its own facts. In some cases we can see that it will not be
      difficult for an  appellant  to  succeed  on  this  basis.  The  fresh
      evidence now before  the  Tribunal  demonstrates  that  the  state  is
      responsible for the displacement of large numbers of people so  as  to
      render them homeless and,  unless  the  misgivings  expressed  in  the
      evidence before us about the very recent lifting of  the  ban  on  the
      distribution  of  food  aid  prove  to  be  unfounded,  the   evidence
      demonstrates also that there has been a discriminatory deprivation  of
      access to food aid which, plainly, is a deliberate policy decision  of
      the state acting through  its  chosen  agents.  But  the  more  recent
      evidence indicates that those agencies involved with the  distribution
      of food aid, separate from  that  available  to  only  some  from  the
      government, have  once  again  been  able  to  recommence  operations,
      although subject to registration requirements.


 256. On the other hand there will be many appellants who will be unable  to
      make out such a case. Where a family has a home  and  access  to  some
      food provision, either from the state or an NGO or other agency, those
      harsh living conditions are unlikely to establish an  infringement  of
      article 3. Many Zimbabweans have relatives living abroad to whom  they
      can look for support. Professor Ranger told us  that  money  transfers
      were now difficult to arrange. In view of the  collapsed  economy  and
      the damage to the banking system on account of hyperinflation,  we  do
      not find that difficult to accept. But he confirmed also in  his  oral
      evidence that there was no reason to believe that the process by which
      friends or relatives living abroad were able to arrange for  groceries
      and other provisions to  be  ordered  and  paid  for  in  neighbouring
      countries and delivered to homes in Zimbabwe had been disrupted.

 257. Some Zimbabweans, especially those living close to the border, will be
      able to travel freely  across  into  some  neighbouring  countries  to
      trade, possibly seek employment, or to buy food and  provisions.  Some
      will be able to sustain themselves adequately on the basis of food aid
      and other relief from agencies able and willing to provide  it.  Thus,
      the position remains that each claim  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
      facts.

Summary of conclusions: Country Guidance


 258. The evidence establishes clearly that  those  at  risk  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe on  account  of  imputed  political  opinion  are  no  longer
      restricted to those who are perceived to be members or  supporters  of
      the MDC but include anyone who is unable to demonstrate support for or
      loyalty to the regime or Zanu-PF. To that extent the country  guidance
      in HS is no longer to be followed.

 259. The fact of having lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  significant
      period of time and of having made an  unsuccessful  asylum  claim  are
      both matters capable of giving  rise  to  an  enhanced  risk  because,
      subject to what we have said at paragraph 242 to  246  above,  such  a
      person is in general reasonably likely to be assumed to be a supporter
      of the MDC and so, therefore, someone who is unlikely to vote  for  or
      support the ruling party, unless he is able to demonstrate the loyalty
      to Zanu-PF or other alignment with the regime that would  negate  such
      an assumption.

 260. The attempt by the regime to identify and suppress its  opponents  has
      moved from the individual  to  the  collective.  Thus,  a  person  who
      returns to a home in an area where the MDC made inroads into the Zanu-
      PF vote at this year's elections  faces  an  enhanced  risk  as  whole
      communities are being punished for the outcome in an attempt to change
      the political landscape for  the  future  and  to  eliminate  the  MDC
      support base.

 261. There is clear evidence also that  teachers  in  Zimbabwe  have,  once
      again, become targets for persecution in Zimbabwe. This  is  confirmed
      by the evidence of Professor Ranger considered at paragraph 96 of this
      determination and reinforced by the news reports,  examples  of  which
      are given at paragraphs 130 and 148.  As many teachers  have  fled  to
      avoid retribution, the fact of  being  a  teacher  or  having  been  a
      teacher in the past again is capable  of  raising  an  enhanced  risk,
      whether  or  not  a  person  was  a  polling  officer,  because   when
      encountered it will not be known what a particular teacher did or  did
      not do in another area.

 262. It is the  CIO,  and  not  the  undisciplined  militias,  that  remain
      responsible for monitoring returns to Harare airport.  In  respect  of
      those returning to the airport there is no  evidence  that  the  state
      authorities have abandoned any attempt to  distinguish  between  those
      actively involved in support  of  the  MDC  or  otherwise  of  adverse
      interest and those who simply have not demonstrated  positive  support
      for or loyalty to Zanu-PF. There is  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
      assessment made in HS of those who would be identified at the  airport
      of being of sufficient interest to merit further interrogation and  so
      to be at real risk of harm such as to infringe either Convention.

 263. Although a power sharing agreement has been signed between  Mr  Mugabe
      on behalf of Zanu-PF and Mr Tsvangirai on behalf of the MDC, it is too
      early to say that will remove the real risk of serious  harm  we  have
      identified for anyone now returned to Zimbabwe  who  is  not  able  to
      demonstrate allegiance to or association with the Zimbabwean regime.

 264. Further international intervention or some unforeseen upheaval  inside
      Zimbabwe itself may change the position, for example,  by  giving  the
      MDC real control of the police. In such an eventuality it will be  for
      judicial fact finders to determine the extent to  which  the  evidence
      before them differs from  that  which  is  before  us,  pending  fresh
      country guidance: see Practice Direction 18.2.

Findings upon the appellant's appeal

 265. Should this appellant return to her home area, where she had lived all
      her life before leaving Zimbabwe a little more than  three  years  ago
      she would be doing so as a young single woman with no effective family
      support to which to turn. She has explained why  she  could  not  seek
      work as a teacher and, in the light of the evidence we have  discussed
      above, such is the risk to teachers in Zimbabwe today it would not  be
      reasonable to expect her to do so.


 266. We are satisfied, for the  reasons  given  above,  that  as  a  former
      teacher, the appellant  faces  an  enhanced  level  of  risk  on  that
      account.


 267.  Nor could the appellant seek to support herself in the only other way
      she had in the past, by selling fruit and vegetables with her  mother.
      For someone in her position there are no such products  left  to  sell
      and, in any event, her mother has fled the  area  on  account  of  the
      threat from the militias arising because the area has been  identified
      as one that supported the MDC in the elections.

 268. It is clear also from the evidence we have examined that War  Veterans
      and youth militias are active in that area.  The  appellant's  profile
      would be someone who, having  previously  worked  as  a  teacher,  had
      claimed asylum in the United Kingdom and would therefore be unable  to
      demonstrate that she had voted for or supported the ruling  party.  It
      is reasonably likely that profile would become apparent,  whether  she
      remained in her home area or sought to establish herself elsewhere.

 269. This means, for the reasons set out above, that she has established  a
      well founded fear that she would be persecuted for a  reason  that  is
      recognised by the Refugee Convention and that there  is  a  real  risk
      that she would be subjected to various forms of ill-treatment such  as
      to infringe article 3 of the ECHR.

 270. Persecutory ill-treatment on return to Zimbabwe may take one  or  more
      of a number of forms. On being  identified  as  someone  not  able  to
      demonstrate loyalty to the ruling party she may find herself taken  to
      one of the camps established by the militias where  there  is  a  real
      risk she would be detained and molested, physically and sexually.  She
      may face physical ill treatment in the course of being displaced  from
      her home area and similar treatment in any other area, urban or rural,
      in which she seeks to re-establish herself.  There  is  no  reason  to
      suppose that she would fare any better than her sister who  fled  with
      her family to South Africa to avoid the adverse attention  of  Zanu-PF
      supporters.

 271. That is sufficient to explain why this appeal is allowed. Had it  been
      necessary to do so we would  have  explained  in  greater  detail  our
      rejection of the appellant's claim to be at risk on  return  from  her
      former boyfriend. It suffices to say that more than three  years  have
      elapsed. There has been no contact from him. There is no  report  from
      the appellant's sister, who recently left Zimbabwe, that he was  still
      around or making enquiries about the appellant. Even if he does remain
      in the area, there is no reason to assume that the  appellant  is  for
      him now anything more than a memory.

 272. The fact that the boyfriend was violent towards the appellant  at  the
      time their relationship was coming to an end and that, soon after  she
      left three years ago, he acted in a similarly unacceptable way  toward
      the appellant's mother, does not establish, even to the  low  standard
      required, that it is reasonably likely that  he  would  constitute  an
      risk of harm to the appellant should she return home now.

Summary of decision:


 273. The immigration judge made a material error of law.


 274. We substitute a fresh decision to allow the appeal on both asylum  and
      human rights grounds, (article 3 of the ECHR only).

 275. In those circumstances the appellant is not entitled to the  grant  of
      humanitarian protection.




Signed                                       Date






Senior Immigration Judge Southern


                               First Appendix

      Written reasons of the Tribunal for finding material error of law
                               16th March 2007

    REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW
    IN THE DETERMINATION

   1. The immigration judge declined to determine the appellant's appeal  on
      human  rights  grounds  because  the  respondent  was  not   enforcing
      involuntary returns to Zimbabwe at the date of the appeal hearing.


   2. S.86(2)(a)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      requires that the immigration judge determine any matter raised  as  a
      ground of appeal. The appellant relied upon her  ECHR  rights  in  the
      grounds of the appeal to  the  immigration  judge  and  so  it  was  a
      material error of law for the immigration judge to fail  to  determine
      this aspect of the appeal.

   3.  But, there is no reason to disturb the decision  of  the  immigration
      judge to dismiss the asylum claim and that part of  the  determination
      shall stand, as shall the facts found by the immigration judge set out
      between paragraphs 16 and 20 of the determination.

   4. The immigration judge gave entirely adequate and  sustainable  reasons
      for finding that the appellant, who did not claim to  be  in  any  way
      politically active, was not at risk on account  of  any  perceived  or
      imputed political opinion. That was a finding of fact open to  him  on
      the evidence.

   5. Similarly, the  immigration  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      appellant's claim of multiple rape by the friends of her  partner  and
      the burning down of her house were untrue and he has given  clear  and
      adequate reasons to support that finding of fact.

   6. What the immigration judge has not done is to make any findings as  to
      whether the appellant would be at risk  of  being  subjected  to  ill-
      treatment such as to infringe article 3 of ECHR either on  account  of
      being forcibly returned as a failed asylum seeker or because she would
      be at risk from her abusive former boyfriend if he was able to  locate
      her upon her return, should he be so motivated to do so,  and  whether
      there would be a sufficiency of protection from the police against any
      such criminal acts the appellant might be  unfortunate  enough  to  be
      threatened with.

   7.  The  grounds  upon  which  the  appellant   sought   an   order   for
      reconsideration include a complaint that the immigration judge made no
      finding of fact as to whether he accepted  the  appellant's  claim  to
      have worked as a schoolteacher. But  this  was  not  relevant  to  the
      issues raised before him.  The  appellant  said  she  ceased  being  a
      teacher in 2003, two years before she  left  Zimbabwe.  There  was  no
      evidence at all to suggest that the appellant subsequently experienced
      any difficulty on this account and there is no reason to  assume  that
      any such difficulty would arise upon her return because of this former
      employment nor did she suggest that she would seek employment in  this
      category on her return.

   8. In those circumstances the reconsideration shall  be  limited  to  the
      issues set out in paragraph 6 above and shall be reviewed in the light
      of the current objective country evidence.




                               Second Appendix


             Findings of fact made by Immigration Judge Phillips
                      Determination dated 8th May 2006.

    In  my  finding  there  are  substantial  reasons  for   doubting   the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  In the first  place  even  the
    very basic detail of the appellant's account are inherently incredible.
     I do not believe that the appellant, a person who was terrified of the
    war veterans, having quit her job in part because of  threats  received
    from war veterans, would shortly after quitting her job begin dating  a
    war veteran.  Whereas the appellant says in her latest statement and in
    oral evidence that she was not aware that he was a war veteran  at  the
    start of the relationship and that when she did find out he told her he
    was not politically active her original statement very  clearly  states
    "although he was a war veteran  he  did  not  seem  to  be  violent  or
    politically active like other war  veterans".   In  my  finding  a  war
    veteran in Zimbabwe is defined as much by his activities as by the fact
    that he fought in the war.  That the appellant would date Bernard for a
    considerable period of time  before  discovering  that  he  was  a  war
    veteran is not only inconsistent with her first statement but  is  also
    utterly incredible.  The change in her evidence is expedient.  I do not
    believe that the appellant was in a relationship with a war veteran  as
    claimed.

    As far as  the  appellant's  account  of  her  discovery  of  Bernard's
    activities is concerned I find it to be vague in  the  extreme.   After
    what she says was a happy relationship lasting  two  years  or  so  the
    appellant claims that she found out that Bernard  was  taking  part  in
    violent war veteran activities including beating and  torturing  people
    and stealing from them.  When asked how she found out her response  was
    effectively that it was from local rumour.  Asked when  she  found  out
    she was vague eventually settling on  a  month  or  so  before  he  was
    violent to her.  I do not believe it.  The appellant's account of being
    raped by her boyfriend changed from happening when she  wanted  to  end
    the relationship in her statement to  when  she  refused  sex  in  oral
    evidence.  As far as the gang rape is concerned the appellant makes  no
    mention at all of seeking medical attention in her  statements  but  in
    oral evidence says that she went to the clinic but there was no  doctor
    there and thereafter she did not seek medical advice  until  more  than
    six months later when in the United Kingdom.  That she would  not  seek
    urgent medical treatment or at the very least testing for HIV  after  a
    gang rape beggars belief.  I do not believe that it happened.  As I  do
    not believe that the event happened  I  do  not  believe  that  it  was
    reported.

    The appellant claims that her home was burned down.  She was not  there
    at the time and she does not know who did it but says that whereas  she
    wanted to make a complaint to the police she  was  afraid  to  approach
    them as a war veterans would know she had done so.  In the first  place
    it is inconsistent that the appellant  would  report  a  rape  but  not
    report the burning down of her home.  Secondly and in any event when  a
    home is burned down, even a thatched hut in a rural village, the police
    are automatically involved.  A  home  cannot  be  burned  down  without
    raising attention.  Yet again  the  appellant  is  not  in  my  finding
    telling the truth.

                               Third Appendix
                 Schedule of documentary evidence considered


          DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT


|Page      |Document                                       |Date           |
|          |TAB A: NEWS STORIES                            |               |
|1         |'Zimbabwe's Morgue-Like Airport.' -            |22/05/2006     |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|2-3       |'Mugabe Revives Torture Camps Ahead of         |11/04/2007     |
|          |Election.' - Zim Online.                       |               |
|4-5       |'Mugabe Mobilises Militia Ahead of Elections.' |24/04/2007     |
|          |- Zim Online.                                  |               |
|6-7       |'Zimbabwe Nearly Doubling Size of Police Force |28/05/2007     |
|          |Ahead of Elections.' - Voice of America News.  |               |
|8-10      |'They Risk Electrocution to Escape Zimbabwe.' -|23/07/08       |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|11-12     |'Gordon Brown: 'It Is Right That I Make Clear  |20/09/2007     |
|          |My Position. We Will Not Shirk Our             |               |
|          |Responsibilities.'' - The Independent.         |               |
|13        |'Zimbabwe Vigil Supports British Trade Union   |20/09/07       |
|          |Demo in Support of Trade Unionist in Zimbabwe.'|               |
|          |- Zimbabwe Coalition Trade Union.              |               |
|14-15     |'In UN Speech, Zimbabwe's Mugabe Lashes Into   |26/09/2007     |
|          |US, Britain.' - Voice of America News.         |               |
|16-17     |'Harare Accuses Britain of Plotting to         |19/11/2007     |
|          |Assassinate Mugabe.' - Zim Online.             |               |
|18-19     |'Zimbabwe: Bulawayo Runs Out of Money.' - IRIN |25/02/2008     |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|20        |'Zimbabwe Opposition Alleges State Security    |04/03/2008     |
|          |Offensive Ahead of Elections.' - Voice of      |               |
|          |America News.                                  |               |
|21        |'Amid Roaring Hyperinflation, Zimbabwe Sets New|04/03/2008     |
|          |Cash Holding Limits.' - Voice of America News. |               |
|22-23     |'Zimbabwe: NGOs Struggle to Feed the Hungry.' -|05/03/2008     |
|          |IRIN News.                                     |               |
|24        |'With Prices Steadily Rising, Zimbabwean       |19/03/2008     |
|          |Authorities Arrest Executives.' - Voice of     |               |
|          |America News.                                  |               |
|25-27     |'Robert Mugabe 'Unlikely to Flee Zimbabwe.'' - |04/04/2008     |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|28        |''Securocrats' Wield Real Power in Zimbabwe.' -|04/04/2008     |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|29        |'Mugabe Unleashes His Dogs.' - Zimbabwe Today. |09/04/2008     |
|30-31     |''Vote Mugabe or You Die'. Inside Zimbabwe, the|10/04/2008     |
|          |Backlash Begins.' - Guardian.co.uk.            |               |
|32-37     |'Two Weeks After Zimbabwe's Elections, Mugabe's|10/04/2008     |
|          |Thugs Are Back on the Streets.' - Mail Online. |               |
|38-39     |'Zimbabwe: They Dragged Me Behind a Truck to   |11/04/2008     |
|          |Make Me Vote for Mugabe.' - Times Online.      |               |
|40-41     |'Terror Time Again.' - All Africa.com.         |(Posted)14/04/0|
|          |                                               |8              |
|42        |'Zimbabwe Accuses Opposition Leader of         |17/04/2008     |
|          |Treason.' - Voice of America News.             |               |
|43-44     |'Robert Mugabe Stole Zimbabwe Election, Says   |18/04/2008     |
|          |Gordon Brown.' - Telegraph.co.uk.              |               |
|45        |'Should the West Intervene in Zimbabwe?' -     |19/04/2008     |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|46-47     |'Mugabe Trying to 'Steal Election.'' - BBC     |21/04/2008     |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|48        |'Zimbabwe Opposition Pleads for International  |21/04/2008     |
|          |Intervention.' - The Independent.              |               |
|49-50     |'Zimbabwe: Humanitarian Operations Curtailed by|21/04/2008     |
|          |Violence.' - IRIN News.                        |               |
|51        |'Miliband Condemns Zimbabwe Poll 'Charade.'' - |22/04/2008     |
|          |Guradian.co.uk.                                |               |
|52-53     |'Zimbabwe: Victims of State Brutality Speak    |24/04/2008     |
|          |Out.' - IRIN News.                             |               |
|54        |'Zuma Calls for Zimbabwe Talks to Avoid Threat |24/04/2008     |
|          |of Genocide.' - The Independent.               |               |
|55-56     |'Brown Demands Outcry on Zimbabwe.' - BBC News.|26/04/2008     |
|          |                                               |               |
|57-58     |'Zimbabwe Health Minister Accused as Terror    |29/04/2008     |
|          |Campaign Reaches Hospital Wards.' - Times      |               |
|          |Online.                                        |               |
|59        |'More Farm Workers Evicted and Jobless.' - SW  |29/04/2008     |
|          |Radio Africa Zimbabwe News.                    |               |
|60        |'Britain Seeks Moratorium on Arms Sales to     |30/04/2008     |
|          |Zimbabwe.' - The Independent.                  |               |
|61-62     |'Botswana Sets Up Refugee Camp' - All          |03/05/08       |
|          |Africa.com                                     |               |
|63        |'Zanu PF Paying Thugs to Kill Opposition       |05/05/08       |
|          |Officials' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe News.    |               |
|64-65     |'Botswana - Zimbabwe: Cross-Border Fuel        |07/05/08       |
|          |Lifeline Cut.' - IRIN News.                    |               |
|66-67     |'Zimbabwe: Hunger Drives Post-Election         |09/05/08       |
|          |Violence, Deepens Poverty.' - IRIN News.       |               |
|68-69     |'Inside Zimbabwe's Secret Torture Camps.' -    |11/05/08       |
|          |Telegrapgh.co.uk.                              |               |
|70        |'In Former Refuge South Africa, Zimbabweans    |19/05/08       |
|          |Targeted By Mobs.' - Voice of America News.    |               |
|71-72     |'South Africa: Xenophobia Bad, Mugabe's        |20/05/08       |
|          |Retribution Worse.' - IRIN News.               |               |
| 73-74    |'South Africa: Foreign Nationals Imprisoned in |20/05/08       |
|          |their Homes.' - IRIN News.                     |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|75        |'Inflation Hits One Million Percent as Prices  |21/05/08       |
|          |Continue to Skyrocket.' - SW Radio Africa.     |               |
|76        |'Zimbabwe: Robert Mugabe Shuts Church Over     |24/05/08       |
|          |Movement of Democratic Change Link.' -         |               |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|77-78     |'Tens of Thousands Said to be Displaced by     |26/05/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Political Violence.' - Voice of       |               |
|          |America News.                                  |               |
|79        |'Brown Condems Mugabe Europe Visit.' -         |02/06/08       |
|          |Guardian.co.uk.                                |               |
|80-81     |'Zimbabwe Suspends Aid Group.' - International |03/06/08       |
|          |Herald Tribune.                                |               |
|82-83     |'Robert Mugabe Accuses West of Trying to Starve|04/06/08       |
|          |Him Out.' - Times Online.                      |               |
|84        |'Zimbabwe Suspends Work of All Aid Groups.' -  |05/06/08       |
|          |Voice Of America News.                         |               |
|85        |' Zimbabwe: Restrictions on Foreigners.' -     |05/06/08       |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|86-87     |'British Diplomats 'Seized in Zimbabwe'.' - The|05/06/08       |
|          |Independent.                                   |               |
|88-89     |'British Government Questions Zimbabwe         |05/06/08       |
|          |Ambassador on Detention of Envoys.' - Voice of |               |
|          |America.                                       |               |
|90        |'Zimbabwe: Robert Mugabe's Military Cabal.' -  |06/06/08       |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk                                |               |
|91-92     |'Southern Africa: Looking For Answers to       |11/06/08       |
|          |Xenophobia's Rise.' - IRIN News.               |               |
|93-94     |'Robert Mugabe's Militia Burn Opponent's Wife  |12/06/08       |
|          |Alive.' - Times Online.                        |               |
|95        |'Zimbabwe Ruling Party Militants Control Rural |13/06/08       |
|          |Movement With Roadblocks.' - Voice of America  |               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|96-97     |'Opposing Robert Mugabe is Now 'Treason' in    |13/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe'. - Times Online.                     |               |
|98        |'Zimbabwe Army Chief Brands Opposition         |14/06/08       |
|          |"Treacherous".' - Reuters UK.                  |               |
|99-100    |'Brown Denounces 'Criminal' Zimbabwe           |16/06/08       |
|          |Leadership.' - Guardian.co.uk.                 |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|101-102   |' Robert Mugabe Warns Zimbabwe's Voters: 'How  |17/06/08       |
|          |Can a Pen Fight a Gun?' - Times Online.        |               |
|103-104   |'Zimbabwe: Five Million People Will Require    |18/06/08       |
|          |Food Assistance, FAO/WFP says.' - IRIN News.   |               |
|105-106   |'Rights - Zimbabwe: Government Blocks Aid for  |18/06/08       |
|          |Six Million in Need.' - Inter Press Service    |               |
|          |News Agency.                                   |               |
|107       |'Politicide Warning: Zimbabwe.' - Sokwanele.   |19/06/08       |
|108       |'State Agents Hunt Down MDC Supporters Who Fled|20/06/08       |
|          |Rural Areas.' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe News. |               |
|109       |'Robert Mugabe Says 'Only God' Can Remove Him.'|21/06/08       |
|          |- Telegraph.co.uk.                             |               |
|110-111   |'Zimbabwean Generals Have 'Taken Robert        |22/06/08       |
|          |Mugabe's Power'.' - Telegraph.co.uk.           |               |
|112-114   |'The Brutality That Has Engulfed Zimbabwe' -   |22/06/08       |
|          |Telegraph.co.uk.                               |               |
|115-116   |'Zimbabwe: Mugabe Troops Use Rape as a Weapon' |22/06/08       |
|          |- Telegraph.co.uk.                             |               |
|117-119   |'Violence Spreads to Harare: 'Ring if Torture  |22/06/08       |
|          |Camps' Set Up in the Suburbs.' -               |               |
|          |Independent.co.uk                              |               |
|120-121   |'UK Names Clique of Six Men Behind 'Campaign of|23/06/08       |
|          |Terror.' - Guardian.co.uk                      |               |
|122-123   |'Zimbabwe: It is Mugabe Versus the World,      |23/06/08       |
|          |Britain Says.' - Telegraph.co.uk.              |               |
|124       |'Mugabe Calls Britain and US Liars: State      |23/06/08       |
|          |Media.'                                        |               |
|          |AFP                                            |               |
|125       |'Speak Out on London Visit, Mandela Urged.' -  |24/06/08       |
|          |The Independent.                               |               |
|126-127   |'Comment: Intervention in Zimbabwe is the Only |24/06/08       |
|          |Solution.' - Times Online.                     |               |
|128       |'Beating the Vote Out.' - Guardian.co.uk.      |24/06/08       |
|129-130   |'MoD Contingency Plans for Military Action in  |24/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe.' - Times Online.                     |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|131-132   |'Paddy Ashdown: Military Intervention in       |24/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe 'Could be Justified'.' - Times Online.|               |
|          |                                               |               |
|133-134   |'Zimbabwe: More Beatings, More Abductions As   |24/06/08       |
|          |the World Watches.' - Guardian.co.uk.          |               |
|135-138   |'Invading Other Countries is Almost Always     |25/06/08       |
|          |Wrong. Faced With genocide in Zimbabwe, It May |               |
|          |Be the Only Right Thing to Do.' - Mail Online. |               |
|139-140   |'Zimbabwe: Hundreds Seek Refuge at the SA      |26/06/08       |
|          |Embassy.' - IRIN News.                         |               |
|141-142   |'World Leaders Say They Will Reject Outcome of |26/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Election, But Mugabe Stays Defiant.' -|               |
|          |Guardian.co.uk                                 |               |
|143       |'Mugabe Tells West Leave Zimbabwe Alone.' -    |26/06/06       |
|          |China View.                                    |               |
|144-145   |'Zimbabwe: Vote for Robert Mugabe and Save Your|27/06/08       |
|          |Life, MDC Says.' - Telegraph.co.uk             |               |
|146-147   |'Zimbabwe: I Saw Robert Mugabe's Thugs Beat a  |27/06/08       |
|          |Man to Death.' - Telegraph.co.uk.              |               |
|148       |'Mugabe Calls on Britain to Stop Meddling in   |27/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean Affairs.' - China View.             |               |
|149-150   |'Mugabe's Secret War - In Britain'. - The      |28/06/08       |
|          |Independent.                                   |               |
|151-153   |'Fear in Zimbabwe as Voters Awake to Operation |28/06/08       |
|          |Red Finger.' - Times Online.                   |               |
|154       |'African Observer: Zimbabweans Voted in Fear,  |28/06/08       |
|          |Defaced Ballots'. - Voice of America News.     |               |
|155-156   |Zimbabwe Vigil UK Article.                     |28/06/08       |
|157-158   |'Rights - Zimbabwe Women Bear Brunt of         |28/06/08       |
|          |Violence.' - Inter Press Service News Agency.  |               |
|159-161   |'Exclusive: Inside Zimbabwe's Election         |28/06/08       |
|          |Nightmare of Death Threats and Intimidation.' -|               |
|          |The Mirror                                     |               |
|162       |'Ministers Accused Over Return of Refugees to  |28/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe.' - The Independent.                  |               |
|163-164   |'Robert Mugabe Sworn in as Zimbabwe President.'|29/06/08       |
|          |- Guardian.co.uk.                              |               |
|165       |'Brown Makes Zimbabwe Cash Promise.' - BBC     |29/06/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|166-167   |'Zimbabwe Election: Robert Mugabe's 'Operation |29/06/08       |
|          |Red Finger' Causes Terror.' - Telgrapgh.co.uk. |               |
|168-169   |'Close UK Embassy in Zimbabwe, Says Arch       |29/06/08       |
|          |Bishop.' - Telegrapgh.co.uk                    |               |
|170       |'Retribution in Some Rural Areas as Mugabe     |29/06/08       |
|          |Prepares for Another Term.' - All Africa.com   |               |
|171-172   |'Mugabe Begins Sixth Term After Beatings,      |30/06/08       |
|          |Intimidation and Murder do Their Job.' -       |               |
|          |Guardian.co.uk                                 |               |
|173       |'G8 Leaders Statement on Zimbabwe.' - Hokkaido |July 08        |
|          |Toyako Summit.                                 |               |
|174-175   |'Inside Mugabe's Torture Camps: Beaten, Maimed |01/07/08       |
|          |and Poisoned With Weedkiller.' -               |               |
|          |Independent.co.uk.                             |               |
|176-177   |'Mugabe's Aide Tells Critics to 'Go Hang.' -   |01/07/08       |
|          |Independent.co.uk.                             |               |
|178-179   |'UN Lines Up Big Names for Key Role in Pincer  |03/07/08       |
|          |Move to Oust Mugabe.' - Times Online.          |               |
|180-184   |'Inside Mugabe's Violent Crackdown.' -         |05/07/08       |
|          |Washingtonpost.com.                            |               |
|185       |'Miliband Backs Tougher UN Sanctions Against   |06/07/08       |
|          |Mugabe.' - Guardian.co.uk.                     |               |
|186-187   |'Teenage Girls Raped at Robert Mugabe's Torture|6/07/08        |
|          |Camps.' - Times Online.                        |               |
|188-189   |'Zimbabwe is Infecting the Region, Miliband    |07/07/08       |
|          |says.' - Telegraph.co.uk.                      |               |
|190-191   |'Zimbabwe Youth Militias Accused of Holding    |07/07/08       |
|          |Women as Sex Slaves.' - Los Angeles Times.     |               |
|192-193   |'Militia Attack Zimbabwe Displaced.' - BBC     |07/07/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|194-195   |'Zimbabwe Sanctions Could Lead to Civil War,   |08/07/08       |
|          |Mbeki Warns Leaders.' - Guardian.co.uk.        |               |
|196       |'Robert Mugabe Supporter Peter Mavunga is Paid |08/07/08       |
|          |by British taxpayer.' - Telegraph.co.uk.       |               |
|197-198   |'ZIMBABWE: Political Violence Surges After     |09/07/08       |
|          |Mugabe Assumes Presidency.' - IRIN News.       |               |
|199-200   |'Zimbabwe: Brown Uses Shock Tactics to Secure  |09/07/08       |
|          |Tough Sanctions Against Mugabe.' -             |               |
|          |Guardian.co.uk.                                |               |
|201-202   |'G8 'Revulsion' at Zimbabwe Crisis.' - BBC News|09/07/08       |
|          |.                                              |               |
|203-204   |'Zimbabwe Brands G8 Sanctions Push             |09/07/08       |
|          |'International Racism.'' - AFP.                |               |
|205       |'Zimbabwe Political Violence Takes On New      |09/07/08       |
|          |Forms, Including Poisoning.' - Voice of America|               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|206-208   |'Brown Brandishes Images of Torture Victims to |09/07/08       |
|          |Unite World Leaders Against Mugabe.' -         |               |
|          |DailyMail.co.uk.                               |               |
|209       |'Gang-Rapes and Murders Continue.' - The       |09/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|210-211   |'Witnesses Describe How Campaign of Violence   |09/07/08       |
|          |was Designed.' - The Zimbabwean.               |               |
|212-213   |'Britain Looks to UN to Squeeze Mugabe.' -     |10/07/08       |
|          |Guardian.co.uk.                                |               |
|214       |'Brown Urges Zimbabwe 'Isolation.'' - BBC News.|10/07/08       |
|          |                                               |               |
|215       |'Zimbabwe Political Violence Takes on New      |10/07/08       |
|          |Forms, Including Poison.- The Zimbabwean.      |               |
|216-217   |'Zimbabwe Sanctions Call 'Racist.'' - BBC News.|10/07/08       |
|          |                                               |               |
|218       |'Opposition Takes Up Arms as Zimbabwe Slides   |11/07/08       |
|          |into Civil War.' - The Zimbabwean.             |               |
|219-221   |'Fury as Zimbabwe Sanctions Vetoed.' - BBC     |12/07/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|222-224   |'No Painkillers, No Visitors and No Way Out:   |14/07/08       |
|          |Mugabe's Hospital Ward for MDC Activists.' -   |               |
|          |The Zimbabwean.                                |               |
|225       |'Zimbabwean Women Face HIV Risk Following Rape |14/07/08       |
|          |as Political Violence.' - Voice of America     |               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|226-227   |'Zimbabwe: Manna From Heaven For a Day.' - IRIN|15/07/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|228       |'War Vets Remove "MDC Children" From Schools.' |15/07/08       |
|          |- The Zimbabwean.                              |               |
|229-230   |'Mercenaries Join Mugabe's Ruthless Terror     |15/07/08       |
|          |Campaign.' - Independent.co.uk.                |               |
|231-232   |'Manicaland and Masvingo Province Situation    |15/07/08       |
|          |Reports (14 July 2008)' - The Zimbabwean.      |               |
|233       |'Official Zimbabwe Inflation Rate Reaches 2.2  |16/07/08       |
|          |Million Percent.' - Voice of America News.     |               |
|234       |'FDLR Mercenaries Now in Zimbabwe.' -          |16/07/08       |
|          |allAfrica.com.                                 |               |
|235       |'Militia Threat Continues.' - The Zimbabwean.  |16/07/08       |
|236       |'"They Treated Us Like Animals" - First-Hand   |16/07/08       |
|          |Account of Militia Horror.' - The Zimbabwean.  |               |
|237       |'500 Activists Killed in Political Violence -  |16/07/08       |
|          |MDC.' - The Zimbabwean.                        |               |
|238-240   |'Zimbabwe: What Makes Monster Robert Mugabe    |19/07/08       |
|          |Tick?'- Telegraph.co.uk.                       |               |
|241-242   |'John Blair in London, War Vets Tell MDC       |19/07/08       |
|          |Returnees.'- The Zimbabwe Standard.com.        |               |
|243       |'Mass Starvation Looms For Zimbabweans.' - SW  |21/07/08       |
|          |Radio Africa.com.                              |               |
|244       |'Zimbabwe Ruling Party Militia Demand Cash For |21/07/08       |
|          |Mugabe Victory Fetes.' - Voice of America News.|               |
|          |                                               |               |
|245-246   |'Hunger in Zimbabwe.' - The Zimbabwean.        |21/07/08       |
|247-248   |'Mugabe Threatens to Grab 'Western' Firms.' -  |21/07/08       |
|          |allAfrica.com.                                 |               |
|249-250   |'Threat of Mass Starvation Looms in Zimbabwe   |21/07/08       |
|          |After Latest Harvest Fails.' - Guardian.co.uk. |               |
|251       |'Zimbabwe Ruling Party Militia Demand Cash For |21/07/08       |
|          |Mugabe Victory Fetes.' - VOA News.com.         |               |
|252       |'1500 MDC Officials Still in Jail.'- SW Radio  |22/07/08       |
|          |Africa.com.                                    |               |
|253-254   |'A Day With a Zanu (PF) Militia Unit. - The    |23/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|255       |'War Vets Terrorise Teachers.' - The           |23/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|256-257   |'Residents Told to Support ZANU PF If They Want|23/07/08       |
|          |to Feed.' - The Zimbabwean.                    |               |
|258       |'Despite Talks, Zimbabwe Opposition Says       |23/07/08       |
|          |Political Prisoners Still Held.' - VOA         |               |
|          |News.com.                                      |               |
|259       |'Opposition Reprisals in Zimbabwe.' - BBC News.|23/07/08       |
|          |                                               |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|260-261   |'Political Violence, Intimidation Continue in  |23/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe.' - Voice of America News.            |               |
|262-263   |'Influx of Refugees Soars From 800 to 5 000 a  |24/07/08       |
|          |Day.' -                                        |               |
|          |ZW News.com.                                   |               |
|264       |'More Tortured MDC Activists in Buhera South.' |24/07/08       |
|          |- The Zimbabwean.                              |               |
|265       |'Despite Talks, Zimbabwe Opposition Says       |24/07/08       |
|          |Political Prisoners Still Held.' - The         |               |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|266-268   |'Green Bombers Worry About Reprisals.' - The   |25/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|269       |'MDC Activists Forced to Drink Poison.' - SW   |25/07/08       |
|          |Radio Africa.com.                              |               |
|270-271   |'Don't Hold Your Breath For Zimbabwe Talks.' - |25/07/08       |
|          |ABC News.                                      |               |
|272       |'Mugabe's Power Ploy.' - Guardian.co.uk.       |26/07/08       |
|273       |'SA Border Post Swamped By Asylum Seekers.' -  |27/07/08       |
|          |SABC News.                                     |               |
|274-277   |'Weekly Update: Harare Last Week: 19-26 July   |28/07/08       |
|          |2008.' CHRA The Zimbabwean.                    |               |
|278-279   |'Zimbabwe Political Violence Continues Despite |28/07/08       |
|          |Talks.' - Voice of America News.               |               |
|280-281   |'Violence and Persecution of MDC Activists and |28/07/08       |
|          |Supporters Continues.' - The Zimbabwean.       |               |
|282       |'Zimbabwe Army Nearing Collapse As Recruits    |28/07/08       |
|          |Lack Basic Training.' - Telegraph.co.uk.       |               |
|283-284   |'Service Delivery Crumbles in Harare.' - All   |28/07/08       |
|          |Africa.com                                     |               |
|285       |'South Africa - Zimbabwe: Sex For Soap, Salt   |29/07/08       |
|          |and Sugar.' - IRIN News.                       |               |
|286       |'Violence Continues Across the Country.' - The |29/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|287       |'More Violence Post MOU.' - The Zimbabwean.    |30/07/08       |
|288-289   |'Violence Continues Despite Dialogue.' - The   |30/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|290       |'War Vets Invade City Land.' - The Zimbabwean. |30/07/08       |
|291-293   |'Outsourcing of Terror: Mugabe.' - The         |30/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|294-295   |'ZANU PF Terror Camps Now Brothels.' - Radio   |31/07/08       |
|          |VOP.                                           |               |
|269-298   |'News Briefs.' - The Zimbabwean.               |31/07/08       |
|299-300   |'Zanu Thugs Kill Cop.' - The Zimbabwean.       |31/07/08       |
|301-302   |'Zimbabwe Bishop Warns About Mugabe's          |31/07/08       |
|          |Intentions.' - The Zimbabwean.                 |               |
|303-304   |'Zanu is Negotiating in Bad Faith.' - The      |31/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabwean.                                    |               |
|305       |'Botswana Battles to Deal With Flood of Injured|31/07/08       |
|          |Zimbabweans.' - The Zimbabwean.                |               |
|306-307   |'55 Zanu Torture Bases Still Operational.' -   |31/07/08       |
|          |The Zimbabwean.                                |               |
|308       |'Horrific Injuries, But Wounded Go Months      |31/07/08       |
|          |Without Treatment.' - The Zimbabwean.          |               |
|309       |'No Food and No Medical Care.' - Sokwanele.com.|31/07/08       |
|          |                                               |               |
|310       |'Basic Food Prices Rocket Out of Reach.' -     |31/07/08       |
|          |TheZimbabweanIndependent.com.                  |               |
|311       |'A Woman Commits Suicide Over Baccossi Goods.' |31/07/08       |
|          |- The Zimbabwean.                              |               |
|312-313   |'Married women seduce men to survive.' - The   |02/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Times.                                |               |
|314-315   |'Zanu-PF Supporters Seize MDC Flats.' - The    |02/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Times.                                |               |
|316-318   |'Obsolete Coins Cause Chaos at Zimbabwe Tills.'|02/08/08       |
|          |- The International Herald Tribune.            |               |
|319       |'Currency Chaos in Zimbabwe.' - SW Radio Africa|04/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe News.                                 |               |
|320-321   |'Zimbabwe: Banks Run Out of Money.' - IRIN     |04/08/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|322-324   |'Zimbabwe Faced With Massive Starvation.' - The|05/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Times.                                |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|325       |'Zimbabwe Food Security "Deteriorating By The  |05/08/08       |
|          |Day" - USAID Official.' - Voice of America     |               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|326       |'MDC Victims Prevented from Seeking Medical    |05/08/08       |
|          |Treatment.' - The Zimbabwean                   |               |
|327-328   |'Millions of Zimbabweans Facing Hunger.' -     |06/08/08       |
|          |Voice of America News.                         |               |
|329       |'Political Violence Caught on Video, Even After|06/08/08       |
|          |Talks Deal.' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe News.  |               |
|330       |'War Vet Kazangarare Continues Reign of        |07/08/08       |
|          |Terror.' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe News.      |               |
|331       |'Zimbabwe Activist Sees HIV Infections Surge   |07/08/08       |
|          |Following Political Violence.' - Voice of      |               |
|          |America News.                                  |               |
|332-333   |'Rogue: Zanu-PF Militia Leader Cmdr            |07/08/08       |
|          |Kazangarare.' - Herald Tribune.                |               |
|334-335   |'Call for Peace as Violence Persists.' - The   |07/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Times.                                |               |
|336-337   |'Zimbabwe: Water Provision in Disarray.' - IRIN|08/08/08       |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|338-339   |'Thousands Face Starvation as Food Crisis      |09/08/08       |
|          |Deepens in Rural Zimbabwe.' - Nehanda  Radio.  |               |
|340-341   |'Zimbabwean Heroes Day Speeches Yield Political|11/08/08       |
|          |Intelligence.' - Voice of America News.        |               |
|342       |'Zimbabwe Must Lift Aid Agency Restrictions to |14/08/08       |
|          |Avoid Humanitarian Crisis.' - UN News Service. |               |
|343       |'Parts of Zimbabwe's Manicaland Province Still |14/08/08       |
|          |a No-Go Zone for Opposition.' - Voice of       |               |
|          |America News.                                  |               |
|344       |'Zimbabwe: New Forms of "Money."' - IRIN News. |14/08/08       |
|345       |'Economic Hardships Worsen in Rural Areas.' -  |16/08/08       |
|          |The Zimbabwe Standard.                         |               |
|346       |'Extended Political Turmoil Puts Zimbabwe's    |18/08/08       |
|          |HIV/AIDS Gains At Risk.' - Voice of America    |               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|347       |'Tougher Time for Zimbabweans as Inflation     |19/08/08       |
|          |Surges.' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe News.      |               |
|348-349   |'Ordinary Zimbabweans Juggle the World's       |19/08/08       |
|          |Highest Inflation and Food Shortages.' - Relief|               |
|          |Web.                                           |               |
|350-351   |'Farmers Can't Afford to Leave Markets -       |19/08/08       |
|          |Literally.' - Inter Press Service News Agency. |               |
|352-353   |'Zimbabwe: Bus Operators Charge Fares in       |19/08/08       |
|          |Forex.' - All Africa.com .                     |               |
|354       |'Manicaland Province Under Siege by War        |19/08/08       |
|          |Veterans Militia.' - SW Radio Africa Zimbabwe  |               |
|          |News.                                          |               |
|355-356   |'Robert Mugabe Zimbabwe Food Aid Ban Sees Five |20/08/08       |
|          |Million Go Hungry.' - The Telegraph.com.       |               |
|357       |'Zimbabwe Ruling Party Officials Accused of    |20/08/08       |
|          |Exploiting Rural Hunger.' - SW Radio Africa    |               |
|          |Zimbabwe News.                                 |               |
|358-360   |'Hungry Zimbabweans Forage to Survive.' -      |20/08/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|361       |'Rights Groups Claim Violence Persists.' - The |21/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Independent.                          |               |
|362       |'Zimbabwe: Large Internally Displaced          |21/08/08       |
|          |Population in Growing Need of Assistance and   |               |
|          |Protection, Says Report.' - Internal           |               |
|          |Displacement Monitoring Centre Press Release   |               |
|363       |'Talks Reach Dead End as ZPF Politburo Vows No |22/08/08       |
|          |Power for Tsvangirai.' - SW Radio Africa       |               |
|          |Zimbabwe News.                                 |               |
|364-365   |'MDC: Brown's Trojan House.' - Mail & Guardian |22/08/08       |
|          |Online.                                        |               |
|366       |'Battleground Zimbabwe.' - IOL .               |22/08/08       |
|367       |'Zimbabwe War Veterans Say Tsvangirai Stalling |22/08/08       |
|          |Talks.' - Reuters Africa.                      |               |
|368       |'Mugabe Takes General's Advice and Abandons    |22/08/08       |
|          |Deal.' - The Independent.                      |               |
|369-370   |'Food Rots as Zim Aid Ban Continues.' - Mail & |23/08/08       |
|          |Guardian Online.                               |               |
|371-372   |'Political Violence: Living With the Enemy.' - |23/08/08       |
|          |The Zimbabwe Standard.                         |               |
|373-374   |'Why Tsvangirai Refused to Sign.' - The        |23/08/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Standard.                             |               |
|375-376   |'Zimbabwe Faces Crunch Week as Mugabe Draws    |24/08/08       |
|          |Battle Line.' - Reuters Africa.                |               |
|377       |'Reporter Who Saw Police Violence Freed After  |25/08/08       |
|          |Several Hours.' - Reporters Without Borders.   |               |
|378-379   |'In South Africa, Zimbabweans Find Sanctuary   |26/08/08       |
|          |and Contempt.' - Inter Press Service News      |               |
|          |Agency.                                        |               |
|380-381   |'Government Blocks Aid for Six Million In      |26/08/08       |
|          |Need.' - Inter Press Service News Agency.      |               |
|          |TAB B: REPORTS                                 |               |
|382-435   |'Zimbabwe: Human Rights in Crisis.' - Amnesty  |May 2007       |
|          |International.                                 |               |
|436-438   |'Trafficking in Persons Report 2008: Zimbabwe' |04/06/07       |
|          |- US Department of State.                      |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|439       |'Political and Economic Turmoil Sparks         |20/12/07       |
|          |Health-Care Crisis in Zimbabwe.' - Medecins    |               |
|          |sans Frontieres Hong Kong.                     |               |
|440-496   |'"We Have Degrees in Violence": A Report on    |December 2007  |
|          |Torture and Human Rights Abuses in Zimbabwe.' -|               |
|          |The Open Society Initiative for Southern       |               |
|          |Africa, The Open Society Institute, The        |               |
|          |Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of Torture. |               |
|497-499   |'Human Rights Watch Researcher Says Food Has   |25/03/08       |
|          |Become a Political Weapon in Zimbabwe.' - HJT  |               |
|          |Research News Reporting Service.               |               |
|500-549   |'All Over Again: Human Rights Abuses and       |March 2008     |
|          |General Flawed Electoral Conditions in         |               |
|          |Zimbabwe's Coming General Elections.' - Human  |               |
|          |Rights Watch.                                  |               |
|550-551   |'Updates on Operation Mavhoterapapi (Where You |14/04/08       |
|          |Put Your 'X')' - Kubatana.net.                 |               |
|552-553   |'More Victims From ZANU PF's Operation         |14/04/08       |
|          |Mavhoterapapi (Where You Put Your 'X')' -      |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|554-555   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |16/04/08       |
|          |Tapiwa Mubwanda's Story' - Kubatana.net.       |               |
|556-557   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |17/04/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Penhalonga' -        |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|558       |'Mugabe Denounces Opposition, Britain as       |18/04/08       |
|          |Attacks on Opposition Supporters Continue' -   |               |
|          |HJT Research.co.uk                             |               |
|559-560   |'Zimbabwe: Zanu-PF Sets Up 'Torture Camps' -   |19/04/08       |
|          |Human Rights Watch.                            |               |
|561       |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |20/04/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Dzivarasekwa, Harare'|               |
|          |- Kubatana.net.                                |               |
|562-563   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |20/04/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Manicaland' -        |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|564-565   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |21/04/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Mashonaland East' -  |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|566-568   |'Zimbabwe: Surge in State-Sponsored Violence.' |25/04/08       |
|          |- Human Rights Watch.                          |               |
|569       |'Violence and Torture in Post-Election Zimbabwe|29/04/08       |
|          |- April 2008 - Power Point Presentation with   |               |
|          |Images.' - Kubatana.net.                       |               |
|570-571   |'Report on Post-Election Violence (with        |30/04/08       |
|          |Images)' - Kubatana.net.                       |               |
|572-593   |'If You Can't Join Them, Beat Them!            |05/05/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Zimbabwe.' - Zimbabwe|               |
|          |Human Rights NGO Forum.                        |               |
|594-595   |'Attacks to Create No-Go Areas for MDC.' -     |06/05/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|596-597   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |07/05/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Manicaland' -        |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|598       |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |08/05/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Shamva and Mutoko.' -|               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|599-600   |'Escalating Cases of Organised Violence and    |09/05/08       |
|          |Torture, and of Intimidation of Medical        |               |
|          |Personnel.' - Kubatana.net.                    |               |
|601-602   |'Aid Group Warn of Rural "Genocide."' -        |09/05/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|603-604   |'Zimbabwe: Violence Reaches Crisis Levels;     |15/05/08       |
|          |Youths Forcibly Recruited' - Amnesty           |               |
|          |International.                                 |               |
|605-606   |'Zimbabwe: African Union Should Immediately    |19/05/08       |
|          |Deploy Monitors.' - Human Rights Watch.        |               |
|607-610   |'Letter to AU Chair H.E. Jean Ping on the      |19/05/08       |
|          |Situation in Zimbabwe.' - Human Rights Watch.  |               |
|611-612   |'UNHCR Distributes Aid to Southern Africa's    |21/05/08       |
|          |Xenophobia Victims.' - UNHCR.                  |               |
|613-672   |'Punishing Dissent, Silencing Citizens: The    |21/05/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe Elections 2008.' - Solidarity Peace   |               |
|          |Trust.                                         |               |
|673-674   |'Soaring Healthcare Costs Proving Fatal.' -    |30/05/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|675-696   |'Post-Election Violence Report No. 2.' -       |May 2008       |
|          |Zimbabwe Peace Project.                        |               |
|697-698   |'Teachers Fall Victim to Rural Violence.' -    |May 2008       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|699-700   |'Zimbabwe: Reverse Ban on Food Aid to Rural    |04/06/08       |
|          |Areas.' - Human Rights Watch.                  |               |
|701-702   |'Operation Mavhoterapapi (How Did You Vote) -  |05/06/08       |
|          |Post-Election Violence in Zaka.' -             |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|703-704   |'Zimbabwe: Amnesty International Accuses       |06/06/08       |
|          |Government of Using Food for Political Gain.' -|               |
|          |Amnesty International.                         |               |
|705-706   |'Cases of Systematic Violent Assault and       |17/06/08       |
|          |Torture Overwhelm Health Professionals.' -     |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|707-709   |'Hope Fades for Free Election in Zimbabwe.' -  |19/06/08       |
|          |US Department of State.                        |               |
|710-711   |'Zimbabwe: Humanitarian Situation is           |19/06/08       |
|          |Deteriorating.' - International Committee for  |               |
|          |the Red Cross.                                 |               |
|712-713   |'Tsvangirai Pulls Out of Ballot Amid Growing   |23/06/08       |
|          |Violence.' - Institute for War and Peace       |               |
|          |Reporting.                                     |               |
|714-715   |'Urging Delay of Zimbabwe's Run-Off Election,  |23/06/08       |
|          |UN Political Affairs Chief Says.' - UN Security|               |
|          |Council, 5919th Meeting (Night).               |               |
|716-719   |'Update on Recent Events in Zimbabwe.' - US    |24/06/08       |
|          |Department of State.                           |               |
|720-722   |'Zimbabwe: African Leaders Should Reject       |24/06/08       |
|          |Zimbabwe's Elections.' - Human Rights Watch.   |               |
|723-724   |'Victims of Organised Violence and Torture     |26/06/08       |
|          |Continue to Flood the Health System.' -        |               |
|          |Kubatana.net .                                 |               |
|725-845   |'Neighbors in Need: Zimbabweans Seeking Refuge |June 2008      |
|          |in South Africa.' - Human Rights Watch.        |               |
|846-918   |'Bullets for Each of You: State Sponsored      |June 2008      |
|          |Violence since Zimbabwe's March 29 Elections.' |               |
|          |- Human Rights Watch.                          |               |
|919       |'Zimbabwe: 11 Youths Abducted from Displaced   |10/07/08       |
|          |Persons Camp.' - Amnesty International.        |               |
|920       |'South Africa: Changing Pattern of             |11/07/08       |
|          |Displacement.' - UNHCR.                        |               |
|921-922   |'Billion-Dollar Poverty in Zimbabwe.' -        |12/07/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|923-924   |'Climate of Fear in Zimbabwe Persists Despite  |25/07/08       |
|          |Deal.' - Amnesty International.                |               |
|925-968   |'Desperately Seeking Sanity: What Prospects for|29/07/08       |
|          |a New Beginning in Zimbabwe.' - Solidarity     |               |
|          |Peace Trust.                                   |               |
|969-976   |'Zimbabwe: Travel Advice for this Country.' -  |30/07/08       |
|          |Foreign and Commonwealth Office.               |               |
|977-978   |'War Veterans in Manicaland Continue Attacks   |31/07/08       |
|          |Against MDC Members and the General Public.' - |               |
|          |Kubatana.net.                                  |               |
|979-980   |'Zimbabwe Continues to Suffer After the        |31/07/08       |
|          |Election.' - US Department of State.           |               |
|981-987   |'Zimbabwe's Humanitarian Crisis.' - BMJ.       |12/08/08       |
|988-1000  |'Zimbabwe: New Evictions Likely as Humanitarian|20/08/08       |
|          |Crisis Worsens.' - Internal Displacement       |               |
|          |Monitoring Centre.                             |               |
|1001-1002 |'Hungry Zimbabweans Forage to Survive.' -      |20/08/08       |
|          |Institute for War and Peace Reporting.         |               |
|1003-1026 |'"They Beat Me Like a Dog": Political          |August 2008    |
|          |Persecution of Opposition Activists and        |               |
|          |Supporters in Zimbabwe' - Human Rights Watch.  |               |
|1027-1078 |'The Many Faces of Displacement: IDPs in       |August 2008    |
|          |Zimbabwe.' - Internal Displacement Monitoring  |               |
|          |Centre                                         |               |
|          |TAB C                                          |               |
|C1 - 156  |Hansard                                        |2008           |


         DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT



|Page      |Document                                       |Date           |
|          |                                               |               |
|1         |Country of Origin Information Service report on|21/08/2008     |
|          |Zimbabwe.                                      |               |
|          |                                               |               |
|282       |Times Online "Robert Mugabe left isolated as   |10/12/2007     |
|          |European leaders attack his misrule in         |               |
|          |Zimbabwe".                                     |               |
|284       |Zimbabwe Tourism Authority, "Tourism Statistics|2008           |
|          |1st Half Report"                               |               |



       BUNDLE OF NEWS REPORTS SERVED FOR HEARING ON 30TH October 2008
_____________________________________________________________________

|Date       |Source       |Title                             |Page  |
|15.09.2008 |BBC News     |Zimbabwe rivals in historic pact. |1     |
|17.09.2008 |BBC News     |Zimbabwe victims demand justice.  |6     |
|18.09.2008 |BBC News     |Deal a humiliation, says Mugabe.  |10    |
|24.09.2008 |Voice of     |Political violence said rising in |13    |
|           |America      |Zimbabwe despite political accord.|      |
|25.09.2008 |Independent  |Zim deal rejected amid violence.  |14    |
|           |on Line      |                                  |      |
|26.09.2008 |Times on Line|Zimbabwe power-sharing deal faces |16    |
|           |             |disaster.                         |      |
|28.09.2008 |Independent  |Asylum for Zimbabweans withdrawn -|18    |
|           |on Line      |MDC angry.                        |      |
|30.09.2008 |Voice of     |Zimbabwe Mayors accuse minister of|19    |
|           |America      |meddling in municipal politics.   |      |
|01.10.2008 |Al Jazeera   |Zimbabwe deadlocked over cabinet. |21    |
|09.10.2008 |Voice of     |Zimbabwe opposition dismisses     |23    |
|           |America      |ruling party accusation.          |      |
|13.10.2008 |Guardian     |Power sharing: not Mugabe's style.|25    |
|           |(Wilf Mbanga)|                                  |      |
|15.10.2008 |New York     |Zimbabwe generals' fears of       |27    |
|           |Times        |prosecution threaten deal.        |      |
|20.10.2008 |Voice of     |Zimbabwe by-elections mooted,     |31    |
|           |America      |raising fears of more political   |      |
|           |             |violence.                         |      |
|21.10.2008 |BBC News     |MDC seeks new Zimbabwe election.  |33    |
|22.10.2008 |Voice of     |Zimbabwe ruling party partisans   |36    |
|           |America      |opt for government without        |      |
|           |             |opposition.                       |      |
|23.10.2008 |Telegraph    |Zimbabwe: Corruption fears over   |38    |
|           |             |�300m UN aid.                     |      |


