
                AA (Algeria - Mental health)  Algeria [2005] UKIAT 00084 | |




                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  15 December 2004
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  20/04/2005

                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                       Dr H H Storey (Vice President)
                         Mr G Warr (Vice President)

Between:







                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Jackson, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss T Hart, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mrs C A
     S O'Garro, promulgated on 7 January 2004.  She dismissed the appeal of
     the Appellant.  He is a citizen of Algeria,  born  in  1973,  who  had
     appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 18 April
     2001, refusing leave to enter or  remain  and  refusing  asylum.   The
     Appellant had claimed asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom in  July
     1997.

  2. The original basis of his claim had been  a  fear  of  persecution  by
     terrorist groups who, it was said, had killed his  brother,  a  police
     officer, in 1994, had killed his mother and father and had  threatened
     him even after he had gone to live with his sister and her husband  in
     a more secure part of Algiers.

  3. Some long time after the refusal decision  in  which  this  claim  was
     rejected, the Appellant accepted, in a  statement  dated  16  December
     2003, that that claim was a fabricated account.  He said that  he  had
     relied on the advice of people with whom he had been detained.  He had
     been convicted of violent disorder at Yarlswood and sentenced to three
     year's imprisonment.  He did not serve it separately  because  he  had
     been in immigration detention for thirty months.  (He was released  on
     immigration bail in March 2004).

  4. Now he said that his parents had not been killed  by  terrorists.   He
     mother was alive aged 85 and  living  in  Algiers,  but  he  had  lost
     contact with her.  He had four brothers and six sisters.  His  parents
     had paid for him to leave Algeria because of sibling  infighting  over
     his father's estate and because of the general level  of  violence  in
     Algeria.  He was afraid of the ongoing violence and terrorism, he  had
     lost family contact, he had no accommodation  and  could  not  readily
     obtain employment.  He would be mistreated  on  arrival.   His  mental
     health was poor and he could not cope with the stress without support.

  5. We turn to the material before the Adjudicator.  She had a report of 4
     July 2001 from Dr Labinjo, a senior medical officer at  HMP  Rochester
     Health Care Centre, where the Appellant had been admitted in May 2001.
      He referred to the history of drug abuse, emotional  instability  and
     suicide attempts and concluded that the Appellant had  never  improved
     over a  considerable  period  in  custody.   He  had  not  coped  with
     incarceration and  his  reaction  had  exacerbated  his  anxiety,  his
     depressive state and his propensity to harm himself.  He suffered from
     acute anxiety/depression, he was suicidal and harmed himself from time
     to time.  At the height of  his  illness  he  was  a  moderately  high
     suicide risk and he  continued  to  be  a  significant  suicide  risk;
     release could only benefit him because he had an exaggerated  reaction
     to incarceration.  Remaining in detention would lead to quite  a  high
     risk of a recurrence of the illness with attendant suicidal ideation.

  6. Dr Gamble produced a report of 24 November 2003  and  a  supplementary
     report of 3 December 2003.  He is a specialist registrar  in  forensic
     psychology and psychotherapy at  the  Portman  Clinic.   His  November
     report recounts the claims  originally  made  by  the  Appellant,  now
     accepted by the Appellant to be a fabrication.   Dr  Gamble  rehearses
     the significant events from the medical records which include a number
     of attempted hangings, and other incidents  of  attempted  self  harm,
     disruptive and destructive behaviour,  attacks  on  staff,  recoveries
     from depression and a conversation, to which Mr  Jackson  said  little
     weight should be attached, in which he was overhead  to  say  that  he
     would not be deported if he kept putting ligatures over his neck.

  7. Dr Gamble concluded that  the  Appellant  was  not  suffering  from  a
     depressive or psychotic disorder  nor  from  PTSD.   His  symptoms  of
     anxiety  and  insomnia  were  a  normal  psychological   response   to
     uncertainty over the  possibility  of  return.   Dr  Gamble  took  the
     Appellant's story largely at face value  but  did  not  see  a  severe
     psychiatric  disorder.   The  behavioural   problems   and   emotional
     instability could be understood  as  "an  interaction  of  situational
     factors, chiefly his imprisonment and the uncertainty about his return
     to Algeria, with a personality which shows some dysfunctional  traits.
     In  my  view,  his  emotional  unstable  personality  and  impulsivity
     predisposes him to respond to stressful situations in  a  violent  and
     self-destructive way.  There is also  some  evidence  of  anti  social
     traits."

  8. His reasoning included  the  Appellant's  behavioural  disturbance  in
     childhood, his hard drug misuse in the United Kingdom, the  stress  of
     detention, the high risk of self harm or suicide  due  to  impulsivity
     (these moods normalised rather than persisted after  a  few  hours  or
     days);  he  evidenced  anti-social  personality  traits  through   his
     deceptive and manipulative behaviour which  included  some  fabricated
     symptoms, some degree of untruth in his story and controlling his self
     harm so as to have a particular effect on the staff.

  9. His manipulative behaviour had created problems for his treatment  and
     management in prison.  No long  term  improvement  would  be  possible
     while he remained there, uncertain  about  his  future.   His  current
     history would continue with a high risk of  suicide  on  impulse.   On
     release in the United Kingdom,  his  misuse  of  illegal  drugs  would
     increase the risk of self harm and of harm  to  others.   If  attempts
     were made to return him, he would become more distressed, unstable and
     at a greater risk of self-harm or suicide, including  more  calculated
     acts to  prevent  his  return.   His  medication  might  improve  some
     symptoms,  but  not   his   longstanding   personality   difficulties.
     Effective treatment for his complex psychiatric difficulties would  be
     difficult in any setting and the more  so  in  prison.   He  would  be
     likely to require prolonged psychological therapy and rehabilitation.

 10. In his supplementary report of December 2003, Dr Gamble said "he would
     be at greatest risk of self harm or suicide shortly  after  he  became
     aware of the failure of his appeal".  The Appellant was desperate  not
     to return to Algeria.  If he could not avoid that,  he  could  respond
     with particularly violent acts of self-harm which could  lead  to  his
     death. (We were not provided with any updating material, nor with  any
     evidence of  any  reaction  to  the  Adjudicator's  dismissal  of  his
     appeal).

 11. Dr Gamble understood that the Appellant was likely to be  detained  on
     return to Algeria, during which time  physical  mistreatment  was  not
     unusual.  The Appellant would find this difficult  to  cope  with  and
     would be at a significant risk of responding with further attempts  at
     self-harm.  The Appellant's actions could lead to his  death  and  the
     more frequently and seriously he tried, the  more  likely  it  was  to
     occur.  Dr Gamble was concerned about  the  risk  of  relapse  in  the
     Appellant's substance misuse, treatment for which would be in at least
     as short supply in Algeria as in the United Kingdom.

 12. The Adjudicator also had evidence from a Miss Seelig of Luton  Amnesty
     International who had visited the Appellant weekly in prison and had a
     maternal interest in him.  He had decided to stay in detention  rather
     than return voluntarily to Algeria.  She feared that if  he  lost  his
     appeal he would react badly and might  attempt  suicide.   She  feared
     that return would result in self harm because of his mental state.

 13.  The  Adjudicator  found  that  his  fear  of  being   a   victim   of
     indiscriminate violence did not make him  a  refugee.  Then  she  said
     (paragraph 11):

           "With regard to  the  appellant's  return  as  a  failed  asylum
           seeker, the objective evidence states that  if  an  unsuccessful
           asylum seeker is neither known to the  authorities,  he  or  she
           faces no threat to their life or freedom [sic].   I  also  noted
           that although the asylum seeker who returns to Algeria  will  be
           detained and interrogated to determine  their  identity  and  to
           check whether there are any outstanding criminal proceedings  in
           Algeria or unfulfilled military service, such  persons  are  not
           maltreated or tortured upon their return.


           As the appellant is not known to the authorities or was involved
           in any armed groups, I find that there is no real risk  that  he
           will be exposed to the sort of physical harm that engages either
           the Refugee or Human Rights Convention, even taking into account
           the appellant's mental state and his reaction to detention.  The
           appellant has now been in detention for more than 30 months  and
           although he has been violent on occasions in the past I have  no
           evidence that he has exhibited violent behaviour recently."


14. She then turned to the medical evidence about  his  mental  health.   Dr
  Gamble concluded that the Appellant did not  suffer  from  depression  or
  psychotic disorder but showed (paragraph 15):




           "... many of  the  features  of  a  person  with  a  personality
           disorder.  Dr Gamble  said  that  effective  treatment  for  the
           appellant's  complex   psychological   difficulties   would   be
           difficult  in  any  setting  and  that  although   his   current
           medication may improve some of his symptoms; it is  unlikely  to
           improve  his  long  standing  personality  difficulties  without
           therapy."




15. She also said (paragraph 11):




           "Dr Gamble has said that the appellant may find it  particularly
           difficult to cope should he be held in detention in  Algeria  on
           his arrival  and  there  is  a  significant  risk  that  of  his
           responding  to  the  stress  and  frustration  of  a  period  in
           detention in Algeria with further self harm or suicide.   In  my
           view there is no reason why  the  appellant  should  attempt  to
           commit suicide should he be returned to Algeria as he is  likely
           to be detained for a short period only while enquiries are  made
           about him.  As the appellant is not a person with a high profile
           or criminal record in Algeria, it is  highly  unlikely  that  he
           will be subjected to punitive measures  by  the  authorities  on
           return.  In my view Dr Gamble is only speculating as to how  the
           appellant is likely to react in a particular  situation.   There
           is no certainty that the appellant will behave  in  the  way  Dr
           Gamble suggests.  In any event I find  that  the  appellant  can
           control how he behaves in a given situation and need not  revert
           to self-destructive acts."




      There was some criticism of those last two sentences.




16. Dr Gamble also was recorded as saying that the Appellant:




           "...  is  deceptive  and  manipulative  and  that  he   may   be
           fabricating  some  of  his  symptoms.   [The  Adjudicator   then
           commented:]  This  of  course  has  borne  itself  out  in   the
           appellant's most  recent  evidence  where  he  has  admitted  to
           fabricating part of his claim for asylum.   The  fact  that  the
           appellant can manipulate a situation to suit indicate to me that
           the appellant can avoid his violent and destructive  actions  if
           he wanted."




17. The Adjudicator's analysis of Dr Gamble's evidence and the standard  she
  appeared to be setting for the proof of harm were also  criticised.   The
  Adjudicator made those comments in the  course  of  rejecting  the  claim
  under the Refugee Convention.



18. She then turned to the ECHR.  It  is  her  conclusions  in  relation  to
  human rights which are challenged in this appeal, because the Adjudicator
  was  told  that  the  appeal  under  the  Refugee  Convention  was  being
  withdrawn.  There is  necessarily  however  much  common  ground  in  the
  analysis of psychiatric evidence under both Conventions.  The claim  made
  was that the Appellant would not be able to access appropriate  treatment
  for his mental illness and would suffer degrading treatment on return.



19. The Adjudicator concluded:




           "The objective evidence therefore does indicate that Algeria  do
           have  adequate  health   care   for   persons   suffering   from
           mental/psychological illness so it is highly possible  that  the
           appellant would be able to receive treatment for  his  condition
           if he is returned to Algeria.  At the moment  the  appellant  is
           only  receiving  medication  with  no   therapeutic   treatment.
           Further, Dr Gamble has said that treatment  of  the  appellant's
           complex psychological difficulties would  be  difficult  in  any
           setting.  Bearing in mind this evidence, I find that as  medical
           treatment is available to the appellant in Algeria,  then  there
           would in my view be no breach of Article 3 of the ECHR."



20. The case was different from that of D.



21. The Adjudicator then turned to Article 8, applying Razgar in  the  Court
  of Appeal.  She asked:



           "... whether serious harm to the appellant's mental  state  will
           be caused or materially contributed to by the difference between
           the treatment that he is receiving in  the  United  Kingdom  and
           that which will be available to him in Algeria."



22. She concluded:



           "Applying these guiding principles to the appellant's case, I do
           not find that the appellant's private  life  will  be  affected.
           The appellant's behavioural difficulties have been  ongoing  for
           some time, possibly even before he came to  the  United  Kingdom
           according to Dr Gamble's  report.   Further,  I  noted  that  Dr
           Gamble says that if the appellant was released from  prison  and
           went into the community he would be concerned about  his  return
           to the misuse of illegal drugs.  His risk of self-harm and  harm
           to  others  would  be  increased  by  the  damaging  effect   of
           substances on his mental health.  If he bought drugs he would be
           in  contact  with  criminals  and  he  would  be  at   risk   of
           exploitation.  Bearing this in mind, I find that  the  appellant
           would be in no better position if  he  remained  in  the  United
           Kingdom. His private life would mostly likely deteriorate."



23. If returned to Algeria, where violence was abating, the Appellant  would
  have the support of siblings, his aged mother and uncle, he could  locate
  his brother in law and therefore the  rest  of  his  family;   medication
  would be available to the Appellant, his mental state would be  improved.
  He could control his self destructive propensity if he chose  to  do  so.
  He would be no more likely to attempt to commit suicide or self  harm  if
  he were returned, than if he remained in  the  United  Kingdom.   Removal
  would be proportionate.



24.  Mr  Jackson  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that   the   Adjudicator's
  determination did not appreciate the true significance of the psychiatric
  evidence.  This showed that, once in detention starting in May 2001,  the
  attempts at self-harm began, some manipulative and some  because  of  his
  personality disorder.  Dr Gamble's evidence, in his supplementary report,
  said that many of the  acts  of  self  harm,  ie  attempted  hanging  and
  swallowing razor blades, could  have  been  fatal  and  demonstrated  his
  desperation and disturbed mental state; the more he tried the more likely
  he was to succeed.



25. Dr Gamble's evidence showed that at each stage of  the  removal  process
  there would be risks to the Appellant when told of the appeal result,  in
  transit, on arrival in Algeria, during questioning there, and the more so
  were he ill treated, and finally after release.  He would be detained  at
  various stages and would be at particular risk of impulsive self-harm  on
  being told of any adverse decision.



26. Mr Jackson submitted that it was for the  Secretary  of  State  to  show
  what protective measures were available both in Algeria and here  in  the
  United Kingdom, following Kurtolli v SSHD [2003] EWHC2744 Admin  -  paras
  62-65.  Soumahoro [2003] EWCH Civ 840 remained good law  after  N  [2003]
  EWCA Civ 1369, [2004] INLR 10, for the  reasons  given  by  Silber  J  in
  Kurtolli.



27. The Adjudicator had applied the tests of  the  cases  of  D  and  N  but
  Soumahoro and Kurtolli showed the  right  test  for  Article  3  and  the
  suicide risk.  The question was not was adequate treatment available, but
  would removal lead to a real risk or a significantly  increased  risk  of
  suicide.  For Article 3 purposes,  behaviour  and  risks  in  the  United
  Kingdom were irrelevant;  those might be relevant to Article 8  but  that
  had a lower threshold of risk.  The Adjudicator had also wrongly required
  certainty about the way in which the Appellant  would  behave.   She  had
  also failed to consider the various stages of risk  which  the  Appellant
  would face on removal against those tests.  She had ignored the  role  of
  the Appellant's personality disorder in reaching the conclusion that  the
  Appellant could avoid his self destructive actions.  Dr  Gamble  was  not
  properly described as speculating about the risk in view of the frequency
  of the Appellant's attempts at self harm, and his being monitored closely
  while still being able to make serious  attempts  at  suicide.   She  had
  asked the wrong questions and that had led to unsustainable  findings  of
  fact.



28. Ms Hart for the Secretary of State submitted that  the  Adjudicator  was
  entitled to conclude as  she  had  done.   Dr  Gamble  had  accepted  the
  Appellant's false history in large measure, although he  was  aware  that
  the claim about the mother being dead might be false.   So the  Appellant
  was a liar and there was evidence that he manipulated  staff  to  try  to
  persuade them that he  was  attempting  suicide,  when  clearly  on  some
  occasions he was not.  There was no reason to suppose that he  would  not
  be  monitored  if  detained  pre-removal;   a   decision   would   remove
  uncertainty.  He had a large family in Algeria, he had been in  detention
  for  a  long  time  before  these  problems  emerged  and  he  faced  the
  possibility of only a short period in detention before gaining  permanent
  freedom.  The outcomes applying Articles 3 and 8 were likely to  be  very
  similar.  The Adjudicator had in reality applied the  Soumahoro  test  if
  not in its precise terms.  It was for the IAT to decide whether Soumahoro
  remained good law.



29. Shortly after submissions concluded, Mr  Jackson  submitted  to  us  the
  Tribunal's decision in M (Djebari) (Decision  -  Evidence)  (Algeria  CG)
  [2003] UKIAT 00089 which had been before the Adjudicator.  He  said  that
  it bore out Dr Gamble's concern that the Appellant would be  ill  treated
  whilst detained upon arrival  at  Algiers.   There  was  no  Home  Office
  Presenting Officer's response.



30. The decision in M concerned how Algeria treated  failed  asylum  seekers
  on return.  After dealing with a previous Tribunal decision  and  various
  elements of background evidence, the Tribunal had said:



           "15.  First, what is likely to happen to  him  immediately  upon
                 his return?  It seems to us the answer to this is clear; he
                 will  be  detained  at  the  airport   and   he   will   be
                 interrogated.  That may be the end of  the  matter.   On  a
                 balance of probabilities we would hold it  likely  that  it
                 would be the end of the matter.   Even Mr Joffe states that
                 it is only where suspicion is  excited  that  a  person  is
                 likely to be detained for any greater period of  time  than
                 that required for his identity and other particulars to  be
                 clarified.  However, in this Tribunal we are not  concerned
                 with balance of probability but  with  real  risk  or  real
                 likelihood and we consider in light of what is said in  the
                 CIPU report and the report of Professor Seddon  that  there
                 must be a real likelihood that Mr Mokhtari's detention  may
                 be for a longer  period  than  that  and  that  he  may  be
                 detained incommunicado for a period  of  some  days  whilst
                 enquires are made into him.

                 He is not a person with a political or Islamist  past.   We
                 must  therefore  consider  what  risks  of   physical   ill
                 treatment he would run.  It seems to us that  the  evidence
                 of Professor Seddon is that he might encounter  a  beating,
                 he might encounter other forms of physical  ill  treatment,
                 but he will not be likely to be severely tortured or to  be
                 seriously physically ill treated.  At least that is how  we
                 view his report.

           16.   It may therefore be  that  even  if  one  takes  Professor
                 Seddon's report at its highest, he will not be at real risk
                 of harm so severe as to contravene the relevant Articles of
                 the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  But
                 we do not feel it appropriate to leave  the  matter  there.
                 We should consider what likelihood there is in reality that
                 he will suffer any sort of physical maltreatment that  this
                 Tribunal should recognise?  Evidently  the  possibility  of
                 such maltreatment exists.  Professor Seddon is aware of two
                 cases where it has occurred.  But as against that, we  must
                 also pay heed to the widespread experience of many  western
                 countries who have been returning failed asylum seekers  to
                 Algeria over  a  long  period  of  time.   We  consider  it
                 inconceivable that if  there  was  any  real  risk  of  ill
                 treatment on a more than isolated basis of returned  failed
                 asylum seekers that word would not have got out by now.

           17.   Persons have been  returning  to  Algeria  in  substantial
                 numbers, not only of their own  free  will  but  as  failed
                 asylum seekers from many western countries for  many  years
                 now.  In the CIPU report hundreds are specified.  We  would
                 venture to suggest from our experience that the number must
                 be thousands by  now,  from  all  the  countries  that  are
                 returning  persons  to   that   country.    It   would   be
                 astonishing,  if  there  were  any  real  risk  of  serious
                 physical ill treatment of these people that no word  of  it
                 has reached any of these Embassies.   And  yet  it  appears
                 that none has."



Conclusions



31. First, the material can properly be appraised on  a  somewhat  different
  basis from Dr Gamble's as to what the Appellant had actually experienced,
  and therefore as to the degree to which he was being manipulative;   that
  characteristic was clearly present.  A different view about the degree of
  manipulative behaviour, leading to a different view about the  extent  to
  which the Appellant could control his attempts at self harm,  is  not  of
  itself unreasonable in the light of the acceptance by the Appellant  that
  almost everything that he had said about his experiences in  Algeria  was
  untrue and a lie that he had manufactured.  It is not just  the  complete
  and long maintained fabrication of the story itself which  is  important;
  it  is  also  that  the  very  experiences  which  underlay  Dr  Gamble's
  conclusions did not occur.  There is  no  report  from  Dr  Gamble  which
  addresses this true basis upon which the Appellant  came  to  be  in  the
  United Kingdom.  Nonetheless, we accept that  the  Adjudicator  may  have
  overstated the prospect of self-control  in  the  light  of  the  careful
  reports of Dr Gamble, misplaced in part though they were.  It  would  not
  be right to see the Appellant as simply a controlled manipulative man.



32. Second, the Appellant suffered from  personality  difficulties  and  not
  from  mental  illness.   These  led  to  impulsive  behaviour  for  which
  treatment (largely therapy)  would  be  difficult  anywhere.   Medication
  played but a limited role.   Third,  a  good  part  of  his  difficulties
  related to the fact of detention  in  prison  and  uncertainty  over  his
  future.  Fourth, there would be risks of  self-harm  or  suicide  in  the
  United Kingdom were he to re-engage  in  substance  misuse,  on  release.
  Fifth, there were some facilities for mental health treatment in  Algeria
  where the Adjudicator found legitimately on the evidence, he  would  also
  receive support from the family.



33. Sixth, the Adjudicator's conclusions that the Appellant would not be  at
  a real risk of physical ill treatment on return was one open  to  her  on
  the evidence.  We do not read M (Algeria) as being of the  assistance  to
  the Appellant which Mr Jackson contended for.  The Adjudicator recognised
  that the  Appellant  was  likely  to  be  detained  and  interrogated,  a
  conclusion which tallies with paragraph 16 of M (Algeria).  The Appellant
  is not in a political risk  category  eg  as  one  with  a  political  or
  Islamist past or one who has been of interest to the police.   There  was
  no real risk of physical  ill  treatment  during  that  short  period  of
  detention, as the Adjudicator found in line with paragraphs 16 and 17  of
  M (Algeria).  There might only be a possibility of some  lesser  form  of
  physical ill treatment during that short period.  This is all  consistent
  with the IND 2/2004 Bulletin  which  refers  to  returned  failed  asylum
  seekers  often  being  interrogated  to  establish  their  identity,  any
  outstanding  criminal  proceedings  or  unfulfilled   military   service.
  Sometimes people are held for several days but there have been  no  known
  maltreatment or torture cases in the last two years of such people.



34. The Adjudicator was right that, viewed as an  ordinary  returned  asylum
  seeker, the Appellant would not face a real risk of a breach of Article 3
  on his return.  This was not  a  case  either  in  which  the  difference
  between the medical treatment which the Appellant would  receive  in  the
  United Kingdom compared to that which he would receive in Algeria, or the
  circumstances of his life could possibly engage Article 3 or, if engaging
  Article 8 could fall into the exceptional and  rare  cases  envisaged  in
  Razgar in the House of Lords as making return disproportionate.  There is
  nothing to show that, once at liberty in Algeria, there would be  a  real
  risk of suicide:  this is not a want of treatment case.  The  Appellant's
  problems relate in very large measure to the fact of incarceration,  lack
  of certainty and a personal desperation not to return.   The  latter  was
  not engendered by any particular associations of past  ill  treatment  or
  experiences in Algeria.  Release from immigration detention was  seen  as
  important for his mental well-being.   Those  issues  would  be  resolved
  through being at liberty in Algeria.  There is a risk of suicide  through
  personality disorder which  could  be  greater  in  the  United  Kingdom,
  through drug abuse, or greater in Algeria, or the same in  either  place.
  There is no real evidence of any increased risk once those other  factors
  of incarceration and uncertainty have been eliminated.



35. Mr Jackson's strongest point related to the way  in  which  the  various
  stages of removal have been considered against various degrees  of  risk.
  These are not clearly dealt  with  and  the  Adjudicator  has  failed  to
  consider certain material factors to which they give rise.   This  is  an
  error of law.  However, we have the material which she had and  are  able
  to make our own assessment of it.



36. The first stage of risk could arise when the Appellant is  told  of  any
  adverse decision.  As we have said, we have not  been  told  of  how  the
  Appellant reacted when  told  of  the  Adjudicator's  determination;   Dr
  Gamble regarded that as the riskiest moment  for  impulsive  suicidal  or
  self-harm reaction.  But three points should be  made.   It  is  for  the
  Claimant not the Secretary of State to show before the  Adjudicator  that
  there would be inadequate protection against  such  a  reaction.   It  is
  different if the Secretary of State asserts that the case  is  manifestly
  unfounded without producing any compelling material to show that there is
  adequate protection;  but that is not the  position  on  a  full  appeal.
  Second, it is unrealistic to suppose that, whether in custody or not, the
  State would not take steps to provide an appropriate degree of protection
  against suicide or self harm in the way in  which  it  would  for  anyone
  whose risk in that respect it was aware of.  It cannot be expected to  do
  more.  Third, and related, the Courts or Tribunals are entitled to  reach
  and inform  the  parties  of  adverse  decisions  even  though  that  may
  increase, even significantly, the risk of suicide or self harm.  This  is
  a not uncommonly asserted risk for those facing imprisonment for criminal
  offences.  It would be wholly contrary to the public interest for  Courts
  or Tribunals to have to weigh against what would otherwise be the  proper
  decision, the threat that someone would in  consequence  commit  suicide.
  Even more so does that apply where there is no  mental  illness  involved
  and there is on the other hand evidence  of  a  manipulative  personality
  disorder.  The answer is that if such an increased risk exists, steps can
  be taken to guard against it.



37. Here, this decision (which will dismiss the  appeal)  will  be  formally
  promulgated after the solicitors have been notified of the result.   They
  can forewarn NASS at his address, who can decide what to do.  This  could
  involve a return into detention before removal.



38. The second stage - pre-removal detention:  the  Appellant  had  been  in
  custody for some time without committing suicide or serious acts of self-
  harm.  The pre-removal detention, during which the Appellant  would  know
  that he would be returned, might see more desperate  attempts  but  there
  would be greater certainty over his departure.  Those in  charge  of  his
  custody would be able to continue the  watchful  measures  taken  before,
  although no guarantees are possible for  someone  who  is  determined  to
  commit suicide or to harm himself seriously.  The Appellant's desperation
  to stay, engendering the risk of suicide, does not to  our  mind  require
  that leave to remain be given to avoid a breach of Articles 3 or 8.   The
  Adjudicator was also right to point out that Dr  Gamble's  assessment  of
  manipulative behaviour and control proceeds on a history which is  almost
  wholly  untrue,  rather  than  untrue  in  one  not  very  large  aspect.
  Manipulative attempts  at  self  harm  or  suicide  attempts  by  someone
  desperate not to return to his own country need to  be  guarded  against,
  but would be removed by the fact of removal.



39. Third stage - transit:   there  are  no  reasons  to  suppose  that  the
  Secretary of State would not  provide  appropriately  qualified  escorts.
  This is known to be done.  Other measures  in  other  cases  may  include
  accompanying family members.



40. Fourth stage - arrival:   we  have  discussed  this  in  general  above.
  There is no real risk of a breach of Article 3;  there is  a  possibility
  of some lesser ill-treatment during a short period of  detention.   There
  is a risk of impulsive suicide or self-harm and we are prepared to assume
  that the Algerian authorities may be less  watchful  than  those  in  the
  United Kingdom.   However,  manipulative  or  controlling  self  harm  or
  attempted suicidal behaviour will be less likely  because  its  objective
  will already have failed.  Insofar as desperation not to return  promotes
  such attempts, that too may well have  diminished  through  the  fact  of
  return and the reality of experience.



41. Fifth stage - release:  as we  have  said,  we  see  nothing  about  the
  circumstances in Algeria to add  to  the  risks.   This  is  not  a  case
  involving a significant difference in treatment.  He could reasonably  be
  expected to contact his large family.  He does not face ill treatment  of
  a nature falling below Article 3.  He  would  not  be  separated  from  a
  family in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  risk  factors  of  incarceration,
  uncertainty and of manipulative self-harm  would  have  been  eliminated,
  even the fact of desperation not to return would  have  been  diminished.
  He would be at some risk anywhere, even if in part those risks arose from
  different reasons depending on where he was.  There is some mental health
  treatment available to him in Algeria but the Appellant  suffers  from  a
  personality disorder with varied causes, not all  as  Dr  Gamble  thought
  because the alleged  personal  experiences  were  untrue,  leading  to  a
  perhaps less severe disorder.  Some  of  these  causes  would  have  been
  eliminated by the fact of return as well.



42. Putting that analysis into ECHR terms,  nothing  involves  treatment  by
  the United Kingdom  which  itself  breaches  Article  3.   The  treatment
  involved in informing the Appellant of the decision, detaining  and  then
  actually removing him does not involve such a breach.  Merely  increasing
  the risk  of  suicide  through  those  actions,  against  which  suitable
  protection is then available,  involves  no  breach  of  Article  3.   In
  Algeria, the degree of risk or of increase,  weighing  the  reduction  in
  risk factors against the fact of return and short term detention with the
  possibility of some low level physical ill treatment, can be described as
  speculative.  But a better answer is that there has not been shown to  be
  a real increased risk of suicide in those circumstances compared  to  the
  risk he would face on release in the United Kingdom.  We do not therefore
  see any basis for a breach of Article 3.



43. Turning to Article 8, the  only  relevant  aspect  of  private  life  is
  personal integrity through its mental health aspect.  Whilst  Mr  Jackson
  is right that a lower threshold of circumstances, than is required for  a
  breach of Article  3,  suffices  to  engage  Article  8(1)  and  to  show
  interference with the Article 8 rights, the effect of Article 8(2)  means
  that the circumstances in which a case does not satisfy Article 3 but can
  nonetheless satisfy Article 8(1) and (2) on the  same  factors,  will  be
  very rare, as was said in Razgar in the House of Lords, paragraph 20.  We
  see no factor of difference here.



44. Even if there were to be a deterioration in the  Appellant's  moral  and
  physical integrity,  we  regard  the  material  as  showing  removal  was
  proportionate in the light  of  the  legitimate  interests  of  effective
  immigration control, as did the Adjudicator.  The Appellant has no  claim
  to be here other than his desire not to return to  Algeria.   He  made  a
  false asylum claim.  He has no mental illness.   He  has  a  pre-existing
  personality disorder.  He has in part manipulated his symptoms to prolong
  or to try to ensure his stay.  He would return to a family  and  to  some
  scope for mental  care  for  what  is  a  condition  difficult  to  treat
  anywhere.  There is likely  to  be  a  reasonable  degree  of  protection
  against any increased risk of suicide prior to removal.  If any increased
  risks persist, rather than being reduced by  departure,  that  degree  of
  increased risk does not make his return disproportionate.



45. We make a few closing observations about Soumahoro in  the  light  of  N
  and of Razgar in the House of Lords.  It is important  to  remember  that
  Soumahoro and Kurtolli involved certificates of  manifest  unfoundedness.
  They do not purport to decide more than what are possible thresholds  for
  a breach of Article 3 and do not set  out  definitive  thresholds  for  a
  breach of Article 3.  The real risk or a significantly increased risk  of
  suicide (Soumahoro paragraph 85) does not purport to  constitute  a  test
  for the breach of Article 3.  It represented  circumstances  in  which  a
  breach of Article 3 could not be regarded as unarguable.   Bensaid  v  UK
  [2001] INLR 325 ECtHR does not suggest that an increased risk of  suicide
  of itself is a breach of Article  3;   in  certain  circumstances  it  is
  capable of  being  a  breach;   nor  would  that  necessarily  engage  or
  constitute an interference with Article 8 rights let alone  constitute  a
  disproportionate  one  having  regard  to  the  legitimate  interests  of
  immigration control.



46. Second, although Soumahoro was not expressly  considered  in  Razgar  in
  the House of Lords because that was an Article 8 case, no conclusion  one
  way or the other can be drawn from that.  But what  is  important  though
  for Article 8 is that the questions  in  paragraph  17-20  of  Razgar  be
  asked.  No conclusion was expressed about the final answer in  that  case
  beyond that it was a possibility that the return of Razgar  might  breach
  Article 8.  But the answer under Article 8 as  a  whole  will  rarely  be
  different from what it would be under Article 3 if the same  factors  are
  relied  on.   Bensaid  reflects  that  same  approach  while  considering
  Articles 3 and 8 separately.



47. Third, N illustrates the extremity of condition  which  still  does  not
  satisfy Article 3 and how high the test has to be for a case  to  satisfy
  Article 3;  that in turn affects the way in which a breach of  Article  8
  overall has to be approached;  the violation has to  be  a  flagrant  one
  amounting to an effective denial of the  rights  in  Article  8.   It  is
  difficult to see that risks of self-harm or suicide for mental illness or
  personality disorder should be approached  very  differently  from  other
  illnesses which may lead to a painful death in an awareness that  such  a
  death is increasingly imminent.  This point was made in Djali [2003] EWCA
  Civ 1371 (paragraph 30), post Razgar and N in the Court of Appeal.



48. It is also worth noting here two other decisions of the IAT:  N  (Kenya)
  [2004] UKIAT 00053, in which the tests in relation to the seriousness  of
  harm required in respect of mental illness and suicide risk where treated
  as essentially similar under both Articles 3 and 8, and  KK  (Serbia  and
  Montenegro) [2004] UKIAT 00228, in which it  was  correctly  pointed  out
  that  Kurtolli  was  a  case  concerning  a   certificate   of   manifest
  unfoundedness, and which considered separately the effect of  an  adverse
  decision in the United Kingdom on risk in the United Kingdom and risk  on
  return after removal.  It recognised the  problems  of  acceding  to  any
  claim that an adverse decision  could  lead  to  suicide  in  the  United
  Kingdom, with the  protective  measures  available,  and  considered  the
  relevance of the Adjudicator's role in  assessing  circumstances  in  the
  country of return against the relevant thresholds, as opposed to  medical
  evidence which considered the best clinical outcome for the client.



49. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for what we say about  Article
  3 and Article 8 in this context.









                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT
