

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
     PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami) Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00089


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 11 April 2007                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Mather
                      Senior Immigration Judge Nichols
                                mrs e Morton


                                   Between


                                PM and Others
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the First and Second Appellants:    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by
                    White Ryland
For the Third Appellant:        Mr B Lams, Counsel instructed by Lawrence
                               and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kovats, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
                    Solicitor


    Those returned from the United Kingdom will not, without more, be at
    real risk at the airport or after arrival in Kabul.


    Those returned from the United Kingdom are not at real risk, without
    more, of being suspected by the authorities as insurgents


    The past of an individual seeking accommodation or work in Kabul, or
    elsewhere, may be discovered and mentioned to the authorities.
    Similarly, the authorities may become aware of someone newly arrived in
    an area.  That may result in a person being detained for questioning
    but there is no satisfactory evidence such questioning gives rise to a
    real risk of serious harm.


    Subject to an individual's personal circumstances, it is unlikely to be
    unduly harsh (or unreasonable) to expect them to relocate to Kabul if
    they have established a real risk of serious harm in (and restricted
    to) areas outside Kabul.


    There is no satisfactory evidence that a person who has been associated
    in the past with Hizb-i-Islami will always be regarded as such.


    There is no longer evidence of real risk to individuals said to have
    possible knowledge of the whereabouts of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The three appellants are  nationals  of  Afghanistan.   Each  has  some
    connection to Hizb i Islami  (also  spelt  Hezb-e-Islami  or  Hisb-e-
    Islami).  Each has had his appeal dismissed by an Immigration Judge and
    errors  of  law  have  been  found  in  respect  of   each   of   their
    determinations.  Each was found  to  be  a  credible  witness  and  the
    factual basis of their claims is not in dispute.  The  reconsiderations
    were heard together in order to enable the  Tribunal  to  give  country
    guidance as to the level of risk that would be faced by persons who are
    either members of Hizb-i-Islami or associated in  some  way  with  such
    members.  Because it is intended that  this  determination  shall  form
    country guidance a list of the background material that was  considered
    by the Tribunal  is  to  be  found  in  a  schedule  attached  to  this
    determination and a summary of our conclusions about the risk  to  such
    persons is to be  found  at  paragraph  140  ,  immediately  before  we
    consider the individual appeals.

2.   In considering the appeals of the three appellants  we  have  borne  in
    mind that in each case the burden of proof is upon  the  appellant  who
    has to establish that on, or after return to Afghanistan, he would face
    a real  risk  of  serious  harm.   By  serious  harm,  throughout  this
    determination, we mean either persecution within  the  meaning  of  the
    Refugee Convention, serious harm within the meaning of the Refugee  and
    Persons in Need of International Protection Regulations 2007 or inhuman
    or degrading treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

Immigration History, Established Facts, Reasons for Finding that  there  was
an Error of Law in the Immigration Judge's Determinations.

First Appellant

3.   The first appellant gives his date of birth  as  1  January  1970.   He
    appears to have entered the United Kingdom illegally on  3  April  2002
    and applied for asylum that day, when he was served with illegal  entry
    papers.  He was eventually interviewed in July 2004.   His  application
    was refused and removal directions issued to  Afghanistan  on  19  July
    2004.

4.   His appeal was heard by an Adjudicator, Ms J E Perrett, on  25  October
    2004.  The respondent was not represented.  The Adjudicator found  that
    he was a credible witness.  The first appellant was born  in  Nangarhar
    and is a Pashtun.  His parents lived in Budiala and a paternal uncle in
    Coma.  His eldest brother, who was about five years older than him  was
    already a member of Hizb-i-Islami when the appellant joined aged  about
    9 or 10 (1979 or 1980).  He was still at school at that point but  took
    pictures of people who wanted to join Hizb-i-Islami and  gave  them  to
    his brother who issued identity cards.  The first  appellant  said  his
    brother was not influential at that stage although he became so  later.
    The first appellant claims to have been detained in 1986,  while  still
    at school, by the Najeeb regime on suspicion of being a member of Hizb-
    i-Islami, but he was released.  He left school  in  1989  whereupon  he
    joined  in  fighting  in  opposition  to  the   Communist   regime   of
    Dr Najibullah.  He claims to have  fought  in  Kunar,  Parwan,  Kabul,
    Jalalabad and also commanded men in doing so.  His eldest  brother  was
    killed during this time fighting the  Russians.   The  first  appellant
    claims to have married his cousin in 1992 or 1993 but she  remained  at
    her father's house in Coma.  He claims that  he  was  paid  by  Hizb-i-
    Islami and also owned some agricultural land from which he obtained  an
    income.  In 1996, when the Taliban took power, the  appellant  returned
    to his uncle's house and helped him in his business, as  a  carpet  and
    crockery wholesaler.  He was arrested in 1997 by the Taliban who wanted
    him to fight on their behalf because they knew he was trained and  knew
    the area.  Whilst not happy, the first  appellant  fought  as  a  foot-
    soldier for them for about two years in  Kunar.   He  left  Afghanistan
    because his brother was taken by members of the  Northern  Alliance  at
    around the beginning of 2002, and he became  aware  that  the  Northern
    Alliance were enquiring of his whereabouts.  He claimed to  be  fearful
    of returning to Afghanistan because he would be wanted  by  the  Karzai
    Government because he had fought with the Taliban  against  them.   His
    wife and uncle remained in Afghanistan.  A cousin who is  in  the  same
    position as him fled to Pakistan but returns occasionally  to  see  his
    family.  When he gave evidence to the Adjudicator the  first  appellant
    said his land had been seized by the Karzai Government.   He  told  the
    Adjudicator that he had fought constantly  from  leaving  school  until
    about 1999.  Despite accepting  the  first  appellant's  evidence,  the
    Adjudicator found against him.  She considered a report from the Danish
    fact-finding mission and other background material,  together  with  RS
    (Hezbe Islami - expert evidence) Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT  00278  which
    considered and accepted evidence from an expert,  Dr  Lau.   She  found
    that he would be at risk in his home area because Dr Lau had identified
    a risk that members or supporters of Hizb i Islami, or  followers  of
    Hekmatyar, may be reported, if only for the rewards on offer  from  the
    authorities.  She  then  considered  whether  the  appellant  could  go
    elsewhere.  She noted that he had changed  considerably  in  appearance
    since he fought in Kabul before 1995.  She found that he would  not  be
    recognisable now in Kabul  and  concluded  that  he  could  live  there
    safely.

5.   The first appellant applied for permission to appeal which was  granted
    by  a  Senior  Immigration  Judge.   The  appeal  was  treated   as   a
    reconsideration and  at  a  hearing  on  10 April  2006  the  Tribunal
    (Immigration Judge Blair Gould, Mrs R M Bray JP and Ms J A Endersby)
    found that the Immigration Judge had made an error of law.  They said:-

         "1.  The appellant  is  a  former  Hizb-e-Islami  fighter  and  the
             Adjudicator found that, in effect, he would be  in  danger  of
             persecution in  his  home  area.   However,  she  went  on  to
             consider whether he would be in danger  in  Kabul,  and  found
             that he would not.

         2.   Permission to appeal was granted in respect of  this  finding.
             The appellant particularly relied upon the evidence of Dr  Lau
             reported in RS Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00278.   The  Tribunal
             reported Dr Lau's written opinion in full, and found him to be
             an impressive,  authoritative,  and  careful  expert  witness.
             However, it did not report the case as a country guidance case
             and concluded only  that  on  the  particular  facts  of  that
             appellant's case Dr Lau  believed  that  his  fear  was  well-
             founded.


         3.   The  Adjudicator  in  the  appeal  before  us  said:  'Dr  Lau
             considers relocation to be a problem due to  an  outsider  not
             fitting in.  He appears to be focusing  on  areas  other  than
             Kabul.'  It is unclear whether Dr Lau intended  to  make  this
             distinction or not.  It does not appear  that  either  in  his
             written opinion or in his evidence before the Tribunal  in  RS
             he adverted to the question of whether Kabul, as  the  capital
             of Afghanistan, was a more cosmopolitan place where his  other
             comments about the difficulty of relocation in  general  might
             not apply.


         4.   Another curious aspect of this appeal is the citation  of  the
             Danish Fact-Finding Report, which  appears  to  have  come  to
             different conclusions in different  places.   The  Adjudicator
             cites paragraph 6.10.1 (page 275 of the appellant's bundle) as
             showing that return to Kabul is  a  possibility,  whereas  the
             appellant cites paragraph 5.5 (page  262  of  the  appellant's
             bundle) saying that the UNHCR found that  an  internal  flight
             alternative is not possible in Afghanistan.


         5.   In truth the Danish Report  is  somewhat  unsatisfactory.   It
             does not provide references for each of its findings, but only
             a general list of sources  at  the  end,  and  it  is  unclear
             whether any particular finding is based upon one of the listed
             documents or upon its  own  investigations.   Insofar  as  the
             findings are based upon  documentary  reports,  those  reports
             ought to be considered directly when  the  evidence  is  being
             assessed, rather than in the form of a summary in  the  Danish
             Report.


         6     We  did  not  consider  that  the  Adjudicator  had  provided
             sufficiently  clear  reasons  as  to  why  she  preferred  the
             interpretation  of  these  sources  to  the  effect  that  the
             appellant would be safe in  Kabul  against  that  which  would
             appear to show the contrary.  We were also unhappy  about  her
             reasoning  that  the  appellant  would  not  now   be   easily
             recognisable there.  This appears to ignore the necessity  for
             anyone in such a society to  be  able  to  explain  his  name,
             family and history, and to disregard the established case  law
             that a returning asylum seeker cannot be deemed  safe  on  the
             basis  that  he  can  always  lie  about  his   identity   and
             background.


         7.   We had well in mind the comments of the Court of Appeal  in  R
             (Iran) & Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 as to complaints of
             lack of adequate reasoning by Adjudicators.   However,  having
             regard to the difficulty of the issues  raised  we  considered
             that the Adjudicator's determination showed a  material  error
             of law in these  respects,  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
             adjourned for reconsideration in respect of the matters raised
             in the appellant's grounds of appeal to us.


         8.   We directed that the adjourned hearing should be held at Field
             House, and the file referred to the convenor  of  the  country
             group covering Afghanistan for his consideration whether  this
             appeal should be listed for  country  guidance  decision.   He
             will issue further directions for the adjourned hearing in due
             course.


         9.   The  presenting  officer  mentioned  the  possibility  of  the
             respondent raising Article 1 F at a reconsideration hearing,
             having regard to Dr Lau's description of the Hizb-e-Islami  as
             'without  doubt  a  very  dangerous   terrorist   organisation
             determined to attack and destroy the current government and to
             turn Afghanistan into a "pure" Islamic state."


The Second Appellant

6.   The second appellant gives his date of birth as  1  January  1974.   He
    was born and  lived  in  the  Charasyab  district  of  Kabul  province.
    Charasyab is about fifteen minutes drive from Kabul City.   The  second
    appellant apparently entered the United Kingdom on 4 September 2002 in
    a  lorry  and  claimed  asylum  on  arrival.    Following   the   usual
    investigation procedures, the  respondent  considered  his  application
    which was refused on 9 June 2004.  As a result he was refused leave  to
    enter and the respondent indicated that he intended to give  directions
    for his removal to Afghanistan.

7.    The  second  appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  an
    Adjudicator,  Ms L Astle.   In  a  determination  promulgated  on  13
    September 2004 she dismissed his appeal on both asylum and human rights
    grounds.  In doing so she accepted the second  appellant  as  credible.
    As a result the following facts have been established.  He is an ethnic
    Tajik and lived in  the  Charasyab  district  with  his  parents,  five
    brothers  and  five  sisters.   His  father  had  been  a   member   of
    Hizb i Islami since  1978  and  his  role  was  to  recruit  members,
    distribute leaflets, give talks and  hold  meetings.   The  appellant's
    elder brother joined the party.  A cousin, Karim,  became  a  commander
    and was put in charge of security in the district during the Mujahadeen
    Government.  The second appellant claimed that  during  the  Mujahadeen
    Government "they" fought against General Dostum.   At  the  hearing  he
    produced a membership card and a number of photographs of himself.   He
    said he had been a member of  Hizb-i-Islami  since  he  was  17  (about
    1991).  In the photographs he and others appear  in  various  locations
    and are armed.  He said that he had about 22 people under  his  command
    and claimed that he  has  been  the  bodyguard  to  the  Chief  of  the
    Afghanistan Commission.  He said the Afghanistan Commission was part of
    Hizb-i-Islami.   General  Dostum  controlled  the  area   adjacent   to
    Charasyab, Balay-e-Hesar.  The second appellant said that at that  time
    the Afghan Ministry of Defence was controlled  by  Ahmed  Shah  Masoud,
    whose deputy was General  Fahim.   General  Dostum  was  one  of  their
    commanders  and,  at  the  time,  a  candidate   in   the   forthcoming
    Presidential election.

8.   In 1995 the Taliban took control of the  second  appellant's  area  and
    Hizb i Islami did not fight them.  One of his cousins  was  arrested,
    beaten and tortured by the Taliban, but released when a number of Hizb-
    i-Islami weapons were handed over.   The  second  appellant's  problems
    started in November 2001 when the Northern  Alliance  took  control  of
    Kabul.  The Northern Alliance became involved in  heavy  conflict  with
    the Taliban in the  area.   During  the  course  of  that,  the  second
    appellant's house was destroyed by tank fire killing three brothers and
    three sisters who were in the house at the time.  His  brother-in-law's
    house was also attacked and seven members of that family  were  killed.
    The second appellant took his mother away and, on  return,  found  that
    his father and two of his brothers had been arrested  by  the  Northern
    Alliance.  They had been at a meeting, plotting to attack the  Northern
    Alliance.  He told the Adjudicator he  still  did  not  know  what  had
    happened to his father and those brothers, although a  cousin  who  was
    also at the meeting was killed.  He said some of  those  arrested  were
    apparently sent to Cuba, but others disappeared.  He subsequently heard
    that the Northern Alliance were looking for him.  As a result  he  went
    to hide at a relation's house in Charasyab, with his mother.  He stayed
    there until he could find an agent to help him leave,  in  March  2002.
    He told the Adjudicator that he feared persecution  from  the  Northern
    Alliance, as a long-standing member of Hizb i Islami; and because his
    family is well-known for its involvement with that party.  He  asserted
    that his cousin was still a high-profile commander, and still  fighting
    in Afghanistan along the Iranian border.  He  argued  that  as  he  was
    wanted in his home district, and as it is close to Kabul, he would  not
    be safe in Kabul.  There is nowhere else he could go in Afghanistan.

9.   The Adjudicator accepted the second appellant was a member  of  Hizb-i-
    Islami and had fought for them.  She noted that he  did  not  say  much
    about his own role and that he had not been included in the meeting  to
    discuss the attack on the Northern Alliance.  Adjudicator said:-

         "In his interview he refers to his father's prominence.  As to  his
         own role, he was 'army officer and soldier, when they needed  me  I
         would go, otherwise I was a member'.  At the hearing the  appellant
         said that he was a bodyguard for someone and commanded 22  men  but
         in the context of his earlier evidence I consider that, although he
         may have fought for Hizb-i-Islami, he was not a prominent or senior
         person in the movement.  Any prominence that he may have had  would
         have been on account of his family links."

10.  The Adjudicator observed that, although the  second  appellant's  house
    and his brother-in-law's house were demolished, they were both in a war
    zone.  Whilst it was possible they were  targeted  on  account  of  the
    family's links to Hizb-i-Islami, she noted it was  also  possible  they
    were simply caught up in the fighting.

11.  In a passage that was one of the main reasons for the  reconsideration,
    the Adjudicator noted that the second appellant had been  hiding  in  a
    relative's house for several months, without problems and in  the  same
    district that he had lived in previously.  She accepted a submission by
    the Presenting Officer that, had  the  Northern  Alliance  really  been
    seeking the second appellant, they could have found  him.   We  mention
    the reasons for the finding that there was  an  error  of  law  in  her
    determination in more detail in paragraph 13 but, in short,  the  point
    made was that it is not logical to say that because  somebody  had  not
    been found, he was not being sought.

12.  The Adjudicator  concluded  that,  although  she  accepted  the  second
    appellant's account, he would not be at risk.   She  did  not  mention,
    because it had not been decided, RS Afghanistan.   She  concluded  that
    whether it was safe  for  an  individual  to  return  depended  on  his
    personal circumstances, and whether he continued to support  Hekmatyar.
    She observed that the second appellant had  been  out  of  the  country
    since March 2002 and that even when he was in Afghanistan  he  did  not
    have a high profile, any prominence  coming  from  family  links.   She
    observed that although the second appellant said his cousin  was  still
    involved in fighting, the appellant did not claim that any other family
    members, for example the person with whom he hid or his uncle, have had
    any problems as a result.

13.  The Tribunal (Senior Immigration Judge McKee,  Mrs R M Bray  JP  and
    Mr T A Jones MBS) considered the grounds and concluded there was  an
    error of law.  Their reasons for doing so are as follows:-

         "A preliminary issue arose as to whether  we  had  jurisdiction  to
        entertain any of the grounds upon which leave had  been  sought  to
        appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  In  granting  leave  on
        25th January 2005, Mr Freeman alluded only to  the  possibility  of
        reconsidering the appeal in the light of RS [2004] UKIAT 278, which
        was promulgated shortly after the  adjudicator's  determination  in
        the instant case.  Since then, Lord Justice Brooke has explained in
        R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 that an adjudicator cannot  commit  an
        error  of  law  by  not  taking  account  of   a   later   Tribunal
        determination.  So we clearly cannot use RS to identify an error of
        law at the first stage of this reconsideration.


     On the other hand, we think that the Vice-President,  by  focusing  on
        the above 'reported' case, may have regarded it as  unnecessary  to
        deal with the other  grounds  of  appeal.   He  certainly  has  not
        refused leave on any of them.  Given Mr Justice  Collins'  comments
        on rule 62(7) of the Procedure Rules 2005 in Wani [2005] EWHC  2815
        (Admin), we think we can interpret the grant of leave as  impliedly
        allowing all the grounds to be argued.


     Mr Harding, who settled those grounds, contends that, having  accepted
        most of the appellant's account - that his father had been a member
        of Hesb-e-Islami since 1978, that his cousin had been a  commander,
        that the appellant himself had fought for Hesb e-Islami, that  the
        family had fought against the Northern Alliance, who  had  arrested
        his father and two brothers in  November  2001  -  the  adjudicator
        could not rationally have concluded that the  appellant  would  not
        now be of interest to the  authorities.   Indeed,  he  argues  that
        there is a dangerous circularity in the adjudicator's reasoning, at
        paragraph 31 of his determination, that 'had the Northern  Alliance
        really been seeking the Appellant, they could have found him.'

         We agree that, in logic, the fact that someone has not  been  found
        does not mean that he has not been looked for.  We  note  that  the
        Adjudicator ends his survey of the background material  by  quoting
        from the Danish report, at paragraph 22 of his determination,  that
        'it depends on a person's history whether  a  former  Hezb-e-Islami
        member runs a risk of being persecuted at present in  Afghanistan.'
        The adjudicator may  not  have  given  sufficient  weight  to  this
        appellant's personal  history,  including  both  his  own  and  his
        family's  involvement  with  Hesb-e-Islami,  in  finding  that  the
        appellant will not be at risk on return.

         There  is  thus  a  want  of   sustainable   reasoning   from   the
        adjudicator's acceptance of the appellant's history of personal and
        family involvement with Hisb-e-Islami to his rejection of any  real
        risk to the appellant, based largely on the fact that the  Northern
        Alliance did not find the appellant when he went into hiding.  This
        insufficient reasoning is a material  error  of  law,  in  that  it
        clearly affected the Adjudicator's decision upon the appeal.

        The reconsideration will therefore proceed to the  'second  stage',
        so that the current risk to the appellant (if any) can be assessed.
         Mr Tarlow, for the Secretary of State, agrees that credibility  is
        not an issue, and that the factual matrix  should  be  the  history
        accepted by the Adjudicator.  The Tribunal will need to consider up-
        to-date country background material,  as  well  as  the  'reported'
        cases of RS and WK [2004] UKIAT 280."

Third Appellant

14.  The third appellant was born on 21 March 1963.  He is  a  Pashtun  from
    Kandahar, who says he has no family in Kabul.  He arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 11 September 1999 and claimed asylum.  That application was
    refused but he was granted exceptional leave to enter on  23 May  2002
    until 24 May 2003.  He appealed against the refusal of asylum but  his
    appeal was dismissed and an application for permission to appeal to the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal was refused.  He then applied  for  further
    leave to enter on 31 March 2003.  That application was refused by  the
    respondent on 1 March 2005 and the third appellant again appealed.  His
    appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Malins on 15 August 2005.  In  a
    determination  signed  on  7 September  2005  the  Immigration  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

15.  In dismissing his appeal the Immigration  Judge  followed  the  earlier
    Adjudicator's determination having considered it in the  light  of  the
    guidance in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   The  Immigration  Judge
    concluded that the third appellant was a credible witness but said  the
    appellant had not  been  found  to  have  been  arrested,  detained  or
    tortured in Afghanistan.  She said "the appellant does not fall  within
    any one of the risk categories due to his profile in the Hizb i Islami
    party and the fact that he was merely used by the  Taliban  to  provide
    medical services".  She wrongly concluded  that  there  was  no  asylum
    appeal before her, but she did hear evidence.  The third appellant told
    her that he had worked for  Hizb i Islami  when  they  were  fighting
    against the Russians.  He was asked how the members of the then present
    government (in 2005) would know about his earlier  activities  and  the
    appellant said:

         "because we were all together,  the  Mujahedin  are  now  separated
         (divided) - part in the government and part  fighting  against  the
         government.  I am a Pashtun from Kandahar and live there.   Whether
         you are Pashtu or Taliban or Hizb i Islami or Al Qaeda, you are the
         enemy to the government".

    He was also asked how people would know that he had been employed as  a
    nurse in a hospital and had treated Hizb i Islami members.  When asked
    to say who it was that he feared in Afghanistan, the appellant gave the
    names of a former governor of Kandahar province who is now Governor  of
    Jalalabad,  a  previous  head  of  the  secret  services  and   various
    commanders who have been against  Hizb-i-Islami,  and  members  of  the
    Taliban.  When asked if he would be safe in Kabul, the third  appellant
    replied that if he went there he would be  in  danger  because  of  the
    presence of all the people who worked for the  present  government  who
    would recognise him straight away.  And he asserted, as  soon  as  they
    knew he was Pashtu they would  try  to  get  rid  of  him.   The  third
    appellant said he would  not  be  able  to  establish  to  any  of  the
    authorities that he is not a member now of Hizb i Islami even though he
    had not been involved with Hizb i Islami  since  shortly  before  the
    Taliban came to power.  He said that between 1989 and 1999 he had  been
    the owner of a medical store  which  supplied  the  Taliban  with  free
    medication.  He told the Immigration Judge that although  he  had  been
    given a British travel document to enable him to go to Pakistan to look
    for his family, he did not know where his wife and six children were.

16.  On the basis of those facts the Immigration Judge  considered  risk  on
    return.  She looked at the Danish  Fact-Finding  Mission  report.   She
    drew conclusions about  former  members  of  Hizb i Islami  and  then
    concluded that Hizb i Islami no longer existed as a political party but
    could be characterised as a loose  structure  of  individual  warlords.
    She said that the appellant was not a warlord and the government  would
    not be concerned with the former Hizb i Islami organisation noting that
    many  of  its  earlier  members  are  now  involved  in   the   present
    administration.  She concluded that the only targeting of Hizb i Islami
    members was of high-profile activists and as the  appellant,  prior  to
    1998 was a nurse and never politically active, he would not be at  risk
    of conduct which would breach  his  human  rights  if  he  were  to  be
    returned.

17.  When the reconsideration came on before us,  there  had  not  been  any
    finding that there  was  an  error  of  law  following  the  order  for
    reconsideration made by a Senior Immigration Judge in  September  2005.
    The basis of the order for reconsideration  was  that  RS  Afghanistan,
    whilst not being a country guidance case, was  a  reported  case  which
    favoured a conclusion  that  was  different  from  that  to  which  the
    Immigration Judge came (at least arguably).  The Immigration Judge  had
    not given any reasoning as to why she did not follow  or  consider  the
    reasoning in RS Afghanistan.   The  third  ground  in  the  application
    argued that she was wrong to conclude that there was  no  asylum  claim
    before her.

18.  Mr Kovats conceded that there had been  an  asylum  appeal  before  the
    Immigration Judge and for that to have been overlooked was  a  material
    error of law.  We were therefore able to proceed to the second stage of
    the reconsideration and consider the risk to the appellant on the basis
    of the facts as accepted by the Immigration Judge, and the  Adjudicator
    before her.

19.  By the time that we came to consider the second stage  reconsiderations
    in these three appeals the respondent had served replies,  as  provided
    for in Rule 30 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
    2005.  The replies related to the first  and  second  appellants  only.
    They asserted that the Tribunal should find that those  appellants  are
    excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention because  of  the
    provisions of Article 1F(c) which provides:-

         "The provisions of this Convention shall not apply  to  any  person
         with respect to whom there  are  serious  reasons  for  considering
         that:
         ...

         (c)  he has been guilty  of  acts  contrary  to  the  purposes  and
             principles of the United Nations."

20.  The interpretation of Article 1F(c) was considered by  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal in Gurung (Exclusion - risk  -  Maoist)  Nepal*  [2002]
    UKIAT 04870 to which we will return.

The Previous Position on Risk and Those associated with Hizb i Islami

21.  The immigration Appeal Tribunal last looked at the situation for  those
    associated with Hizb-i-Islami in RS Afghanistan, a decision notified on
    30 September 2004.  That Tribunal had the benefit of an expert  report,
    and oral evidence, from Dr Lau.  They also considered  a  Danish  Fact-
    Finding report dated June 2004.

22.  Dr Lau is a barrister and head of the law department at the  School  of
    oriental and African Studies at the University of London.  He gave more
    personal details in his report and said that he had visited Afghanistan
    five times in the previous two years.  He had done so on behalf of  the
    German Government in January that year in connection with consultations
    on Afghanistan's new constitution.  In  July  2003  he  held  workshops
    there on the reform of Afghanistan's criminal  procedure.   During  the
    course of various visits to Afghanistan, he had met with  many  judges,
    police officers, prosecutors and lawyers, as well as NGOs, UN officials
    and government officials.  He said that the opinions in his report  are
    based on his experience of working  on  Afghan  legal  issues  and  the
    dynamics of law enforcement.

23.  The Tribunal was sufficiently impressed with Dr Lau's report that  they
    quoted it in full.  The appellant in RS Afghanistan had not been  found
    to be wholly credible by the Adjudicator, although it was accepted that
    he and his brother were Hizb-i-Islami members and that that appellant's
    brother was a  commander  who  had  a  position  of  prominence.   That
    appellant had been involved in surrendering weapons to the  Taliban  in
    October 1996, following  which  he  and  his  brother  abandoned  their
    political activities.  That appellant has set up a  shop  in  Jalalabad
    and his brother went to farm.  They had no further  problems  with  the
    Taliban and led a peaceful life.  They did not leave the party as such,
    although they described it as breaking  up  saying  it  was  no  longer
    functional.

24.  The decision can be read for the full text of Dr Lau's opinion but  he
    said this at paragraph 11:-

         "The war against  terrorism  in  Afghanistan  is  being  fought  by
         numerous agencies and groups.  It is fought largely in  secret  and
         has so far stayed clear of Afghanistan's legal system.  The silence
         of the objective evidence on the trial of suspected terrorists,  of
         the rate of those arrested  as  suspected  terrorists,  indeed  the
         almost complete absence of any information in the public domain  on
         the number of persons arrested because they are  accused  of  being
         associated  with  Al Qaeda,  the  Taliban  and  Hizb-i-Islami  is
         deceptive.  Occasional newspaper reports reveal  that  arrests  and
         interrogations of suspects take place  on  a  very  regular  basis.
         They are carried  by  Afghan  internal  security  and  intelligence
         agencies, US agencies and  even  private  mercenaries  co-operating
         with members of the Northern Alliance ..."

        He later said:-

        "13. Secondly, I have been asked whether  his  continuing  fear  of
             return to Afghanistan for the reasons given in  his  statement
             are well-founded.  In my opinion the most serious risk  arises
             from his association with the Hizb i Islami.  The  group  is
             without  doubt  a  very   dangerous   terrorist   organisation
             determined to attack and destroy the current government and to
             turn Afghanistan into a 'pure' Islamic state.  Its  leader  is
             believed to be in hiding in Afghanistan and despite  concerted
             efforts he has not been apprehended.  His group  continues  to
             carry out terrorist attacks.


        14.  In my opinion it is difficult to discount the appellant's fear
             as irrational  only  because  his  own  association  with  the
             Hizb i Islami ceased some time ago.  It appears that members
             of the Northern Alliance think otherwise, as evidenced by  his
             arrest, interrogation and mistreatment  [it  should  be  noted
             that the Adjudicator had not accepted that the  appellant  had
             been arrested, interrogated and mistreated].  I am  not  aware
             of any public trials of suspected terrorists and thus there is
             no judicial forum for him to protest his innocence.  Given the
             substantial financial rewards for information leading  to  the
             arrest of suspected terrorists promised by  the  US  there  is
             ample motivation to 'test' the  knowledge  of  anyone  who  is
             believed to have been close to  the  Hizb i Islami.   In  my
             opinion the appellant's fear in this regard is well-founded."

25.  Dr Lau  did  not  think  that  the  apparent  westernisation  of  that
    appellant would cause him to be at particular risk on return  but  when
    asked about the option of internal flight he said that in  his  opinion
    this was very problematic and went on to say:-

         "The country's societal structure is very tribal in nature  and  it
         is most problematic for an outsider to fit into an  area  where  he
         has no family and relatives."

     He then said that he did not consider that the legal system as  it  was
    at that stage could offer any chance of effective protection  and  that
    ISAF does not protect individuals.

26.   The  Tribunal  accepted  the  appellant's  assessment  that  "once  an
    individual joined a group or party then  others  considered  he  was  a
    member 'til the end'" as a credible assertion in the light of Dr  Lau's
    oral evidence.

27.  The Tribunal heard  argument  about  the  Danish  Fact-Finding  Mission
    report but concluded it was not wholly consistent in its assessment  of
    the risk facing those involved with Hizb i Islami.  At one  point  it
    said that supporters did not have problems with the Government if  they
    make it clear that they did not work for Hekmatyar.  It  observed  that
    some former members occupy  high  positions  in  the  Government.   The
    report said that whether a former member of Hizb i Islami is at risk of
    persecution depends on his individual history and particularly  on  the
    connection of the person concerned with Hekmatyar  and  the  extent  to
    which that  person  has  been  in  conflict  with  powerful  people  in
    Afghanistan.  The report said that those who were at present active for
    Hizb i Islami are considered as being at war against the government and
    on a par with the  Taliban  supporters.   The  Tribunal  observed  that
    Afghanistan was a country where "the rule of law has  broken  down  and
    there is no  realistic  prospect  of  an  individual  establishing  his
    innocence through due process".  That, it said, added to the incentives
    to  detain  and  ill-treat  those   suspected   of   involvement   with
    Hizb i Islami in the hope of obtaining information which may lead  to
    senior wanted men and enormous rewards, there was a real risk that  not
    only those who were genuinely  active  for  Hizb i Islami  but  those
    suspected of such involvement past and present faced similar risks.

28.  More recently the Court of Appeal has made some obiter observations  on
    this issue in R (Iran) [2005] Imm AR 535, at paragraph 147.  The  court
    quoted from RS Afghanistan and then said:-

         "The main conclusion to be drawn from that  decision  was  that  an
         appellant would be at real risk of persecution and ill-treatment on
         return to Afghanistan  if  he  had  a  past  association  with  the
         Hizb i Islami, actual or perceived through  his  family,  in  the
         absence of clear evidence before  the  authorities  in  Afghanistan
         that he had disassociated himself with Hizb i Islami.  There were
         substantial rewards  for  information  leading  to  the  arrest  of
         suspected terrorists promised by  the  United  States.   There  was
         ample motivation to 'test' the knowledge of anyone who was believed
         to have been close the Hizb i Islami; the passage of time did not
         help suspects."


    The court, in drawing its  conclusions  in  paragraph  152,  noted  the
    submission by Mr Manjit Gill QC that, although RS Afghanistan had not
    been formally treated as country guidance because the IAT had  remitted
    the case to the Adjudicator, it had informed all future decisions taken
    within the Immigration Appellate Authority about the risks facing those
    formerly associated with Hizb i Islami,  if  returned.   One  of  the
    matters raised for consideration in  this  country  guidance  case  was
    whether the Court of Appeal had broadened the  conclusions  drawn  from
    Dr Lau's report beyond those contained in RS Afghanistan.

29.  The hearing of this reconsideration has been postponed on a  number  of
    occasions to enable Dr Lau, who  was  said  at  various  times  to  be
    visiting Afghanistan, to appear before us as an expert.  In  the  event
    he did not do so.  We heard  instead  from  Dr Antonio  Giustozzi  who
    prepared a report and gave oral evidence.  No reason or explanation was
    ever given as to why we had no further report from  Dr Lau.   We  have
    therefore concluded that we cannot assume that Dr Lau would necessarily
    still stand by the evidence which he gave in 2004, or that his opinions
    would now be the same.  Whilst we take note of what was said  then,  by
    him, we do not regard his then evidence as a starting point upon  which
    we can build.  Rather we look at  the  situation  today  based  on  the
    evidence which is before us and not that which was before the  Tribunal
    in RS Afghanistan.

Dr Giustozzi's Evidence

30.  Dr Giustozzi prepared a combined  report  for  the  first  and  second
    appellants and a separate report for the third appellant.  His original
    reports were produced in January 2007 but he updated  them  both  on  3
    April 2007.  He helpfully put the extra text in bold in the more recent
    versions.  He told us that there had been no deletions,  save  that  in
    the section dealing with abuses by  Afghan  security  agencies  he  had
    replaced the text.  His original text  was  available  in  the  earlier
    reports which form part of the  evidence  submitted  to  us  for  these
    cases.  Both sides  accepted  that  Dr Giustozzi  was  an  appropriate
    expert.  Mr Kovats, in the opening words of his submissions,  said  he
    accepted that Dr Giustozzi is a  "knowledgeable,  fair  and  objective
    witness and that he (Mr Kovats) did not dispute his evidence insofar as
    it was factual".  Mr Kovats went on to argue that his opinions on  the
    risks to the  appellants  were  speculative  both  in  his  report  and
    cross examination,  and  we  will  return  to  that.   In  his  report
    Dr Giustozzi explains that he is a Research Fellow at the London School
    of Economics and Political Science (LSE)  in  the  Development  Studies
    Institute.  He has a PhD in International Relations from the  LSE  that
    he achieved in 1997.  He gives a list of some of his publications, some
    of which are for the Crisis States Research Centre at the LSE.   Others
    appeared in  Jane's  Homeland  Security  and  Resilience  Monitor,  and
    elsewhere.  He also lists a number of current  research  projects.   He
    says he has given evidence in legal proceedings in the United  Kingdom,
    the Netherlands and  Australia  and  has  declined  to  prepare  expert
    reports  where  "the  account  given  jarred  with  my  knowledge   and
    understanding of relevant conditions in Afghanistan."  He  acknowledged
    his duty to the court.

31.  When he gave evidence he was asked about  his  sources.   He  explained
    that  since  he  left  his  employment  with  (UNAMA  (United   Nations
    Assistance  Mission  to  Afghanistan)  he  has  been   to   Afghanistan
    approximately three times a year.   He  last  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 16 March 2007.  The introduction to his  report  given  the
    periods when he has been in Afghanistan.  They include: April/May 2003;
    October 2003 to September 2004 (with UNAMA as Political Affairs Officer
    in Kunduz and Mazar i Sharif); November 2004; March 2005 (to carry out
    a consultancy project on the provincial  administrations  of  Kandahar,
    Faryab and Herat provinces); February 2005 (to carry  out  research  on
    customs and taxation issues  in  Kabul);  May  2005  (to  research  the
    relationship between business and politics in Kabul, Mazar and  Herat);
    September to October 2005 (to research local power structures in  Herat
    province); January - February 2006 (to study the security situation and
    local strong men in Kabul, Kandahar and Jalalabad); May  to  June  2006
    (to study security and the 1980s  Jihad  movement  in  Kunduz,  Takhar,
    Baghlan and Kabul); September to  October  2006  (to  study  Jihad  and
    security issues in Kabul and Paktya); and February to  March  2007  (in
    Kabul and Nangarhar, studying the 1980s Jihad).  He told us that during
    those periods he had built up a number of contacts.  During his role as
    political affairs officer in Kunduz and Mazar i Sharif his job was to
    report on the situation in those areas, to mediate between groups where
    necessary and to advise the local administration in Mazar i Sharif.  He
    had to report to UN headquarters in Kabul on the local situation.   His
    sources include expatriates working for the United Nations, and  people
    working for various diplomatic corps.  He spoke to others  working  for
    NGOs and officers working for the various foreign militia  contingents.
    Whilst with the United  Nations  he  worked  for,  in  particular,  the
    Assistant Mission Head of the Political Section, Chris  Alexander.   He
    also dealt with other political affairs officers, of whom the most high-
    ranking  is  Talatbek  Magadykov.   He  worked  closely  with   several
    Embassies,  but  in  particular  the  Italian,  Bulgarian  and   German
    missions.  He also used to work with the UK Embassy  but  most  of  the
    people he knew there have been replaced and he does not  now  know  the
    staff as well.  He has contacts among the EU Mission in Kabul and among
    the Italian, British, Bulgarian and German military  contingents  (i.e.
    ISAF).  He knows the Head  of  Political  Affairs  at  the  EU  Mission
    (Michael Simple) and two other  political  affairs  officers,  although
    they have recently been replaced.  As to the NGOs, he has contacts with
    the Afghan Research and  Evaluation  Unit  which  he  regards  as  very
    important as it does research into the situation  in  Afghanistan.   He
    also has contacts at CPOU, the Afghan Research Institute.  Asked  about
    the NGOs, he said that he  knows  various  people  but  does  not  have
    permanent contacts.  He described them as mostly Afghan NGOs  but  with
    some international ones, such as  Oxfam  and  GTZ  (a  German  umbrella
    organisation for their NGOs).   He  said  there  are  probably  several
    hundred Afghan NGOs and he makes a point of going to  interview  people
    whenever he goes to a new place.  Within the Afghan  administration  he
    knows Colonel Nekzad of the Ministry of the Interior - he  is  Head  of
    the Crime Department.   He  knows  several  Chiefs  of  Police  in  the
    provinces but observed that they are rotated very frequently.  He makes
    a point of going to see the Police Chief in provinces that  he  visits,
    in  order  to  discuss  the  general  situation.   He  has  interviewed
    approximately 20 to 25 Members of Parliament.  Although  he  now  knows
    some of the Ministers, he has not spoken to them since they  have  been
    appointed as Ministers.  He has spoken to  some  Deputy  Ministers  and
    some members of the Presidential staff.  He has interviewed a number of
    Hizb i Islami people in the last two years.  He said some were former
    commanders, and some were members of the party but no  actual  fighting
    members.  He has spoken to at least 30 activists.

32.  The reports, which are not identical  because  they  deal  with  issues
    relevant to each appellant, do have much common material.   They  start
    by giving a useful  background  to  Hizb i Islami.   The  name  means
    "Islamic Party".  It was formed in 1979 as one of the factions of  what
    used to be the Muslim Youth Movement.  It was one of the main groups in
    the resistance against the Communist regime and Soviet occupation.   It
    is a party which is largely Pashtun-based although, in  the  1980s  and
    1990s, it had a strong base among Tajiks and Uzbeks.   Around  1992  it
    fought against Jamiat-i-Islami, another faction which had derived  from
    the Muslim Youth Movement.  Jamiat was predominantly a Tajik group  and
    controlled most of Kabul.  There was fighting between Hizb-i-Islami and
    Jamiat-i-Islami from 1993, with defections of Hizb-i-Islami  commanders
    so that Hizb-i-Islami became closer  to  being  a  Pashtun  group  than
    before.   The  fighting  was  largely  over  control  of   Kabul,   but
    Hizb i Islami never managed to take the city from Jamiat.   In  1996,
    Jamiat and Hizb i Islami reached an agreement and formed a  coalition
    government in the face of the approaching Taliban.  The  coalition  was
    forced to flee and, as the Taliban occupied most of Afghanistan,  their
    organisational structure virtually collapsed.  That was in part because
    many Pashtun members joined the Taliban.  The reports suggest that  not
    all Pashtun members of Hizb i Islami joined the Taliban in 1996,  but
    those who did not had little support and either fled the country or hid
    in the villages.  Dr Giustozzi, simplifying somewhat,  said  that  the
    activists remained loyal to Hekmatyar even when rank and  file  members
    defected to other groups.  They did so  largely  on  ethnic  divisions,
    with Tajiks going to Jamiat i Islami and Pashtuns to the Taliban.  He
    said that following the fall of the Taliban, at the end of  2001,  many
    former members of Hizb i Islami who  had  joined  the  Taliban  found
    themselves isolated (especially those in Kabul or in northern and north
    eastern Afghanistan).  In order to  avoid  retribution,  they  switched
    sides once it became apparent the Taliban were  going  to  lose.   Many
    former Hizb i Islami commanders joined  Jamiat i Islami  not  least
    because they were in their area.

33.  In a section headed "Hizb i Islami Today", he said that not  all  the
    Hizb i Islami members joined Jamiat.  Many commanders maintained their
    independence, or even stayed on the Taliban side, in particular in  the
    south east and east of Afghanistan.   The  leader  of  Hizb i Islami,
    Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar,  is  in  hiding  although  he  issues  periodical
    declarations of Jihad against the  Afghan  Government  and  foreigners.
    Dr Giustozzi suggests that in early 2006 it was apparent that not many
    commanders were still following him, although a hard core of  activists
    seem to have  remained  faithful.   It  seems  that  they  have  allied
    themselves with the Taliban, against  the  Afghan  Government  and  the
    Coalition/ISAF  troops.   He   referred   to   military   activity   by
    Hizb i Islami in 2006 in the provinces of Kunar, Laghman and Logar with
    some smaller scale activity in Kabul, Kapisa, Nangarhar, Paktya,  Khost
    and Paktika.  It is thought that the activists  in  Paktya,  Khost  and
    Paktika are mostly people  with  a  Hizb i Islami  background.   NATO
    considers that Hizb i Islami's strength is low with only 300  to  400
    fighters during 2006.  Dr Giustozzi considers this is too  low,  given
    the spread of the party's activity and regards that as an  average  for
    active fighters.  He feels that  a  figure  of  around  1,500  is  more
    realistic to allow for people who are resting, and  travelling  to  and
    from areas of conflict.

34.   Dr Giustozzi  said  that  because  of  that  activity  much  of  the
    government's counter-insurgency activity is concentrated  in  the  same
    areas.  He said that "individuals  linked  to  Hizb i Islami  or  the
    Taliban are therefore now particularly likely to  be  targeted  by  the
    security services".  He referred to a series  of  arrests  starting  in
    April 2002.  He said they had contributed  to  driving  Hizb i Islami
    underground and towards armed opposition.  He  made  reference  to  the
    arrest of hundreds of members of the party who had  gathered  in  Kabul
    for a meeting aimed at  reorganising  the  party,  outside  Hekmatyar's
    influence.  The arrests followed an accusation that they  were  in  the
    process of organising a coup.  The UN considered the accusation did not
    stand up to scrutiny, and the reality was that the  leaders  of  Jamiat
    appeared to have been wary of a new and more credible party emerging to
    compete   for   the   sympathy   of   fundamentalist-leaning   Afghans.
    Dr Giustozzi takes issue with a contrary statement in  RS  Afghanistan
    (paragraph 23) saying that the arrests also  targeted  people  who  had
    broken up with Hekmatyar.  Arrests  of  activists  have  continued  and
    Dr Giustozzi cited arrests in Logar province  in  November  2006.   He
    suggested that there is evidence that remnants of Hizb i Islami have re-
    established a network throughout the country over the past three years,
    but that the network includes many individuals  who  no  longer  openly
    claim allegiance to the party.  He suggested in his report that  it  is
    the existence of these underground  networks  which  explains  why  the
    security services are interested in people with the  first  and  second
    appellant's profiles.

35.  He referred to a commander, Hazrat Ali, who is the main  representative
    of Jamiat i Islami in Nangarhar, Kunar and  Laghman.   He  says  that
    Hazrat Ali earned his position by being  the  only  commander  to  keep
    fighting against the Taliban, which he did from the  mountains  on  the
    border with Kunar and Nuristan.  Hazrat Ali was originally a  commander
    of Khalis's group, a splinter from Hizb-i-Islami and switched to Jamiat
    after the arrival of the Taliban.  Hazrat Ali has built solid relations
    with the American occupation forces which he uses  to  consolidate  his
    power, despite his reputation for looting and abuses against civilians.
     After the Taliban collapsed at the end of 2001 he became commander  of
    the local army corps.  When that was disbanded in 2004,  following  the
    disarmament of the militias, he  became  commander  of  the  provincial
    police force.  His core power base is represented by the Pashai  ethnic
    group (along the border with Kunar province); his Kabul connections are
    such that he has also been able to establish  a  strong  network  among
    Pashtun  commanders  in  Nangarhar   and   Laghman.    Through   Jamiat
    connections, he is able to enlist the support of a network which covers
    most of the country, including Kabul.  Dr Giustozzi suggested that the
    power structures in Nangarhar are such that Hazrat Ali is  striving  to
    consolidate his hold over the province where he sees Hizb i Islami as
    an obstacle, because it is  the  only  party  in  Nangarhar  with  some
    organisational  strength  and  party  discipline.   As  a  result,  the
    targeting of members and former members  of  Hizb i Islami  has  been
    particularly intense under his control in that  region.   Dr Giustozzi
    postulated  that  the  first  appellant's  father  and  brother   might
    therefore have fallen victim to  Hazrat  Ali's  attempt  to  purge  his
    strongholds of Hizb i Islami.

36.  NATO's commanding officers are said to believe  that  the  Taliban  and
    Hizb i Islami, in alliance, will try to cut off Jalalabad from Kabul.
    In October 2006 it was suggested the Taliban planned to  fight  through
    the winter to throttle Kabul, although it has clearly not happened yet.
     Dr Giustozzi described the areas where these operations are likely to
    take place and suggested that, as they were Hizb i Islami strongholds
    in the past, Hekmatyar's party would play a major role in that attempt.
     He described a build-up of insurgent activity over the past year.   He
    said that the increased activity is one of the causes  of  the  growing
    repression of Hizb i Islami by local security forces loyal to  Hazrat
    Ali, and that the search for members of Hizb i Islami in the area  of
    Jalalabad is likely  to  intensify  further.   He  explained  that  the
    general increase in the level of violence in  Afghanistan  during  2006
    also happened in the south east,  in  particular  in  Paktya,  northern
    Paktika and Khost.  These were never  Taliban  strongholds  and  it  is
    thought the increase  in  violence  is  associated  with  Hizb-i-Islami
    activists.  Dr Giustozzi said the implication is that the  party  must
    have had at least some success in its campaign to recruit old  and  new
    members.  He suggested that it is logical that  the  security  agencies
    would assume that the resurgent Hizb i Islami and Taliban would target
    families who had previously been  affiliated  to  the  two  groups  for
    recruitment.

37.  He said that former members of Hizb i Islami are also targeted by the
    Jamiatis who hope to prevent the emergence of potential competitors  in
    the political arena in a number of regions in the country.

38.  At paragraph 15 of his report  for  the  first  and  second  appellants
    there is reference to former members of Hizb i Islami who did not want
    to join Jamiat, drifting towards  President  Karzai  from  about  2003.
    Some were local and national leaders of Hizb i Islami.  Dr Giustozzi
    cites  Bashir  Baghlani  and  Wahidullah  Sabawoon.   This  realignment
    started when a rift began  to  develop  between  President  Karzai  and
    Jamiat and  other  non-Pashtun  factions.   This  caused  some  Pashtun
    activists and commanders to reconsider  their  options  and,  by  2004,
    openly announce their support for Karzai, refusing to  acknowledge  the
    leadership  of  Hekmatyar.   Sabawoon  had  declared  his  split   from
    Hekmatyar before 2001, but Baghlani has never  said  so  openly.   This
    caused Jamiat's hostility towards Hizb i Islami to strengthen.  In 2005
    a  further  splinter  faction,  led  by  Faruqi  and  Arghandiwal,  was
    registered as a legal party in Kabul.  That faction  is  negotiating  a
    merger with other splinter factions from Hizb i Islami.  Dr Giustozzi
    suggested this may also have caused some alarm in the ranks of  Jamiat.
    The two factions succeeded  in  having  a  few  Members  of  Parliament
    elected in September 2005.

39.  There is some evidence that Hizb i Islami is active again  in  Parwan
    and Kapisa, where it had been  thought  that  all  its  commanders  had
    joined  Jamiat.   There  have  been  a  number  of  assassinations  and
    Dr Giustozzi considers that Tajik members of Hizb i Islami, like the
    second appellant, may be particularly at risk as the Jamiat  leadership
    is particularly jealous  of  its  monopoly  over  the  Tajik  political
    representation in the north east, the north and areas around Kabul.

40.  Dr Giustozzi's report then moved on to the attitude  of  the  security
    services towards Hizb i Islami.  He started by saying that they  have
    limited  resources  and  technology  and   that   information-gathering
    techniques  are  limited  to  the  recruitment  of  informers  and  the
    interrogation of suspects.  He considers  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants, who have come from families with  a  strong  background  in
    Hizb i Islami, could be a future target for arrest and interrogation on
    return to Afghanistan, "the more so given the spread of the  insurgency
    to their home areas of Charasyab and Nangarhar."  He suggests that they
    could  be  targeted  to  obtain  information  about  other  members  of
    Hizb i Islami, or  as  a  result  of  pre-emptive  arrests  aimed  at
    preventing  the  insurgents  from  establishing  permanent   bases   in
    Charasyab.  Dr Giustozzi referred to an interview he had with Professor
    Allah Dad of the Jalalabad Pedagogical Institute in February this year.
     He is the father  of  a  young  member  of  Hizb i Islami  and  told
    Dr Giustozzi that his son had to flee the country because of harassment
    by the security forces.  The Professor said that similar cases were not
    infrequent in the area.  That  interview  was  the  subject  of  cross-
    examination by Mr Kovats and we will return to it.

41.   Dr Giustozzi  said  that  Jamiat i Islami's  main  power  base  is
    concentrated within the security  directorate  (intelligence)  and  the
    Ministry of Interior.  As  a  result  there  will  be  no  shortage  of
    individuals who are biased against Hizb i Islami within those agencies.
     He observed that none of the security agencies have so far shown  much
    concern for human rights and  said  there  is  abundant  evidence  that
    Afghan law enforcement agencies have a poor record of sticking  to  the
    law.   He  considered  that  arbitrary  arrest  and  detention,  whilst
    prohibited by law are both a serious problem, as is access  to  lawyers
    and the inconsistently applied use of  warrants  and  bail.   Pre-trial
    detention goes well beyond the  limits  established  by  law,  and  the
    police have been known to detain prisoners even after  they  have  been
    found innocent.  There is wide evidence of the extraction of bribes  to
    obtain release or to avoid arrest, and of the arrest  of  relatives  to
    force fugitives  to  hand  themselves  in,  or  prisoners  to  confess.
    Dr Giustozzi mentioned that despite thousands of casualties each year,
    and repeated reports of arrest of insurgents and suspected  insurgents,
    there has as yet been no public trial of  any  insurgent  in  the  four
    years from the start of the current conflict.  He suggested that  while
    the insurgency is active, and the standards of the rule of law are even
    lower than elsewhere, suspects are regularly arrested  without  warrant
    on a simple suggestion of wrongdoing.  That leaves room for abuse, such
    as informers reporting those whom they do not like  as  activists.   He
    made reference to the number  of  complaints  received  by  the  Afghan
    Independent Commission on Human Rights.  He said that  37  out  of  410
    complaints in 2006 were of illegal detention by the authorities, 71  of
    torture and 11 of extra-judicial killings  in  Kabul.   396  violations
    were reported in Nangarhar in 2006 of which 34 were illegal detentions,
    44 torture and rape, and 23 extra-judicial killings.  He said the  data
    gathered by the commission does not cover the whole of Afghanistan.

42.  Dr Giustozzi reported an improvement in policing in Kabul during  2003
    and 2004, following the completion of training  of  a  few  batches  of
    recruits at the new  police  academy.   He  said  that  the  UN  police
    advisors feel the effectiveness of the  training  programmes  has  been
    diluted because the professionally  trained  recruits  are  distributed
    thinly among existing police units,  with  the  result  that  they  are
    unable to influence the behaviour of their colleagues.   The  UN  fears
    that many recruits will adopt the same pattern of corruption and a lack
    of professionalism that is endemic among  the  older  police  officers.
    The UN has reported a spate of attacks against NGOs in Kabul,  some  of
    which were carried out by men in police uniform.  He said that in  2005
    policing in Kabul deteriorated again following the sacking of officials
    within the Ministry who were aligned to Jamiat.  There is evidence  the
    corruption in the Afghan police is reaching new heights.

43.  Dr Giustozzi suggested, in paragraph 23 of the report, that relocation
    in Kabul would not assist the first or second appellants.  He said that
    is because the security presence in Kabul is heavier than in  Charasyab
    or Nangarhar.  Also because it is NATO's belief that the insurgents are
    targeting the capital with an increase in violence.  if  anything,  the
    search for individuals with a Hizb i Islami background is  likely  to
    intensify.  Dr Giustozzi postulated that given  the  arrest  of  their
    relatives, the first and second  appellants  may  now  be  particularly
    motivated to link up with the opposition.

44.  His report dealt with an issue that he later concentrated  on  in  oral
    evidence.  He said that whilst the appellant's may be  able  to  escape
    detection at Kabul Airport if their name is not on a list of  suspects,
    they would soon need to look for jobs and accommodation.  Dr Giustozzi
    suggested that they would then have to disclose information about their
    places of origin and their family background.  Failure to do  so  would
    hamper their chances of  finding  either  work  or  accommodation.   He
    suggested that lying would not work in the medium  or  short  term,  as
    employers and landlords are able to check information through  networks
    of acquaintances, and regularly do so.  He said that  whilst  it  might
    take weeks to receive the feedback, eventually the  background  of  the
    individuals would be checked.  He also suggests that the settlement  of
    a stranger, even in a neighbourhood in Kabul, attracts some  attention,
    especially so now because the in flow of returnees from  Pakistan  has
    dried up.  He said that Kabul is mostly  organised  in  ethnically  and
    tribally  homogenous  neighbourhoods,   which   makes   tracking   down
    individuals easier.  He suggested that if the  security  services  were
    interested in either of those appellants they would easily  be  tracked
    down.  Dr Giustozzi did not regard the second appellant's ethnicity as
    a factor, given that most security service staff are Tajiks themselves.
     There are no reports of clashes  between  Tajiks  and  either  Uzbeks,
    Pashtuns or Hazaras, in Kabul.

45.  Dr Giustozzi suggested that finding accommodation or a job would be  a
    problem in Kabul.  Unemployment is currently estimated at around 33% of
    the workforce.  Accommodation is not  easy  to  find  for  a  returning
    refugee, because of the massive return of refugees from Pakistan  which
    led to the population of Kabul doubling in twelve months, and the  fact
    that 65,000 to 70,000 houses were destroyed  by  the  hostilities.   He
    said that rents went up from  2002  to  2004,  with  four  to  six-fold
    increases in rental prices having been reported over the last  eighteen
    months.  He suggested that one male labourer's wages may be able to pay
    for the rent of a house, but it can take more.  Even in remote parts of
    Kabul a two-room apartment could cost two and a half times  the  salary
    of a civil servant in May 2003.  It is now suggested that even  finding
    a place in a ruin is becoming impossible.  On average, houses and flats
    accommodate more than three times as many people as they were  designed
    for.

46.  In paragraph 26 of this report Dr Giustozzi disagreed with one of  the
    conclusions by Dr Lau in his  report  for  RS.   He  agrees  that  the
    Americans have offered high rewards for  the  capture  of  the  leading
    figures of Hizb i Islami and accepted that could lead some individuals
    in the security forces to try and seize members of Hizb i Islami  for
    the purpose of information-gathering.  However, he did not  think  that
    risk need concern either the first or second appellant because  it  has
    become clear that very few people know the whereabouts of Hekmatyar  or
    the other top leaders of Hizb i Islami.  Furthermore, it is considered
    that those who do know must  be  located  around  Kunar,  where  it  is
    thought that Hekmatyar is based.  Neither of those two appellants would
    be anywhere near to either Hekmatyar or  Kunar  and  would  not  be  of
    interest to anybody seeking information  about  the  top  leaders.   He
    summarised by saying:-

         26.  ... The risk to both Mr PM and Mr SS would arise from the fact
             that in the current conflict  situation  the  security  forces
             will be looking out for individuals with  personal  or  family
             links to the insurgent groups (Taliban  and  Hizb i Islami).
             The fact that both of  them  had  relatives  arrested  by  the
             security forces contributes to strengthen  their  profiles  as
             potential  recruits  for  the  insurgency.   In  the  case  of
             Mr Sadat two factors compound his personal risk.   The  first
             one is that being one of the limited number of Tajik activists
             in the ranks of Hizb i Islami, his value to both Hizb i Islami
             and the security service is highlighted as the former tries to
             expand  its  activities  into  Tajik  territory.   Since   the
             security service are still largely staffed by Jamiatis who see
             Afghan is Tajik in the north east and around  Kabul  as  their
             own political monopoly, there will be an additional  incentive
             for them to target somebody  with  Mr Sadat's  profile.   The
             second factor of risk derived from the fact that Mr Sadat  is
             from  Charasyab,  a  district  which  the  insurgents  started
             infiltrating very recently and that is one  of  the  gates  to
             Kabul.  The security force  services  must  as  a  consequence
             redouble their effort to round  up  suspect  individuals  from
             this district.


         27.  In the case of Mr PM, a factor compounding his  situation  is
             that he hails from Nangarhar province, where a  local  warlord
             Hazrat Ali has for some time been busy  trying  to  root  out
             Hizb i Islami in order  to  prevent  the  expansion  of  the
             insurgency in the area.  As despite all there are signs  (sic)
             that  the  insurgency  is  slowing  spreading  anyway,  it  is
             unlikely that there will be any let up in such efforts.  It is
             worth noting that Hazrat Ali  is  well  networked  in  Kabul,
             through his Jamiati connection."


47.  In his report for the third appellant the general  background  evidence
    is the same.  At paragraph 9 he referred to the  position  in  Kandahar
    where he said Hizb i Islami had a number of commanders during the Jihad
    against the Soviets.  Whilst the commanders were the most active in the
    area, their tribal base was narrow  and  the  commanders  were  largely
    wiped out by the Taliban when they occupied the  region  in  1994.   He
    said that at present there is no record of activity of Hizb i Islami in
    Kandahar.  He speculated however, that it is likely that former members
    of Hizb i Islami are serving under the Taliban flag in the area.  The
    Ghilzais, the tribe from which Hizb i Islami drew its commanders, are
    said to be one of the core tribes within the Taliban  ranks.   Kandahar
    has become much more affected by  violence  in  2006,  it  having  been
    relatively quiet in 2005.   There  were  reports  in  2006  of  Taliban
    attempts to recruit within Kandahar City, including from the  ranks  of
    health staff.  This was apparently with the intention  of  establishing
    health services in areas under their control and attending to their own
    wounded.  Dr Giustozzi said much the same about the third  appellant's
    situation not improving by relocating to Kabul as he did in his  report
    for the first and second  appellants.   He  again  did  not  think  the
    ethnicity of the third appellant is a risk factor, given  that  40%  of
    the population of Kabul is Pashtun.  He said his Kandahari  accent  "if
    he has one" might  attract  some  attention  because  the  Taliban  are
    expected to attempt to infiltrate the capital, but  he  did  not  think
    that would get him into difficulty  with  the  security  services.   He
    would have the same difficulty in obtaining accommodation and  work  as
    the other two.  The same view applies about there being no  significant
    risk of the authorities believing that the third appellant may know the
    whereabouts of Hekmatyar or of other Hizb i Islami figures.

Dr Giustozzi's Oral Evidence

Evidence-in-Chief - Mr Jacobs for the first and second appellants

48.  Dr Giustozzi was asked about the Danish Fact-Finding Mission report of
    2 December 2004.  It cited a range of sources to the effect that former
    members of Hizb i Islami, including commanders would not have a problem
    with the Afghan Government, if they made it clear they  are  no  longer
    working with Hekmatyar.  Although this would  depend  on  the  person's
    connection with Hekmatyar, and the extent to which the person is  still
    in conflict with powerful people in  Afghanistan.   He  said  that,  in
    principle, being a former member of Hizb i Islami is not against  the
    law.  The difficulty is that current members do not normally admit that
    they are members, and the organisation is  carrying  out  military  and
    terrorist activities against the Government.   Dr Giustozzi  suggested
    that unless somebody was caught  red-handed  they  would  not  normally
    admit their involvement.  He thought the distinction between former and
    current members is difficult to make and one cannot tell by talking  to
    them.  He felt that making a distinction was an arbitrary act and  that
    the security forces would assume  that  former  members  may  still  be
    active.  Asked what had changed since the 2004  report,  he  said  that
    attempts by Hizb-i-Islami  to  organise  politically  had  intensified.
    Some former members had been elected, although they were largely people
    with a background of co-operating with other  groups,  and  are  almost
    certainly people who spoke for Hizb i Islami many years  ago.   These
    people had a track record of having split  with  Hekmatyar  and  it  is
    public  knowledge  that  they  have  difficult  relations   with   him.
    Otherwise, he said the violence has intensified since  2004,  and  2006
    has been the most violent year for some time.  Until 2004 the  violence
    had been mostly in the remote areas but as 2006 approached there was  a
    shift from guerrilla warfare to terrorist activities.  Suicide  attacks
    became quite large scale in 2006.  There are now attacks in the  cities
    and this has had an impact on the behaviour of the  security  agencies.
    They  are  now  more  concerned  than  they  were  before  to   prevent
    infiltration into the cities.  He said that the means used to  identify
    potential activists may be different now from those that were  used  in
    2005.  Then, they were be looking for armed people  roaming  about  the
    countryside, now they are looking for people  with  more  sophisticated
    infiltration techniques.  The infiltrators they seek in urban areas are
    closer to the profile of a Hizb i Islami supporter.  In part that  is
    because the Taliban is largely composed of rural people with no  strong
    networks in the cities.  Now, there is a need to rely  on  people  from
    the  cities  and  former  members  of  Hizb i Islami  are  valuable.
    Hizb i Islami has always had a strong membership of educated  people.
    The Taliban look for people rooted in the urban areas because they  are
    seen as possible recruits as infiltrators.

49.  Dr Giustozzi was  then  asked  about  his  view  that  on  return  the
    appellants would not be at risk as a result of people  seeking  rewards
    for information relating to Hekmatyar.  He said that it now seems to be
    assumed that Hekmatyar is hiding in Kunar province, a very  mountainous
    area near Pakistan and a former stronghold of Hizb i Islami.  It  has
    become obvious that his whereabouts  are  not  common  knowledge  among
    members  of  Hizb i Islami.   Therefore,  in  seeking  Hekmatyar  the
    authorities' only interest will be in high-ranking members  from  Kunar
    province.

50.  Asked about the assertion  in  paragraph  23  of  Mr  Kovats'  skeleton
    argument that the evidence shows that former members of Hizb i Islami
    would not be  at  risk  unless  they  are  perceived  to  be  currently
    supporting the Hekmatyar faction and that it would generally take  more
    than  the  fact  of  past  membership  to  create  such  a  perception,
    Dr Giustozzi said that nobody would say in public that they are current
    members of Hizb i Islami although it is not against the law to be so.
    He said that former members, who can demonstrate by their  record  that
    they have  split  from  Hekmatyar,  or  fought  against  the  Hekmatyar
    faction, are safe to the extent that they have in some instances become
    active  in  politics.   If  they  cannot  demonstrate  that  they  have
    distanced themselves, people are at risk of at  least  harassment.   He
    explained that the Afghan security agencies are not very sophisticated.
     They do not have any electronics or modern equipment.  One  major  key
    to dealing with an insurgency is to gather  information.   The  way  in
    which they gather information is to round people up and put them  under
    pressure.  They attempt to turn  them  into  informers,  and  may  jail
    people for long periods.  Informers could lead to  family  members  who
    are current or former members.  He said there is a  range  of  ways  of
    putting on pressure.  It can take the form of repeat visits  to  homes,
    threats, arrests and  interrogation.   Such  a  consistent  pattern  of
    threats and harassment can be applied particularly to young  males  who
    are seen as the best possible recruits for Hizb i Islami.  He did not
    think that, in terms of information gathering, it made much  difference
    whether a  person  had  a  family  with  a  tradition  of  support  for
    Hizb i Islami.  The authorities look, not for culprits but for  those
    who can provide information on the movement and whereabouts of  members
    of the insurgency.  He said that family members can be targeted, as can
    anyone who has access to the insurgents.  He said that recruitment into
    Hizb i Islami tends to happen at clan and family level and therefore it
    is not unreasonable for the authorities to assume that clan  or  family
    will know what is going on in a particular area  where  the  population
    effectively belongs to one pool of people.

51.  He said that Hizb i Islami are having some difficulty in  recruiting.
    This is partly because they do not have the same level  of  funding  as
    the Taliban, but also because  their  support  used  to  be  among  the
    educated.  Education in Afghanistan has virtually stopped over the last
    twenty years, and very many people who were educated are no  longer  in
    Afghanistan.  The typical Hizb i Islami member was somebody  who  had
    been recruited in the 70s and 80s and was educated.  It is among  their
    families where there is the best chance of recruiting new members.   He
    said it is becoming difficult to find people who are willing  to  fight
    and to recruit people competent to undertake guerrilla  warfare,  where
    tactics and strategy can be complicated.

52.  Asked whether the authorities  know  that  people  who  belong  to  the
    formal traditional families are at the forefront  of  recruitment  into
    Hizb i Islami, Dr Giustozzi said that the  educated  people  in  the
    intelligence services have been fighting  against  Hizb i Islami  for
    30 years.  Some were in the intelligence services under the  Communist
    regime in the 80s.  Many of the staff of the security services are from
    Jamiat i Islami and they are familiar  with  Hizb i Islami.   Asked
    whether the Afghan authorities would have any interest in  someone  who
    has been in the United Kingdom for several years, and  not  in  contact
    with Hizb i Islami, Dr Giustozzi said that certainly such an individual
    would not likely be suspected as an insurgent, at  least  not  when  he
    returns.  He said the authorities main interest is to  get  a  database
    and information about as many people as possible.   They  can  then  be
    used to track down the insurgents.  Once a returnee has settled down he
    will inevitably build a network of relationships.  Even if  he  is  not
    recruited, such a person will come to know about other people from  the
    same village or area.  They may well have fought together in the  past.
    He would become suspected as a person  who  is  part  of  a  pool  with
    considerable knowledge of what is going on among  the  insurgents.   He
    may become aware of the networks, even  in  Kabul,  because  insurgents
    need such things as safe houses and weapons piles.  It  should  not  be
    forgotten that information-gathering is important to  both  sides.   He
    suggested that a returnee may come under  pressure  from  the  security
    services intent on scaring him and by threatening him with  a  view  to
    converting him to help.  They may do this for a while to see whether he
    gives way.  Depending on the result, they may let him  go,  or  upgrade
    the pressure.  Asked about the risk of ill-treatment, Dr Giustozzi said
    he could not say  what  happens  when  somebody  is  in  custody.   The
    background evidence mentions abuses, even torture and illegal detention
    but to say who would be tortured or killed is not easy.  The  treatment
    can vary a great deal.  Some  people  report  they  have  been  beaten,
    others that they have simply been verbally interrogated.  Much  depends
    on what the authorities think they can get out  of  the  detainee,  and
    whether they think that they are in with a chance of doing so.

53.  Dr Giustozzi was referred to  paragraph  26  of  Mr Kovats'  skeleton
    argument where it is said that none of the background material (the  US
    State Department report 2005, Human Rights Watch report  2005,  Amnesty
    International Report 2005,  Freedom  House  Report  2005,  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office human rights Report 2005) refers to  any  risk  for
    former Hizb i Islami members.  He was asked whether the position  has
    changed.  Dr Giustozzi said those reports dealt with  2004,  and  said
    again that between 2005 and 2006 the character of  the  insurgency  has
    changed.

54.  He was then asked about the reintegration programme.  He said that  re-
    integration  was  not  an  appropriate  expression.   People  are   not
    reintegrated into society, there is no amnesty.  What happens  is  that
    people are offered a certificate if they are prepared to declare  their
    support for the Government and to say that  they  will  not  carry  out
    activities against the Government.  The Peace Strengthening  Commission
    states in the certificate that, unless a person is found to  be  acting
    against the statement he has made, he  should  be  left  alone  by  the
    establishment.  He said the scheme falls short of an amnesty, and is no
    help in finding a  job  or  accommodation.   About  4,000  people  have
    applied since 2005, and most have obtained certificates.  Dr Giustozzi
    said that he interviewed some of the directors  of  the  Commission  in
    Kandahar and Paktika provinces, to find out what sort  of  people  were
    signing up.  They did not give him a list of names although some of the
    most important names were mentioned to  him.   When  he  checked  those
    names he found that the majority were  former  old  Taliban  Government
    personnel who had  not  been  known  to  be  active  since  2001.   The
    political affairs officer in Jalalabad had looked into  the  Commission
    for himself, but all he was able to do was  to  obtain  a  visit  to  a
    centre where people were processed.  He found only  eight  individuals,
    all of whom had returned from Pakistan and  all  of  whom  denied  ever
    acting in the insurgency.  He said they claimed to be small shopkeepers
    who were applying for certificates because they  hoped  it  would  help
    them to set up their businesses again on return.

55.  He said there was  little  evidence  that  ex-insurgents  sign  up  for
    certificates because the guarantees are not very strong.  It would  not
    be difficult for the authorities to  pretend  that  somebody  had  done
    something wrong in order to be able to arrest them.  Because  there  is
    no rule of law the certificate would offer no protection if  that  were
    to happen.  Asked whether a former commander, or a relative of a senior
    commander, could re integrate, Dr Giustozzi said that in order to get
    the certificate there has to be an admission of activity but  it  would
    not be difficult to lie in order to obtain a certificate  and  resettle
    more easily.  Some people are reluctant to put on record that they have
    previously been active against the Government because it may be thought
    they could become so again.

56.  Asked about the three Hizb-i-Islami factions, Dr Giustozzi  said  that
    in fact there are more than three.  He was only asked  about  the  main
    three.  The Hekmatyar faction opposes President Karzai and  appears  to
    support Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

57.  He said the Khalis faction may no longer exist because Khalis was  very
    old and died recently.  He did not agree that Khalis had  been  killed,
    he thought he had died a natural death.  The faction does not exist  as
    an organised party.  The people in it all come from the same  tribe  or
    network.  It existed in Nangarhar and was very local.  He suggested the
    networks probably still remain, but  that  nobody  operates  under  the
    banner of the Khalis  faction.   Mr  Khalis'  son  claimed  to  be  his
    father's successor.  He is reliant on Taliban  support  and  the  older
    members do not recognise  him  as  their  leader.   In  reality  he  is
    probably the local leader of the Taliban.

58.  The Farooqi faction has an office  in  Kabul  which  Dr  Giustozzi  has
    visited.  He met their senior people.  They have a number of Members of
    Parliament.

59.  Mr Jacobs asked about the risks to the first and second appellants  in
    Kabul.  Dr Giustozzi said that cities  in  general  were  increasingly
    being targeted and, as a result, the security services react.  He  said
    the more terrorist attacks there are, the more  the  security  services
    mobilise to prevent infiltration, and to gather information on recruits
    and potential recruits.  Asked about a reference at paragraph 7 of his
    report, to Hizb i Islami action in Kabul, Dr Giustozzi said he meant
    the province of Kabul, not the city.  He said there has been  extensive
    infiltration in the south of the province with some attacks on  foreign
    troops.  Insurgents had been spotted in the villages and one local  NGO
    had suspended its surveys of villages in the province  because  of  the
    presence of insurgents.  He thinks that they are trying to improve  and
    identify support.  They are looking for safe houses to enable  them  to
    increase their activity.  ISAF believes they want to  infiltrate  Kabul
    City once they have stockpiled enough supplies.

60.  Asked if there were arrests of Hizb i Islami  members,  Dr Giustozzi
    said the police tend to report to the press when they make arrests, but
    the army does not.  Even when the police do mention arrests, it is  not
    usually specified who it was.  Any reference is usually to  insurgents.
    As the Taliban are a much bigger organisation it is safe to assume that
    the majority of arrests are of Taliban members but much depends on  who
    is strong in the area in question.  He  was  unable  to  say  how  many
    arrests there have been in Kabul city because they are  mostly  by  the
    intelligence services, who do not report them.  The police tend  to  be
    more active  in  the  rural  areas.   He  said  that  information  will
    occasionally circulate in the city, for example when arrests were  made
    at the university.  If people are taken from their homes,  it  is  less
    likely to get into the public domain.  There are no  published  figures
    for arrests.

61.  In paragraph 8 of his report, Dr Giustozzi said that there is evidence
    that remnants of Hizb i Islami have re-established a network throughout
    the country over the past three years.  He was asked how much detail is
    known about this.   He  said  that  in  Kunduz  province  reports  were
    received that Hizb i Islami were recruiting in the region.  It is  an
    area that supported the Jihad against the Russians.

62.  Asked about  Hazrat  Ali  (in  relation  to  Mr  Mohammadi,  the  first
    appellant) Dr Giustozzi said that he now controls Nangarhar and  there
    is some evidence that he sees Hizb i Islami as a threat.  Asked whether
    the First Appellant, having been here for a  number  of  years,  albeit
    that he was a former commander, would  be  at  risk  from  Hazrat  Ali,
    Dr Giustozzi said that if he were to go back to Nangarhar he would need
    a place to stay and a job.  He would therefore have to rely on his  old
    network.  He said that his  presence  would  become  known  quickly  in
    Nangarhar, although it would take longer in Kabul because it was a  big
    city.

63.  Asked about the anticipated attack on Kabul,  which  it  was  said  was
    going to happen during the winter of 2006, and when  it  might  now  be
    expected, Dr Giustozzi said there is normally a gap of a month between
    the end of the winter and the start of fighting, largely as a result of
    the length of the supply chain that needs to be  established.   It  was
    the view of ISAF that there was to be an attempt to separate  Jalalabad
    and Kabul.  It was pointed  out  to  Dr Giustozzi  that  the  footnote
    referred to in his report said the anticipated attack was going  to  be
    through the winter, and therefore the delay after winter would  not  be
    relevant.  He said that each  year  there  is  a  decline  in  fighting
    through the winter with a peak in July and August, but the Taliban want
    to eliminate the gap between winter and summer fighting.

64.  As to the rule of law, Dr Giustozzi said there is still no sign of any
    public trials of arrested insurgents.  If there are any trials they are
    held in secret.  He said there are now attempts to reform the  judicial
    system and introduce defence lawyers.  Under the old regime there  were
    no defence lawyers and, as  a  result  there  are  no  trained  defence
    lawyers.  There are plans to train them at  the  university.   Previous
    training was only for the judges.  The few active  lawyers  that  there
    are, have studied abroad.  He said there are still signs of  corruption
    in the police and the judiciary, but it is not simply  corruption  that
    is the problem.  For example, in Nangarhar the police are controlled by
    various factions and reports to them of harassment by the  intelligence
    services are unlikely to produce  a  sympathetic  response  because  of
    that.

Evidence-in-chief - Mr Lams - For the Third Appellant

65.   Dr Giustozzi  said  that   he   had   travelled   to   Kandahar   in
    January/February 2006, and had previously been  there  in  March  2005.
    Asked about how  Kandahar  was,  in  terms  of  the  intensity  of  the
    insurgency, Dr Giustozzi said that as a  region  in  the  south  it  is
    probably the most violent after Helmand  and  Oruzgen.   They  are  the
    three worst provinces out of the 34 in Afghanistan.  As a  result,  the
    counter-insurgency is also at its strongest in those provinces.   Asked
    what he meant in his report when he referred  to  pre-emptive  arrests,
    Dr Giustozzi said there  is  evidence  that  the  Taliban  are  making
    significant efforts in  the  area  to  recruit  medical  personnel  and
    establish field hospitals.  In southern Afghanistan it is difficult for
    them to treat their injured fighters  because  they  are  operating  in
    rural and mountainous  areas.   He  said  that  as  they  traditionally
    recruit among the uneducated from the villages and they have no doctors
    in their ranks they try to get round the  problem  by  offering  higher
    salaries than State hospitals but that is not very  successful  due  to
    the risks and the lifestyle involved.  They have been known  to  kidnap
    doctors and nurses, but they find they have problems with practitioners
    who are not happy to be forced to work with them.   As  a  result,  the
    majority of the medical staff  in  the  area  have  fled  and  are  not
    available for kidnap.  The Taliban find recruiting is difficult because
    of  the  ideological  allegiances  required  and  therefore  they  need
    Hizb i Islami on side.  As a result they are closer to  Hizb-i-Islami
    than to other groups.  The security forces are aware of the kidnappings
    and which are also reported in the press.  They are also aware  of  the
    Taliban attempts  to  establish  hospitals.   If  the  authorities  see
    somebody with the skills required by the Taliban they would regard them
    as a potential for recruitment by the Taliban, and keep an eye on them.
     They could be taken into custody to strengthen the  message  that  the
    Taliban are trying to recruit people.  The  third  appellant  would  be
    part of a group of potential recruits  that  the  security  forces  may
    therefore be interested in.  Asked where the third  appellant  was,  on
    the scale of education, Dr Giustozzi said that he is  typical  of  the
    type that you do not generally find among  the  Taliban  but  which  is
    needed by them.  They also have  a  need  for  engineers,  for  example
    because they have been acquiring anti-aircraft equipment but cannot use
    it.  The Taliban do not generally have natural sympathisers  among  the
    educated.

66.  Dr Giustozzi was asked about the third appellant's  possible  problems
    in Kabul.  He again referred to Hizb-i-Islami developing  networks  and
    how the insurgents are recruiting in cities,  not  just  to  carry  out
    attacks but also to build networks.  He referred to the recent  arrests
    at universities, saying he did not  know  what  particular  allegiances
    those people had, but the  university  had  always  been  a  recruiting
    ground for Hizb-i-Islami.  The arrests he referred  to  were  in  2003,
    after riots among students but he said  there  have  been  more  recent
    arrests of students accused of preparing terrorist  attacks.   He  said
    the rioting was not of the same quality of activity as the more  recent
    arrests implied.  The recent arrests seemed to be in  relation  to  the
    preparation of explosives.  Although he did not know the allegiance  of
    the people who were arrested, they were probably not Taliban.

Cross-Examination - Mr Kovats

67.  Asked by Mr Kovats  how  he  had  become  interested  in  Afghanistan,
    Dr Giustozzi said he did his doctorate on  Afghanistan,  finishing  in
    1997.  He used to use Russian sources  because  in  the  1990s  he  was
    unable to go to  Afghanistan.   He  speaks  Russian,  but  not  Pashtu,
    although he can read Dari.  Asked why he had interviewed more  than  30
    people who were past and present members of Hizb i-Islami, he said  it
    was in the context of research that he is still  carrying  out  on  the
    Jihad against the Soviets, and because Hizb-i-Islami is not a very well-
    researched topic.  He said one interview had  been  specifically  about
    returning refugees, but the others were focused on  his  research  into
    the earlier  Jihad.   He  said  that  during  the  course  of  all  his
    discussions, the issue of returning refugees  may  have  surfaced  from
    time to time.  The one interview that was focused on returning refugees
    was  with  Professor  Allah  Dad  at  the  Pedagogical  Institution  in
    Jalalabad.   He  was  asked  why  he  had  wished  to  interview   him.
    Dr Giustozzi said another person had mentioned issues of harassment and
    arrest, and when he asked who would be able  to  tell  him  more  about
    that, the Professor was mentioned.  It was the professor who said  that
    his own son had been forced to flee the country.   He  originally  came
    from a village, and his son had remained there.  He was harassed by the
    security forces and accused by the authorities of being  involved  with
    the Hekmatyar faction.  In the end the professor, under  pressure  from
    his wife, told their son to  leave  the  country.   He  left  in  2006.
    Dr Giustozzi conceded that this was nothing to do  with  returning  to
    Afghanistan, but leaving it.  Asked how this threw  any  light  on  the
    position of those who left in 1999 or 2002, Dr Giustozzi said it showed
    the harassment of people who are accused  of  having  connections  with
    Hizb i Islami, and that it was happening in that region.  Asked about
    the form of harassment the professor's son had suffered,  Dr Giustozzi
    said the professor had spoken of repeated visits by security agents  to
    the house.  They had not found his son, but put pressure on his wife to
    say where their son was and report back to the police.   This  happened
    more than once.  Mr Kovats asked whether the fact  that  somebody  was
    repeatedly not in when the security forces called may itself be  ground
    for suspicion.  Dr Giustozzi agreed.  He said that was exacerbated  by
    the fact that he did not go to  the  police.   He  said  that  was  not
    surprising in view of the rumours about mistreatment.

68.  He agreed that no organisation  has  listed  Hizb-i-Islami  members  as
    being in a risk category.  He also accepted  that  none  of  the  three
    appellants had fought against the current  government.   Asked  whether
    not fighting the Taliban would  give  any  indication  as  to  how  the
    appellants may be viewed by the security forces now, Dr Giustozzi said
    that not fighting could go against them as it may  indicate  that  they
    were not hostile to them.  Asked whether  the  Hekmatyar  faction  came
    into existence after the Taliban took over, Dr Giustozzi said that was
    true in a way although  Hekmatyar  had  always  been  regarded  as  the
    Hizb i Islami leader and that others had defected from Hizb i Islami.
    Hekmatyar had been unable to talk to the Taliban from his  position  in
    exile, but others who remained had to find an accommodation either with
    the Taliban, or the opposition.  He agreed that the  Hekmatyar  faction
    only allied itself with Al Qaeda after the fall of the Taliban.   Asked
    why anybody now would think the  appellants  had  any  connection  with
    Hekmatyar, or the Taliban, as all three left before  the  Taliban  fell
    and in fact opposed them, Dr Giustozzi said that some  of  Hekmatyar's
    people support the Taliban but the core of the party left  the  country
    and the majority of leaders now oppose the Taliban.  He said he did not
    regard being connected with the Taliban as a relevant factor.

69.  Mr Kovats asked why, when various groups including  Hizb-i-Islami,  go
    back many years, and people have been fighting for them for many years,
    the authorities would think people who have been in the United  Kingdom
    for years would have any information to give.  Dr Giustozzi said  that
    there have already been a lot of arrests although it is not known  who,
    but mostly of people presumed  to  have  information,  such  as  people
    staying in villages, with networks, who have relations or friends known
    to be in the service of Hizb i Islami.  The appellants would have to re-
    establish their connections in order to find jobs.  He accepted that on
    return they would be people with few connections, but in the  following
    month or so they would need to make those  connections.   There  is  no
    possibility of financial support otherwise than from  old  friends  and
    relations.  That would also mean they would have to mix back  into  the
    community.  Mr Kovats suggested that any risk  to  the  appellants  is
    entirely speculative and asked Dr Giustozzi to comment on three issues.
     First, he asserted the risk is  speculative  because  nobody  has  any
    evidence that returning refugees from  similar  backgrounds  have  been
    mistreated.  Dr Giustozzi acknowledged that there was no such evidence
    but he said that no one is monitoring returning  refugees,  except  for
    Sikhs  who   are   monitoring   themselves   for   disappearances   and
    mistreatment.  He accepted that in the  absence  of  monitoring  it  is
    difficult to say what is happening.  He said the number of  returns  is
    not very high, but he acknowledged that a proportion of those returning
    would be from Hizb-i-Islami.  He accepted there had been large  numbers
    of voluntary returns from Pakistan, but said they  were  not  political
    people.

70.  Mr Kovats' second point was that there is no body of evidence that the
    Afghan security forces would regard those who  have  been  out  of  the
    country for years as a more promising source of information that  those
    in Afghanistan.  Dr Giustozzi agreed that they would not inevitably  be
    a source of information but it was necessary  to  consider  the  longer
    term.  Because returnees would re-establish their  networks  of  family
    and friends, it would only be a matter of months before they  would  be
    in the same position as those who had been there longer.

71.  Mr Kovats' third point was that Afghanistan is  in  the  international
    spotlight.  The fact that no organisation has listed  people  like  the
    appellants, who had not fought for many years, and that no one has said
    that they are at real risk, are strong arguments  against  their  being
    considered at real risk.  Dr Giustozzi  said  that  the  reports  that
    Mr Kovats was referring to dealt with 2004/2005 when the role of Hizb-i-
    Islami was minimal.  He said there may be other reports.  Mr Kovats put
    it to him that there are more up-to-date reports, up to February  2007,
    and none suggest any risk.  Dr Giustozzi said that  he  had  mentioned
    reports in the Afghan press that dealt with killings and  arrests,  but
    lower level cases of harassment would not be reported as they  are  not
    headline issues.  He said that until June 2001  Hizb-i-Islami  did  not
    have a separate identity from other  insurgents  who  were  all  lumped
    together.  Dr Giustozzi agreed  with  Mr Kovats  that  the  fact  the
    insurgency has got worse since 2004, and that the appellants  had  been
    away from before that time, showed there would be no  interest  in  the
    short term.  However, he again said that in the longer term that  would
    cease to be the case.  Finally, Dr Giustozzi agreed with Mr Kovats that
    there was a strong element  of  speculation  in  suggesting  that  when
    questioned,  if  they  were  questioned,  the   appellants   would   be
    mistreated.  Dr Giustozzi suggested that somebody with a high  profile
    may have an easier time because of that high  profile.   The  majority,
    including the appellants, would be arrested with no profile to  protect
    them.  He also accepted that on arrival there was  a  good  chance  the
    appellants would be of no interest for some time but, in time, a  month
    or longer, the likelihood of them  being  subjected  to  harassment  or
    worse would increase proportionately with the  length  of  their  stay.
    Asked whether all three cases  were  similar  Dr Giustozzi  said  that
    Jalalabad and Nangarhar are high risk, Nangarhar the more so.  There is
    less risk in Kandahar because Hazrat Ali was not there.  Asked  whether
    Hazrat Ali would be concerned about things that  happened  many  years
    ago, even accepting that he is interested in stopping political rivals,
    Dr Giustozzi said that he was a Pashai  which  was  a  small  minority
    living on the border.  He had not been influential in the past but  now
    he is the only one fighting the Taliban.  His power has magnified, even
    though his political power base is  small.   He  is  vulnerable  to  an
    organised challenge, for example from the Pashtu,  which  is  the  only
    group that probably could make a challenge to him.  That is why  he  is
    trying to avoid them, by remaining in Nangarhar.  He gets most  of  his
    revenue from there and wants to keep the Pashtun divided as between the
    different tribes.  Dr Giustozzi was not suggesting he would target the
    first appellant as such  but  said  he  controls  the  police  and  the
    security forces.  That,  together  with  directions  he  receives  from
    Kabul, gives him a very strong interest in motivating his  own  men  to
    prevent Hizb-i-Islami disrupting his networks.  Asked whether the first
    appellant,  if  at  risk  in  Nangarhar,  could  avoid  that  by  going
    elsewhere, Dr Giustozzi said that it depended where.  Hazrat Ali is an
    MP and has influence in Kabul.  There are parts of Afghanistan where he
    is not in charge of the security services, for  example  in  the  north
    west and the central highlands, but there it would be difficult  for  a
    Pashtu to settle.  A Pashtu would  not  normally  go  to  settle  among
    Uzbeks.   He  would  incur  local  hostility  and  find  difficulty  in
    obtaining work.

Re-examination by Mr Jacobs

72.   Mr Jacobs  referred  to  the  evidence  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants would not be at immediate risk on arrival in  Kabul  but  in
    order to survive there with no financial assistance they would need  to
    interact with people in the community and in doing  so  would  disclose
    factors that would put them at risk.  He asked whether  they  would  be
    safe if they got out of Kabul before  their  identities  became  known.
    Dr Giustozzi said that for Pashtu people to live in areas  where  they
    had no network or contacts and no friends, and no one to help, would be
    difficult.  They would need such contacts for example to approach money
    lenders.  He said that Afghanistan is not a place where  you  can  live
    without family or networks.  Areas occupied by Uzbeks and Tajiks  would
    be difficult for Pashtuns, because Pashtuns had taken land from  Uzbeks
    and Tajiks.  There have been attacks on Pashtuns as  a  result.   Those
    areas  would  be  relatively  hostile  territory  for  a  Pashtun.   He
    emphasised that social networks are particularly important where  there
    is no rule of law, as everything is based on trust.  Obtaining jobs  is
    based on  networks,  businesses  will  be  staffed  by  relatives,  the
    judiciary cannot be relied upon, there is  no  law  enforcement.   They
    would be asked about their past, information given would be checked and
    if the information could not be obtained  one  would  not  get  a  job.
    Information given to employers and landlords would be passed  on.   The
    second appellant who is from the Kabul area would not be able  to  hide
    his identity there.  He might find a safe  house  to  start  with,  but
    would need to give information to  individuals.   A  Tajik  from  Kabul
    would still need networks if he were to go to Nangarhar where there are
    more Tajiks.  He would not come across ethnic issues but the area comes
    under the control of Hazrat Ali who is opposed to Hizb i Islami.  The
    area near Kabul where the second appellant comes from is a  very  small
    place, no more than a big village.  His arrival there would be  noticed
    immediately.

Re-examination - Mr Lams

73.  Dr Giustozzi said that it would be difficult for the third  appellant,
    from Kandahar, to relocate to Nangarhar.  He would be unable to conceal
    his identity in Kabul.  Dr Giustozzi confirmed that he would regard the
    third appellant as an educated man and there are not many  around.   He
    said that 70% of the population is illiterate.   Of  the  30%  who  are
    literate, only a very small minority are educated to degree level.   He
    would stand out if he went to Nangarhar as a professional, although  if
    he went with an NGO, and was introduced by the organisation, that would
    be different although many  NGOs  have  left  and,  as  a  result,  the
    professionals are relocating.

74.  Earlier in his evidence Dr Giustozzi had said, in answer to Mr Kovats,
    that although contacts are needed to obtain  jobs,  when  the  UN  were
    looking for people who were skilled in IT, or  other  technology,  they
    tended not to enquire into the background of  those  that  they  found,
    because of the need for staff.

75.  The Tribunal asked a number of questions.  Dr Giustozzi was asked what
    he had in mind when he said that the tension may vary from area to area
    but it was particularly the case for young males.  He  said  those  fit
    enough to be able to run and  fight  are  mostly  at  risk.   Generally
    Afghans in their forties would not be fit enough, because they tend  to
    age quickly, bearing in mind that the average life span  is  47  years.
    Asked whether the security forces would therefore target young men,  he
    said that their main concern is to prevent terrorist attacks and indeed
    their careers are at risk if they fail to prevent them.

76.  He was then  asked  about  the  reintegration  programme  and  why  the
    appellants could not get around their difficulties by signing the forms
    and  obtaining  certificates.   Dr Giustozzi  said  first  that   the
    instigation of the programme was a political act by politicians who are
    trying to diminish the appeal of the insurgency.  He said that the most
    likely applicants are former Taliban as they fear  being  arrested  and
    the scheme is there to reassure people.  He said that  the  people  who
    run the scheme do not see "eye-to-eye with the  Government"  about  it.
    They do not like the idea of former insurgents going free.   They  make
    the point that it is easy to say one has stopped opposing  and  anybody
    could pretend to be innocent.  They see that as concerning as  the  war
    goes on, and there is a need to look for potential  terrorists.   Asked
    whether he had taken any evidence from anyone who had chosen either to,
    or not to, sign up, Dr Giustozzi said there have been interviews in the
    press of those from Pakistan who are tired of fighting and are  afraid.



77.  Asked about whether there is anything in common  between  the  factions
    of Hizb i Islami, he said there were two theories.  The first is that
    those people who are now co-operating with the Government are  in  fact
    only a front for the Hekmatyar Party.  It is suggested  that  they  are
    preparing the ground for a political deal, or alternatively using their
    faction to infiltrate government with a view to subverting it one  day.
    The other theory is that the majority of  Hizb i Islami's  supporters
    believe that Hekmatyar does not know what he is doing, having failed to
    take any position in government, and they have abandoned  him.   It  is
    said they have joined the government because that is where the jobs are
    because they need to feed their families and are getting older.   Those
    people do not regard fighting as a serious option and do not trust  the
    Taliban, but do not feel that Hekmatyar can compete with  the  Taliban.
    It may well be that when they feel the time  has  come  to  organise  a
    coup, it will be easier to secure power because they are in there.   He
    said the difference between the two theories is a tactical  one.   None
    of the MPs will acknowledge any contact with  Hekmatyar,  but  all  say
    that he is a good leader.  The  infiltration  theory  was  regarded  by
    Dr Giustozzi as the more attractive one.   He  said  it  is  generally
    thought that Pakistan would back Hizb i Islami, and drop any  support
    for the Taliban, if Hekmatyar were able to get power.

78.   Dr Giustozzi  was  asked  what  is  meant  by  a  commander   within
    Hizb I Islami, and what he meant when he used the expression.  He said
    that Hizb i Islami is not structured like an army and  there  are  no
    formal ranks, although that may be  changing.   He  said  a  person  in
    charge of between  20  and  100  men  would  be  regarded  as  a  group
    commander.  Those in charge of a few hundred to about  1,000  would  be
    district commander, above which would be the  provincial  and  regional
    commanders, the latter being based in Pakistan.  Any commander would be
    a core member of the party and the problems which could be faced  by  a
    former commander would depend on the level of command that they had.

79.  He was asked about what was happening at the time when  the  appellants
    each left Afghanistan.  He said that, when the third appellant left  in
    1999 there was some fighting but not a great  deal  of  involvement  by
    Hizb i Islami.  The fighting was largely in  Kunar  and  a  few  were
    fighting the Taliban.  When the  first  appellant  left  in  2001,  the
    Taliban Government had fallen so there was some fighting and resistance
    to the Taliban.  When the second appellant left in March 2002 there was
    very little fighting going on, except near the Pakistan border and that
    was mostly by Arabs.  The insurgency started during 2002.  He  reminded
    us that in 1996 the Taliban occupied all areas that had previously been
    occupied by Hizb i Islami and, by October  1996,  it  had  eliminated
    Hizb i Islami as a fighting force.  After that there was only minimal
    fighting and odd clashes in  the  mountains  with  those  unwilling  to
    surrender to the Taliban.

Submissions and Background Material

Mr Kovats' for the Respondent

80.  Mr Kovats started his submissions by making four  points.   First,  he
    accepted that Dr Giustozzi was a  knowledgeable,  fair  and  objective
    witness.  He did not dispute his evidence insofar as  it  was  factual,
    but submitted that his opinion on risk  to  the  three  appellants  was
    speculative, both in his report and in cross-examination.  His evidence
    was not supported by any other objective evidence,  and  his  anecdotal
    evidence did not make out a real risk.  The one  interview  he  carried
    out, in February this  year,  after  the  original  reports,  contained
    nothing concrete.  He spoke to a man whose son left in 2006 because  he
    was being harassed.  It was not clear whether that man  was  a  current
    member of Hizb i Islami.  In any event, it did not form any evidential
    basis for saying that a former member of Hizb i Islami would be at real
    risk on return.

81.  Second, it was the respondent's case that none of the three  appellants
    are at risk anywhere in Afghanistan,  nor  will  they  be  required  to
    conceal their identity.  Dr Giustozzi  accepted  that  none  would  be
    suspected of being an insurgent, and he accepted that none is likely to
    be  thought  to  know  Hekmatyar's  whereabouts.   He  said  that  what
    Dr Giustozzi did was to apparently identify a risk of being considered
    a potential source of information for the security services.   But,  he
    argued, even that thesis did not stand up.  Mr Kovats said  that  they
    have been absent from Afghanistan for some time and were absent  during
    the recent significant events.  They have been absent since the Taliban
    fell, since Hizb i Islami allied itself with Al Qaeda, and since before
    the increase in the insurgency.  They simply were not there when  those
    interesting activities happened.  He argued  that  it  is  contrary  to
    common sense to think that any of the three would be a  more  promising
    example of someone who would know what is  going  to  happen,  than  an
    Afghan who has been there all along.  Allied to that, he said there was
    no reason why they should not sign up for the reintegration  programme.
    Dr Giustozzi himself had said that the certificate would mean that the
    security services would leave them alone.  He did not say  in  evidence
    that does not happen in practice.

82.  Third, even if the appellants are  of  any  interest  to  the  security
    services  they  do  not  face  a  real  risk  of   persecution.    What
    Dr Giustozzi said, and he was repeatedly pressed, did not show that he
    knew what the risk was.  He referred to visits, threats  and  financial
    incentives but, Mr Kovats argued, that was all speculative.  He did not
    say at any time that there is a real risk that they would be  tortured.
    Mr Kovats accepted that in the voluminous amount of evidence there are
    plenty of references to abuse by the security services.  He  said  that
    Dr Giustozzi, at paragraph 19 of his report, referred to the number of
    complaints made about mistreatment.  Mr Kovats argued that it was  not
    right to equate the number of complaints to the  number  of  incidents.
    He said there was no evidence to show  that  the  security  forces  are
    interested  in  mistreating  returnees.   They  may  be  interested  in
    insurgents and  their  aims,  but  that  does  not  cover  these  three
    appellants.  He argued that if there was any  established  evidence  of
    mistreatment of returnees it would be in the objective evidence and  it
    simply is not there.

83.  Fourth, Mr Kovats argued that even if he was wrong,  and  any  of  the
    appellants would be at risk in their home areas, they could go to other
    parts of Afghanistan.  He noted that the first appellant is said to  be
    at risk from hazrat ali in Nangarhar where he has his power  base,  and
    also from him in Kabul.  He pointed out that  Dr Giustozzi  said  that
    Hazrat Ali's power base is a modest one.

84.  As to the second appellant, who is Tajik, Dr Giustozzi said  he  would
    have no ethnic problems in Nangarhar or Mazar i Sharif or in Kabul.  He
    does not have a political profile that would give rise to any problems.



85.  As to the third appellant, he is a Pashtun, in common with 40%  of  the
    population of Afghanistan.  It is the largest ethnic group.   He  comes
    from Kandahar, near the Pakistan border.  There is  no  reason  why  he
    should not relocate to other parts of Afghanistan, including Kabul.

86.  As to Article 1F(C) of the Refugee Convention Mr Kovats accepted that,
    in the light of what Dr Giustozzi had said about commanders, we may not
    feel that it is an Article 1F case.   He  argued  that  the  first  and
    second appellants cannot have it both ways.  If they have a  sufficient
    history to put them at risk on return to Afghanistan, that  would  only
    be because either or both was a war criminal.  He referred to page  210
    of the COI report which has a brief extract about Hizb i Islami and the
    Hekmatyar faction.  It describes how it was founded in  the  1970s  and
    reached the  height  of  its  power  in  1992  when  the  Soviet-backed
    Government of President Najibullah fell to a  coalition  of  Mujahideen
    factions including Hizb i Islami.  Hekmatyar served as Prime Minister
    in 1995.  He was designated a terrorist by the US State  Department  in
    February 2003 for participation in, and  support  for,  terrorist  acts
    committed by Al Qaeda and the Taliban.  He is currently in hiding.

Submissions - Mr Jacobs for the First and Second Appellant

87.  Mr Jacobs started by emphasising the quality of  Dr Giustozzi  as  an
    expert witness and referred to his  wide-ranging  sources.   He  argued
    that we should attach considerable weight to his  evidence  as  he  was
    able to give considerable assistance, as had Dr Lau.  He  reminded  us
    that in his report Dr Giustozzi had referred to the counter-insurgency
    operations and acknowledged that,  whilst  Dr  Lau's  report  had  been
    focused on the whereabouts of the leadership  of  Hizb i Islami,  the
    interest is now in the whereabouts of anyone connected with insurgency.
     Anyone linked to the Taliban  or  Hizb i Islami  are  likely  to  be
    targeted.  He acknowledged  that  the  first  appellant  had  not  been
    involved with Hizb i Islami since 1997 or the second since 1995.   He
    reminded us that Dr Giustozzi had said that  Hizb i Islami  has  now
    established networks including individuals who do not claim any link to
    the  organisation.   He  reminded  us  that  the  first  appellant  had
    commanded 30 to 35 men.  His brother, who was a more senior  commander,
    had been taken in 2001.  The second appellant was a local commander  in
    the Kabul area, and  his  cousin  a  senior  commander.   He  said  the
    Immigration Judge had found that the second appellant's cousin is still
    active;  and  that  his  father  and  brothers  were  arrested  by  the
    authorities in 2001.  He said the resurgence of Hizb i Islami is very
    relevant.  In 1996, after defeat by the Taliban, they were said not  to
    be an effective force but are now becoming more serious in  non-Taliban
    areas and are re-recruiting old members.   He  acknowledged  that  they
    have difficulty in attracting the older members who were more  educated
    such as engineers.  He said there is no  new  recruiting  ground.   The
    authorities are aware that Hizb i Islami would therefore go back to the
    families  who  traditionally  supported  them.   He  reminded  us  that
    Dr Giustozzi had said that 1,500 fight for Hizb i Islami, 400 at any
    one time, that there is a plan to cut off Kabul,  and  that  they  have
    core support in the neighbouring provinces.  Dr Giustozzi said in cross-
    examination that thousands of people had been  arrested,  because  they
    were  perceived  to  have  information  about   the   insurgency.    He
    acknowledged that evidence about arrests is not  freely  available  and
    only gets into the public domain occasionally, for example the  arrests
    at the university.  He said the risks are through personal family links
    to insurgent groups, and because of relations that had  been  arrested.
    In the case of the second Appellant, his risk is  increased  by  having
    been a member of a limited number of Tajik activists in  the  ranks  of
    Hizb i Islami.  Dr Giustozzi said his value, to both Hizb i Islami and
    the security forces, would be highlighted  because  Hizb i Islami  is
    trying to expand its activities into Tajik  territory.   He  also  said
    that the security services are still largely staffed  by  Jamiatis  who
    see the Afghans, and Tajik, in the north east,  and  around  Kabul,  as
    their own political monopoly.  There is thus additional  incentive  for
    them to target somebody such as the second appellant.  The second  risk
    factor for the second appellant is that he comes from  Charasyab,  only
    fifteen minutes from Kabul.  That is a district  where  the  insurgents
    have started to infiltrate recently, as it  is  one  of  the  gates  to
    Kabul.

88.  He said the risk factors for  the  first  appellant  are  contained  in
    paragraph 27 of Dr Giustozzi's report.  He comes from Nangarhar, where
    a local warlord, Hazrat Ali, has for some time been  busy  trying  root
    out Hizb i Islami in order to prevent the expansion of the insurgency
    in his area.  As it seems the insurgency is spreading, it  is  unlikely
    there will be any let up in such efforts.  Hazrat  Ali  is  also  well-
    networked in Kabul.  He asked us not to underestimate the influence  of
    powerful warlords.

89.  He suggested that the assertion by Mr Kovats, that  Dr Giustozzi  was
    speculating, is not supported by the objective evidence.  He started by
    quoting  the  current  COI  report  which  contains   an   extract   of
    Dr Giustozzi's input to a conference.  He quoted  para  11.94  of  the
    October 2006 COIR:-

        "Notes on Afghanistan, presented on 28 June 2006 at  a  country  of
        origin information conference by Dr Antonio Giustozzi, an expert on
        Afghanistan, stated that Hizb i Islami, like most Afghan political
        groups, were known to recruit by way of family connections:


             'Current activists will approach former members, perhaps  right
             up to the age of 45 - 50 years, with a view to asking  them  to
             collaborate  with  political  or  terrorist  activities.    The
             security services (NSD) are aware of this  policy  and  try  to
             keep track of  their  progress.   The  NSD  have  stated  their
             ambition is to have an informant in  every  village,  but  this
             remains an ambition due to budget constraints and  due  to  the
             difficulty of recruiting in areas  of  the  country  where  the
             population is hostile.


             The security services in Communist  times  enjoyed  significant
             resources and strong intelligence, but now have  to  rely  more
             exclusively on  more  basic  methods.   Physical  beatings  are
             common to try and obtain information, both within the  NSD  and
             the police.   Occasionally  deaths  in  custody  are  reported.
             Those formerly associated with the Hizb  are  singled  out  for
             harassment,  either  to  obtain  intelligence  or   simply   to
             intimidate them into avoiding future associations - the message
             being sent is that "we are with the  government,  we  can  hurt
             you."'


      Mr Jacobs  referred  particularly  to  the  harassment  and  risk  of
    persecution  demonstrated  in  that  article.   He  argued   that   the
    respondent's own evidence shows that what Dr Giustozzi was  saying  is
    not speculative and he  had  been  quoted  with  approval.   Mr Kovats
    reminded us, at the end of submissions, of the introduction to the  COI
    report which says:-

          "The report is compiled wholly from material produced  by  a  wide
         range of recognised  external  information  sources  and  does  not
         contain any Home Office opinion or policy."



90.  Mr Jacobs then turned to  the  US  State  Department  report  on  Human
    Rights Practices 2005 which,  under  the  heading  'Torture  and  other
    Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment' refers to reports
    of abuses despite the  law  prohibiting  such  practices.   The  report
    refers to the authorities in Herat, Helmand and other  locations  which
    continue to routinely torture and abuse detainees.  Torture  and  abuse
    are said to consist of pulling out fingernails  and  toenails,  burning
    with hot oil, beatings, sexual humiliation and sodomy.   It  also  says
    that NGOs reported that security forces continue to use excessive force
    during their fight against the Taliban and Al Qaeda remnants, including
    looting, beating  and  torturing  of  civilians.   In  Balkh  province,
    residents alleged that local commanders are running private prisons  to
    extort money and that abuse generally consisted of  beatings  resulting
    in some cases in death.  On the subject of mistreatment he then  turned
    to the current COI report.  It mentions the Danish Fact-Finding Mission
    of 2004 which said the Lawyers Union of  Afghanistan  stated  that,  in
    regions governed by warlords, it is common that people in  custody  are
    beaten up until they confess the crime of which they are being accused;
    and that  the  punishment  depends  on  the  crime  and  the  captive's
    relationship with the commander.  It also said that the police  force's
    use of torture in Kabul is less widespread because of the  presence  of
    journalists and Western organisations  but  even  now  the  police  can
    behave roughly.  The Human Rights Watch report is  also  quoted.   This
    was dated September 2004  and  said  that  local  military  and  police
    forces, even in Kabul, are involved in  arbitrary  arrests,  kidnapping
    and extortion, and torture  and  extra-judicial  killings  of  criminal
    suspects.  Outside Kabul, commanders and their troops in many areas are
    implicated in widespread rape of women and girls, rape of boys, murder,
    illegal detention and forced displacement.

91.  The Amnesty International 2005 Afghanistan Annual report  reported,  in
    a report to the UN that it had emerged that the US forces had  tortured
    and ill-treated detainees during the war on terror  in  Afghanistan  in
    2004.   The  UNHCR  and  ECRE  guidelines  on  those  who  may  require
    protection includes:-

         "Others who fear that they would  be  victims  of  violence,  in  a
         situation in which there is no law or order,  on  the  basis  of  a
         settling of old scores."

     Mr Jacobs suggested that a Jamiat-i-Islami  warlord,  with  a  grudge,
    would  be  particularly  interested   in   seeking   out   members   of
    Hizb i Islami.  He said that was in the nature of a conflict which had
    been going on for 24 or 25 years, when the sides are  based  on  tribal
    and political groupings.  He then turned to Dr Lau's earlier  evidence
    which formed the basis for the finding in RS Afghanistan.  He said that
    experts are often  called  in  country  guidance  cases  because  other
    evidence does not cover the points raised.  In that case  his  evidence
    was not covered by other objective material.  In particular he  pointed
    to paragraph 11 of Dr Lau's then report which is  quoted  in  full  in
    paragraph 12 of RS Afghanistan.  There he said that:-

         "The war against  terrorism  in  Afghanistan  is  being  fought  by
         numerous agencies and groups.  It is fought largely in  secret  and
         has so far stayed clear of Afghanistan's legal system.  The silence
         of the objective evidence on the trial of suspected terrorists,  of
         the rate of those arrested  as  suspected  terrorists,  indeed  the
         almost complete absence of any information in the public domain  on
         the number of persons arrested because they are  accused  of  being
         associated  with  Al Qaeda,  the  Taliban  and  Hezb-i-Islami  is
         deceptive.  Occasional newspaper reports reveal  that  arrests  and
         interrogations of suspects take place  on  a  very  regular  basis.
         They are carried  by  Afghan  internal  security  and  intelligence
         agencies, US agencies and even  private  mercenaries  co operating
         with members of the Northern Alliance."

     Later, at paragraph 14 of his report, Dr Lau said:-

           "In my opinion it is difficult to discount the appellant's  fear
           as irrational only because his own association with the  Hezb-i-
           islami ceased some time ago.  It appears  that  members  of  the
           Northern Alliance think otherwise."

    Mr Jacobs argued that Dr Giustozzi had said there were no public trials
    and he said much the same as Dr Lau about  regular  arrests.   He  said
    there is reference to silence about arrests in the background evidence.
     He said that so far as paragraph 14 is concerned,  for  'the  Northern
    Alliance' now read 'the Government'.  The Tribunal, in RS  Afghanistan,
    accepted that a history of involvement does not mean no  interest.   At
    paragraph 16 of his old report, Dr Lau commented on internal flight and
    said that society  in  Afghanistan  is  tribal  in  nature  and  it  is
    problematic for an outsider to fit into an area where he has no  family
    or  relatives.   He  also  emphasised  that  ISAF  does   not   protect
    individuals.  Challenged about the fact that Dr Lau was not in court to
    say that he stood by his original opinion, Mr Jacobs argued that he had
    been accepted in 2004 and that Dr Giustozzi  updates  the  report.   Mr
    Jacobs argued that Dr Lau's report was based on a historic knowledge of
    Hizb i Islami and was not simply a snapshot as at  the  date  of  the
    report.  He argued that, at paragraph 18 of the Tribunal's decision  in
    RS Afghanistan, it was accepted that Afghanistan was a  country  where
    the rule of law had broken down and there was no realistic prospect  of
    an individual establishing his innocence through due process.  He  said
    that Dr Giustozzi showed that  was  still  the  case.   He  said  that
    Tribunal had accepted that Dr Lau had reached his conclusions  through
    proper reasoning, and an informed assessment of country conditions, and
    that similarly there have  been  no  challenges  to  the  reasoning  of
    Dr Giustozzi.  He argued that we should find that Dr Giustozzi has made
    an informed assessment of country conditions, especially with regard to
    connections.  He said that any suggestion that the situation has  moved
    on since RS Afghanistan may well be true, but in reality the  situation
    has deteriorated, not improved.

92.  As to Mr Kovats' second point, that the appellants  had  not  been  in
    Afghanistan when matters that  would  cause  interest  took  place,  he
    referred to the 400 - 1,500 active insurgents loyal to Hizb i Islami.
    He said they are close to Kabul and that it is  impossible  to  survive
    economically without a network.  For appellants who have  relations  as
    commanders, whether that be cousin or brother, they would be deemed  to
    hold  evidence  relating  to  counter-insurgency  despite  having  been
    outside Afghanistan.  There are some who think that Hizb i Islami  is
    run from outside Afghanistan.

93.  He argued that using the reintegration programme  is  not  a  realistic
    option.  Dr Giustozzi had said that some people consider it too great a
    risk to admit previous connections to the agency running the  programme
    which, paradoxically, is opposed to the programme itself.

94.  As to Mr Kovats' third point, that even  if  the  appellants  were  of
    interest, there is no real risk of persecution, Mr Jacobs argued  that
    he had demonstrated by references to  the  COIR,  US  State  Department
    report and the other background material that there is such a risk.  He
    turned to the assertion that the  UNHCR  guidelines  do  not  refer  to
    Hizb i Islami members as being at risk and referred us  to  paragraph
    6.73 in the Country of Origin Information Report on  Afghanistan  April
    2006.  There it is said that the UNHCR paper identified them as  people
    who may have protection needs,

         "Afghans associated with the Taliban or other groups opposed to the
         current transitional process."


    He argued that 'other groups' would  clearly  include  Hizb i Islami,
    Hekmatyar faction.  It is the main group, other than the  Taliban.   Al
    Qaeda is not an Afghan group.

95.  He then turned to Mr Kovats' argument that the number of  reports  and
    complaints of mistreatment does not equate with  the  actual  level  of
    abuse.  He argued that many will be  reluctant  to  make  a  complaint,
    because the rule of law has broken down.  He argued that in reality the
    number of victims will be far greater than the  number  of  complaints.
    Turning to Mr Kovats' argument that there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    security forces have no interest in returning refugees, he argued  that
    it was accepted in RS Afghanistan  that  whether  a  former  member  of
    Hizb i Islami is at risk depends on  his  individual  history,  which
    depends on the connection of the person concerned with  Hekmatyar,  and
    the extent to which that person has  been  in  conflict  with  powerful
    people.  He accepted the argument, that people would be at risk because
    of the desire of others to  gain  financially  by  reporting  them,  no
    longer has weight.  He reminded us that Dr Giustozzi had said there was
    no evidence that returnees are monitored.

96.  He returned to Mr Kovats' fourth point, which was that even if he  had
    been wrong and there  was  a  risk  in  their  local  areas,  then  the
    appellants could relocate without reasonable hardship.  He reminded  us
    of what he described as the guidance by Lord Bingham in Januzi  [2005]
    UKHL 5 where it was said that the test was whether or not  that  person
    can lead a relatively normal life in their place  of  relocation.   (In
    fact  Lord  Bingham  was  quoting  UNHCR  guidelines  on  International
    Protection of 23 July, as he developed his findings.)  Mr Jacobs argued
    that AG IG  and NM [2007] EWCA Civ 297  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    considered this issue further.  He argued that neither of the first two
    appellants could relocate to Kabul.  That is because Dr Giustozzi  had
    said that whilst they would not immediately  be  apprehended,  if  they
    tried to establish themselves with accommodation or  work,  they  would
    need to give information about themselves and it would only be a matter
    of time before the authorities learnt of them.  He reminded us that  in
    IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00312  the  Tribunal
    said it was not reasonable to expect a returning failed  asylum  seeker
    to lie.  It therefore followed that the appellants' risk  would  accrue
    on a daily basis to the extent that after a month or so the authorities
    would know their backgrounds.  He argued that, even if  the  appellants
    were able to transit through Kabul, and leave before  they  were  found
    out, it is unreasonable to expect them to go somewhere else where  they
    have no connections.  Dr Giustozzi had spoken of the relative hostility
    and suspicion that would attach to someone relocating in an area  where
    they are not known.  He reminded us  that  they  would  need  a  social
    network, that there is no rule of  law  and  so  everything  relies  on
    trust.  Previous family connections with Hizb i Islami would come out
    and that would contribute to the accrued risk.  He said that  does  not
    point to them being able to lead a relatively normal  life.   He  again
    mentioned that the Second  Appellant,  who  is  a  Tajik  would  be  in
    difficulty because the Tajik areas  in  the  north  are  controlled  by
    Jamiat and the local commander of Jamiat is interested in  rooting  out
    Hizb i Islami.  He accepted that there would be no ethnic  hostility,
    but said there  would  be  political  hostility,  therefore  he  cannot
    relocate.  The first appellant is from the Kabul area.

97.  He turned to  the  UNHCR  guidelines  on  internal  flight,  quoted  at
    paragraph 6.190 in the April 2006 COIR report.  He quoted the following
    parts:-

         "Even in a city like Kabul, which is  divided  into  neighbourhoods
         (Gozars) where people tend to know each other, the risk remains, as
         news about a person arriving from elsewhere in the country  travels
         fast ...


         The protection provided by families, extended families  and  tribes
         is limited to areas where  family  or  community  links  exist  and
         without them, a relatively normal life without  undue  hardship  at
         another location  than  one's  place  of  origin  or  residence  is
         unlikely.  As documented in studies  on  urban  vulnerability,  the
         household and the extended family remains the basic social  network
         in Afghanistan and there are indications that existing  traditional
         systems of sharing and redistribution function less in the extended
         urban family.  It would therefore, in UNHCR's view, be unreasonable
         to expect any Afghan to relocate to an area to which he or she  has
         no effective links, including in urban areas of the country."

     He argued that if any of the appellants were  at  risk  in  their  home
    areas they could not relocate without undue hardship.

98.  Mr Jacobs then referred to a number of pieces  of  background  evidence
    acknowledging that these are largely the  ones  set  out  in  Mr Lam's
    skeleton.  The first was a report from the US Centre of Excellence  and
    Disaster Management dated 28 March 2007 which reported a  suicide  bomb
    attack in Kabul, which killed at least five.  At page G8, paragraph  31
    the same report says that ISAF has, over the past few months,  detected
    an increase in security incidents in the provinces of Paktika and Khost
    of 70% and 50% respectively.  There is reference, at  paragraph  34  of
    the report, to UNAMA whose work was strongly praised.  It is UNAMA  for
    which Dr Giustozzi worked in the past.

99.  The Human Rights Watch World Report 2007 (reporting on 2006) refers  to
    ISAF extending its reach across the entire country and confronting  the
    insurgency in the south and south east  of  Afghanistan  where  it  had
    escalated into open warfare.  In other parts of  the  country,  Afghans
    are routinely subject to abuses and oppression by regional warlords and
    militias, most of them ostensibly allied with the Government.  There is
    reference to the Taliban, and other  anti-Government  forces,  carrying
    out more than 80 suicide bombings.   A  different  Human  Rights  Watch
    report (dated 18 January 2006) makes reference to  Taliban  and  other
    anti-Government  forces,  some  allied  with  Hekmatyar,  significantly
    expanding their  insurgency  in  the  predominantly  Pashtun  areas  in
    southern Afghanistan during 2005.

100. Chapter 8 of the US Department of State  Country  Report  on  Terrorism
    2005 (issued in April 2006) has a piece on 'Hizb i Islami  Gulbuddin'
    (the  Hekmatyar  faction).   It  describes  it  as  a  faction  of  the
    Hizb i Islami Party and refers to links with Bin Laden.  It also refers
    to Hekmatyar's regular statements on the need for Afghans to reject the
    international community's presence in their country and  says  that  he
    has staged small attacks in  an  attempt  to  force  the  international
    community to withdraw,  to  overthrow  the  Afghan  Government  and  to
    establish  an  Islamic  fundamentalist  State.   It   reports   regular
    encounters with the US forces in Kunar where Hekmatyar is most  active.
    Chapter 5 of the report also  makes  reference  to  the  programme  for
    strengthening peace.  It says that the programme is to reconcile former
    Taliban and Hizb i Islami Gulbuddin members.  It says that six regional
    offices were founded and, as of December 2005,  more  than  600  former
    fighters had joined the programme.  63,000 former combatants  had  been
    processed through the  disarmament,  demobilisation  and  reintegration
    programme and its next phase will be to make  efforts  to  disband  the
    most notorious illegal armed groups on  a  province-by-province  basis,
    and to identify and remove Government officials  with  links  to  those
    groups.

101. A UNAMA press briefing by Chris Alexander is  reported  in  a  document
    dated 8 January  2007.   He  is  the  United  Nations  Deputy  SRSG  in
    Afghanistan (Special Representative of the Secretary  General)  and  is
    one of Dr Giustozzi's sources.  In particular, Mr Jacobs referred to an
    answer to a question  in  which  he  said  that  both  the  Afghan  and
    international partners have very good information on how  the  Taliban,
    Hizb i Islami, and Hekmatyar are operating.  It is their challenge, and
    priority, in 2007 to make those  responsible  for  initiating  violence
    accountable for that violence and for what they are doing.  The  United
    Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights reported on Afghanistan in a
    report dated 5 March 2007.  Mr Jacobs referred to paragraphs 24 and  25
    under the heading "Armed Conflict and Violence".   There  it  was  said
    that violence, linked with armed conflict, in 2006 was the worst  since
    the fall of the Taliban in 2001.  He said that, although centred in the
    four southern provinces, it occurs over large areas from Kunar  in  the
    east to Farah in the west.  Parts of the southern central highlands are
    also becoming destabilised.  It said there  has  been  an  increase  in
    insurgent-related attacks, from less than 300 a month  at  the  end  of
    March 2006 to over 600 by the end of September 2006.   The  average  in
    2005 was about 130 per month.  Suicide attacks have risen dramatically.
     There were 17 in 2005, 123 in 2006.

102. His next reference was to the US House of Representatives Committee  on
    Foreign Affairs hearing "On  Afghanistan",  published  on  15  February
    2007.  At page 12 (of 29) there is a report  of  the  testimony  of  a
    retired US General who said:-

         "In looking at the nature of  the  threats  inside  Afghanistan,  I
         often drew out a diagram of interlocking circles  characterised  as
         the 'three walls of Afghanistan'.  This diagram outlined  not  only
         the activities US and Coalition forces were  involved  with  daily,
         but also highlighted  the  interrelated  aspects  of  Afghanistan's
         challenges.  It neatly defines in graphic form many of the  sources
         of instability in Afghanistan as well.  The first  circle  reflects
         the war against the senior leadership of Al Qaeda, the Taliban  and
         the Hizb i Islami Gulbuddin  (HIG)  -  the  three  primary  enemy
         organisations, all affiliated with each  other  in  a  marriage  of
         convenience.  Senior leadership  of  these  organisations  includes
         Osama Bin Laden, Al Zawarhiri, Mullah Omar and Hekmatyar as well as
         their most senior lieutenants - the brain power of  each  terrorist
         group."

     At page 17 of 29, the testimony of  an  academic  from  John  Hopkins
    University is recorded as saying that part of  the  resurgence  of  the
    Taliban can be summarised in the word  Pakistan.   It  suggested  that,
    among others, Hekmatyar is based there and  that  some,  including  the
    leader of the Taliban,  never  leave  Pakistan.   A  little  later,  at
    page 25 of 29, there is reference to HIG sanctuaries in Pakistan, and
    to the areas they operate in within Afghanistan, having increased four-
    fold between 2005 and 2006.

103. The US State Department report on Afghanistan 2006 (published in  March
    2007) refers in its opening section to:

         "The  Taliban  and  anti-Government   elements   continue   to   be
         responsible  for  threatening,  robbing,  attacking   and   killing
         villagers, Government officials,  foreigners  and  non-governmental
         organisation workers.  Whilst the Government expanded its authority
         over provincial centres, a few areas remained under the control  of
         regional commanders or the Taliban  following  insurgent  offences.
         During the year, over 1,400 civilians died as a result of terrorist
         activities, including  suicide  attacks,  roadside  bombs  and  gun
         assassinations.  There continue to be instances in  which  security
         and factional forces committed extra-judicial killings and torture.
          Human rights problems included: extra-judicial killings;  torture;
         poor prison  conditions;  official  impunity;  prolonged  pre-trial
         detention; abuse of authority by regional  commanders;  restriction
         on freedoms of press, religion, movement, and association; violence
         and societal discrimination against women, religious converts,  and
         minorities; trafficking in persons; abuse  of  worker  rights;  and
         child labour."

     On  the  following  page  there  is  reference  to  increased  violence
    involving terrorists and insurgents including  HIG,  all  of  whom  had
    killed more civilians than in the previous year.

104. He then moved on to a report by the United Nations on the situation  in
    Afghanistan and its  implications  for  peace  and  security  dated  11
    September 2006.  At paragraph 6, the report  identifies  five  distinct
    leadership centres of the insurgency which it suggests act in  a  loose
    co-ordination  with  each  other  and  benefit   from   financial   and
    operational links with the drug trafficking  networks.   This  includes
    Hekmatyar in Kunar province and neighbouring areas.  It refers  to  the
    Peace Strengthening Programme having had some  success  with  mid-level
    Taliban commanders but said it has  not  attempted  to  attract  senior
    commanders.  At  paragraph  11  it  is  said  that  the  trend  towards
    instability  has  not  been  restricted  to  areas  affected   by   the
    insurgency.  A sense of volatility has gripped Kabul over the past few
    months, triggered by violent riots on 29 May following a  serious  road
    traffic incident.  There are a few paragraphs  concerning  attempts  at
    improving the rule of law, starting at paragraph 51.  In  paragraph  76
    there is reference to Afghanistan finding itself in the midst of a  new
    crisis, with a third of the country racked by violent  insurgency.   It
    said:-

         "The situation in the south, south east and  east  is  unlikely  to
         improve  in  the  near  future  and   the   prospect   of   further
         deterioration cannot be excluded.  While the rest  of  the  country
         remains  relatively  secure,  Afghans  everywhere  understand   the
         insurgency  poses  a  grave  threat  to  the  political  transition
         nationwide."


    Referring to the Commission, the report said at paragraph 81:-

         "The programme to disband illegal armed groups addresses one of the
         clearest and most consistently  expressed  demands  of  the  Afghan
         people, the compliance to date has been disappointing."

     And at paragraph 82:-

         "Corruption  and  the  narcotics  industry  continue  to   threaten
         Afghanistan's transition and must  be  dealt  with  as  matters  of
         priority by the Government and the international community."

105. Freedom House, reporting on 6  September  2006,  referred  to  2005  as
    being the bloodiest year since the fall of the Taliban  in  2001,  with
    nearly  1,600  civilians,  law  enforcement  personnel,  officials  and
    foreign aid workers killed and injured during the year.   It  expressed
    concerns about widespread corruption, nepotism and cronyism which  were
    growing.  There is reference to there being no  functioning  nationwide
    legal system, and that justice in many places is  administered  on  the
    basis of a mixture of legal codes by judges with minimal training.   It
    refers to outside influences over the judiciary  remaining  strong  and
    their judges and lawyers are frequently  unable  to  act  independently
    because of threats from local  power  brokers  or  armed  groups,  with
    bribery widespread.

106. He then turned again to  the  Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,
    published in April 2006.  There are several references  to  lack  of  a
    functioning nationwide legal system and the fact that individuals  held
    in Government-controlled prisons are frequently held for months without
    being charged.  The UN-appointed independent expert on  the  Commission
    on Human Rights added that,  persons  who  are  charged  are  held  for
    extended periods of time,  without  being  tried;  and  that  pre-trial
    detentions exceed the sentence for the crimes.  Individuals who may  be
    innocent are held in detention with hardened  criminals  and  children.
    Juveniles are  commonly  held  in  the  same  cells  as  violent  adult
    criminals.  Corruption throughout the system  is  rampant.   A similar
    point was made by the US State Department report in 2005.

107. In a section headed "Warlords and Commanders" at 5.63 of COIR  the  UN-
    appointed independent expert for the  Commission  on  Human  Rights  is
    reported as saying how ethnic allegiances and the prolonged absence  of
    a legitimate centralised State, means  all  local  and  regional  power
    within Afghanistan is subject to the authority exercised by  a  variety
    of armed  actors,  commonly  referred  to  as  warlords.   Their  local
    commanders wield authority through  a  combination  of  arms,  mutually
    supportive relationships with other armed  actors,  safe  networks  and
    ethnic allegiances.  The UNHCR is reported, at 5.68, as saying, in June
    2005, that these commanders continue  to  pose  a  threat  to  national
    security and human rights especially in the light of their  involvement
    in what is regarded as a rapidly expanding drug trade.

108. The state of the police is referred to from paragraph  5.102.   The  UN
    Secretary General reported that the national police has limited ability
    to project itself outside Kabul.  Attempts are being made to  introduce
    more training.  Prison conditions are discussed  from  paragraph  5.111
    onwards.  Amnesty said, in 2004, that conditions in Kabul have seen  an
    improvement, but  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  rehabilitation  and
    reconstruction elsewhere.  By March 2006 the US State Department report
    was  reporting  that  prison  conditions  remain   poor   with   severe
    overcrowding and the UN Secretary General at the same  time  said  that
    the  human  rights  situation  regarding  imprisonment  in  Afghanistan
    remains critical.  There is some evidence of torture  in  prisons.   In
    its overview, the COIR report, looking at human rights, quotes  a  2004
    report from a UN appointed expert on human rights who said  that  most
    human  rights  violations  occur  at  the  hands  of  warlords,   local
    commanders, drug traffickers and other actors  who  wield  a  power  of
    force.

109. There is reference to the security situation in  Kabul  from  paragraph
    6.23.  In May 2004, the ECRE said:-

         "The Afghan Government continues to  lack  effective  control  over
         Kabul, and efforts to create a new national army and  police  force
         and to reform the judicial system throughout the country remain  at
         an embryonic stage."

     As to torture this is dealt with from paragraph 6.55.  The 2004  Danish
    Fact-Finding Mission had said that the  Lawyers  Union  of  Afghanistan
    report that people in custody are beaten up until they confess.   Human
    Rights Watch, in September  2004,  reported  that  local  military  and
    police  forces  even  in  Kabul  are  involved  in  arbitrary  arrests,
    kidnapping and extortion, the torture and  extra-judicial  killings  of
    criminal suspects.  Outside Kabul commanders, and their troops, in many
    areas are implicated in the widespread rape and  murder.   Amnesty,  in
    2005, reported evidence emerging that US forces had tortured  and  ill-
    treated detainees.

110. At paragraph 6.484  there  is  reference  to  the  Danish  Fact-Finding
    Mission which reported that if  the  security  forces  believe  that  a
    person is connected to Hizb i Islami's Hekmatyar faction there  is  a
    risk of arrest as there is a risk that people  will  accuse  others  of
    having connections with Hekmatyar for personal motives.  This, however,
    is the 2004 report that was dealt in by RS Afghanistan.

111. Mr Jacobs then moved on to Article 1F, reminding us that Mr Kovats  had
    said that we might feel that this was not  an  exclusion  case  in  the
    light of the evidence given.  He reminded us that the second  appellant
    stopped fighting in 1995, and the first appellant in 1997, both  before
    Hekmatyar's decision to start a Jihad on the  international  forces  in
    Afghanistan.   He  suggested  the  activities  conducted  by  the   two
    appellants  were  not  criminal,  they  were  engaged  in  inter-tribal
    conflict of a guerrilla nature, typical of life in  Afghanistan.   They
    were in mountainous regions firing mortars and shells at another  group
    in a similar situation.  They were doing no more than  defending  their
    own region from another tribal group.  He reminded us of the  terms  of
    Gurung [2002] UKIAT  04870.   Their  actions  were  not  to  facilitate
    terrorism and that if these two were to be excluded then  the  majority
    of asylum seekers  from  Afghanistan  would  be  excluded  without  any
    serious evidence of criminal conduct on their  part.   He  referred  us
    particularly to paragraph 31 of Gurung where the Tribunal had said that
    Article 1F  is  only  concerned  with  serious  criminality,  but  not
    necessarily restricted to those committed in the  context  of  war  and
    armed conflict.  In paragraph 36 of Gurung  there  is  reference  to  a
    Canadian case which referred to international criminals on all sides of
    conflicts rightly being unable to claim refugee status.   In  paragraph
    39, to the principle of the need for a holistic approach.  He  accepted
    there  was  a  similar  restriction  in  relation  to  the   grant   of
    humanitarian protection, but he reminded us that in any event Article 3
    was an absolute right which contained no such exclusion clause.

Mr Lams' Submissions of Background Evidence for the third appellant

112. Mr Lams adopted Mr Jacobs' submissions, and went on  to  look  at  the
    profile of the third appellant.  He left Afghanistan earlier,  although
    his association with Hizb i Islami goes back a long way.  He had spent
    two years  helping  the  Mujahideen  and  Hizb i Islami  against  the
    Communist regime.  At that time Jamiat and Hizb i Islami were fighting
    together against the Communists.  The third appellant was  then  allied
    to Jamiat and, as a result, he is known to the Jamiat people which,  he
    argued, strengthens his profile on return.  It has been  accepted  that
    both his father and his brother were Hizb i Islami members  who  were
    arrested by the Taliban.  So, not only does the  third  appellant  have
    family connections with Hizb i Islami, but he has worked with Jamiat-i-
    Islami.  Furthermore, the third appellant is educated.  His family  had
    a pharmacy in Kandahar and he, and his family, would be  recognised  if
    they were to return.  Dr Giustozzi reckoned this  would  only  take  a
    number of days.

113. He argued that, in Kabul, Jamiat are  highly  placed  in  the  security
    structure.  The Minister of Interior is a Jamiat man, and they are  the
    party that do the enforcing.  That affects  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant would come to their attention in Kabul and in  Kandahar.   He
    reminded us that there was an earlier report by Dr Lau about the third
    appellant  which  was  before  the  first  Adjudicator.   It  is  dated
    8 September 2003.  It  is  a  short  report,  which  at  paragraph  11
    describes Hizb i Islami as:

        "a most radical and violent group  which  has  been  implicated  in
        numerous   attacks   on   individual   members   of   the   interim
        administration, bomb attacks in Kabul and other cities, attacks  on
        ISAF troops with rockets and more recently by employing  a  suicide
        attack and attacks on Coalition troops operating in Afghanistan".


    At paragraph 40, Dr Lau said that he had been asked  to  comment  upon
    whether the third appellant's continued fear of return  to  Afghanistan
    was well-founded.  He considered that it was.  He said:

         "I think that his membership in the Hizb i Islami exposes him to a
         significant risk from both the Northern Alliance and  in  fact  the
         current Government."

     He said that, unlike the Lau report in RS Afghanistan,  in  the  third
    appellant's case weight was not put on factors which were  subsequently
    disagreed with by Dr Giustozzi i.e. financial rewards for  identifying
    Hekmatyar's whereabouts.  He argued that Dr Giustozzi's report supports
    the position from 2003.  He asked, rhetorically, what had changed since
    then.  He said the situation had deteriorated.  He said the  factor  in
    2003 was Hizb i Islami's involvement  in  terrorism.   The  level  of
    insurgency increased since then, especially during 2006 and 2007.  Both
    reports use a similar pattern of reasoning.  He argued  that,  although
    the amount of actual recorded arrests may be lower than expected,  this
    appears to be because of a lack of reporting, because of  the  lack  of
    rule of law.  The  inference  is  that  those  who  are  arrested,  are
    connected with the insurgency.  This is a chain of  reasoning  both  in
    RS Afghanistan and Dr Giustozzi's report.   The  Danish  Fact-Finding
    report has been called into query by Dr Lau although  the  report  was
    contradictory in places, it did say that Hizb i Islami membership gives
    rise to a risk.  Dr Giustozzi specifically referred to the appellant's
    educated status and to pre-emptive  arrests  to  avoid  recruitment  by
    Hizb i Islami or the Taliban.  He argued that the risk of pre-emptive
    arrest was an additional factor.  Mr Lams was asked whether this  could
    not be seen as an element of State protection.  He  argued  that  would
    depend on what happened after the arrest, because the prison conditions
    were extremely poor and a person could be held in custody indefinitely.
     He urged us to look at evidence about the prisons, and  ask  how  long
    that detention may continue.

114. He said that Dr Giustozzi spoke of harassment and then referred  to  a
    range of treatment  which  could  include  arrest,  ill-treatment,  and
    beatings to make people informers.  He suggested this opened up a whole
    net of possible scenarios and, although it was possible to say that  is
    all speculative, the other side of the argument is that it  is  in  the
    background material and does  give  rise  to  a  real  risk.   The  key
    question is, are you going to be targeted or arrested?   He  said  that
    Mr Kovats had argued that the third appellant was "only a nurse",  and
    not an active member of an organisation, but Mr Lams said that  is  not
    the appellant's case.  He referred us to the grounds, at paragraph  5.3
    when it is argued that the third appellant has been a  full  member  of
    Hizb i Islami since 1988.  He had produced his membership card, and an
    invitation to attend the visit of the leader of the party in 1995.  The
    first  Adjudicator  had  accepted  that.   Whereas  the  appellant   is
    characterised by Mr Kovats as a nurse, his nursing activities were  in
    aid of a war effort, and he has been to party meetings.

115. He then referred more extensively to the bundle that  had  been  before
    the Adjudicator on the last occasion.  He referred to a BBC news report
    dated 13 April 2004.  That referred to Hizb i Islami as being suspected
    of carrying out many attacks on foreign  and  Afghan  forces  over  the
    previous year.  It said Hizb i Islami was seen as a  serious  threat,
    along with the Taliban, and was blamed for  much  of  the  violence  in
    Afghanistan over the past eighteen months.  At that  stage  there  were
    fears that Hizb i Islami may be planning more violence in the run-up to
    the then forthcoming elections.

116. At pages A13 and 14 of the bundle there was  an  article  sourced  from
    the 'Eurasianet.org' website.  It said that, following the explosion of
    a bomb in a Kabul market, the President accused Pakistan of  sheltering
    Hekmatyar, saying that intelligence led them to believe that  is  where
    he was hiding.  The Christian Science Monitor reported in December 2003
    that the US authorities  derided  Hekmatyar  as  a  warlord  without  a
    portfolio, and made reference to operations against  Hekmatyar  troops.
    There were references to activities by Hizb i Islami in the  Pakistan
    Tribune, published on its website on 20 March 2004, and to arrests  in
    Kabul of men believed to have been linked with Al Qaeda and  Hekmatyar
    in April 2004 (Daily Afghan Report  website).   At  page A38  of  that
    bundle, the Wahdat newspaper (published in Pehawar  on  25  July  2004)
    referred to a list of people given to Pakistan by the Afghan Government
    as wanted.  It said that the majority would belong to Hizb i Islami.

117. Turning to internal flight,  he  noted  that  Dr Giustozzi  said  that
    somebody from Kandahar would stand out in Nangarhar.   He  would  be  a
    Pashtun in a Tajik area and it would be unduly harsh because  he  could
    not pursue a normal life there.  He said that it  was  Kabul  that  was
    identified in earlier skeleton arguments as the place where  the  third
    appellant may be able to relocate to and the expert report was based on
    internal flight to Kabul.  He argued that  it  was  too  late  for  the
    Secretary of State now to widen the field, because his expert  had  not
    dealt with internal flight to other areas.  He said,  if  we  were  not
    with him on that argument, we have Dr Giustozzi's evidence  about  the
    other areas.  He asked us also to look at the UNHCR material,  and  the
    other documents referred to in his supplementary skeleton argument.  He
    said that the position  in  Kabul  had  been  extensively  dealt  with.
    Finally he referred to part of the US State  Department  report  to  be
    found at page 217 of the bundle.  There, there was reference  to  human
    rights abuses by the Taliban which he said was another area of risk.

118. We raised with counsel the question of whether there was  any  evidence
    at all  about  what,  if  any,  family  the  appellants  still  had  in
    Afghanistan.  The third appellant was said to  have  been  accepted  as
    credible by the earlier Adjudicators and had said  he  had  no  contact
    with his family, and did not know their whereabouts.   Mr  Jacobs  said
    there were no helpful findings at all in relation to either  the  first
    or Second Appellant, although it was said in  relation  to  the  second
    appellant that his house had been destroyed in 2001.

119. Mr Kovats raised issues which had not been dealt with previously.   He
    asked us to put no weight on the earlier Lau opinion because we did not
    know why there was no update and  the  whole  political  situation  has
    changed.  Dr Lau was speaking of the threat by the  Northern  Alliance
    and, at paragraph 18 of his  earlier  report,  had  made  reference  to
    financial hardships on return.  Mr Lams reiterated that in paragraph 14
    of the report Dr Lau referred to risk from the Northern Alliance  'and
    the current Government'.  He reminded us that President Karzai had been
    sworn in, in 2001.

Findings and Conclusions

120. We start by  saying  that  we  do  not  regard  the  first  and  second
    appellants as people who should be excluded from  the  benefit  of  the
    Refugee  Convention  because  of  their  conduct  when  they  were   in
    Afghanistan.   The  burden  of  showing  that  a  person  seeking   the
    protection of the Refugee Convention should be  excluded  lies  on  the
    respondent.  He  has  to  show  that  there  are  serious  reasons  for
    believing that the person  has  committed  any  of  the  criminal  acts
    specified in Article 1F.  (Gurung (Refugee exclusion clauses especially
    1F (b)) Nepal CG * [2002] UKIAT 04870).  Although the first and  second
    appellants have been described as commanders, they were at  the  lowest
    level of command and in a position which,  in  a  formal  army  may  be
    somewhat akin to a corporal.  They were  not  in  any  significant  way
    leaders.  There is no satisfactory evidence  of  any  serious  criminal
    conduct, and it seems when they were in Afghanistan they  were  in  all
    probability  fighting  to  protect  their  own  area  rather  than   as
    aggressors.  They were also involved in fighting of the nature that has
    been going on in the country for generations and as such as  cannot  be
    said to fall within the criminal acts specified in Article 1F.

121. We have been referred to a great deal of  background  material.   There
    was a great deal to which we were not referred, but we had indicated at
    the beginning of the hearing that we expected to be referred  expressly
    to such material as was relied on  by  the  parties,  either  in  their
    skeleton arguments or in submissions.  Much of  the  material  provided
    pre-dated RS Afghanistan and the  report  of  Dr Lau.   Whilst  it  is
    arguable that gives the case some historical context, it was of  little
    value in assessing the risk on return now.

122. We put very little  weight  on  either  of  Dr Lau's  earlier  reports
    inasmuch as they purport to assess risk.  That was partly  because  the
    situation has changed considerably since his reports, but more  because
    we do not have any evidence that Dr Lau still supports the position he
    took when he reported in 2003 and 2004.  The hearing was  adjourned  on
    several occasions because the Tribunal was told  that  Dr Lau  was  in
    Afghanistan and we were asked to wait for his return so that  he  could
    give evidence.  The Tribunal was  encouraged  by  that,  and  willingly
    acceded to the requests on the basis that it would be very  helpful  to
    have evidence from an expert who had recently been to Afghanistan.   No
    new report by Dr Lau has ever been submitted and the last  adjournment
    was caused by Dr Giustozzi's reports being produced at the last moment
    and too late for the respondent to consider them in appropriate detail.
     There has been no explanation for Dr Lau's reports not appearing  and
    his not being called, when it clearly had been  expected.   Of  course,
    this does not mean he was unable to support the appellants, but  we  do
    conclude that we cannot assume either that he would have supported  the
    appellants, or that his  earlier  reports  still  represent  his  views
    today.

123. We have had extremely helpful evidence from Dr Giustozzi.  He has also
    spent a considerable  amount  of  time  in  Afghanistan  and  has  only
    recently returned from there.  Both sides accepted  that  factually  he
    was an extremely helpful and reliable witness.  We  were  impressed  by
    the quality of the sources that he has drawn on.

124. In approaching the question of risk today we  obviously  bear  in  mind
    all the general background material but that is  exactly  what  it  is,
    general.  Dr Giustozzi's evidence is specific to  the  appellants  and
    draws on a wide variety of sources.  He indicated in his  reports  that
    he has in the past declined  to  write  reports  for  appellants  whose
    accounts do not fit in with his understanding of events in Afghanistan.
     He is therefore more than just a "hired gun".  He has demonstrated his
    independence.

125. In relation to the general background situation it  is  clear,  and  we
    accept, that the insurgency has been increasing.  The evidence is  that
    it appears to be moving nearer to the cities.  We also accept that  the
    historical recruiting base for the Taliban is in rural areas  with  the
    consequence that their  supporters  and  members  are  drawn  from  the
    uneducated and the unsophisticated.  The  Taliban  have  an  increasing
    need  for  more  skilled  assistance.   The  evidence   is   that   the
    Hizb i Islami Party recruited more successfully from the educated and
    more sophisticated members of society.  As a result, Dr Giustozzi says
    there is greater pressure on families of former Hizb i Islami members
    and supporters to become involved in the insurgency, in the  hope  that
    they can provide medical, technological and engineering  support  which
    the Taliban are lacking.  The evidence is that the Hekmatyar faction of
    Hizb i Islami is co-operating with the Taliban in the insurgency.

126. We find that, although it seems that the insurgency  is  still  at  its
    highest in the south and south east, the background  material  suggests
    that it is becoming more generalised.  There is evidence  of  increased
    activity in the cities and the consequence of that  is  that  there  is
    greater counter-terrorism activity by the authorities.

127. Dr Giustozzi  described  how  insurgents  are  attempting  to  set  up
    networks involving safe houses and arms dumps.  At  the  same  time  he
    described  counter-terrorism  activities  involving  greater  searching
    among people who may be able to give assistance by disclosing  what  is
    going on, as they learn from their friends and families.

128. The background evidence also makes it clear  that,  as  yet,  there  is
    little in the way of an effective rule of law.   There  are  almost  no
    defence lawyers, and the judiciary is not  reliably  independent.   The
    background evidence indicates there have been quite  large  numbers  of
    arrests and detentions of people suspected of being involved  with  the
    insurgency, but there have been no reports of trials of  those  people.
    The background evidence suggests that  although  the  police  may  make
    details of their arrests public, they do not  say  much,  if  anything,
    about the allegiance of those arrested.  The security services  do  not
    announce arrests and they only become known if they occur in  a  public
    place such as those at Kabul University.

129.  The  background  material  also   makes   it   clear   that,   perhaps
    unsurprisingly, there is a degree  of  impunity  and  that  in  general
    terms, there are risks of torture and serious mistreatment of detainees
    both in the prison system and  during  interrogation.   There  is  some
    evidence that complaints have been made  to  the  authorities  but  the
    numbers are low.  Mr  Jacobs  was  probably  not  unrealistic  when  he
    suggested that the actual  numbers  of  people  being  mistreated  will
    exceed the number of complaints by some margin.

130. We accept that those who fall into the hands  of  the  Taliban,  unless
    considered friendly to them, are likely to be ill treated.

131. We find that the situation in Kabul does not appear to  be  as  bad  as
    elsewhere.   This  is  because  there  is  a  degree  of  international
    oversight and the police and other  authorities  are  beginning  to  be
    trained in a way which is not happening in the provincial areas.

132. These three appellants, all of whom have been out of Afghanistan for  a
    considerable  length  of  time,  will  be  returned  to  Kabul  (as  we
    understand to be the case with returnees  generally).   We  acknowledge
    that questions of internal flight, or internal re-location  only  arise
    if an appellant has established that he is at real risk of serious harm
    in his home area.  For the purposes of this determination we  start  by
    considering whether they would be at real risk of serious harm in Kabul
    and, bearing in the mind that  none  of  them  come  from  Kabul  City,
    whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  them  to  stay  there.
    Paragraph 339O of HC395 refers to the question of whether a person  can
    reasonably be expected to stay in any part of his country and  provides
    that regard should be had to the general  circumstances  prevailing  in
    that part of the country and to that person's  personal  circumstances.
    We bear in mind the tests in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and AH ig and nm, and
    that it is only when basic (non-derogable) human  rights  are  at  real
    risk that  unreasonableness  arises.   Whilst  the  general  background
    material paints a fairly gloomy picture about human rights abuses,  and
    the struggle between the Afghan Government and the  insurgency,  it  is
    only a generalised description.  We find that the  background  evidence
    does not establish that any of these appellants would be at a real risk
    of serious harm, although clearly there  is  a  possibility  that  they
    would come to harm.  In order to assess the individuals' situations  we
    need to consider  the  specific  expert  evidence  that  has  been  put
    forward.  We need to interpret the evidence by Dr Giustozzi and decide
    whether his conclusions are, as Mr Kovats argues, speculative or  not.
    Mr Jacobs argued that his evidence was not speculative  because  he  is
    quoted in the  COI  reports.   We  do  not  accept  that  was  a  sound
    submission.  As Mr Kovats said, the quoted material is not endorsed  or
    confirmed by the compilers of the report.

133. Dr Giustozzi accepts, and we find, that there  is  no  longer  a  risk
    arising  from  people  suggesting  that  individuals   may   know   the
    whereabouts of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, in order to win themselves a reward
    from the United States authorities.  It is now accepted that  Hekmatyar
    is most likely in a distant and mountainous area and that  only  senior
    members of Hizb i Islami might know where he is.  That risk was largely
    the basis upon which RS Afghanistan was founded and it  is  clear  that
    that case should therefore no longer be followed.   We  also  find,  as
    Dr Giustozzi accepted, that those returning from the  United  Kingdom,
    and who have been away for a considerable time, would not be  suspected
    of being insurgents when they arrive back in Afghanistan.  There was no
    evidence from him that suggests they would be at risk at  the  airport,
    or immediately on arrival in Kabul.  It may be  different  for  someone
    who has only recently left Afghanistan, and who  may  be  suspected  of
    knowing what is currently going on.  There is no question that  any  of
    these three appellants would have any idea.  There have been  a  number
    of major political developments since they left and the passage of time
    alone would indicate that they would not know what is happening now.

134. The risk, according  to  Dr Giustozzi,  would  arise  after  a  period
    following their return.   He  argues  that  it  is  in  the  nature  of
    Afghanistan society that relationships are based on trust and that  for
    the appellants to obtain work  or  accommodation  they  would  need  to
    reveal something about themselves  to  their  prospective  employer  or
    landlord.  He said that would give rise to checks being made into their
    background.  He said that is easier now,  with  the  advent  of  mobile
    phones and other communications, and  that  their  pasts  would  become
    apparent.  It would  not  thereafter  take  long  for  the  people  and
    therefore the authorities to hear  about  them.   Not  only  would  the
    authorities hear about them, through their sources,  but  it  could  be
    assumed that after a relatively short number of weeks  or  months  they
    would have  re-established  themselves  and  become  part  of  informal
    networks of family and friends.  Dr Giustozzi said that  the  security
    forces may well then think that they are worth  interrogating,  because
    of knowledge they may pick up from those family or friends.

135. If that is correct, and we accept that it is, the appellants  would  be
    no different from those members of society who have been in Afghanistan
    all along.  We have not heard evidence to the effect that all those who
    are in Afghanistan are at real risk as a result of having networks that
    may be considered of interest to the authorities.  Some of the  general
    population will no doubt have some past involvement  in  conflict.   We
    have heard evidence of arrests but not in  the  sort  of  numbers  that
    would create a real risk to these appellants.  We have not  heard  what
    happened to those arrested.  It has been suggested that someone who has
    been involved with Hizb i Islami will always be regarded as a member.
    There is no satisfactory evidence to that effect.  There is evidence to
    the contrary as illustrated by the MPs who are ex-Hizb i Islami.  The
    fact that the appellants have been out  of  the  country  for  so  long
    suggests, on a common sense basis and in the light of the  above,  that
    their  past  conduct,  without  more,  will  not  cause  them   serious
    difficulty.

136. Dr Giustozzi was specifically asked, a number of times, about the  way
    in which the security forces may approach those who they suspect  could
    have information of use to them in their counter-insurgency activities.
     He initially described it as harassment.  He said it may take the form
    of visits to their home and of the asking of  questions.   He  did  not
    volunteer the suggestion that people may be seriously mistreated.  When
    he was asked about the position of returning failed asylum seekers, the
    only example he could give us was of a young man who it  was  said  had
    been forced to leave Afghanistan.  He was the son of a  professor,  but
    when pressed it became clear that he was not a returnee,  but  a  young
    man who had lived in a village in Afghanistan all along.   We  did  not
    learn anything  from  that  evidence  about  what  may  happen  to  the
    appellants on return.  In summary, we have concluded that  it  has  not
    been demonstrated that returnees such as the  appellants  would  be  at
    real risk in Kabul.  It is possible, but no more, that after they  have
    been there for a period, their existence  would  become  known  to  the
    security forces.  The evidence is that they would not be  suspected  of
    directly knowing anything about what is  going  on  in  the  insurgency
    although after a period, in common with all others, they may  be  asked
    questions about what they know from their  relatives  and  friends  and
    their  own  personal  networks.   There  is  no  satisfactory  specific
    evidence about the way in which they are likely to be treated  such  as
    to establish that there is a reasonable likelihood that they  would  be
    subjected to serious mistreatment.  We accept that if  a  person  falls
    into the hands of the authorities as a suspect it is possible that they
    may be seriously mistreated but we do not find there is a real risk  of
    that on the basis of the facts in these  cases.   Clearly,  if  such  a
    returnee elects to become active for Hizb i Islami the situation may be
    different, but these appellants are not being  returned  on  the  basis
    that that is what they will do.  After all, they  came  here  to  avoid
    that.

137. If the appellants show that they have a  well  founded  fear  in  their
    home areas it is reasonable to expect them to live in Kabul.  Kabul  is
    a functioning city.  It has a government and some security forces.   We
    acknowledge that it is not the role of ISAF to protect individuals, but
    there is an Afghan army and a police force and security forces.   Kabul
    is not an entirely lawless place.  There  are  houses  to  rent,  at  a
    price; and despite a fairly high level of unemployment, there is  work.
    The three appellants have spent  a  considerable  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, they are all relatively educated and may well  be  in  a  good
    position to obtain work with the authorities  or  an  NGO  or  similar.
    There is no satisfactory  evidence  that  suggests  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect them to live there,  or  that  they  would  lead
    other than a relatively normal life.  Insofar as Article 3 is concerned
    there is no satisfactory evidence that they would be subject to inhuman
    or degrading treatment or that they would be at real risk of  a  breach
    of any of their fundamental human rights in Kabul.  It follows from all
    that we have said that in  general  returning  failed  asylum  seekers,
    without more, are able to relocate to  Kabul,  if  they  cannot  return
    safely to their home areas.

138. There are a few general points that we should make  from  the  evidence
    in these reconsiderations.  First, the description of  a  person  as  a
    commander  in  Hizb i Islami  needs  to  be   treated   with   some
    circumspection.  It is apparent from what we have said in paragraph  77
    that this can be anything from a local commander in charge of twenty or
    so men to a regional commander based in Pakistan.

139. It is the Gulbuddin Hekmatyar faction of Hizb i Islami that is allied
    to the Taliban and Al Qaeda and is therefore in part  responsible  for
    the current insurgency.  It is that faction which is of interest to the
    authorities.  Of the other two major factions one (the Khalis  faction)
    has effectively cease to exist, because of the death of its leader.  It
    matters not whether he died a natural death or was killed.  His son has
    not been accepted as his replacement and is effectively a local  leader
    for the Taliban.  Although  that  faction  has  effectively  ceased  to
    exist, its members have not formally disbanded.   The  Farooqi  faction
    has distanced  itself  from  Hekmatyar  and,  whatever  Dr Giustozzi's
    theories about its motives, has a number of Members of  Parliament  and
    is effectively in government.  It does not appear to be regarded by the
    authorities as any form of threat.


Summary of general conclusions relating to Kabul





The following is a summary of our general conclusions.  It is  not  intended
    as the authoritative view and the determination should be read in  full
    for our detailed reasoning.


          i) Those returned from the United Kingdom will not, without  more,
             be at real risk at the airport or after arrival in Kabul.
         ii) Those returned from the United Kingdom are not  at  real  risk,
             without  more,  of  being  suspected  by  the  authorities   as
             insurgents.
         iii) The past of an individual seeking accommodation  or  work  in
              Kabul, or elsewhere, may be discovered and mentioned  to  the
              authorities.  Similarly, the authorities may become aware  of
              someone newly arrived in an  area.   That  may  result  in  a
              person  being  detained  for  questioning  but  there  is  no
              satisfactory evidence such questioning gives rise to  a  real
              risk of serious harm.
          iv) Subject to an  individual's  personal  circumstances,  it  is
              unlikely to be unduly harsh (or unreasonable) to expect  them
              to relocate to Kabul if they have established a real risk  of
              serious harm in (and restricted to) areas outside Kabul.
           v) There is no satisfactory evidence that a person who has  been
              associated in the past  with  Hizb-i-Islami  will  always  be
              regarded as such.
          vi) There is no longer evidence of real risk to individuals  said
              to have possible knowledge of the  whereabouts  of  Gulbuddin
              Hekmatyar (RS Afghanistan [2004] UKIAT 00278 should no longer
              be followed).




The appellants' individual appeals


141. As to the appellants' individual appeals, we find as follows:-

     The first appellant is a Pashtun from Nangarhar.  It is  said  that  he
    would be at risk as a result of Nangarhar being under  the  control  of
    Hazrat Ali, who is a member of Jamiat I Islami.  He has a powerbase,
    albeit a narrow one, in Nangarhar and in particular Mazar-i-Sharif.  He
    is also involved in government in Kabul.  As  a  member  of  Jamiat  he
    would be interested in weeding out Hizb i Islami supporters although it
    is said that he does not have any difficulty  with  Pashtuns  as  such.
    The evidence was  that  if  the  first  appellant  were  to  return  to
    Nangarhar he would not have any difficulty because  of  his  ethnicity.
    He  may  have  some  difficulty  arising  out  of  his  past  political
    allegiance although we note that the powerbase of Hazrat Ali  is  very
    narrow and, in our view, it has not been made out  that  without  more,
    returning  to  Nangarhar  would  cause   the   first   appellant   real
    difficulties.  We acknowledge that there, as in Kabul, he would need to
    establish himself with networks and his presence would become known  to
    the security authorities.  There is perhaps rather more  risk  for  him
    there than there would be in Kabul  because  it  is  a  smaller  place.
    However, if he felt he cannot return to his  home  area,  then  he  can
    safely relocate to Kabul where it would not be unduly harsh for him  to
    live and he would be able  to  live  a  reasonably  normal  life.   Our
    primary finding is that the first appellant has not shown that he is at
    real risk of serious harm in his home area.

142. The second appellant is a Tajik from Kabul province.  His home area  is
    some fifteen minutes from Kabul City and it is argued that  because  it
    is a small place his presence would quickly be  noticed  and  he  would
    come to the attention of the  authorities.   We  acknowledge  that  may
    happen more quickly in a small place, than in the city.  Being a  small
    place, it is more difficult to avoid anyone who is suspicious  of  one.
    On the other hand it is where his roots and earlier networks are based.
     In the unlikely  event  that  the  second  appellant  is  regarded  as
    somebody who would know anything at all about the insurgency,  then  it
    is likely he will  come  to  the  attention  of  the  authorities  more
    promptly but that is not to say that there is any evidence of real risk
    to him as a result.  If he does not feel comfortable returning  to  his
    home area, he could relocate to  the  city  of  Kabul  where,  for  the
    reasons we have set out, it would not be unduly harsh to expect him  to
    go and he could live a reasonably normal life.  It has  been  suggested
    that he could relocate to the Tajik areas of Afghanistan, but  we  have
    not considered that as he would be safe in Kabul.  Our primary  finding
    is that he has not shown that he would be at real risk of serious  harm
    in his home area.

143. As to the third appellant, he is a Pashtun from Kandahar.  Kandahar  is
    currently experiencing high levels of insurgency but  we  observe  that
    insofar as the insurgency is concerned there is no  reason  to  suggest
    that the appellant would be a target for them.  Now that Hizb i Islami
    and the Taliban are in some form of loose alliance his past  would  not
    make him someone that they would regard as being in opposition.

144. It is not clear how efficient the  authorities  are  in  Kandahar.   We
    acknowledge that if the level of insurgency is higher  there  then  the
    activities of the authorities will be greater, and there is  a  greater
    risk that he may be picked up for questioning.  There is,  however,  no
    satisfactory evidence that that would lead to mistreatment although  we
    acknowledge that in Kandahar, the police and the authorities are likely
    to be less well-trained and the degree of impunity is probably greater.
     If the third appellant does not wish to return to Kandahar  there  is,
    for the same reasons that we have given in relation to  the  other  two
    appellants, no reason why he should not relocate  to  Kabul,  where  it
    would not be unduly harsh and where it would  not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to live a relatively normal life in common with 70%  of  the
    population he is Pashtun.  Our primary finding is that he would not  be
    at real risk of serious harm in his home area.

General

145. At the beginning of this determination we explained that we were  using
    the words serious harm to denote 'persecution',  serious  harm  in  the
    context of the Refugee and Person in Need of  International  Protection
    Regulations (and  para  339  Of  HC 395)  and  inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment.  Although  we  have  not  considered  the  three  protection
    regimes separately, we have concluded that none of the  appellants  are
    at real risk of serious harm and that  applies  equally  to  all  three
    regimes.  Had we found that there was a real risk of serious  harm,  in
    the context of these reconsiderations it would have been for a  Refugee
    Convention reason, namely their actual or imputed political opinion.

146. Although RS (Hezbe Islami - expert evidence) Afghanistan  [2004]  UKIAT
    00278 is not a country guidance case it has been widely followed.  This
    case supercedes RS Afghanistan, which should no longer be followed.


Conclusions


147. There is no real risk of serious harm and,  the  Tribunal  having  made
    errors of law on the occasion that each of these  appeals  were  heard,
    the following decisions are substituted.

148. The three appeals are dismissed  on  refugee,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.





Signed                                  Date


Senior Immigration Judge Mather

Objective material referred to

Eurasianet  Ron Synovitz article 02/09/03
The Christian Science Monitor Ann Tyson article 22/12/2003
Yahoo News Item 25/1/2004
Human Rights Watch Internet article 9/3/2004
Pakistan Tribune Article 20/3/2004
BBC News Report  13/4/2004
Wadhat Newspaper Pehawar List of wanted people 25/7/2004
Human Rights Watch Volume 16 No 3(c)
Amnesty International Report 2005
Human Rights Watch Report January 2006
COI Report Afghanistan April 06
US State Dept Report April 2006
Freedom House Report 6/9/2006
UN Report 11/9/2006
COI Report Afghanistan October 2006
Security Council Report 2006
UNAMA Report 8/1/2007
Human Rights Watch Report January 2007
Press Briefing by Chris Alexander UN Deputy SRSG in Afghanistan January
2007
US Committee on Foreign Affairs Hearing 15/2/2007
Centre for Strategic & International Studies Report February 2007
US State Dept Report March 2007
OHCHR Report March 2007

