

Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

                  PO (interests of the  state -Article 8) Nigeria [2006]
                  UKAIT 00087

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|                                                |                           |
|On 27 June 2006                                 |24 October 2006            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Storey
                              Ms S S Ramsumair
                                Mrs J Harris

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr A N Ikie, Solicitor, from Ikie Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Ms Lee Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


When addressing the issue of proportionality (Lord Bingham's question  5  in
Razgar [2004] UKHL 27) it is only in very  limited  circumstances  that  the
interests of the state and wider community in the maintenance  of  effective
immigration control will not carry a heavy weight. Whilst the  interests  of
the state and wider community do not carry a fixed  weight  (GS  (Article  9
-public interest not a fixity) Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]  UKIAT  00121),
the only factors that might  justify  heavy  weight  not  being  given   are
likely to be where the state has shown by its own action  or  inaction  that
immigration control considerations require modification e.g.  where  it  has
adopted but not applied a  policy  to  allow  certain  categories  otherwise
subject to strict immigration control exceptional leave to remain.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1) The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.   On  24  January  2002,  in  a
      decision  taken  under  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,  the
      respondent refused her application  to  vary  leave  to  remain  under
      paragraph 322(1) with reference to  paragraphs  18-20  of  HC  395  as
      amended.  The appellant's appeal was heard by the Adjudicator, Mr R  J
      Oliver. In a determination notified on 24 August 2004 he dismissed her
      appeal both under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.  By  virtue  of
      transitional  provisions  made  under  the  Asylum   and   Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 her application  for  permission
      to appeal took effect as an application for reconsideration. This  was
      refused by a Senior  Immigration  Judge  but  succeeded  on  statutory
      review.

   2) At the appeal before the Adjudicator the appellant  did  not  seek  to
      pursue any argument under the  Immigration  Rules,  nor  was  such  an
      argument raised in the grounds of reconsideration.   The sole issue in
      this case concerns Article 8.

   3) At the outset of the appeal an  issue  arose  concerning  whether  the
      Adjudicator was right to determine the Article 8 issue in the light of
      JM* (Rule 62(7); human rights unarguable) Liberia [2006]  UKAIT  00009
      and whether, in consequence, we were bound to say that Article  8  had
      no prospect of success in view of the need for there to be  a  further
      (appealable) immigration decision to remove. There was also  an  issue
      of whether in any event, in relation to an appeal such  as  this,  one
      arising under the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and  not  under  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  case   of   R
      (Maksimovic v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWHC
      1026 Admin should be  followed.  This  case  considered  that  in  the
      context of a s.69(2) appeal under the 1999 Act, human rights had to be
      dealt with. Prior to completing this determination it has been brought
      to our notice that the Court of Appeal on 6 October 2006 decided  that
      JM* is wrong on the Article 8 arguability point.  Therefore,  although
      we have yet to see the written judgment, we are prepared on the  basis
      of this information to approach this appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant was entitled to rely on Article 8 and that we  must  make  a
      decision on whether the Adjudicator erred in law in finding  that  the
      decision was a proportionate one.

   4) We are persuaded that the Adjudicator  materially  erred  in  law.  He
      applied the principle set out in M* Croatia (M (Croatia)  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2004] UKIAT  24,  [2004]  INLR  327)
      which prohibited adjudicators on appeal from considering the merits of
      the Article 8 claim: indeed he expressly rejected a submission reliant
      on the House of Lords judgment in Daly [2001] 1 WLR 840,  to  consider
      the appellant's Article 8 claim on its merits.  Partly on the basis of
      what had been held in Daly, the Court of Appeal in Huang  [2005]  INLR
      247 decided that M* (Croatia) was wrong  and  that  adjudicators  were
      obliged to decide Article 8 claims on their merits.

   5) Additionally we also consider that the Adjudicator  erred  in  law  in
      failing to show that he had, when  considering  proportionality  under
      Article 8(2), taken into account all relevant  considerations.  Indeed
      it is difficult to  see  that  he  conducted  any  kind  of  balancing
      exercise at all.

   6) Having decided that the Immigration Judge materially erred in law,  we
      next considered whether we were in a position to decide the appeal for
      ourselves. We decided that we  were,  since  Mr  Ikie  was  unable  to
      identify any evidence concerning recent developments which would  have
      had a material bearing on the matters we had to decide.

   7) The respondent does not dispute in this case that  the  appellant  had
      established both private life and family life relationships in the  UK
      and that the decision refusing to vary her leave to remain amounted to
      an interference with those relationships.


   8) The sole issue is therefore whether the decision amounted  or  amounts
      to a disproportionate interference. Whether one does this (as Mr  Ikie
      contends) by reference to the Nhundhu and Chiwera 01/TH/0613  step-by-
      step approach or by reference to Lord Bingham's step-by-step  approach
      in  Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, it is clear (by reference to  Huang),  that
      for an appellant to show that his Article 8 rights would be  violated,
      it  is  necessary  to  identify   circumstances   which   are   "truly
      exceptional".  Subsequent case  law  has  confirmed  that  that  is  a
      stringent test: for a summary see  WK  (Article  8-expulsion  cases  -
      review of case-law) Palestinian Territories [2006] UKAIT 00070.

   9)  Mr  Ikie's  principal  argument  for  why  we  should  identify   the
      appellant's circumstances as  "truly exceptional"  was that this was a
      case where the interests  of  the  state  and  the  community  in  the
      maintenance of effective immigration control were not to  be  accorded
      their normally preponderant weight. He cited the case of GS (Article 8
      - public interest not a fixity) Serbia and  Montenegro   [2005]  UKIAT
      00121 to support his argument that the  appellant's qualifications and
      work in the UK as a teacher meant that there was in this case a  state
      and wider community interest in the appellant staying rather  than  in
      being subjected to immigration control.  However, in our view, Mr Ikie
      has misunderstood the ratio of GS.    That  case,  it  is  true,  does
      highlight the point that the public interest side of the   (imaginary)
      scales does not bear a fixed weight.  However,  the  only  factors  it
      identified as justifying normally heavy weight not being given to  the
      interest of the state in  the  effective  maintenance  of  immigration
      control were of limited scope. They arose only  where  the  state  has
      shown  by  its  own  action  or  inaction  that  immigration   control
      considerations required modification e.g. where it has adopted but not
      applied a policy to allow  certain  categories  otherwise  subject  to
      strict immigration control. This  reflects  the  observation  made  by
      Lord Bingham in Razgar at [19] , when dealing with  the  [question  4]
      issue of whether the proposed removal is an interference which  pursue
      a legitimate aim, that:

        "...implementation of a firm and orderly immigration policy  is  an
        important function of government in a modern democratic  State.  In
        the absence of bad faith, ulterior motive or  deliberate  abuse  of
        power, it is hard to imagine an adjudicator answering this question
        [question 4] other than affirmatively."


  10)  Plainly, therefore, when  addressing  the  issue  of  proportionality
      (Lord Bingham's question 5) it is only in very  limited  circumstances
      that the interests of the state and wider community in the maintenance
      of effective immigration control can not carry a heavy weight.

  11)  In the type of circumstance described by Mr Ikie, by contrast,  there
      has  been  no  conduct  of  the  state  so  as  to  justify  modifying
      immigration control considerations.  Therefore  the  existence  of  an
      evident need on the part of the state and wider community  in  the  UK
      presently for trained teachers  does  not  demonstrate  that  the  co-
      existing interest of  the  state  and  wider  community  in  effective
      immigration control is no longer an imperative.

  12)  Furthermore, on the particular facts of this case there were specific
      reasons why the immigration control considerations were to be seen  as
      weighing heavily in the overall balance against the  appellant.    She
      had remained in the UK  well beyond her permitted six months period of
      visit granted to her on 8 December 2000 and had proceeded, whilst here
      as an overstayer,  to   obtain  further  teaching  qualifications  and
      experience. She at no stage during this period  sought  permission  to
      pursue and engage in these activities.

  13)  In considering the balancing exercise required  under  Article  8  we
      take into account in the appellant's favour: that she  had  previously
      spent nine years in the UK lawfully, having arrived here when she  was
      nine; that during  those nine years she went to school here; that back
      in Nigeria she lost her husband (to cancer) after only  six  years  of
      marriage and also her mother in the following year; that  during these
      difficult times, her youngest brother John (who had  been  in  the  UK
      previously) came to live with her before returning over a  year  later
      to the UK; that in Nigeria she was a university graduate who had  gone
      into the teaching profession there, rising to a  position   equivalent
      to deputy head; that her desire to come to the UK was  driven  by  her
      loneliness as  a widow and her  strong  wish  to  be  near  her  three
      siblings in the UK;  that whilst in the UK she  has  strengthened  her
      knowledge of teaching,  undertaking  several  courses,  and  receiving
      glowing references from senior UK teachers; that  she  was  a  teacher
      with skills in short supply in the  UK  currently;  that  she  has  no
      criminal convictions; that she has done a lot  of  useful  church  and
      community work; and that whilst here she has  strengthened  her  close
      family ties with her siblings, living here with  her  younger  brother
      John   (with  whom  she  is  particularly  close)  and  providing  him
      considerable guidance after their mother's death.

  14)   However,  such  considerations  are  greatly  outweighed  by  others
      counting against the appellant. Although she lived in the UK for  some
      nine formative years, she had  spent  the  majority  of  her  life  in
      Nigeria,  and,  after  returning  from  the  UK,  had  done  much   to
      reintegrate  there:  obtaining  university  qualifications,   entering
      employment, marrying and enjoying  (until  her  husband's  death)  six
      years of normal married life there. She was an adult  with  no  health
      problems. Her siblings in the UK were now independent adults. Although
      she has claimed she was uncertain about her immigration status due  to
      her previous residence here, we are quite unable to  accept  that  she
      was unaware that she had only limited leave of six months and that her
      stay thereafter was unlawful. In this regard we note that her  younger
      brother John had made careful enquiries of the British High Commission
      in Nigeria and would surely have passed on what he had learnt,  namely
      that she could not seek to re-enter to the UK as a returning resident.
      It may be that she had suffered from not receiving better  immigration
      advice in the past, e.g. in relation to  the  highly  skilled  migrant
      scheme, but such advice would only in  any  event  have  opened  up  a
      further opportunity for her to be considered by an overseas  post  for
      entry clearance to the UK, not for being able to  remain  in  the  UK.
      As the Adjudicator properly noted at paragraph  43,  this  opportunity
      remains, albeit it is one which requires her to depart and then  apply
      from abroad  for  entry  clearance  in  the  same  way  as  any  other
      applicant.

  15)  For the above reasons, we consider that the appellant's circumstances
      are not  "truly exceptional". The decision to refuse to vary her leave
      to remain was and is not disproportionate.

  16)  We conclude:

      The Adjudicator materially erred in law.


      The decision we substitute for his is to dismiss the appeal both under
      the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.







Signed                                  Date
Senior Immigration Judge Storey



