
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       IA ('applying policies') Mauritius [2006] UKAIT 00082

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 September 2006                            |..........03 October       |
|                                                |2006....                   |
|                                                |                           |



                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge Perkins
                       Senior Immigration Judge Taylor

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

It will only be in  extremely  unusual  circumstances  that  an  Immigration
Judge can decide properly that an appellant satisfies the requirements of  a
policy but if such circumstances do occur then the appeal should be  allowed
because the decision to remove is not in accordance with the law.
If, exceptionally, an Immigration Judge is satisfied that a  person  fulfils
the requirements of a policy then it may be correct to allow the  appeal  on
human rights grounds with reference to article  8  because  the  removal  of
such a person is not necessary for the purposes of  article 8(2).

Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr P Nathan, Counsel, instructed by G. Singh
Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr L Parker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius.  She was born  on  13th  June  1964
and so is now 42 years old.  She appeals the decision of the  respondent  on
15 December 2005 to refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the
basis of her marriage and  to  give  directions  for  her  removal,  on  the
grounds that the decision is contrary to her rights protected by  Article  8
of the European Convention on Human Rights and is otherwise unlawful.

The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Judge  complain   that   the
appellant's husband is "a very sick man" who needs the  appellant's  support
and that the decision is unlawful  because  the  appellant  has  established
family life in the United Kingdom and her removal would be  disproportionate
to the proper purpose of enforcing  immigration  control  "in  view  of  the
physical condition of the husband".

The Immigration Judge allowed the appeal "on immigration grounds"  and  also
on human rights grounds with reference to  Article  8.  We  assume  that  in
allowing the appeal "on immigration grounds" the Immigration Judge  intended
to allow the appeal in respect of the  Immigration  Rules.   Reconsideration
was ordered, at the respondent's request, by Senior Immigration  Judge  Gill
on each of the four grounds set out by the respondent in his application.

The papers show that the appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a  visitor
on 29 June 2002. She had permission to remain until 24 September  2002.   On
23 September  2002  she  married  a  British  citizen,  [AHJ],  at  a  civil
ceremony. Her husband is twenty nine-years her  senior.    On  25  September
2002 the appellant applied for permission to remain on  the  basis  of  that
marriage but that application was withdrawn on 22 July 2004.  Rule 34 of  HC
395 provides that an application for permission  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom shall be treated as withdrawn if the applicant requests  the  return
of her passport for the purpose of travel.   It was not  argued  before  the
Immigration Judge, or before us, that the respondent was wrong to treat  the
application as withdrawn.  The appellant made  further  applications  on  15
August 2004 and 15 November 2004.    By then the  appellant  had  overstayed
her valid leave but no enforcement action had been taken against her.

In a '"Notice of Refusal of Leave to  Remain  Under  the  Immigration  Acts"
dated 15 September 2005 the respondent set out the  appellant's  immigration
history and asserted  that  by  reason  of  paragraph  284  of  HC  395  the
appellant was not entitled to an extension of stay under the  rules  because
"you fail to meet at least one of the criteria".

The respondent's letter shows that he then considered his  policy  known  as
DP3/96 which the respondent recognised may permit the  appellant  to  remain
if the marriage is genuine and subsisting, if it predates the service of  an
enforcement notice by at least two  years  and  if  it  is  unreasonable  to
expect the settled spouse to accompany his/her spouse on removal.

The letter  then  explains  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  respondent  the
appellant's case did not fall within those guidelines because, "in  all  the
circumstances we are  not  satisfied  that  you  are  living  in  a  genuine
subsisting relationship  with  a  British  citizen".  The  letter  does  not
suggest that there was any other reason for refusing the  application  under
the policy.

The letter then went on to say that, in the  opinion  of  the  Secretary  of
State, removing the appellant would not be contrary to her rights  protected
by Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The determination of the Immigration  Judge  is  very  short  and  sets  out
little  of  the  evidence  before  him.  However,  at  paragraph  8  of  the
determination there are commendably clear findings in the following terms:
  "'Since 23.09.04 the appellant and her husband have lived as man and wife
  at [address] where due to his ill health the appellant now cares for  her
  husband, not only functioning as a housewife  but  also  supervising  his
  medication.  I am satisfied that each of the appellant  and  her  husband
  intends to live permanently with the other."

These findings have not been criticised by the  respondent  in  his  grounds
and we note that the Immigration  Judge  reached  them  after  hearing  very
short submissions on the evidence from an extremely  experienced  Presenting
Officer.

The Immigration Judge had before him a report from Dr Saftar Naqvi who is  a
consultant physician and endocrinologist  at  the  Ashford  and  St  Peter's
Hospital in Ashford. We understand this to  be  a  National  Health  Service
hospital and Dr Naqvi is  clearly  entitled  to  the  respect  the  Tribunal
usually extends to health service consultants. He said of the appellant:

  "On examination his blood  pressure  was  130/70,  his  thyroid  function
  seemed to be normal, clinically heart sounds were normal  and  chest  was
  clinically clear. Examination of the  feet  revealed  lack  of  sensation
  although the pulses in the feet were normal.   I  therefore  conclude  in
  view of the above that Mr Jain needs a considerable amount of support  at
  home, not only to provide him with  food  but  also  at  times  he  needs
  assistance going up and down stairs and putting drops in his  eyes.   His
  wife pays most of the bills  as  he  finds  it  difficult  to  walk  long
  distances. It is also quite important to note that he is on near  maximum
  medication and will be heading towards insulin.   If that happens, it  is
  extremely unlikely that he would be able to inject insulin in himself and
  will require assistance. In conclusion, as it becomes  obvious  from  our
  interview and subsequent examination, that Mr Kailash Jain needs constant
  support as he is dependent on various activities of daily living  and  if
  this support is withdrawn it may be detrimental to  his  health.  I  will
  therefore support the view that his wife should remain with him."

The first ground supporting the application complains that  the  Immigration
Judge made a material misdirection in law in allowing the appeal  under  the
Immigration  Rules.   The  point  made  is  that  the  appellant  made   the
application that led to this appeal at a time when  she  was  unlawfully  in
the United Kingdom. She was therefore beyond  the  scope  of  paragraph  284
because she could not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  284(iv)  (not
remained in breach of immigration rules). It followed that even  though  the
Immigration Judge was satisfied that each of the  parties  to  the  marriage
intended  to  live  permanently  with  the  other  and  the   marriage   was
subsisting, and therefore the requirements of  paragraph  284(vi)  could  be
satisfied, the full requirements of that rule were not met.

The grounds overlook the fact that the appellant did not  actually  seek  to
appeal the decision of the respondent on the basis that she was entitled  to
remain under the Immigration Rules.

It is quite plain to us that the appeal should not have been  allowed  under
the Immigration Rules and the Immigration Judge was wrong  when  he  decided
otherwise.

At paragraph  10 of the  determination  under  the  heading  'Decision'  the
Immigration Judge made it plain that he was:
  "entirely satisfied on the evidence before me that the  marriage  of  the
  appellant and her husband is genuine and subsisting and that further,  on
  account of the medical evidence before me as to the husband's  condition,
  it would be untenable to expect him to accompany his spouse to  Mauritius
  to make a marriage application from there."

The second ground complains that the  Immigration  Judge  "made  a  material
misdirection in law in allowing the appeal under the  Home  Office  policy".
According to the ground:
  "'The judge cannot allow the appeal outright  under  the  Policy  as  the
  Secretary of State applies this policy at its discretion."

There are several things  wrong  with  this  assertion.  Firstly,  and  most
importantly, the Immigration Judge did not allow the appeal 'under the  Home
Office policy'.  He  allowed  the  appeal  on  immigration  grounds  and  he
allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.  If the  Immigration  Judge  had
intended to 'allow the appeal outright under the policy' he would  have  had
to allow the appeal under section 86(3)(a) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that the decision against which the  appeal
is brought was not in accordance with the law.   That  he  clearly  did  not
do.

Following the decision of SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148 it  has  been  clear
that an Immigration Judge can decide that a decision is  not  in  accordance
with the law.  Typically  this  will  arise  when  the  respondent  has  not
followed his own policy even when he was right to dismiss the  appeal  under
the Immigration Rules and, following Abdi, it would  normally  be  right  in
such circumstances to rule that the application of a policy to the case  has
not been considered and to allow the appeal to the extent that the issue  of
the relevance of the  policy  remains  outstanding  for  the  respondent  to
consider because the decision was not in accordance with  the  law.  However
this is not because the Immigration Judge has never had power to  allow  the
appeal outright because the decision is contrary to the law but  because  it
will only be in an  unusual  case  that  an  Immigration  Judge  can  decide
properly that a person meets the requirements  of  a  policy  and  the  only
legally proper decision is that the appeal should be allowed outright.

Before the introduction of the concept of  human  rights  into  the  law  of
England and Wales it is hard to contemplate circumstances in  which  an  the
Immigration Judge who found the Secretary of State to have  failed  to  have
considered his policy could properly contemplate any other course that  that
indicated above.   Published polices are,  in  their  very  nature,  in  the
public domain and should be considered by  appellants  and  their  advisors.
In our experience they are invariably couched in general terms  saying  what
should  usually  happen  if  certain  things  are  established   and   often
incorporate factual requirements that are peculiarly  within  the  knowledge
of the Secretary of State, for example, if the appellant has  been  involved
in criminal acts in his  time in the United Kingdom.

It is plain from Abdi (page 157) that Immigration Judges  are  not  intended
to review the decisions of the Secretary of State 'by reference to  all  the
matters that will be relevant for a judicial review of  the  decision'.   If
the  Secretary  of  State  applies  his  policy  inappropriately  then   the
appellant has a remedy outside the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.

However it is a feature of  this  case  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
considered his policy and has indicated his reasons  for  finding  that  the
appellant does not benefit from that policy. He found that the marriage  was
not genuine and subsisting and it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  settled
spouse to accompany his wife on  removal.    For  perfectly  proper  reasons
that  have  not  been  challenged,  the  Immigration  Judge  has  reached  a
different conclusion on these two points.

We reject Mr Parker's submission that the Immigration Judge's  finding  that
it is unreasonable to expect the appellant's husband to remove with  her  is
unreasoned.   It is not detailed but the finding  is  clear  enough  and  we
have referred to the evidence that was before the Immigration Judge.    This
case is unusual in that the Immigration Judge knows  why  the  Secretary  of
State found that policy did not apply and has concluded  for  legally  sound
reasons that the Secretary of State's reasons for not  applying  the  policy
are wrong.

We have considered the case of Fouzia Baig v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1246.
There Buxton LJ, at paragraph 28, approved of an  argument  asserting  that,
following:
  "the authority of Huang the question of the application of such a  policy
  to an individual case was a matter for the Adjudicator and not  simply  a
  matter for review of the decision of the Secretary of State".

He said, at paragraph  29:
  "I am content, for the purpose of discharging this application, to assume
  that there was that omission  on  the  part  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
  Tribunal, and that prima facie, therefore, the correct  remedy,  and  the
  remedy which Mr Drabble seeks, is for the matter to  be  remitted  to  an
  adjudicator, so that he can properly apply  himself,  which  so  far  the
  adjudicator has not done, to the seven year policy."

We appreciate, of course, that Buxton LJ's observations were  obiter.    The
case of Baig concerned a case where, on the facts, a  person  plainly  could
not benefit from a policy. Nevertheless they are the considered  remarks  of
a Lord Justice of Appeal and should  be  given  appropriate  weight.   Where
there is a clear and obvious breach of a policy  an  Immigration  Judge  can
find that  the  decision  is  not  accordance  with  the  law.  However,  we
emphasise that for the reasons considered previously, it  will  only  be  in
very unusual circumstances  that  such  a  finding  can  be  made  properly.
Usually the Immigration Judge cannot decide if an  appellant  satisfies  the
requirements of a policy because  he  cannot  make  the  necessary  findings
either about the scope  and  operation  of  the  policy  or  the  particular
appellant's circumstances. Indeed  we  suggest  that  an  Immigration  Judge
should be particularly sceptical about evidence tending to  suggest  that  a
person qualifies under a policy when he has not applied  under  that  policy
and  has  not  disclosed  his  evidence  (especially  evidence   about   his
character) to the respondent well before an appeal hearing.

However the substance of a policy is extremely relevant when  considering  a
case under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

It follows that the Immigration Judge did not err as  alleged  under  ground
2. He did not allow the  appeal  under  the  policy  although  in  the  very
particular facts of this case it would have been  hard  to  have  criticised
him if he had.

Ground 3 complains that  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in  his  Article  8
findings because he did not follow the guidelines in Mahmood [2001]  Imm  AR
229.  It is convenient to consider here as well  ground  4  of  the  grounds
which complain that the Immigration  Judge  "erred  in  law  in  failing  to
consider the guidelines set in [2005] EWCA Civ 105 Huang v SSHD  March  16th
2005 and in failing 'to give reasons as to  how  the  appellant's  case  was
truly exceptional'.

We have reminded ourselves  of  MB  (Croatia)  (Huang  -  proportionality  -
bulletins) [2005] UKIAT 00092.   This emphasised that the removal  would  be
proportionate to the proper purpose of enforcing immigration control in  all
but truly exceptional cases where a person was not  entitled  to  remain  in
the United Kingdom under the rules or the policy. However,  this  is  not  a
case  where  the  Immigration  Judge  needed  to  find   truly   exceptional
circumstances in order to make a  sound  decision.   He  found,  as  he  was
clearly entitled to do, that removing the  appellant  would  interfere  with
her protected private and family life, that is  her  relationship  with  her
husband, and that such removal would be  disproportionate  not  because  the
circumstances are truly exceptional but because it would be contrary to  the
respondent's policy. Interference with a person's private  and  family  life
is contrary to Article 8 unless it is 'necessary in a  democratic  society'.
It is very  difficult  to  imagine  circumstances  where  removal  would  be
necessary in the case of a  person  who  was  entitled  under  a  policy  to
remain.   The Immigration Judge  decided  that  this  appellant  is  such  a
person and so it is irrelevant that he did not find the facts  to  be  truly
exceptional.

There is  further  point.  In  deciding  whether  removal  is  necessary  or
proportionate an Immigration Judge is entitled to have regard to the  policy
even if the appellant that he is considering does not benefit directly  from
the policy.  The Court of Appeal said as much in Shkembi v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
Civ 1592. Mr Nathan, perhaps a little too modestly,  did  not  refer  us  to
this decision but Latham LJ said at paragraph  15:
  "The policy does not strictly apply to the appellant  but,   nonetheless,
  Mr Nathan is entitled, it seems to me, to argue that if  and  insofar  as
  the rationale can be discerned for the policy, the Tribunal can  consider
  whether or not as a consequence the Adjudicator  was  wrong  to  conclude
  that this was merely  a  concession  which  the  Secretary  of  State  is
  entitled either to depart from or to require  strict  adherence  to,  but
  goes further than that and justifies  the  conclusion  that  this  is  an
  exceptional case."

In other words it is necessary in some cases to  consider  the  requirements
of a policy in order to consider Article 8.    It must flow from  this  that
Immigration Judges will, sometimes, be obliged to consider  in  some  detail
how a policy operates and, in very unusual circumstances, to  find  that  in
failing to apply his policy the respondent  has  made  a  decision  that  is
contrary to the law.

It will be helpful if the Secretary of State comes to a hearing prepared  to
explain how an apparently relevant policy operates  and  why  the  appellant
does not, or does, come within its scope rather than perpetuating  the  myth
that policy is no  concern  of  the  Immigration  Judge.    It  is  not  the
Immigration Judge's place to apply policy but the  Immigration  Judge  needs
to understand the respondent's policies in order to consider how a  decision
impacts on an appellant's protected human rights.

It is, perhaps, helpful to conclude by reminding ourselves of the  essential
facts in this case.  The appellant is married  to  a  British  national  now
aged seventy-one years.  According to the respondent the appellant  was  not
entitled to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  a  policy  because  the
marriage was not genuine and subsisting and it was reasonable to expect  the
appellant's husband to accompany the appellant in the event of her  removal.
An Immigration Judge decided that the marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting
and it is unreasonable to expect her husband to accompany the  appellant  in
the event of her removal and he allowed the appeal.  We  find  no  error  of
law in that decision.

In summary, we say the following.  When considering a  person's  entitlement
to remain in the United Kingdom an Immigration Judge is obliged to  consider
the Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State's  known  policies  but  it
will only be in very unusual circumstances where an  Immigration  Judge  can
decide properly that any decision is  contrary  to  the  law  because  of  a
failure to follow a policy.   In any  case  where  a  policy  has  not  been
followed, or has not been considered properly, the best course  will  almost
certainly be to allow the appeal to the extent that the Secretary  of  State
is required to consider the application again under his policy because  that
element of the claim is outstanding.

However, when considering a person's human rights an  Immigration  Judge  is
obliged to consider the operation of  a  policy  and  where,  as  here,  the
Immigration Judge concludes that a person is  entitled  to  remain  under  a
policy, the Immigration Judge must go on to conclude that removal  would  be
disproportionate to the proper purposes of  enforcing  immigration  control.
In order to make such a finding the Immigration  Judge  must  make  findings
about the appellant's ability to satisfy the requirements of the policy.  In
doing that he is not usurping the role of the Secretary of State but, as  he
is required to do, he is applying his mind to the law.

That is what the Immigration Judge did here and he did not  err  in  law  in
allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Decision:

The  original  Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  the  following   decision   is
substituted:
The appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is dismissed
The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds





Signed                                  Date 26 September 2006
Senior Immigration Judge Perkins


