
IN THE ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL
at Field House
             PH(ex-CUKC with UK-born grandmother) Bahamas [2006] UKAIT 00083
Heard:         17.10.2006
Signed:        18.10.2006
Promulgated on: 04.11.2006

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before:

Mr CMG Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                       Senior Immigration Judge Freeman and
                       Senior Immigration Judge Perkins

                                  Between:

                                                                   Appellant

                                    and:

                       Entry Clearance Officer, NEW YORK,
                                                                  Respondent

No appearance for the appellant
Mr K Norton for the respondent

A citizen of the Bahamas with a grandmother born in the United Kingdom  lost
his CUKC status  on  the  independence  of  the  Bahamas  and,  despite  the
misleading terms of the visa application form he completed, had no right  of
abode capable of being continued under the British Nationality Act 1981.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is a case where the  Tribunal  has  ordered  reconsideration  of  a
   decision of Immigration Judge Wood TD, sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  27
   June 2005,  a certificate of entitlement appeal  by  a  citizen  of  the
   Bahamas. The Tribunal thought the judge might have made an error of  law
   in relying on the version  of  the  Immigration  Acts  set  out  in  the
   explanatory statement: since he does not seem to have  got  any  further
   help from the presenting officer before him, we have every sympathy  for
   him in doing so; however we have of course to decide the case  according
   to  law.  Since  there  was  no  challenge  in   the   application   for
   reconsideration to the judge's  positive  credibility  findings  on  the
   appellant's family history, we can take that as established  and  review
   his immigration status in this country as it altered over the years.  We
   need to do this, because the version of the law presented to  the  judge
   was the one contained in the Immigration Act 1971 as originally enacted;
   but  there  were  significant  changes  brought  about  by  the  Bahamas
   Independence Act 1973 and the British Nationality Act 1981.

2. Appellant's status before 1971 Act

   The appellant was born on 9 December 1944 in the United States, the  son
   of Bahamian parents, and a British subject by  virtue  of  his  father's
   birth in the Bahamas (at that  time  a  British  colony).  His  paternal
   grandmother was born in  the  United  Kingdom:  otherwise  he  had  only
   remoter connexions with this country. On the commencement of the British
   Nationality Act 1948 on 1 January 1949 he became a citizen of the United
   Kingdom and Colonies [CUKC], and on reaching 21 in 1965 he renounced the
   United States citizenship to which his birth there entitled him.

3. Status under 1971 Act

   The appellant had the right of abode in this country by  virtue  of  the
   following provision of the Act [s. 2 (1) (b)], being a CUKC

   ...born to ...a parent who had that citizenship at the time of the birth
   ...and the parent either

      i) then had that citizenship by his birth in the United Kingdom or in
         any of the Islands [meaning the Channel Islands  or  the  Isle  of
         Man: see s. 33]; or
     ii) had been born to a parent  who  at  the  time  of  that  birth  or
         adoption so had it.

   For present purposes we can assume in  his  favour  that  there  was  no
   relevant difference between his parents' status at his birth as  British
   subjects belonging to the Bahamas, and the one they, like him,  acquired
   in 1949 as CUKCs. The reason of course that he had the  right  of  abode
   under  the  1971  Act  as  originally  passed  was  that  his   paternal
   grandmother had been born here; so his father had been born to a  parent
   who held that citizenship by birth.

4. Bahamas Independence Act 1973

   The general provision for citizenship under s. 2 (2) was as follows:

      Except  as  provided  by  section  3  of  this  Act,  any  person  who
      immediately before the appointed  day  is  a  citizen  of  the  United
      Kingdom and Colonies shall on that day cease to be such a  citizen  if
      he becomes on that day a citizen of The Bahamas.

   There is no suggestion that the appellant did not become  a  citizen  of
   the Bahamas on the appointed day (10 July 1973); so he only retained his
   CUKC status if he fell under one of the exceptions in  s.  3.  The  only
   apparently relevant one is set out in s. 3 (1) (a):

      Subject to subsection (5) of this section, a person shall not cease to
      be a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies  under  section  2  of
      this Act if he, his father, or his father's father -

        a) was born in the United Kingdom or in a colony ...

   Unfortunately for the appellant, s. 3 (5) (a) provided that

      ...references  to  a  colony  shall  be  construed  as  not  including
      references to any territory which, on the  appointed  day,  is  not  a
      colony for the purposes of the British Nationality Act  1948  as  that
      Act has effect on that day, and accordingly do not include  references
      to the Bahamas ...

   Since the appellant's  grandmother's  birth  here  did  not  affect  the
   position, that meant he lost his CUKC status on 10 July 1973. Whether he
   lost his right of abode with it might be a question of  some  historical
   interest; but, in view of the terms of the 1981 Act, which follow, could
   not affect the result of this case.


5. British Nationality Act 1981

   Section 39(2) of the 1981 Act replaced s. 2 (1) (b) of the 1971 Act (see
   3) with the following:

      A person is under this Act to have the right of abode  in  the  United
      Kingdom if -

      ...he is a Commonwealth citizen who

           i) immediately before the commencement of the British Nationality
              Act 1981 was a Commonwealth citizen having the right of  abode
              in the United Kingdom by  virtue  of  section  2  (1)  (d)  or
              section 2 (2) of this Act as then in force; and

          ii) has not ceased to be a Commonwealth citizen in the meanwhile.

   This appellant has of course been a Commonwealth citizen all along; but,
   whether or not he retained, following the Bahamas Independence Act 1973,
   the right of abode he had enjoyed  on  the  coming  into  force  of  the
   Immigration Act 1971, that was a right he had held under s. 2 (1) (b) of
   the 1971 Act (see 3), and not under s. 2 (1) (d). As originally enacted,
   the former had extended the right of abode to any Commonwealth citizen

      ...born to ...a parent who at the time of the birth had citizenship of
      the United Kingdom and Colonies by his birth in the United Kingdom  or
      in any of the Islands.

   Section 2 (2) refers to women Commonwealth citizens married to  a  CUKC,
   and is not relevant to this case. Section 2 (1)  (d)  cannot  of  course
   help this appellant, since neither of  his  parents  were  born  in  the
   United Kingdom or Islands. It must follow that  he  has  not  since  the
   coming into force of the 1981 Act on 1 January 1983 been entitled to the
   right of abode in this country, and the certificate of  entitlement  was
   rightly refused, though for reasons which the judge found to  be  wrong,
   and on which his decision has not been challenged.

6. General

   We were somewhat concerned that these proceedings had begun with an  out-
   of-date view of the relevant nationality law  being  put  forward  by  an
   entry clearance post which should have been well in the mainstream of the
   modern world, and continued before the  judge  without  that  view  being
   corrected by the presenting officer. In fact the potential for  confusion
   had arisen even on the visa application form, which invites the applicant
   to make his application by ticking one of a number of boxes, the relevant
   one being "As someone who, at birth, was a citizen of the United  Kingdom
   and Colonies and has  or  had  a  grandparent  born  ...  in  the  United
   Kingdom". As we have established, not  without  some  trouble  ourselves,
   that was some way from qualifying this appellant for the right of abode.

7. Mr Norton helpfully referred us to the guidance notes (INF 12)  available
   on line (at www.ukvisas.gov.uk ) which do seem correctly to state the law
   as we have found it, both for former CUKCs and for Commonwealth citizens.
   We do not however think that an applicant issued with a visa  application
   form which appears to offer him the right of abode ought to have to go on
   line to find out whether it means what it says or not before  paying  the
   fee for his application. This appellant might reasonably have thought  he
   could get a certificate of entitlement on the strength  of  his  paternal
   grandmother having been born in this country, and consideration should be
   given to refunding him his fee.

The  original  Tribunal   a  material  error  of  law.   The   decision   is
accordingly substituted following the appeal against refusal of  certificate
of entitlement, for reasons given at 5 above.
                                                                       [pic]
                                            Senior Immigration Judge Freeman
                                        approved for electronic distribution
