
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Nimo (appeals: duty of disclosure) [2020] UKUT 00088 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2020                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     MR C.M.G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                CHARLES NIMO
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms M Malhotra, Counsel, instructed by Adukus
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1) In an immigration appeal, the Secretary of State's  duty  of  disclosure
is not knowingly to mislead: CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe
CG [2013] UKUT 0059, citing R v SSHD ex parte Kerrouche No 1 [1997]  Imm  AR
610.
(2) The Upper Tribunal was wrong to hold in  Miah  (interviewer's  comments;
disclosure; fairness) [2014] UKUT 515 that, in  every  appeal  involving  an
alleged  marriage  of  convenience,  the  interviewer's  comments   in   the
Secretary of State's form ICD.4605 must be disclosed to  the  appellant  and
the Tribunal. No such general requirement is  imposed  by  the  respondent's
duty of disclosure or by rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. A person who is a family member of an EEA national (as defined  in  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016)  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom is entitled to ask  the  respondent
    for a residence card, confirming his or her status as a family  member.
    The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, made  such  an  application  on  the
    ground that he was married to a  Dutch  national,  who  was  exercising
    treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   For  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations (and the underlying Directive), a spouse is not entitled to
    be treated as a family member if he or she is a party to a marriage  of
    convenience.


 2. Having undertaken separate interviews with the appellant and his  wife,
    the respondent decided that they were in a marriage of convenience  and
    so refused to issue the appellant with a residence card.


 3. The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    which, following a hearing in Newport on 4  June  2019,  dismissed  his
    appeal.


 4. The judge had before him the verbatim records of  the  interviews  with
    the appellant and his spouse.  The judge heard oral evidence from them.
     In his decision, the judge placed no weight on  certain  discrepancies
    given by the appellant and his spouse at their  respective  interviews,
    concerning their everyday  life  together.   The  judge  did,  however,
    consider it highly significant that the appellant "knew  nothing  about
    his wife being out of the country for a period of  a  week,  let  alone
    which other  country  she  may  have  gone  to  and  for  what  reason"
    (paragraph 18).  The judge found that the respondent had discharged the
    legal burden of proof,  the  appellant  having  failed  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation.  The judge concluded that the marriage  had  been
    properly shown  by  the  respondent  to  be  one  of  convenience.   He
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.


 5. Although the judge had the record of interviews, which  had  also  been
    supplied to the appellant in advance of the hearing, he did not have  a
    document known as ICD.4605.  This  was  the  interview  summary  sheet,
    compiled by an official of the respondent who undertook the interviews,
    which included a section headed "recommendation -  genuine/marriage  of
    convenience?" together with evidence to support the recommendation.


 6. There is nothing to indicate that  the  appellant,  his  solicitors  or
    counsel  who  attended  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  asked   the
    respondent for a copy of ICD.4605.  Nor was anything  said  about  this
    document at the hearing.


 7. In the  grounds  which  accompanied  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, we find the following:

         "The appellant's application for a residence card as a spouse of an
         EEA  National  was  refused  on  5  April  2019  due   to   alleged
         inconsistencies in their responses at the marriage  interview.   In
         the interest of fairness, the appellant should have been alerted by
         the elements of the case against him (sic).

         However, the document containing the interviewer's comments -  form
         ICD.4605 which should have been disclosed was not.  We refer to the
         case of Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure:  fairness  [2014]
         UKUT 00515 (IAC).  In fairness to the appellant, the hearing should
         have been adjourned to enable him and his spouse specifically  [to]
         deal with these matters in their witness statements.

         Therefore, the FtT Judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
         appeal contained an error of law."


 8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  on  20  August  2019.   The  granting  judge's  decision
    contains the following:-

         "3.  Disclosure is described at [22] of Miah as being  dictated  by
             the right to a fair hearing.   Given  this,  I  am  driven  to
             conclude that the grounds are arguable, it being for the Upper
             Tribunal  to  determine  whether   the   fairness   point   is
             nonetheless answered by the appellant apparently never  having
             raised the issue before. "


 9. Pursuant to the Upper Tribunal's  directions,  the  parties  filed  and
    served skeleton arguments.  We also  heard  oral  submissions  from  Ms
    Malhotra and Mr Melvin.  The respondent's skeleton argument was drafted
    by Mr Melvin's colleague, Mr Jarvis.


10. In Miah, the Upper Tribunal held that form ICD.4605 must  be  disclosed
    as a matter of course, in order to afford an appellant  a  right  to  a
    fair hearing.


11. The Upper Tribunal summarised the two questions raised in the  case  as
    follows:-

         "2.  The main question raised by this appeal is an interesting one,
             the answer whereto could potentially  affect  the  conduct  of
             interviews in contexts other than  that  under  consideration.
             It may be summarised thus: is a decision by the  Secretary  of
             State  under  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
             Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") that  a  marriage  is
             one of convenience  vitiated  by  procedural  unfairness  and,
             thereby, erroneous in law where the  decision  making  process
             includes comments, or opinions, of  the  interviewing  officer
             adverse to the  subject's  case  which  are  conveyed  to  the
             decision maker but are withheld from the  subject?        Thus
             formulated, this appeal raises a classic  question  of  common
             law procedural fairness.  This is  essentially  the  issue  on
             which the FtT allowed the appeal and upon which permission  to
             appeal was granted.

         3.   The subsidiary question raised by this appeal is also of  some
             interest, as it bears on the Secretary of State's duty to  the
             First-tier  Tribunal  under  Rule  13  of   the   Asylum   and
             Immigration Procedure Rules 2005.  It may be framed thus: does
             the duty under Rule 12 encompass  a  requirement  to  disclose
             Form ICD4605, the "Interview Summary Sheet", in every case  of
             this nature?  The consequences of the new FtT procedural rules
             are addressed in [20] infra."


12. At paragraph 9, the Upper  Tribunal  cited  from  the  speech  of  Lord
    Mustill in R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  ex-parte
    Doody [1994] [1 AC 531], in which it was stated that where  an  Act  of
    Parliament confers an administrative power, there is a presumption that
    it  will  be  exercised  in  a  manner  which  is  fair  in   all   the
    circumstances.  Standards of fairness are not immutable but  will  very
    often require a person who may be adversely affected by the decision to
    have an opportunity to make representations, either before the decision
    is taken with a view to producing a favourable result, or after  it  is
    taken, with a view to  procuring  its  modification,  or  both.   Since
    worthwhile representations cannot be made without knowing what  factors
    may weigh against the person's interests, fairness will  often  require
    the person to be informed of the gist of the case he has to answer.


13. The Upper Tribunal also cited R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ex-parte  Fayed  [1996]  EWCA  Civ  946.   This  involved  a
    judicial review by Mr Fayed of the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to grant him naturalisation as a  British  citizen.   The  Upper
    Tribunal noted, in particular, the observation of Phillips  LJ  (as  he
    then was) that the duty of disclosure is calculated to ensure that  the
    process by which the minister  reaches  his  decision  is  fair.   This
    enables the party affected to address the matters which are significant
    and therefore helps to ensure the Minister reaches his decision  having
    regard to all the relevant material (p.253).


14. Having observed that finding a person is  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience "will be a significant blot on the person's history and can
    operate to his detriment in the future", the Upper Tribunal said:-

         "13.  These  features  of  the  context  point  decisively  to  the
             proposition that the affected person must be  alerted  to  the
             essential elements of the case against him.  This  places  the
             spotlight firmly on the pre-decision interview which, it would
             appear, is an established part of the process in cases of this
             nature.  The interview  is  the  vehicle  through  which  this
             discrete duty of disclosure will, in practice,  be  typically,
             though not invariably or  exclusively,  discharged.   In  this
             forum, the suspicions  relating  to  the  genuineness  of  the
             marriage must be fully ventilated. This will entail putting to
             the subject the essential elements of any evidence upon  which
             such suspicions are based.  In this way the  subject  will  be
             apprised of the case against him and will have the opportunity
             to  make  his  defence,  advancing  such  representations  and
             providing such information, explanations or interpretations as
             he wishes.  Adherence to these basic requirements  should,  in
             principle, ensure  a  fair  decision  making  process  in  the
             generality of cases.  In order to cater  for  the  unusual  or
             exceptional  case,  those  involved  in  the  decision  making
             process must always be alert to the question  of  whether,  in
             the interests of fairness, anything further is required."


15. Miah was an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    following the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appeal of the
    person who was said to be party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience.   It
    appears that the appeal had been allowed because  4CV  4.605  had  been
    disclosed to the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  maker.   The  Upper
    Tribunal  was,  understandably,  not  disposed  to  regard  this  as  a
    constituting an impermissible action, such  as  to  entitle  the  other
    party to succeed.   It  would,  frankly,  be  bizarre  if,  within  any
    organisation, an official was precluded from making a recommendation to
    another (usually higher) official, who  is  tasked  with  the  duty  of
    making the decision in the case.


16. The Upper Tribunal put the matter in the following way:-

         "17. Insofar as Mr Ahmed submitted that the comments  and  opinions
             of the interviewing officer should never be considered by  the
             decision maker, I cannot agree.  The interviewer will normally
             be  well  equipped  and  placed  to  express  relevant  views,
             particularly  where   the   same   person   has,   separately,
             interviewed  the  two   parties   to   the   marriage.    More
             specifically, the  interviewer  will  be  uniquely  placed  to
             comment on the subject's presentation, reactions and demeanour
             generally.  This is illustrated in the present  case,  in  the
             interviewing officer's description of  his  "impression"  that
             the wife was evading certain critical questions.  There is  no
             challenge to the bona fides of  the  interviewer.   Where  the
             interviewer elects to include comments and/or opinions in  the
             materials conveyed to the decision maker, the latter will not,
             of course, be bound by them. I consider that the duty  on  the
             decision  maker  is  to  approach  and  consider  all  of  the
             materials with an open mind and with circumspection.  The  due
             discharge of this duty, coupled with the  statutory  right  of
             appeal, will provide the subject with adequate protection."


17. The Upper Tribunal in Miah then  turned  to  the  second  issue.   This
    concerned rule 13 of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005.  So far as relevant, rule 13, provided as follows:-

         "Filing of documents by respondent.

         13 - (1) When the respondent is served with a copy of a  notice  of
         appeal, it must (unless it has  already  done  so)  file  with  the
         Tribunal a copy of -

            (a)   the notice of the decision to which the notice of  appeal
                 relates, and any other documents served  on  the  appellant
                 giving reasons for that decision;


            (b)   any -


                 (i)    statement  of  evidence  form   completed   by   the
                    appellant;


                 (ii)  record of an interview with the appellant,


                                   in  relation  to  the   decision   being
                 appealed;


            (c)   any other unpublished document which is referred to in  a
                 document mentioned in  sub-  (a)  or  relied  upon  by  the
                 respondent;


                         ..."


18. In  October  2014,  the  2005  Rules  were  replaced  by  the  Tribunal
    Procedural (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration & Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
    2014.  Rule 24 makes provision, in paragraph (1) to the same effect  as
    old rule 13(1):

         "24 - (1) ...when a respondent is provided with a copy of a  notice
             of appeal, the respondent must provide the Tribunal with-

             (a)  the notice of the decision to which the notice of  appeal
                  relates and any other document the respondent provided  to
                  the appellant giving reasons for that decision;

             (b)  any statement of evidence or application  form  completed
                  by the appellant;

             (c)  any record of an interview with the appellant in relation
                  to the decision being appealed;

             (d)  any other unpublished document which is referred to in  a
                  document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or relied upon  by
                  the respondent;

             ..."


19. In Miah, the Upper Tribunal was in no  doubt  that  the  principles  of
    procedural fairness, as articulated in its analysis of the first of the
    two issues, required rule 13 to be read so that form ICD.4605  must  be
    disclosed to an appellant:-

         "21. The requirement to make disclosure (formerly discovery) of all
             material documents in a party's possession, custody  or  power
             is a long established feature of most litigation contexts.  It
             is an integral part of the administration of justice.  It is a
             duty owed to both the other party and the  court  or  tribunal
             concerned.  It is rooted in  fairness  and  the  rule  of  law
             itself.  In  the  particular  context   of   judicial   review
             proceedings,  Sir  John  Donaldson  MR  stated  in  R  -  v  -
             Lancashire County Court, ex parte Huddleston [1986] 2  All  ER
             941, at 944;

                  "Certainly it is for the applicant to satisfy the Court of
                  his entitlement to judicial  review  and  it  is  for  the
                  respondent to resist his application, if it  considers  it
                  to be unjustified. But it is a process which falls  to  be
                  conducted with all the cards face upwards on the table and
                  the  vast  majority  of  the  cards  will  start  in   the
                  authority's hands".

             ...

             This has also been formulated as a duty of candour: see  Tweed
             - v - Parades Commission (Northern Ireland) [2006] UKHL 33, at
             [54], per Lord Brown. Asylum, immigration and kindred  appeals
             are a species of public law proceedings, in which the  parties
             are the citizen (on the  one  hand)  and  the  State  (on  the
             other).  I consider that these duties apply with full force in
             the context of such appeals.  To suggest  otherwise  would  be
             inimical to the administration of justice. Rule 13 of the 2005
             Rules is to be construed and applied accordingly.

         22.  The representatives of  both  parties  were  agreed  that  the
             document enshrining the interviewer's comments - Form ICD.4605
             - is not routinely disclosed in  appeals  of  this  kind.  The
             practice appears to be irregular and inconsistent. I  consider
             that  fulfilment  of  the  duties  identified  above  requires
             disclosure of this Form as a matter of course. The  Claimant's
             right to a fair  appeal  hearing  dictates  this  course.  If,
             exceptionally, some legitimate concern about  disclosure,  for
             example the protection of a third party,  should  arise,  this
             should  be  proactively  brought  to  the  attention  of   the
             Tribunal, for  a  ruling  and  directions.  In  this  way  the
             principle of independent judicial  adjudication  will  provide
             adequate safeguards. It will also enable  mechanisms  such  as
             redaction, which in practice one would expect  to  arise  with
             extreme rarity, to be considered.

         23.  While, there may be cases where it can  be  demonstrated  that
             non-disclosure  of  this  document  did  not  contaminate  the
             fairness of the tribunal's decision making process, one  would
             expect these to be rare."


      Discussion


20. It is plain from paragraph 21 of Miah, in which the Upper Tribunal made
    reference to the duty "to make disclosure (formerly discovery)  of  all
    material documents in a party's possession custody or power", that  the
    Upper Tribunal considered this duty, or something very like it, applies
    in immigration appeals, including EEA appeals.  With respect,  that  is
    not right. Regrettably, the Upper Tribunal did not have cited to it the
    relevant authorities, which  establish  that  there  is  a  significant
    difference between, on the one hand, appeals  in  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  and,
    on the other, civil litigation as conducted in courts.


21. The authorities were usefully analysed by the Upper Tribunal in CM  (EM
    country guidance; disclosure (Zimbabwe) CG [2013] UKUT 0059.   Although
    concerned with an asylum appeal, what CM has to say  on  the  issue  of
    disclosure is of general application in this jurisdiction,  so  far  as
    concerns appeals:-

         "36. As  a  starting  point  and  in  contrast  to  ordinary  civil
             litigation, we recognise that there is no general  requirement
             for disclosure of all relevant data held by the Home Secretary
             or indeed the Foreign Secretary in asylum appeals.  These  are
             appeals to a Tribunal governed by a statutory regime  and  the
             Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as  amended.
             Neither these Rules nor the AIT (Procedure)  Rules  2005  made
             provision for general disclosure."

         37.   In  principle,  the  starting  point  was  similar  to   that
             considered by the House of Lords in Abdi and Gawe [1996] 1 WLR
             298 [1996] Imm AR 288 where Lord Lloyd concluded that  neither
             the express provisions of the rules then  applicable  nor  the
             interests of justice required the Secretary of State  to  give
             discovery in asylum appeals.   The  case  was  concerned  with
             return to a safe third country,  and  it  is  clear  from  the
             speech of Lord Lloyd and the partly concurring speech of  Lord
             Mustill that the  circumscribed  timetable  of  third  country
             appeals  was  a  material  factor  in  determining  what   the
             interests of justice required.

         38.  R v SSHD ex p Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR   610  was  another
             third country case; Lord Woolf  said:

                   "While Lord Lloyd's approach must be the  starting  point
                  for the consideration of this issue, there are  limits  to
                  the approach he indicated in that case. The decision would
                  not justify the Secretary of  State  knowingly  misleading
                  the Special Adjudicator. The obligation of  the  Secretary
                  of State cannot be  put  higher  than  that  he  must  not
                  knowingly mislead. Before the Secretary of State could  be
                  said to be in that position, he must know or ought to have
                  known that the material which it is said  he  should  have
                  disclosed materially detracts from that on  which  he  has
                  relied."


22. Accordingly, in placing weight upon rule 13(1)(c) of the 2005 Rules  to
    support its finding that form ICD.4605 must be disclosed as a matter of
    course, the Upper Tribunal in Miah was starting from the  wrong  place.
    The rules and principles relating to civil litigation disclosure do not
    apply to appeals of the present kind.


23. As can be seen from paragraphs 10 and 21 of  its  decision,  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Miah appears to have equated  judicial  review  proceedings
    with those of a statutory immigration appeal.  However, these two types
    of litigation are distinct.  There is no legitimate  reason  to  import
    into immigration appeals the duty of candour, which exists in  judicial
    review.


24. The basic reason why it is unnecessary and inappropriate to  do  so  is
    identified in Mr Jarvis's skeleton argument.  We are,  here,  concerned
    with an appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal judge was  not  undertaking  a
    review  of  the  respondent's  decision,   with   all   the   attendant
    restrictions that flow the judicial review process.  The  case  is  not
    like Fayed, where the claimant received an adverse  decision  which  he
    wished to challenge but did not know the reasons for that decision and,
    thus, the case he had to meet. On the contrary, it was an appeal, where
    the respondent was obliged to say why she had refused  the  application
    and where the judge was required to decide  for  himself  the  question
    whether, on the evidence before him, the respondent had discharged  her
    duty of showing, on the balance of probabilities, that the  appellant's
    marriage was one of convenience.


25. Although concerned with an appeal raising human rights issues, what the
    House of Lords said  in  Huang  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] UKHL 11 makes the distinction in this context between
    appeal and judicial review plain:-

         "11  ... the task of the appellate  immigration  authority,  on  an
             appeal on a  Convention  ground  against  a  decision  of  the
             primary official decision-maker refusing  leave  to  enter  or
             remain in this country, is to decide  whether  the  challenged
             decision is unlawful as incompatible with a  Convention  right
             or  compatible  and  so  lawful.   It  is  not  a   secondary,
             reviewing, function dependent on establishing that the primary
             decision-maker misdirected himself or  acted  irrationally  or
             was  guilty  of   procedural   impropriety.    The   appellate
             immigration authority  must  decide  for  itself  whether  the
             impugned decision is lawful and, if  not,  but  only  if  not,
             reverse it..."


26. To put that another way, in an immigration appeal the reasons  for  the
    respondent's decision are merely the starting point for an  independent
    judicial process.  Once this point is grasped, it can readily  be  seen
    that  there  is  no  justification  for  a  rigid  requirement  on  the
    respondent to file and serve from ICD.4605 in marriage  of  convenience
    cases.  This proposition can be tested by reference to the facts of the
    instant appeal.


27. The verbatim records of  interview  were  produced  by  the  respondent
    pursuant to rule 24(1)(d) of the 2014 Rules.  The respondent's decision
    of 5  April  2019  made  specific  reference  to  the  interview.   The
    inconsistencies  identified  in  the   decision,   arising   from   the
    interviews, were expressly articulated in the form of "bullet  points".
    Details were given in those bullet  points  of  what  was  said  to  be
    inconsistent.   For  instance  (and  as  the  judge  emphasised),   the
    appellant  could  not  recall  the  last  time  his  wife  visited  the
    Netherlands, whereas she said that she had gone to the Hague for a week
    in October 2018 for friend's funeral.


28.  Other inconsistencies detailed in the  decision,  by  refence  to  the
    interviews, involved the appellant's knowledge of his wife's work,  her
    finances, her past life in the Netherlands, and information  about  his
    wife's children.  The decision also referred to two photographs of  the
    appellant and his wife, taken in a restaurant, as regards  which  there
    was an inconsistency as to who had taken  the  photograph  and  whether
    that person had been dining with the couple.


29. From the information on the Upper Tribunal's file, we can see that  the
    respondent was directed by the First-tier Tribunal on  7  May  2019  to
    send copies of the documents disclosed pursuant to rule 24(1)(d) to the
    appellant, by 4 June 2019.  There was no complaint at the hearing  that
    the  appellant  and   those   professionally   representing   had   had
    insufficient time to consider the record of interviews.


30. As we have already mentioned, form ICD.4605 has been disclosed  by  the
    respondent.  This followed the grant of permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  In it, we can see the caseworker's recommendation  was
    that the appellant's marriage was a marriage of  convenience.   In  the
    following column, headed  "Evidence  to  support  recommendation",  the
    caseworker set out what were considered to be inconsistencies in  areas
    where the appellant did not know information about his  wife  which  he
    might be expected to know, if his  marriage  were  genuine.   With  one
    exception, these correlate precisely with  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision.  The  exception  is  that  the  interviewing  caseworker  had
    credibility issues with  photographs  supplied  by  the  appellant,  in
    addition to those taken in the restaurant.


31. Since the case before the First-tier Tribunal judge was an  appeal  and
    not judicial review, the case the appellant had to meet was set out  in
    the respondent's decision.  The reasons given  in  that  decision,  and
    only those, were being relied upon by the respondent in order to resist
    the  appeal  and  the  ICD.4605  was  not,  either  expressly   or   by
    implication, "referred to" in the decision or the reasons for it.


32. We note that rule 24(2) of the 2014 Rules requires  the  respondent  to
    provide "a statement of whether the respondent opposes the  appellant's
    case and the grounds for such opposition", in circumstances where  "the
    respondent intends to change or add to the grounds  or  reasons  relied
    upon in the notice or the other  documents  referred  to  in  paragraph
    (1)(a)".  This provides  a  mechanism  for  ensuring  that,  where  the
    respondent's justification for her decision changes, both the appellant
    and the Tribunal are made aware of this.


33. It  therefore  matters  not  at  all  whether  form  ICD.4605  contains
    observations, by reference to the  records  of  interview,  that  might
    further support the respondent's decision concerning the nature of  the
    marriage, but which are not articulated in that decision.  There can be
    no possible unfairness to the appellant in this regard because both  he
    and the First-tier tribunal judge are in the  same  position.   Neither
    will  know  of  those  additional  observations  in  ICD.4605.    Those
    observations therefore cannot play any part  in  the  judge's  decision
    whether to allow or dismiss the appeal.


34. Before us, Ms Malhotra submitted that, insofar as the decision followed
    and reflected the stance of the caseworker who compiled ICD.4605,  that
    document should have been disclosed, as it was part  of  the  decision.
    We do not agree.  As we have already observed, it is a  commonplace  of
    any ministry or, indeed, any organisation (certainly, one of  the  size
    of the Home Office) that several  officials  will  be  engaged  in  the
    process that leads to a formal decision, such as a decision that  gives
    rise to a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The fact that  a
    decision-maker adopts the recommendations of a colleague does not  mean
    that those recommendations have to be supplied to an appellant and  the
    Tribunal. What matters to  the  appellant  and  the  Tribunal  are  the
    reasons for the decision.


35. It is, however, necessary to make the following point.  The duty not to
    mislead, as described by the Upper Tribunal in  CM,  will  require  the
    respondent to disclose form ICD.4605, where there is  something  in  it
    that could materially assist the appellant, but which is not  mentioned
    in the respondent's decision or in the records of interview.   If,  for
    example, the interviewing officer comments that the appellant or spouse
    appeared to be seriously unwell during the  interview,  and  that  this
    might account for the unsatisfactory answers given, then the respondent
    is under a duty to disclose.  The presenting  officer  would,  in  such
    circumstances, be misleading the Tribunal, if she were to rely  on  the
    discrepant  or  otherwise  unsatisfactory  answers,   without   drawing
    attention  to  what  the  interviewer  had  had  to   say   about   the
    interviewee's apparent state of health.  The possibility  that  such  a
    piece of information might lie within form ICD.4605 is not, however,  a
    reason to require its automatic production, any more than there  ought,
    for such a reason, to be a general duty of disclosure on the respondent
    in respect of all internal communications leading to  any  decision  in
    the  immigration  field,  which  may  be  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


36.  For  these  reasons,  we  respectfully  decline  to  adopt  the  broad
    construction of (what is now) rule 24(1)(d), which was adopted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in Miah.  In the present case, ICD.4605 was not referred
    to in the notice of decision or any  other  document  provided  to  the
    appellant, giving reasons for that decision.   Form  ICD.4605  was  not
    relied upon by the respondent.  The expression "relied  upon"  in  rule
    24(1)(d) must mean that the  respondent  relies  upon  the  unpublished
    document as part of her case before the First-tier Tribunal.   For  the
    reasons we have given, the expression cannot properly be  construed  as
    referring to any advisory or preparatory document that has  led  up  to
    the form in which the respondent has articulated the  reasons  for  her
    decision, as contained in the decision letter.


37. In the present  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  gave  entirely
    sustainable reasons for finding that  the  appellant  was  party  to  a
    marriage of convenience.  The appellant and his  advisors  had  advance
    notice of the record of  interviews,  which  featured  in  the  written
    decision and reasons.  No unfairness was occasioned by  the  fact  that
    the appellant and the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  did  not  see  form
    ICD.4605.


      DECISION


      The appeal is dismissed.





                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
