
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC)

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 April, 6 May and 3 June 2015            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             td (1st appellant)
                             AD (2nd APPELLANT)
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss S Khan, instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors
     Miss R Frantzis, instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


Much of the guidance given in AM & BM (Trafficked women) Albania  CG  [2010]
UKUT 00080 (IAC) is maintained. Where that  guidance  has  been  amended  or
supplemented by this decision it has been highlighted in bold:



         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.

         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


   1) The social status and economic standing of her family
                      2)  The  level  of  education  of   the   victim   of
                         trafficking or her family
                      3) The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of  health,
                         particularly her mental health
                      4) The presence of an illegitimate child
                      5) The area of origin
                      6) Age
                      7) What support network will be available.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


    INDEX

    Section                    Paragraph numbers


    Introduction                    1-6
    Evidence                        7-75
    Our Conclusions on the Evidence 76-112
    Legal Framework                 113-118
    Country Guidance                119
    The Individual Appellants           120-176



    ABBREVIATIONS

    The following abbreviations are used in this determination:


    ARA      Albanian Responsible Authority for Anti-Trafficking
    CA       Competent Authority
    CARE Coordinated Approach for the Reintegration of Victims of
    Trafficking
    CIG      Country Information and Guidance
    COIR Country of Origin Information Report
    EEA      European Economic Area
    FCO      Foreign and Commonwealth Office
    IOM      International Organisation for Migration
    NCATS    National Coalition of Anti-Trafficking Shelters
    NGO  Non-governmental organisation
    NCRVT    National Reception Centre for Victims of Trafficking ("the
    Linza centre")
    NRM  National Referral Mechanism
    OGN  Operational Guidance Note
    OSCE Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
    PVOT Potential Victim of Trafficking
    RAVT IOM project 'Reintegrating Victims of Trafficking'
    SOP      Standard Operating Procedures for the Identification and
    referral of
             victims of trafficking and potential victims of trafficking,
             applied by the Office of the National Co-ordinator on
             Combating Trafficking in Persons in Albania
    TIP  Trafficking in Persons Report published annually by the United
             States' State Department
    UKHTC    United Kingdom Human Trafficking Centre (part of the National
             Crime Agency)
    UN       United Nations
    VOT      Victim of trafficking
    WAVE Women Against Violence in Europe



    INTRODUCTION

 1. This decision to which we have both contributed is in two  parts.   The
    first considers the availability or otherwise of a safe internal flight
    for  women  who  have  been  trafficked  for  the  purpose  of   sexual
    exploitation.  This  involves  an  assessment  of  the   re-integration
    services  offered  by  the  Albanian  State,  NGO  and  civil   society
    organisations to such an individual.

 2. The second part is specific to the appellants who are  two  women  from
    Albania who have been trafficked for  sexual  exploitation.  They  have
    both been found to be at risk of persecution in their home  areas.   It
    is accepted by the Secretary of State that they are unable  to  re-join
    their families or look to them for support if returned. The dispute for
    them that arises is whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    relocate in Albania  and  whether  they  would  be  vulnerable  to  re-
    exploitation taking account of  our  general  conclusions  and  matters
    specific to the appellants.

 3. The Upper Tribunal last considered the issues relating to the return of
    trafficked women in AM & BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG  [2010]  UKUT
    00080 (IAC) following hearings in February and May 2009.  Its  findings
    were summarised in the following headnote:

         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.


         b)   At its worst the psychological damage inflicted on a victim of
             trafficking can lead to  difficulties  in  reintegrating  into
             Albanian society and has implications on whether or not it  is
             possible for  the  victim  of  trafficking,  should  she  fear
             persecution in her own area, to relocate.


         c)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         d)   Those  that  see  themselves  outside  society,  for  example,
             divorced or abandoned  women,  or  others  who  wish  to  live
             abroad, may seek out traffickers in order to facilitate  their
             departure from Albania and their establishment in prostitution
             abroad. Although such women are not "trafficked women" in  the
             sense that they have not been  abducted  against  their  will,
             there  is  likely  to  be  considerable  violence  within  the
             relationships and the psychological affect  of  that  violence
             may lead to a situation where the  pressures  which  they  are
             under and the lack of freedom they are under means  that  such
             women should be treated as trafficked women.


         e)     The Albanian Government and authorities are taking steps  to
             protect trafficked women who return but  such  steps  are  not
             always effective.  When considering whether or not there is  a
             sufficiency of protection for a trafficked woman who is to  be
             returned her particular circumstances must be considered.  Not
             all trafficked women returning to Albania will  be  unable  to
             access the arrangements and  facilities  available  to  enable
             successful re-integration.


         f)      Trafficked women from Albania may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


                   1) The  social  status  and  economic  standing  of  the
                      trafficked woman's family.
                   2) The level of education of the trafficked woman or her
                      family.
                   3) The trafficked woman's state of health,  particularly
                      her mental health.
                   4) The presence of an illegitimate child.
                   5) The area of origin of the trafficked woman's family.
                   6) The trafficked woman's age."

 4. The Secretary of State contends that since that case  was  heard  there
    has been progress by  the  Albanian  government  in  the  detection  of
    trafficking and the support of its victims; it is further said that the
    support victims of trafficking ("VOTs") now receive from  the  IOM  and
    NGOs provides safety and support to the extent that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable nor unduly harsh to expect the women to relocate away from
    their families. On this basis their  protection  claims  were  refused.
    The First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer)  heard  the
    appeals against the Secretary of State's decisions on  8  August  2014.
    In separate decisions he  dismissed  the  appeals  on  asylum  grounds,
    grounds  under  Council   Directive   2004/83/EC   (the   Qualification
    Directive) and human rights grounds.  Essentially he concluded that the
    appellants would be able to internally relocate  within  Albania.  This
    would be initially  within  the  shelters  available  and  the  support
    framework provided  by  the  IOM  in  their  return  and  reintegration
    package. They could thereafter  seek  protection  if  needed  from  the
    authorities  in  the  light  of  the  significant  changes  the   judge
    considered have recently occurred.

 5. Error of law was found by the Upper Tribunal  in  these  decisions.  In
    summary this was on the basis that inadequate reasons  had  been  given
    for departure from country guidance.  The 'error of  law'  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judges Dawson and Rintoul can be found  at  Appendix  A.
    The matter was set down with directions with a view to  giving  updated
    country guidance.  A  list  of  issues  was  formulated  to  provide  a
    framework for our  decision  making.  In  essence,  the  agreed  issues
    included an evaluation of the  effectiveness  of  the  IOM  return  and
    reintegration packages, and to what extent they might assist  returning
    VOTs in the short and long term. Those packages are  time  limited;  we
    were not invited to consider how a VOT might fare on return absent such
    resources. To that extent, the guidance we give is  confined  to  those
    measures being in place on return.

 6. During the course of the hearing the appellants were granted permission
    without objection to rely on additional grounds under Article 4 of  the
    Anti-Trafficking  Convention.  It  had  been  initially  conceded  that
    neither appellant could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,
    including paragraph 276ADE. Their altered position was that  the  "very
    significant obstacles" test in paragraph 276ADE(v)   would,   in  these
    cases,  be founded on the same facts as the "unduly harsh"  test  under
    the Refugee Convention: for that reason they could not logically eschew
    one and not the other.




    THE EVIDENCE

 7. The appellants relied on the evidence of two country experts: Professor
    Edlira  Haxhiymeri,  Professor  of  Social  Work  and   Social   Policy
    Department, Faculty of  Social  Sciences,  University  of  Tirana,  and
    Robert Chenciner, a recognised expert on the former Soviet  states  and
    Eastern Europe.  Their reports are  based  in  part  on  questions  the
    parties had posed.  Dr  Haxhiymeri  gave  evidence  by  telephone  from
    Albania, and due to time constraints, her cross-examination  was  based
    partly  on  questions  previously  notified  by  Mr  Whitwell.   Robert
    Chenciner was not called to give oral evidence.

 8. In addition, we  heard  evidence  from  Miss  Rachel  Mullan-Feroze  of
    Ashiana, a UK based NGO offering assistance to VOTs and from Dr  Roxane
    Agnew-Davies, a Consultant Clinical Psychologist, who gave evidence  by
    telephone from France. She too answered questions posed in  advance  by
    Mr Whitwell, as well as responding  to  direct  cross-examination.   Dr
    Agnew-Davies offered her general observations about  the  psychological
    sequelae of trafficking as well as providing  her  assessment  of  each
    individual appellant. The latter is considered in part two. In  respect
    of the former we note that the evidence is the same as that given by Dr
    Agnew-Davies to the  Tribunal  in  AM  &  BM;  we  have  not  therefore
    reproduced it here.

 9. We were also provided with extensive documentary material,  a  list  of
    which is set out in the  index  at  Appendix  B.  Since  much  of  this
    documentary evidence was not contested we have not summarised all  that
    is before us. There are however three documents that were  particularly
    relied upon by the representatives - and  the  expert  witnesses  -  as
    providing up to date analysis and statistics on the position of VOT  in
    Albania.  The first is the January 2015 report published by  IOM  under
    the  auspices  of  the  United  Nations  Programme  Support  to  Social
    Inclusion in Albania: Profile of the situation of  trafficking  victims
    and efforts for social inclusion ("the UNP report"). The second is  the
    Needs Assessment: Human Trafficking in the Western Balkans ("the  Needs
    Assessment") produced by the Research Communication Group on behalf  of
    IOM. The third is the US State Department Trafficking in Persons Report
    for 2014 ("the TIP"), published by the Office  to  Monitor  and  Combat
    Trafficking in Persons.

10. Each  report  refers  to  procedures  put  in  place  by  the  Albanian
    government as set out in the  Standard  Operating  Procedures  for  the
    Identification and Referral of Victims  of  Trafficking  and  Potential
    Victims of Trafficking ('the SOP') amended and approved in  July  2011.
    We were also provided with some very recent  information  by  IOM  with
    which we begin.



    IOM


11. The IOM is an inter-governmental organisation whose  stated  commitment
    is to the principal that humane and  orderly  migration  benefits  both
    migrants  and  society.  As  the  "leading  global   organisation   for
    migration", IOM works with migrants, governments and  its  partners  in
    the international community. Its  work  includes  the  facilitation  of
    reintegration and safe return for migrants, and supporting the  efforts
    of the international community to combat trafficking in  persons.   IOM
    offices include locations in Tirana and London, and  we  were  provided
    with information from both.

12. IOM has provided evidence about the nature of its resettlement  package
    currently  offered  to  Albanian  VOTs.   Known  as  the  Reintegrating
    Albanian Victims of Trafficking programme (RAVT), its aims are set  out
    in an IOM information leaflet thus:

         "[to help VOTs]...resettle in a humane  and  sustainable  way  that
         mitigates the risk of re-trafficking. The programme is stated to be
         entirely voluntary and is designed with the victim  of  trafficking
         at the centre of the process in order to empower them  through  the
         decision-making procedure".

13. VOTs who are interested in returning to Albania can be referred to RAVT
    by the Salvation Army and its sub-contractors, UKHTC,  Home  Office  or
    Poppy Project.  The referred VOT is asked to complete a "Screening  and
    Assistance Interview Form". We were provided with one of  these  forms.
    The interview process begins with detailed assessment of the individual
    concerned, covering her level of  education,  work  experience,  family
    situation, health,  how she came to be trafficked and by whom,  whether
    there are any risk factors in respect of re-trafficking and the  nature
    of the work she was forced to  undertake.  There  is  also  an  enquiry
    whether there are any special factors relating to return,  whether  the
    applicant requires pre-departure assistance and the degree  of  transit
    and  reception  assistance  required.  Finally  the   nature   of   the
    reintegration package is addressed.

14. Despite being time limited, the "tailored" package described in the IOM
    literature is at the heart of the appeals before us, and we  have  been
    told that it has featured in a number  of  refusal  letters  served  on
    Albanian VOTs. IOM have sought to clarify the  position  in  a  Written
    Statement on:  Reintegrating  Albanian  Victims  of  Human  Trafficking
    Project issued on 26th March 2015 ("the  Statement")  setting  out  the
    nature of the project in more detail. This document  was  sent  to  the
    First Appellant's solicitors under cover of an email from Jennifer  Dew
    of the IOM in the UK who wrote:


         "IOM feels that this project should have no bearing  on  an  asylum
         decision as it cannot  address  individual  fears  of  persecution,
         threats to life or  freedom  in  Albania,  and  it  cannot  provide
         protection from potential danger. Furthermore it  is  important  to
         underline the fact that this is a voluntary  return  project  which
         means that an individual must be making an informed  decision  that
         return is right for them. If a victim of trafficking does not  wish
         to sign the voluntary declaration form they will  not  be  eligible
         for the project and IOM would not be able to provide them with  any
         integration assistance".

15. The Statement also gives the following additional details  about  RAVT.
    The programme is  available  to  adult  Albanian  VOTs  who  have  been
    accepted into the UK NRM, having received either a 'Reasonable Grounds'
    or 'Conclusive Grounds' decision from the Competent Authority.   If  an
    individual does not wish to go through the NRM,  but  there  are  still
    indicators of trafficking, she may be admitted; this would  be  decided
    on a case-by-case basis.   Again, the voluntary nature of the programme
    is underlined. The first step is that  the  VOT  is  asked  to  sign  a
    declaration of voluntary return: if she does not wish to sign this form
    she will not be eligible for the project and  the  IOM  are  unable  to
    provide her with any assistance.   The Statement notes:


         "The decision to return home is very complex and usually involves a
         number  of  different  factors,  ranging   from   the   trafficking
         experience  and  associated  psychological  issues,   to   personal
         aspirations and family support  networks.  To  date,  two  Albanian
         victims  of  trafficking  have  received  assistance  through  this
         project: the first had a positive reasonable grounds  decision  and
         the second had a positive  conclusive  grounds  decision.  In  both
         cases the victims of trafficking had  family  support  networks  in
         Albania and felt that returning  home  was  the  right,  and  safe,
         choice for them."

16. Once the decision is made, and the form completed, the  IOM's  Standard
    Operating Procedures (SOPs) stipulate that a risk  assessment  must  be
    carried out.  This begins with a general risk  assessment,  which  will
    look at the current scale of trafficking in  Albania  and  whether  any
    attempt has made been made by traffickers to contact  the  VOT  or  her
    family. If general risks are  found,  a  specific  risk  assessment  is
    conducted.  If the level of risk is deemed "unacceptable",  or  if  the
    individual herself considers that she is in danger,  she  will  not  be
    eligible for the project.

17. Once a VOT is accepted into the programme, arrangements  are  made  for
    departure. The IOM UK co-ordinates with Refugee Action  who  will  make
    the  travel  arrangements.  IOM  Albania  will  inform   the   Albanian
    Responsible Authority for Anti-trafficking (ARA) who will meet the  VOT
    on arrival in Tirana.  IOM Albania  then  work  with  the  returnee  to
    develop and implement their  reintegration  plan,  including  accessing
    training, education, or developing a business plan.  They  provide  all
    assistance in kind; there is no cash provision.  The  maximum  provided
    for is �2100 per case and it can be spent on:



          . Temporary accommodation
          . Education
          . Vocational training
          . Start-up business activity
          . Employment subsidiary salary
          . Medical support
          . Childcare

18. Following the Statement there ensued correspondence  between  the  IOM,
    the FCO and the Home Office.  On the 30th April 2015  Clarissa  Azkoul,
    the IOM UK Chief of Mission wrote to  Mr  Glyn  Williams,  Director  of
    Immigration and Border Policy. Ms Azkoul cites paragraph 1.1.14 of  the
    September 2014 CIG (which gives a summary  of  the  RAVT  project)  and
    states that it has come to her attention that this section of  the  CIG
    is still being relied upon in refusal letters, and the project is being
    portrayed as a 'protection measure'.  This is despite the  IOM  raising
    its concerns about it during meetings on at least four occasions and in
    email correspondence  dating  back  to  September  2014.  The  concerns
    expressed are that the project cannot, and was never intended to, offer
    any protection. Second, RAVT assistance is only available to  voluntary
    returnees: "the form is signed following an  information  session  with
    the individual victim of trafficking to ensure  that  the  decision  to
    receive assistance under the  project  is  indeed  voluntary  and  made
    without undue coercion". Third, IOM considers that paragraph 1.1.14  of
    the CIG is inaccurate where it  states  that  returnees  are  "normally
    transferred to the secure National  Reception  Centre  for  Victims  of
    Trafficking, guarded by special police 24/7". Ms Azkoul points out that
    this is not what has happened in any of the,  now  3,  individuals  who
    have returned from the UK under the project.

19. Assistance  is  also  offered  by  way  of  a  �750  in-kind  temporary
    accommodation grant.  She asks that the Home Office urgently review and
    amend the CIG paragraph in question and concludes by emphasising again,
    that there must be a "clear desire" on the part of the VOT  to  receive
    reintegration support.

20. Mr Williams responded by email. He agreed that the package does not  in
    itself provide protection, and clarifies that the CIG was not  intended
    to indicate otherwise.   The Home Office position is that the existence
    of the shelters, and the IOM package, are amongst a number  of  factors
    relevant to the question of protection.  The Home Office recognise that
    the programme is voluntary, and that VOT cannot be compelled to use it:
    the CIG has been amended  to  reflect  this.  That  said,  Mr  Williams
    continued:

         "However, as I am sure you can appreciate, the Home  Office  has  a
         clear  responsibility  to  ensure  effective  immigration  control.
         Making sure that the asylum route is reserved for people who have a
         "well-founded fear  of  being  persecuted"  under  the  UN  Refugee
         Convention is an important part of that responsibility. As part  of
         that, we must consider whether the individual will be  at  risk  on
         return; that includes the availability of a  supported  return  and
         reintegration package in considering whether  effective  protection
         can be sought on  return  and  so  whether,  if  the  applicant  is
         fearful, that fear is well-founded. This does not compel victims to
         use  this  or  any  other  voluntary  returns   package   but   the
         availability of support and protection, whether assisted by the IOM
         or not, is a factor that may be taken into account when considering
         an asylum application. It is also worth noting that the  CIG  makes
         clear  that  asylum  decision-makers  must  take  account  of   the
         individual circumstances of each case,  and  so  cannot  justify  a
         blanket approach to refusals; the paragraph which refers to the IOM
         package is directly followed by  one  emphasising  this  point  and
         listing  the  various  individual  factors   decision-makers   must
         consider"

21. As to Ms Azkoul's concerns about the inaccuracy of the CIG, Mr Williams
    agrees that the term "normally" should be deleted  and  indicates  that
    the CIG can be amended so as to make it explicit that  the  shelter  is
    state-run.

22. The email exchange between Ms Azkoul and  Mr  Williams  also  addresses
    when the RAVT project is due to end.   It was  initially  funded  until
    the 30 April 2015, and in her letter of the same  date  Ms  Azkoul  had
    referred to this as adding urgency to the IOM's concerns.  Mr  Williams
    for his part appears to have considered it settled that the funding was
    to extend to the 30 September 2015; in a further letter of 29 May  2015
    Ms Azkoul agrees this to be the case, with an end-date of 30 June  2015
    for new entrants, in order that there is sufficient time  remaining  to
    deliver the assistance before the funding runs  out.   A  letter  dated
    23rd April 2015 from Nick Miller of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office
    'Returns and Reintegration  Fund'  states  that  the  FCO  have  agreed
    funding for RAVT until the  30  September  2015.  On  the  question  of
    funding Mr Williams makes the following observations:

         "We remain very  concerned  about  the  lack  of  take-up  of  this
         project, given the public funds we have invested in it. As we  have
         discussed with you at previous meetings, we accept that demand  may
         always be limited given that many victims may not wish  to  return.
         However, we strongly believe that there is more to be done  in  how
         this package is communicated to victims. To  date,  the  literature
         provided to victims and opportunities  for  discussion  or  seeking
         further information appear to have been minimal. Information on the
         project has been provided to victims at one  remove  from  IOM,  by
         support providers who are not party to our contract with you and do
         not necessarily  have  a  stake  in  explaining  or  promoting  the
         project".

23. That was the extent of the evidence we were given in respect  of  RAVT.
    During the first  day  of  hearing  Mr  Whitworth  alerted  us  to  the
    Respondent's proposal to make submissions about  another  IOM  promoted
    package, known as CARE: 'Coordinated Approach for the Reintegration  of
    Victims of Trafficking'. This is a project  similar  to  RAVT,  jointly
    funded by the IOM, the FCO, the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs  and
    other partners. It was due to run for 24 months from the 2nd  September
    2013.   Its aim is to provide a sustainable reintegration  package  for
    returned VOTs from Austria, France, the UK, Cyprus, Portugal and Spain.
     This was the extent of the information we were given about CARE, which
    appears to operate along the same lines as RAVT.




    Standard Operating Procedures [SOP] for the Identification and Referral
    of Victims of Trafficking

24. The SOP is described by the Albanian Office of the National Coordinator
    on Combating Trafficking in Persons, under the auspices of the Ministry
    of Interior, as having been 'updated and improved' in  2011,  when  the
    document was published.  The SOP comprises  a  detailed  checklist  for
    stakeholders  dealing  with  VOTs  identified  in-country  as  well  as
    arriving at Albania's borders: it gives step-by-step guidance  on  what
    to do, whom to contact and inform, and what steps to take next.  It  is
    advanced as a comprehensive document that forms an  important  part  of
    the  Albanian  government's  efforts  to  improve   its   response   to
    trafficking and expand the scope of  the  National  Referral  Mechanism
    (NRM).  It claims to set a gold standard for the treatment of potential
    VOTs (PVOTs).

25. The SOP states that on arrival the returnee is interviewed and  advised
    about her rights and the assistance available.  Even  if  the  returnee
    declines assistance the Responsible Authority  is  informed  about  her
    arrival. The initial interview is conducted by a Border  and  Migration
    Police Officer and it takes about 30 minutes.  Food and drink should be
    provided, and if the returnee needs medical assistance, she  should  be
    taken to the nearest health centre. If in  that  initial  interview  it
    appears to the officer that trafficking indicators are present the PVOT
    is to be taken to "appropriate premises" for the interview to continue.
     This further interview takes no more than an hour.  If the  conclusion
    is that the interviewee is a PVOT the Border and Migration police  must
    immediately inform their counterparts from the  'Sector  of  the  Fight
    Against Illegal Trafficking' (SFAIF). An in-depth  assessment  is  then
    made, with the PVOT being informed of  the  assistance  that  might  be
    available to her. This would include information being gathered with  a
    view to prosecuting  her  traffickers.   The  assessment  of  needs  is
    conducted by the police officer and a social  worker,  and  a  copy  of
    their conclusions is passed to the shelter where the  PVOT  is  placed.
    The shelter will then stay in touch with the social worker  and  advise
    them about any developments. If there is perceived to be  any  risk  to
    the PVOT in getting to the shelter she is to be accompanied by a police
    officer.  If the PVOT refuses to go to a  shelter  she  must  be  given
    information about available services in the area that she is  returning
    to; the social services department in that area will be informed  about
    her arrival.

26. In respect of Albanians voluntarily returning  to  the  country  having
    been identified abroad as PVOT, the SOP states that efforts  should  be
    made to identify any health needs prior to arrival. The  socio-economic
    assessment is made in accordance with the on-arrival procedures set out
    above.  If the PVOT wishes to return  to  her  own  community/family  a
    local social worker will co-ordinate this. The PVOT  will  be  provided
    with an up to date list of assistance available to her there,  and  her
    social worker will contact any relevant organisations to introduce  the
    PVOT. There will be an assessment of the  family  before  the  assisted
    return is facilitated. This will be conducted by a  social  worker  who
    will contact and interview the PVOT's family. If it  appears  that  the
    PVOT or her family are at risk from  traffickers  the  police  will  be
    immediately notified  and  intervention  requested.    After  the  PVOT
    returns home the social worker continues to monitor her  situation  and
    will immediately notify the  Responsible  Authority  if  there  is  any
    change in circumstance or risk assessment.  There is no time  limit  on
    the support offered by the social worker.  If it is found that the well-
    being of the PVOT is being compromised in her home situation, immediate
    action must be taken to find an appropriate solution.




    The UNP Report and the Needs Assessment

27. The January 2015 report produced under the auspices of the UNP contains
    actual case-studies, produced very  recently,  of  VOTs  attempting  to
    reintegrate in Albania. It  also  contains  direct  quotes  from  other
    actors 'on the ground' such as representatives of  NGOs.  Unfortunately
    the document suffers from poor translation into  English;  nevertheless
    it is comprehensible.   The Needs Assessment was published in 2014.  It
    is based on research conducted between September 2013  and  March  2014
    into human trafficking in  Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Kosovo,
    Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia. As  such  its  conclusions  are  more
    generic, although we note that many more stakeholders were consulted in
    respect of Albania than any other country in the study, and  that  much
    of the text does specifically refer to Albania.  It  reveals  that  the
    authors spoke directly to stakeholders including  VOTs  themselves  and
    those working to find reintegration solutions for them.

28. Both reports were produced in conjunction with the IOM.  We  deal  with
    them together simply because thematically they address many of the same
    issues. They cover a wide range of issues but for the purpose  of  this
    determination, there are four areas of interest: how VOTs  gain  access
    to assistance through the NRM, what is offered in the shelters, whether
    VOTs remain at risk of trafficking once they have entered the NRM,  and
    how VOTs manage once they have left the shelters.


29. The Albanian NRM is identified in the  Needs  Assessment  as  the  only
    "highly operational" NRM in the Western Balkans. Multiple informants to
    that research describe the NRM as "working well  and  a  good  example"
    with  effective  communication  between  the   social   services,   the
    authorities and the NGOs. The UNP report notes  that  VOT  are  brought
    into the NRM through a variety  of  sources,  including  civil  society
    organisations, social services, and counselling services in Europe, but
    by far the largest source  of  referrals  in  Albania  comes  from  the
    police.   Different & Equal are cited as recording seven cases  brought
    during 2013 in which it was the prosecutors  who  attached  the  status
    "VOT" to the victims. Both reports do however note shortcomings in  the
    identification and referral  process.  Partly  because  there  are  key
    actors who are not yet involved, such as labour inspectors, and  partly
    through the reluctance of VOTs to be identified. The UNP cites a survey
    conducted by the IOM in 2013-2014  which  found  that  38%  respondents
    reported that they would be deterred from coming forward because of the
    "type and quality" of assistance on offer.


30.  NCATS  is  the  National  Coalition  of   Anti-Trafficking   Shelters,
    comprising the NCRVT government shelter in Linza, Tirana, and the three
    NGO-funded  shelters  Tjeter  Vizion  ('Another  Vision')  in  Elbasan,
    Different & Equal in Tirana, and Vatra in Vlore.  The UNP report states
    that the three NGO shelters apply a re-integration approach in  stages:
    first, crisis intervention and reception  at  a  shelter;  second,  the
    reintegration  stage  supporting  semi-independent  living  and  third,
    reintegration and social inclusion.  The range of services can  include
    "safe accommodation and good living  conditions,  safe  transportation,
    individual assistance plans, food, clothes,  medical  examinations  and
    treatments, as well as provision of care in  case  of  hospitalisation,
    health information, psychosocial  counselling,  employment  counselling
    and facilitation, reintegration  grants,  support  for  the  return  to
    school and studies, social and cultural activities, vocational training
    and care during pregnancy, as  well  as  for  the  child".   The  Needs
    Assessment adds that VOTs are offered a  choice  of  which  shelter  to
    enter, although those with any safety concerns are encouraged to  enter
    the NRCVT state-run facility. At the date of the UNP report  there  was
    found to be sufficient capacity in the shelters to meet  demand:  NRCVT
    can accommodate up to 100 persons, Different  &  Equal  15,  Vatra  20,
    Tjeter Vision 34. The report goes on to note that "such capacity is not
    sustainable" because of funding issues.


31. The UNP report examines the  cases  of  ten  VOT  as  they  attempt  to
    reintegrate into Albanian society. Eight are women.  Two had previously
    been trafficked, having already been in one of the "relevant shelters".
    This accords  with  the  findings  of  the  NCATS  report  which  found
    "Previous trafficking remains a key vulnerability factor. Hence, 16 new
    cases of trafficking (18%)  referred  to  NCATS  during  the  reporting
    period have been identified previously and  accommodated  in  Coalition
    Shelters". The National Anti-Trafficking Co-ordinator reports  that  in
    the year prior to the UNP report being compiled there was an  increased
    response to trafficking by law enforcement officials. In both 2012  and
    2013 there were only 2 convictions but in 2014 there  were  10;  during
    the reporting period from  September  2013  there  were  a  further  60
    referrals to the  Serious  Crimes  Prosecutor,  including  58  for  the
    offence of "exploitation for prostitution".  Both the UNP and the Needs
    Assessment indicate that service providers working in the field express
    scepticism  about  official  figures,  suggesting  that  these  do  not
    accurately reflect the scale of  the  problem  in  Albania.  The  Needs
    Assessment  further  notes  that  the  majority  of  reports  and   key
    informants mention corruption - in the form of complicity between local
    officials and police with traffickers - as a major barrier to combating
    trafficking.


32. All eight of the female VOT featured in the  UNP  report  had  received
    some kind of education or training  whilst  in  a  shelter.  Three  had
    trained as hairdressers, three had taken a culinary course and one  had
    done tailoring. One, a minor, had been supported to go back to  school.
    This training had resulted in work for five of the women. Two had  been
    employed by an NGO, but their position was precarious  due  to  funding
    issues; one was living with family members and the other was living  in
    shared accommodation, trying to pay the rent on an income of 10,000 Lek
    per month[1].  One described herself as "highly skilful" in her work as
    a chef for a private organisation; she was able to pay the rent  on  an
    apartment herself.   One was also living alone  but  expressed  concern
    about how she would meet  the  rent  because  she  did  not  think  her
    employment  secure.  The  fifth  was  "very  confident"  and  good   at
    hairdressing; she was living with her mother.

33. In respect  of  long-term  support  the  gaps  in  provision  "featured
    prominently" in  the  research  conducted  for  the  Needs  Assessment.
    Although  one  informant  suggested  that  "protection  and  assistance
    services to  people  who  have  experienced  trafficking  (foreign  and
    domestic)  upon  exit  from  the  shelters  are  zero"[2]  most  people
    interviewed  highlighted  the  major  problem  as  being  the  lack  of
    employment support.  This in  turn  leads  to  difficulties  in  living
    independently. Of the eight women in the UNP case-studies four went  to
    live with family members, three paid rent independently and one  wished
    to go back to the shelter. All reported that it is  very  difficult  to
    pay rent alone.  There is no legal provision to give priority to VOT in
    the allocation of social housing.  There is a social housing  programme
    which seeks, inter alia, to provide for single parent families, but  at
    the time that the UNP research was undertaken  "no  single  person  had
    benefitted" from such programmes.  The experience of women who did find
    work after leaving the shelters was varied: three were in unsecure, low
    paid employment (as a chef, a  cleaner  and  a  part-time  distributor)
    whilst two described themselves as "confident  and  skilful"  in  their
    respective employment  as  a  chef  and  in  "aesthetics".  The  report
    summarises the position in the following terms,


         "The data received from the interviews are confirmed by the service
         providers. The high unemployment rate has driven people  to  accept
         any kind of job, having no social insurance  and  very  low  wages.
         Some reports show that in Elbasan, there have been tens of cases of
         women in need and victims of  trafficking  who  have  accepted  all
         sorts of jobs. Employment  offices'  offers  are  limited  and  are
         associated with problems relating to working hours, days off,  very
         low salaries which cannot substantiate a safe re-integration.


         According to the interviews with  the  service  providers,  maximum
         efforts are made to create jobs  within  the  organisations,  given
         that they are sensitive to the special needs of victims, but  these
         possibilities are very limited and depend hugely on funds. What the
         service  providers  give  as  a  recommendation  based   on   their
         experience, is establishment of social businesses"


34. The Needs  Assessment  conclusion  is  framed  in  similar  terms,  and
    highlights the risks carried with such low levels of economic security:


         "At the same time it was noted in Albania  that  even  where  cases
         were able to find employment, low income jobs often meant that they
         could not afford to meet their basic living costs. This  highlights
         a crucial point made in one report (Balkan Act Now 2013) that  most
         victims are returning to the same place facing  the  same  problems
         that they had before they were trafficked. In particular,  lack  of
         economic opportunities motivated many  people  who  get  caught  in
         trafficking networks to have migrated in  the  first  place.  Their
         situation has not generally altered upon their return, and may even
         be exacerbated by costs incurred  through  their  migration.  Thus,
         long-term  reintegration  brings  challenges  for  which   adequate
         solutions have generally not been identified and implemented".




    The 2014 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report

35. The TIP report is a document produced annually  by  the  United  States
    State Department who describe it  as  "the  US  Government's  principal
    diplomatic tool to engage foreign governments on human trafficking.  It
    is the world's most comprehensive resource of  governmental  anti-human
    trafficking efforts and reflects  the  US  Government's  commitment  to
    global leadership on this key human rights and law enforcement  issue".
    The authors of the Albanian chapter consulted with relevant  ministries
    within the Albanian government and representatives of NGOs.  They  also
    had  regard  to  other  human  rights  reports.  The  report   contains
    statistics on matters such as prosecutions and training.

36. Albania remains a source and destination  country  for  trafficking  in
    persons for the purpose of sexual exploitation and  forced  labour.  In
    each year since 2009 the United States government has classified it  as
    a 'Tier 2' country, placing it in a category with countries as  diverse
    as Afghanistan and Portugal. 'Tier  2'  status  means  that  the  State
    Department has concluded that Albania is making significant efforts  to
    comply  with  the  minimum  standards  set  out  in  the  relevant   US
    legislation, the Trafficking Victims Protection Act. The exception  was
    in 2013 when Albania was placed on the 'Tier  2  Watch  List'  for  the
    following reasons:
         a)  the absolute number of victims of severe forms of trafficking
         is very significant or is significantly increasing;
         b)  there is a failure to provide evidence of increasing efforts to
         combat severe forms of trafficking in persons from the previous
         year, including increased investigations, prosecution, and
         convictions of trafficking crimes, increased assistance to victims,
         and decreasing evidence of complicity in severe forms of
         trafficking by government officials; or
         c)  the determination that a country is making significant efforts
         to bring itself into compliance with minimum standards was based on
         commitments by the country to take additional steps over the next
         year.

37. In 2014 Albania returned to 'Tier 2':

         The Government of Albania does not fully comply  with  the  minimum
         standards for the elimination of trafficking; however, it is making
         significant efforts to do  so.  In  October  2013,  the  government
         appointed a  new  national  anti-trafficking  coordinator,  who  in
         December initiated  the  development  of  a  special  taskforce  to
         improve  coordination  among  police,  prosecutors,   and   judges.
         Albanian law enforcement improved its understanding  of  a  victim-
         centered approach to human trafficking, though further training  is
         still  needed  to  improve   their   operating   effectiveness   in
         identifying  cases  and  leading  them  through  prosecution.   The
         government  increased  the  number  of  victims   identified,   but
         prosecuted and convicted a small number of  trafficking  offenders.
         The government did not fund the NGO shelters that provided services
         to victims  of  trafficking.  Victims  received  inadequate  mental
         health services at the state-run shelter, and  medical  care  staff
         needed training.

38. The TIP states that in  the  reporting  period  2013  to  2014  Albania
    increased its anti-trafficking law enforcement efforts and improved its
    criminal law by increasing sentences and creating new offences. In 2013
    there were 24 cases investigated, compared to only 11 in 2012. One case
    was brought to trial, which had not concluded at the date  of  the  TIP
    report.  In  2012  two  defendants  were  successfully  prosecuted  and
    received  sentences  of  15  years'  imprisonment.  During  2013,   the
    government trained 57  judges,  prosecutors,  and  police  officers  on
    investigation  and  prosecution   of   traffickers,   and   on   victim
    identification and protection. The government increased the  number  of
    judicial police and special prosecutors assigned to  trafficking  cases
    from three to seven during the reporting period. In December 2013,  the
    national anti-trafficking coordinator initiated the  development  of  a
    special taskforce to improve coordination  among  police,  prosecutors,
    and  judges.  NGOs  reported  that  police,  prosecutors,  and   judges
    demonstrated improved understanding of a  victim-centered  approach  to
    human trafficking, though further training is still needed.  Corruption
    and high rates of turnover continued to be an issue within  the  police
    force, which hampered the efficacy of training. The government did  not
    report any  investigations  or  prosecutions  of  government  officials
    allegedly complicit in human trafficking offences during the year.

39. There was an increase in the identification of VOT and  their  referral
    to the appropriate services.  In  the  reporting  period  95  VOT  were
    identified, and 93 received assistance in either an NGO  or  government
    shelter.  Although  there  was  some  financial  provision   for   VOTs
    (approximately $10,000), there was a failure to fund NGO  shelters  and
    $50,000 that had been allocated to provide them  with  food  failed  to
    materialize. Bureaucratic hurdles prevented victims from accessing free
    healthcare that had previously been approved by the government and VOTs
    had to pay for their own medical expenses.  During the reporting period
    the NGOs reported improved  operation  of  the  NRM  and  there  was  a
    substantial increase in special mobile units formed to  identify  child
    VOTs.  The problems in the shelters is summarised as follows:

         "Victim advocates and NGOs  reported  that  the  state-run  shelter
         lacked human, physical, and  financial  resources  for  longer-term
         care of victims of trafficking, including  health,  education,  and
         employment services. Victim advocates reported  that  psychological
         services offered at  the  state-run  shelter  were  inadequate  and
         medical staff required further training. NGOs reported that victims
         were punished as a direct result  of  being  in  human  trafficking
         situations. In 2012, at least three victims of sex trafficking were
         convicted of prostitution. In one case, the  court  issued  both  a
         conviction against the defendant for trafficking  in  persons,  and
         simultaneously convicted  the  victim  for  prostitution.  Lack  of
         training and the high rate of  turnover  among  prosecutors  was  a
         challenge to progress on this problem".



40. The TIP states that in October 2013, shortly after taking  office,  the
    new government appointed a National Anti-Trafficking Coordinator with a
    budget of approximately $50,000. Further funds were made  available  to
    local government and there is  some  evidence  of  regional  committees
    being active in addressing trafficking.  NGOs  assisted  with  capacity
    building and training, but more is needed.




    Professor Edlira Haxhiymeri

41. Professor Edlira Haxhiymeri is a Professor of Social Work in the Social
    Policy Department, Faculty of Social Sciences,  in  the  University  of
    Tirana.  In addition she is the executive director of the "Shelter  for
    Battered Women and Girls" in that city, a post she has held since 1998.
     She has worked for almost 25 years in the field of gender based  abuse
    and is the author of numerous reports, papers, political documents  and
    research on abuse against women  and  children  in  Albania.   She  has
    contributed  to  training  professionals  including  police   officers,
    judges, prosecutors, health workers, teachers, psychologists and social
    workers on dealing with  all  forms  of  gender  based  abuse  and  has
    contributed to the  drafting  of  national  documents  with  regard  to
    combating and minimising violence against women and girls.  She is  the
    co-author of the National Standards for Social Services for Victims  of
    Domestic Violence.


42. Her report begins with  an  introduction  followed  by  answers  to  25
    questions to which the Secretary of State contributed and finishes with
    conclusions  on  the  general  situation  as  well  as   the   specific
    circumstances of the appellant.  Professor Haxhiymeri gave her evidence
    by telephone amplified through a loudspeaker.

43. She  was  questioned  in  cross-examination  on  her  past  activities.
    Observing that she was,  in  parts  of  her  report,  critical  of  the
    Albanian government's efforts to combat trafficking, Mr  Whitwell  drew
    the Tribunal's attention to the fact that Professor Haxhiymeri  had  at
    one time been a member of the ruling Socialist Party  and  that  during
    that period she had publicly called for the resignation of the  current
    Prime Minister Edi Rama. Professor Haxhiymeri  accepted  that  she  had
    called for Edi Rama to resign, but that  was  before  he  became  Prime
    Minister, and the call was in respect of his position as leader of  the
    Party. She said that she is principally an academic with  33  years  of
    experience in teaching and research. She  had  only  been  involved  in
    politics for two years; she withdrew after  finding  it  was  "not  for
    her".  She stated that she had been critical of all leaders in  Albania
    because of their failure to address social problems. She describes  her
    stance towards Edi Rama as "critical but not hostile".

44. The following key points emerge from Professor  Haxhiymeri's  evidence.
    Where appropriate we have quoted her directly:

      a) When a woman returned by the UK authorities arrives in Albania  the
         SOP indicates that she will be met at the border point by a  police
         officer (possibly female), a social  worker  and  a  representative
         from an NGO.  The returnee will be asked to fill in a questionnaire
         which could be followed by identification procedures and it remains
         to be decided whether the returnee will be identified as  a  victim
         of trafficking or not.

      b) There is a distinction between the shelters run by  the  NGOs,  and
         the NRCVT at Linza. The latter is on the outskirts of Tirana and is
         protected by guards 24 hours a day. It has a capacity for 100  beds
         although she understands the current  occupation  is  20.  Many  of
         these  are  women  from  other  countries  who  have  either   been
         trafficked to, or transited, Albania: there are for instance  women
         from Ukraine and  Moldova  there.  It  is  run  by  a  staff  of  a
         professional and "political" background.

      c) Being a public centre funded by public funds and under the Ministry
         of Welfare and Youth it is affected by any political  change.  This
         was illustrated by events at the end of 2013 when following  a  new
         government  coming  into  office  the  staff  were  suspended.  The
         director and other professionals were fired. It  took  some  months
         for new staff to be appointed. This means that the  centre  is  not
         stable, since its staff are highly affected by political  rotation.
         For instance, today only two of the twenty or so  staff  there  are
         the same as last year. Such  changes  do  not  happen  in  the  NGO
         shelters which have a professional profile.

      d)  She  has  not  recently  visited  Linza.  There  is  concern  over
         disturbing the residents. It is a long procedure to get permission;
         she does however meet with the staff and  director  regularly.  She
         accepted there was no real evidence that any of the women there had
         fallen into the hands of traffickers but she knew VOT preferred not
         to go there as it was far away on the outskirts.  There was a  need
         to walk for twenty minutes to get the bus in an  isolated  mountain
         area and the bus journey to the centre of Tirana is another  20  to
         30 minutes.  The VOTs are always  accompanied  if  they  make  this
         journey, since walking alone in this  undeveloped  area  is  highly
         dangerous. There is a high risk of being caught by traffickers.

      e) Through cooperation with her shelter and the Linza Centre  she  and
         her staff have come to know the staff there. There are  not  enough
         social workers, psychologists or educators.  Most  of  the  current
         staff   have   an   "economic   background".   The   quality    and
         professionalism of the staff remains a problem with all the  public
         centres.  With Linza being located on the outskirts she observes it
         is impossible for any of the girls to continue  their  normal  life
         from there and have to be accompanied in order to  reach  the  city
         and other services. Any girls with high risk will go there and when
         they move out of the shelter they are still unprepared to face "the
         reality" The majority of victims who wish to enter the NGO  centres
         have a different profile.  Despite the 24 hour guarding, it is hard
         to say that it was a safe place as  the  building  is  very  easily
         identified.  It has for instance, appeared on Albanian television a
         number of times.

      f) It is considered that a six month stay at Linza  will  normally  be
         long enough for a VOT.  It may be as short  as  three  months.  The
         assessment is made case by case.  Pregnant women, those with  newly
         born babies, or those who are at  high  risk  of  being  hunted  by
         traffickers would be permitted a longer stay but in no  case  would
         it be more than two years.  With reference to the second appellant,
         who has a 9 month-old baby, her case would be considered a  "heavy"
         case and the assessment would be ongoing.

      g) As to other  shelters  she  refers  to  three  NGO  shelters  which
         cooperate with the government's Linza Shelter being "Another Vision
         in Elbasan with a capacity of eight  to  ten  persons  at  a  time,
         Different and Equal in Tirana with a capacity of 20 to  25  persons
         and Vatra  in  Vlora,   Southern  Albania,  with  nearly  the  same
         capacity. In addition ARSIS is a new centre for children that  have
         experienced trafficking and it is in Tirana".  She has visited  the
         centre in Vlore once and Different & Equal several times, the  last
         being in October 2014.  She has not been to ARSIS  but  members  of
         her staff have.

45. In Professor Haxhiymeri's opinion the shelters have,  during  the  past
    few years, tried to enrich the scope of  services  but  the  effect  of
    their intervention "does not seem to last long".  At the  beginning  of
    their  activity  they  were  offering  mainly  psycho-social   support,
    shelter, nutrition and  medical  treatment.   Nowadays  programmes  for
    vocational training, employment and housing are established. As to  the
    training of staff, some are social workers but are not  specialised  in
    dealing with mental health.  There is one psychologist but he or she is
    not trained in dealing with mental health problems.  They  are  trained
    in counselling but not in therapy.  Most  mental  health  patients  are
    treated by doctors with "medical treatments",  that  is  to  say,  they
    prescribe medication. When asked about this, she explained  that  there
    are no staff equipped to deliver "deep" psychological  treatment.  Some
    will provide basic  counselling  but  this  is  not  always  available.
    Generally speaking where reports refer to "mental health provision"  in
    the shelters they are talking about medication, in the  form  of  anti-
    depressants.

46. In respect of women with children, children are permitted to enter  the
    shelters and they will usually share a room with  their  mothers.  VOTs
    with babies find it "impossible" to attend courses.  Thus she concludes
    that "the facilities in all centres for treating victims of trafficking
    remain poor".  The women there  are  isolated  and  the  buildings  are
    poorly furnished. There is no space for privacy.  She  illustrates  her
    point by quoting from some of the beneficiary interviews in  the  Needs
    Assessment.  When questioned Professor Haxhiymeri acknowledged that  in
    the NGO shelters women can receive free childcare for 3-4 months.

47. Professor Haxhiymeri could find no official data regarding  the  number
    of VOT using shelters between 2010 and to date.   She  reiterates  that
    the situation of victims who cannot be reunited with their families  is
    more difficult than the other cases and states  that  "the  process  of
    integration becomes almost impossible"  as  family  support  is  a  key
    factor. According to the regulations at the centres  victims  can  stay
    six to twelve months. Exceptions are made  for  more  demanding  cases,
    described as "heavy" but the time limit is no more than two years.  The
    government has not funded NGO shelters that provide services to victims
    to trafficking. These are wholly reliant on support by foreign  donors.
    No public funds have gone to  the  NGO  sector  offering  services  for
    victims so far.

48. The real problem with the shelters, as far as Professor  Haxhiymeri  is
    concerned, is that none have a programme  for  long-term  intervention.
    Housing is only supported for three to six months.  After this, victims
    do not have enough means to pay the  rent  themselves.  The  employment
    offered there is in her view, a short-term intervention.

49. Turning to the prospects for the  VOT  once  she  leaves  the  shelter,
    Professor Haxhiymeri's evidence was as follows:

      a)  She  considers  that  the  six   characteristics   identified   as
         significant by the Tribunal in AM &  BM  are  still  important.  Of
         great relevance is the degree of education of the  VOT:  most  VOTs
         had an elementary level education or less and as  such  they  could
         hardly find decent paid jobs.  Mothers of illegitimate children are
         not well received in social groups and find it  difficult  to  work
         long hours to make the money needed to cover living  expenses.   It
         is difficult for them to leave  children  in  institutions  because
         they know they will not be well treated and  supported.   Professor
         Haxhiymeri  accepts  that  VOT  can  receive  some   support   from
         authorities in the country but this in no way helps them  to  start
         "a new and honest life".

      b) The majority of uneducated people can expect to receive a  wage  of
         up to E150 per month whereas rents are on  average  E200.  Although
         there were  no  official  statistics  to  support  these  estimates
         Professor Haxhiymeri bases them on her own experience of trying  to
         resettle victims of domestic violence. Workers at her shelter  have
         found it very difficult to find suitable housing in Tirana for less
         than E200 and she is aware from the feedback of those who have been
         housed that they find it very difficult to  pay  the  rent  because
         their wages do not cover it. They also have to pay  for  all  their
         other expenses on  top.  Because  of  the  lack  of  employment  in
         Albania, many people try to get any kind  of  work  without  asking
         about  conditions  and  this  raises  the   risk   of   abuse   and
         exploitation.  VOTs face a higher risk as they have  to  deal  with
         the situation by  themselves.  These  references  to  rental  costs
         relate to the private sector. There are no public housing services.
         When she was asked about the social housing referred to in the  UNP
         report she was incredulous: it has never functioned. There were two
         to three blocks built in 2007/08 and nobody  had  entered  them  to
         this day.  There is no financial support to pay for childcare.  The
         support provided, is then, superficial:  it does not allow the  VOT
         to make enough money to cover her needs.

      c) Upon exit from the shelters VOTs received "zero support" for  their
         employment  and  housing  problems.   When  asked  about  this  she
         referred  to  the  statement  to  the  same  effect  in  the  Needs
         Assessment. Although she agreed with Mr Whitwell that  that  report
         did not specifically relate that assessment to Albania  (the  Needs
         Assessment pertaining to a  number  of  countries  in  the  Western
         Balkans), she said that  in  her  experience  it  was  an  accurate
         assessment.

      d) VOTs from the North of Albania, the fact that they have  no  family
         to support or protect them in the city, and that they are so easily
         identifiable by their accent, makes them especially  vulnerable  to
         criminal groups.

50. As to mental health care and treatment in Albania, Professor Haxhiymeri
    refers to the section of the UNP report dealing with  social  inclusion
    which includes reference to the Health Insurance Fund. In an  interview
    given for a newspaper in June 2014 the Health Insurance  Fund  director
    said that there were about 200 women and girls who would  receive  free
    medical service and get a health card  without  paying  a  penny.   She
    believes this to cover health treatment in general and that nothing  is
    provided for mental health care and treatment. Whilst VOTs receive free
    mental health treatment in the shelters the quality is very  low;  once
    the VOT leaves the shelter she will be given a  health  care  card  but
    this does not cover all services.  This creates  a  risk  of  suffering
    from mental health problems without treatment.

51. A further problem lies in the isolation of the VOT once she leaves  the
    shelter.  The family remains of central importance in Albanian  society
    and women such as VOTs or victims of domestic violence who  live  alone
    stand out. Being a single  woman  is  always  a  factor  that  attracts
    unwanted attention.   For  instance  harassment  in  the  workplace  is
    something which occurs, but is less likely to happen to women who  have
    the protection of a family around them. Although there is  no  data  or
    recent research on the situation for single women who return to Albania
    and live alone, in Professor Haxhiymeri's experience they are "in  most
    cases considered as abandoned from  their  families  because  they  are
    'kurva' (whores).  This label carries a lot of hate, discrimination and
    risk of exclusion. They are not welcomed in social groups.   Even  when
    employed, people try to stay away from them.   Employers try to exploit
    them by making them  work  long  hours,  harder  and  pay  them  less."
    Professor Haxhyimeri observes that such individuals do not make  a  lot
    of money but sometimes "it is enough to survive".

52. Whilst these problems are faced by all single women  the  position  for
    women from Northern Albania is  exacerbated  by  the  very  traditional
    culture there. In her view young women in Northern Albania face a  high
    risk of being trafficked because of their  lack  of  proper  education,
    social isolation, arranged  marriages  and  limited  living  resources.
    Girls in Northern Albania experience  higher  levels  of  abuse  within
    their family which sometimes influences their decision to run away with
    the first man they meet.  This  does  not  mean  that  those  from  the
    southern part of the country do not face a risk of  trafficking;  risks
    arise in  isolated  areas  because  of  a  lack  of  resources  or  the
    vulnerability of the family, for example the presence of no men  or  an
    unmarried mother.

53. As to the application of the Kanun, Professor  Haxhiymeri  acknowledges
    that she can "hardy find written evidence to justify it"  but  explains
    that it is a silent phenomenon. She  accepts  that  old  Kanun  is  not
    mentioned frequently but those norms and  rules  are  still  alive:  it
    might be taboo to discuss it but it is simply "part of our lives".  For
    instance girls might be forced into marriage with someone in  a  remote
    rural area, or to a "handicapped husband", or with  someone  living  in
    rural  and  remote  areas.   Women  who  have  been  exploited  through
    trafficking are treated in the same way as  women  who  have  committed
    adultery: it means that they will  have  violated  the  honour  of  the
    family and every male in the family reserves the right to  punish  them
    with death.  During the last twenty years  Albania  has  experienced  a
    high level of internal migration. People from rural  regions  to  urban
    and suburban areas brought with them their culture and norms.   Because
    of this the majority of the population remain under  the  influence  of
    traditional  culture  and   consequently   women   having   experienced
    prostitution or being trafficked are treated as kurva ("whores").  They
    are rejected and stigmatised.  The possibility for integration  remains
    very low to "zero". The situation of a mother with a child born out  of
    wedlock is even more difficult.  The child would be  "pushed,  ignored,
    despised, discriminated, insulted, offended and excluded  from  and  in
    every social group". As to the fear of VOTs that they will be found  by
    their families, Professor Haxhiymeri underlined that Albania is a small
    country characterised by extended kinship networks.

54. In respect of the efforts made by the Albanian  authorities,  Professor
    Haxhiymeri recognises that progress has  been  made.   She  adopts  the
    formulation of the TIP to state that in her opinion the  government  of
    Albania does not fully  comply  with  the  minimum  standards  for  the
    elimination of trafficking, but it is making significant efforts to  do
    so.  Some of the main laws have been improved and the SOP  implemented.
    The national coordinator of the  Unity  Against  Human  Trafficking  is
    active. The NRM is enriched with new partners and she agrees  with  the
    contributors to the Needs Assessment that is in a  "good  example"  for
    other countries in the region. The  National  Committee  against  Human
    Trafficking and its units in different regions  are  also  operational.
    That said, Professor Haxhiymeri expresses deep reservations  about  the
    depth and strength of the changes being made.

55. She does not, for instance, believe that the government has backed  its
    public statements of intent with actual money. She believes  that  many
    of the politicians making positive statements are doing so only because
    of the "pressure of the international community":

         "In previous years I have witnessed as  a  result  of  my  personal
         experience of working with victims of abuse that  those  previously
         asking for shelter and protection in Albania were supported with  a
         small amount of money and cash.   This  is  not  the  case  anymore
         because the new government cancelled  the  amendment  and  excluded
         this group from  accessing  the  support.  Also,  the  governmental
         support for non public agencies that offer services to  victims  of
         abuse became non-existent.  Whilst in reality interventions are not
         happening, the propaganda is increased".

56. Whilst she acknowledges that legislation has been expanded and improved
    she is critical of the measures taken to actually enforce it. The legal
    procedures for compensation of the VOT do not seem to  function  or  be
    implemented fairly.  Although the lawyers and judges  are  reported  to
    take a more victim-centred  approach  during  trials  they  still  need
    training and legal support to  function  professionally.    There  have
    been attempts by NGOs to engage in capacity building  and  training  of
    officials but these are gains that are at risk of being lost due to the
    new administrative reform which brings about a new division of Albanian
    territory.

57. In her view, the biggest problem remains police  corruption.  Professor
    Haxhiymeri believes collaboration between traffickers and the police to
    be an ongoing risk factor.  She  refers  to  cases  of  police  offices
    collaborating with traffickers for  financial  profit  and  helping  to
    identify repatriated VOTs. There is no official data to prove this  but
    whilst working with victims of domestic violence she has  become  aware
    of  several  cases  of  collaboration  between  police   officers   and
    offenders. For instance during the first  months  of  2015  two  police
    officers were arrested for having collaborated with traffickers.  As to
    societal attitude, Professor Haxhiymeri acknowledges that  no  data  or
    research exists to assess the attitudes of Albanian police to VOTs  and
    she relies again on personal experience.  Despite what  might  be  said
    and written about the situation improving, Albania  "stands  out  world
    wide" because of corruption, bribery and organised crime.  There is  no
    official evidence to prove that police are  complicit  in  trafficking,
    but again relying  on  her  personal  and  professional  experience  in
    everyday life she would say this is a fact.

58. From her experience in working with victims of  domestic  violence  and
    attempts  to  relocate  them  to  other  cities,  Professor  Haxhiymeri
    considers without doubt that they can be re-trafficked either by  their
    former traffickers or by new ones.  She concludes in her  opinion  that
    "relocation of the victims of trafficking in other areas is impossible"
    and the findings of the Tribunal in AM & BM remain "current".

59. Professor Haxhyimeri was unable to give us any information  about  CARE
    as it was not a programme that she is familiar with.




    Mr Robert Chenciner

60. Mr Chenciner is a Member of the  Senior  Common  Room  of  St  Antony's
    College, Oxford and has been an Honorary Member of the Russian  Academy
    of Science, Daghestan Filial, since 1991. His principal area  of  study
    is the Eastern Caucasus. His first report in  these  appeals  is  dated
    15th April 2015.   In  response  to  some  written  questions  from  Mr
    Whitwell he provided an addendum dated 26th May 2015. We did  not  hear
    live evidence from Mr Chenciner. In October 2014 he visited Albania for
    a week. He travelled across the country and met with  various  agencies
    and  individuals  concerned   with   human   rights.   These   included
    representatives of the OSCE, IOM and USAid who were working with  VOTs.
    In addition to VOTs returned to Albania from abroad these agencies  are
    concerned  with  the  protection  of  women   trafficked   for   sexual
    exploitation and children  subject  to  forced  labour  within  Albania
    itself.


61. In October 2014 he met with Genci Pjetri of  the  IOM  in  Tirana.   Mr
    Pjetri said that the IOM has been working with VOTs in Albania for over
    20 years, their current project being funded by the UK FCO.  Their  aim
    is to assist voluntary returnees. They publicise  the  project  through
    contact with organisations in the UK such as the Poppy Project and  the
    Salvation Army.  They are neither able nor willing to put  pressure  on
    VOTs.  If a VOT expresses an interest in returning to Albania, the  IOM
    facilitates  various  relevant  ministries  there  are  six  ministries
    involved - to make discreet enquiries with the woman's family or  other
    concerned people to find out if they can safely take her back  and  how
    to avoid the risk of her being re-trafficked.


62. Mr Pjetri said that there had been "many" enquiries  about  the  return
    package but only one specific referral. The case was dealt with  within
    24 hours. The woman was interviewed by trained female workers  and  was
    then reunited with her family. She is living outside of  Tirana.   With
    regard to asylum seeking VOTs in the UK the project  would  not  apply:
    that is because at that stage the VOT would not wish to return home and
    so would not be a voluntary returnee. Mr Pjetri told Mr Chenciner  that
    the Home Office had misinterpreted the scope of  the  project  in  that
    they have been relying on it in asylum refusal letters.   Mr  Chenciner
    concludes that the project should continue because  it  can  provide  a
    satisfactory outcome for the few voluntary returnees who represent part
    of the group of VOTs.


63. In respect of the capacity of shelters for VOTs Mr Chenciner states:


         "There are about 90 places for women and children, both children of
         the women who are VOTs and children  who  are  VOT  themselves,  in
         secretly located shelters in Albania. A few stay for years but most
         are short and medium term, there were no available figures  on  any
         limits on the length of stay. It was not apparent that  there  were
         any criteria for how long a VOT could stay in the  shelters.  Acute
         VOTs have been rescued from active attack; and about  half  of  the
         total are potential victims. One shelter  in  Elbasan  has  funding
         problems and has less than 10 VOTs; Vatra NGO in Flora has about 30
         plus children; in Tirana another is about the same size  as  Vatra;
         lastly the state run emergency shelter has funding difficulties and
         is virtually running down. In general there has  been  a  shift  of
         emphasis among foreign donor groups over  the  past  4-5  years  to
         concentrate on helping children as  a  relatively  more  vulnerable
         group than women VOTs.


         Day centres are mainly for children and call centres  such  as  the
         '129' police  line  does  not  usually  elicit  a  response  unless
         violence is taking place.


         With regard to the treatment of women VOTs by police,  while  there
         are likely to have been instances of stigma and unpleasantness,  by
         and large it appears that  the  years  of  training  have  in  some
         measure started to change attitudes. However  another  problem  for
         the aid agencies is that Albania has a coalition  government  where
         as many people as possible must  be  rewarded  by  ministerial  and
         ministerial team appointments. The result is  frequent  changes  in
         personnel so that it is difficult for a team to take possession  of
         a project or complete training and consolidation"


    Mr Chenciner adds that the "state-sponsored shelter is underfunded" and
    that there is only limited accommodation available in the four shelters
    available, what provision there is usually  being  taken  up  by  women
    fleeing domestic violence.


64. Mr Chenciner also met with a representative of USAid. He was told  that
    they are funding, along with other partners, a project to  improve  the
    identification, referral and protection of  VOTs.  Concerns  about  how
    VOTs are referred for care  persist,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  of
    civil society  and  the  Albanian  government.  The  project  is  being
    delivered by Vatra, Different & Equal and Tjeter Vizion, which will co-
    ordinate it. To the same end USAid are also the co-funders of  the  new
    'app' which allows members of the public to  quickly  report  suspected
    cases of trafficking.


65. Mr Chenciner was asked to comment on the issues that women  VOTs  might
    face trying to integrate into Albanian society without the  support  of
    their families.    He references anthropological  studies[3]  to  offer
    the following opinion:


         "With regard to government support, it is  virtually  non-existent.
         The family is the main economic unit in Albania,  from  subsistence
         farming in rural areas to  bribing  the  authorities  for  required
         documentation,  to  obtaining  rare  jobs  usually  from  the  main
         employer the state. The family income is also often supplemented by
         one or two members who remit earnings as migrant workers both legal
         and illegal in Italy Greece and other parts of Europe..."


66. This is in the context of Albania being one of the  poorest  places  Mr
    Chenciner has seen in his travels in the Balkans and Eastern Europe.  A
    woman away from the relative security of her family might  be  able  to
    get casual work as a seamstress, waitress or cleaner but the  situation
    is still "extremely difficult', as acknowledged in AM & BM.  She  would
    be vulnerable to sexual harassment,  and  according  to  the  US  State
    Department report would not be able to  register  for  social  services
    support without risking her family finding out where she is:   "corrupt
    police who would pass  on  the  information  to  vengeful  male  family
    members who perceive that the  trafficked  victim  has  stained  family
    honour".   The difficulties of managing in low  paid,  informal  sector
    employment means  that  women  are  vulnerable  to  being  forced  into
    prostitution.  Overall Mr Chenciner agrees with  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in AM & BM.


67. As evidence of police  corruption  Mr  Chenciner  refers  to  a  report
    published in January 2015 by the Institute for Democracy and  Mediation
    (IDM) and funded by the Dutch Foreign Office[4], which he summarises as
    finding that citizens are viewed as an "opportunity to extort  bribes".
    There is impunity at all levels, and that 36% of public respondents  in
    that study reported bribing the police "very often". The conclusions of
    the IDM are that there continues to be high  levels  of  corruption  in
    Albanian  society  in  general.  Dr  Chenciner  reports  the  anecdotal
    evidence of his respondents during his trip in October  2014:  "I  also
    asked everyone if the police  were  trusted  -  emphatic  no  -  and/or
    corrupt - emphatic yes". Women face the additional hurdle of the police
    acting in conformity with traditional patriarchal norms. For  instance,
    a common narrative concerning domestic  violence  is  that  police  are
    called by neighbours to a noisy and severe beating, whereupon  the  man
    is arrested and placed in the cells overnight. He is then released  the
    next day. He is unlikely to be charged since there  are  no  witnesses,
    and the victim herself needs him to  be  at  home  earning  money.  The
    police view such matters as private,  family  affairs.   For  the  same
    reason they are very unlikely to become involved in an  issue  where  a
    family's honour is deemed to have been violated.   There were no direct
    reports of police collusion with traffickers  but  Mr  Chenciner  notes
    that prosecutions are rare, and that the IDM do refer to  instances  of
    police involvement with organised crime, which he infers  must  include
    trafficking. The IDM report contains "much evidence" of corrupt  border
    guards.  Mr Chenciner relays an incident he  himself  witnessed  during
    his trip which he believed was a man bribing a border guard.

68. In his first report  Mr  Chenciner  notes  that  the  2014  TIP  report
    "promotes" Albania from "Tier 2 watch list" to "Tier 2". He states that
    this was because they had appointed  an  anti-trafficking  co-ordinator
    with a budget of $50,000.  In  his  additional  questions  Mr  Whitwell
    sought to clarify if this was the sole reason  for  the  promotion.  In
    response Mr Chenciner acknowledged that it  is  more  complicated  than
    that, but that the appointment, and the budget allocation, were  indeed
    the main improvements identified in the TIP report.



    Ms Rachel Mullen-Feroze

69. Rachel Mullan-Feroze is the Service Manager at  Ashiana,  Sheffield[5].
    She has worked with women who have experienced abuse or trauma for over
    23 years.   She currently manages Ashiana's trafficking project,  which
    in the past 12 months has received a large increase in  the  number  of
    referrals for Albanian PVOT.    At the time of her report on  the  13th
    April 2015 Ashiana was supporting 32 Albanian women.   One of  them  is
    the First Appellant.


70. In her oral and written evidence Ms Mullan-Feroze states  that  Ashiana
    support and promote the voluntary return of VOTs who are in a  position
    to make an informed  choice.    Ashiana  are  'sub-contracted'  by  the
    Salvation Army who hold the national trafficking contract with the Home
    Office and it is part of their contractual obligation to explain all of
    the options to their clients.  In that capacity, and  through  her  own
    extensive contact with the IOM on this matter,  she  has  developed  an
    understanding of the two alternative routes to resettlement facilitated
    by the IOM.


71. The first is through the Albanian NRM. The VOT must consent to entering
    the NRM and once she does, it is up to the Albanian authorities whether
    they recognise her as a PVOT/VOT: they do not automatically accept  the
    decisions of  the  UK  NRM,  the  Home  Office,  or  the  Tribunal.   A
    Conclusive Grounds decision does not hold any weight, and although  the
    Albanian  NRM  would  not  seek  to  "revoke"  recognition  by  the  UK
    authorities as such, they make up their own minds.  She was  told  this
    during telephone contact with IOM  representatives  including  Jennifer
    Dew, during February 2015.  The VOT would be met at the airport by  the
    Albanian police and a social worker. She would usually be  escorted  to
    the National Reception Centre for Victims  of  Trafficking  whilst  her
    claim was investigated.  This centre has 24 hour police protection. IOM
    confirmed that the goal of the  centre  would  ultimately  be  the  VOT
    reintegration with her family. To date, no VOT had returned to  Albania
    from the UK to take up this route.    She expresses some concern  about
    the danger of individual  police  officers  contacting  women's  family
    members without consent, and cites evidence to this effect found in the
    May 2013 OGN, itself a reference to the 2011 COIR.


72. The second option is the "socio-economic  assessment  route".  This  in
    essence amounts to supporting VOTs to  reintegrate  with  their  family
    upon return, without recourse to the shelters. The VOT must consent  to
    the IOM and/or Albanian police contacting her family or she will not be
    eligible for this assistance.  She  would  go  straight  home,  and  be
    offered some in-kind assistance by the IOM,  such  as  meeting  medical
    expenses.  She might not meet a representative face to face  but  would
    be expected to maintain telephone contact after her arrival in Albania.
    The two women who have returned to Albania voluntarily since the  start
    of the project have taken this route and Ms Mullen-Feroze has been told
    that they were both keen to go home and be with  their  families.   She
    said that their reintegration does appear to have been successful.  The
    first woman returned in September 2014, the second in November 2014.


73. In setting out that evidence Ms Mullan-Feroze makes two further points.
    First, it is Ashiana's position, based on their contact with  the  IOM,
    that the RAVT project is entirely voluntary. Secondly it is her belief,
    based on her personal contact  with  representatives  of  the  Albanian
    embassy in the UK, that the Albanian government are  not  so  concerned
    with assisting VOTs as they might claim.


74. In respect of the first, Ms Mullan-Feroze explained  that  Ashiana  has
    real concerns about the way that the Home Office appears to  have  been
    relying on the RAVT package as a reason to refuse women asylum. She has
    seen for herself women being told about it at the beginning  of  asylum
    interviews.   Ashiana has raised this with the IOM, and  directly  with
    the Home Office who have indicated that they are reviewing  procedures.
    The IOM have repeatedly  told  Ashiana  that  this  is  not  a  package
    intended to offer protection, and that it is entirely voluntary.  Their
    view is that it cannot logically  be  relied  upon  during  the  asylum
    process. That said she  acknowledged  that  it  is  part  of  Ashiana's
    contractual obligation with the Salvation Army (who currently hold  the
    national trafficking contract from the Home  Office)  to  inform  women
    about their choices, and this would include the RAVT  package.  Ashiana
    has leaflets about it in their offices and they  do  explain  to  their
    clients that it is an option, should they wish to avail  themselves  of
    it.  So far none of Ashiana's client group has taken it up.


75. As for the willingness of the Albanian government to work with VOTs  Ms
    Mullan-Feroze expressed scepticism. On the 11th February 2015  she  was
    one of about 16 stakeholders who attended a  meeting  at  the  Albanian
    Embassy organised by the Human  Trafficking  Foundation.  Also  present
    were representatives of the IOM, the police, solicitors,  Albanian  and
    UK NGOs and consular staff. It was her  observation  that  the  embassy
    staff were "very  clear"  in  their  assertions  about  trafficking  in
    Albania. They did not accept that  there  was  a  significant  problem,
    stated that the majority of  asylum  claims  in  the  UK  -  concerning
    trafficking and blood feuds - are probably false and  that  the  system
    here is open to abuse. The principle concern appeared to be  that  such
    claims "create a bad impression of Albanians".   The Consul  also  said
    that if individual details  about  claimants  could  be  disclosed  the
    Albanian government would take steps to check the facts. Others present
    at  the  meeting  were  moved  to  point  out  that  there   would   be
    confidentiality issues with such an approach.    Ms  Mullan-Feroze  was
    left with the impression that the efforts of the  Albanian  authorities
    to address trafficking is hampered by a "culture of disbelief" and that
    their main focus is protecting the reputation of Albania.  In  response
    to cross-examination she confirmed that she  could  not  say  with  any
    certainty  that  such  views  were  widely  held  across  the  Albanian
    government, but since the staff at the embassy could be assumed  to  be
    speaking on behalf of the government that was what she had inferred.



    OUR CONCLUSIONS ON THE EVIDENCE

76. We have considered all of the evidence in the round; what follows is
    our evaluation of the core evidence relied upon by the parties. As will
    become clear, three reports assumed particular significance:  the UNP,
    the Needs Assessment and the TIP.  In varying respects the evidence of
    the expert witnesses was consonant with these reports.

    Professor Haxhiymeri

77. Professor Haxhiymeri does not work with VOTs herself, but rather formed
    her view on the issues in this appeal  through  the  lens  of  her  own
    involvement in dealing with victims of  domestic  violence.  It  is  of
    course open to her as an expert to rely on that long experience, and we
    accept that there may be many parallels between the two  groups:  where
    such similarities exist her  evidence  was  helpful,  for  instance  in
    respect of the difficulties single women face in finding and paying for
    secure accommodation.  In light of  the  fact  that  she  has  actually
    visited some of the NGO shelters and has  regular  contact  with  their
    staff we have attached weight to her analysis of the services they  are
    able to offer, for instance in respect of mental  health.   However  it
    was also  apparent  that  in  other  respects  her  knowledge  directly
    relating to  the  current  circumstances  of  VOTs  was  limited.   For
    instance, she had not visited the Linza shelter for some years and  she
    was not aware of provision such as that provided by the CARE programme.
     In the absence of direct  knowledge  Professor  Haxhiymeri  relied  on
    generalisations: her evidence that women in the Linza  shelter  face  a
    real risk of being caught by traffickers if they ventured  outside  was
    not supported by a single example of this ever happening. Similarly her
    concerns about political appointments at Linza was not supported by any
    illustration as to why this  might  be  to  the  resident's  detriment.
    Whilst we were  not  persuaded  by  the  Respondent's  suggestion  that
    Professor Haxhiymeri had a political axe to grind,   we were left  with
    the impression that her perspective lacks detachment  and  underpinning
    by suitable material; rather it was one  formed  after  many  years  of
    campaigning for the rights of abused women,  and  women  generally,  in
    Albania.  This is perhaps why her analysis of the prospects  for  women
    trying to live on their own was considerably  bleaker  than  the  other
    evidence might suggest.   For instance, notwithstanding her recognition
    of the varied services provided by the shelters, there is  no  analysis
    of the potential gain which the time spent in  the  shelter  may  bring
    about; her apparently blanket condemnation of police corruption did not
    appear to take account of her own evidence of police co-operation  with
    her organisation in cases involving domestic violence.  She  relies  on
    the evidence of recent prosecutions of the  police  as  supporting  her
    view on corruption, yet no consideration is given  to  the  possibility
    that such prosecutions might indicate  a  willingness  to  address  the
    problem. Professor Haxhiymeri's view of how  matters  are  evolving  in
    Albania is bound up with her long campaign as women's  rights  activist
    and does not, without more, persuade us that her thinking is a complete
    and reliable assessment of the current situation for VOTs.




    Mr Chenciner

78. Mr Chenciner spent one week in Albania for the purpose of  his  report.
    We appreciate that he was only instructed late in  the  day,  but  this
    very short trip unfortunately left him with very little time to conduct
    research; he was not, for instance, able to meet with a  representative
    of one of the shelters as hoped. That the report  lacks  clarity  in  a
    number of respects may be attributed  to  these  time  constraints.  We
    found it difficult, for instance, to work out what commentary was  that
    of Mr Chenciner, and what was  a  direct  quote  from  Mr  Pjetri.  The
    information that Mr Chenciner supplied in respect of  capacity  in  the
    shelters did not tally with the figures we were shown anywhere else; it
    was not evident from the report whether  these  were  obtained  in  his
    meeting with Mr Pjetri or from other sources.  Nor were we assisted  by
    the great volume of background information drawn  from  Mr  Chenciner's
    experience of other countries. Whilst there may be similarities between
    Albania and other  Eastern  European  countries,  in  particular  those
    formerly in the Soviet bloc, we were concerned in  these  appeals  with
    specifics.  Where we did find his  report  to  be  useful  was  in  his
    analysis of recent academic research that we  may  not  otherwise  have
    been referred to, for instance in respect of anthropological studies on
    the family in Albania, and on the extent of police corruption.




    Ms Mullan-Feroze

79. Ms Mullen-Feroze was not tendered as an expert, but rather as a witness
    of fact as to her meeting at the Albanian embassy, and in her  dealings
    with the IOM.  We have no doubt that she gave an honest account of  her
    meeting at the embassy, but we are unable to accept her analysis of it,
    namely that the Albanian authorities as a whole intend only to pay 'lip
    service' to tackling the problem of trafficking. That  conclusion  does
    not sit well with other, well-researched and documented evidence before
    us. Albania is a country emerging from a difficult past, with divergent
    strands  of  tradition,  culture  and  politics.   It   is   in   those
    circumstances unlikely that every Albanian in a position of  authority,
    be it ambassador or border guard, will hold the same  views.   We  were
    however grateful to Ms Mullen-Feroze for her insights into how the RAVT
    package has operated thus far, and the extent to which it  is  promoted
    to potential returnees. It is part of her job to be able to communicate
    what the package entails directly to VOTs in the UK; as  such  she  was
    able to explain the details to us with clarity.

80. Having made those general observations about those  witnesses,  we  set
    out our findings. We begin  with  those  matters  that  are  the  least
    controversial, that is to say that the evidence about them  is  largely
    consistent.




    The NRM


81.  We  can  say  with  certainty  that  there  is  a  framework  for  the
    identification, referral and assistance of VOTs returning  to  Albania.
    It is clear that the Albanian government has in place a functioning NRM
    into which all returning VOTs will  be  considered  for  referral.  The
    returnee will be met on  arrival,  interviewed  by  police  and  social
    workers,  offered  medical  assistance   if   necessary,   and   safely
    transported to her chosen residence. Where that  residence  is  depends
    upon her circumstances; if she has opted to go back to her  family  the
    Albanian authorities will undertake checks to ensure that this  is  the
    safe and right choice for her. If she is taken to a  shelter,  on-going
    assistance can be delivered there. In recent years  the  mechanism  has
    been enriched and expanded by  the  inclusion  of  no  fewer  than  six
    government Ministries in its operation. That the Albanian NRM functions
    well is acknowledged by Professor  Haxhiymeri,  Mr  Chenciner  and  the
    "multiple respondents" from civil society who contributed  towards  the
    Needs Assessment research. The  Albanian  NRM  is  identified  in  that
    report as "working well and a good example" to other countries  in  the
    Western Balkans, and the efforts to  train  relevant  staff  delivering
    services under the NRM are singled out  for  praise  in  the  2014  TIP
    Report. The existence and relative success of the NRM  is  one  of  the
    factors that has led the US State Department to reinstate Albania  into
    their 'Tier 2' classification.




    The Shelters

82. In addition to the state shelter  at  Linza,  Tirana  there  are  three
    shelters working with adult, female VOTs in Albania. These  are  Tjeter
    Vizion in Elbasan (Central Albania), Different and Equal in Tirana, and
    Vatra in Vlore.   These  three  NGO  shelters  suffer  from  precarious
    funding. The NCRVT is reported  to  suffer  from  difficulties  in  the
    training and retention of staff. The overall quality of the services on
    offer may vary; we are told however, that these shelters do provide VOT
    and PVOT with assistance and basic amenities, which can, but  will  not
    always,  include  safe  accommodation  and  transportation,  individual
    assistance plans, food, childcare, medical examinations and  treatments
    (as  well  as  fees  in  the  case   of   hospitalisation)   employment
    counselling,  further  education,  vocational  training,  psycho-social
    counselling, reintegration grants and micro-finance  loans.    The  IOM
    programmes are based on the availability of these various  shelters  to
    returning VOTs and it is on that basis that we  have  considered  their
    suitability for the purposes of internal relocation.



    RAVT and Strategies for Reintegration


83. At the date we heard these appeals the  UK  government  was  funding  a
    reintegration programme implemented by the IOM in Tirana,  referred  to
    herein as RAVT.  This is a voluntary programme, designed  to  "empower"
    the VOT and place her at the centre of the decision-making  process.  A
    VOT will only be eligible if the IOM are satisfied that she  is  making
    an informed and consensual decision to return to Albania.  The  IOM  do
    not consider it appropriate, in that context, that the Home Office rely
    upon the existence of the package in order to refuse  VOTs  asylum.  In
    his closing submissions Mr Whitwell adopted the  comments  made  by  Mr
    Williams, Director of Immigration and Border Policy, in  his  email  to
    the IOM. Noting the UK  government's  responsibility  to  preserve  the
    integrity of the asylum system he said:

          "As part of that, we must consider whether the individual will  be
         at risk on return; that includes the availability  of  a  supported
         return and reintegration package in considering  whether  effective
         protection can be sought on return and so whether, if the applicant
         is fearful, that fear is well-founded. This does not compel victims
         to use  this  or  any  other  voluntary  returns  package  but  the
         availability of support and protection, whether assisted by the IOM
         or not, is a factor that may be taken into account when considering
         an asylum application...."

84. The Respondent is correct in her submission that as a matter of  law  a
    claimant is not in need of international protection if there is a  part
    of her country of origin where there is not a real risk of persecution,
    and where she can reasonably be expected to stay: see AN & SS (Tamils -
    Colombo - risk?) Sri Lanka CG [2008] UKAIT 00063.  IOM consistently and
    unambiguously state that VOTs will only be considered eligible for RAVT
    (and as we understood it parallel programmes such as CARE) if return to
    Albania is voluntary. It follows that analysis of whether an individual
    can reasonably refuse to avail herself of such intervention will depend
    upon the facts and must be decided on a case by case basis.


85. The decision must be made "without undue coercion".  For women  who  do
    choose  to  enter  this  process,  there  is  a  careful  and  detailed
    assessment of their individual needs, concerns and  circumstances;  all
    of this will be considered when the return package is  formulated.  For
    those women who do wish to take this option, there are two  alternative
    pathways to  reintegration  back  into  Albanian  society.  The  first,
    described by Ms Mullan-Feroze as the "socio-economic"  pathway,  is  in
    essence, return to the natal family with some  in-kind  assistance  for
    things such as medical bills.  We are told that the two women who  have
    availed themselves of the assistance of the  IOM  since  the  programme
    began both took this option. Ms Mullan-Feroze was told that  both  were
    keen to go home and that for them, this  has  been  a  success.  It  is
    likely that these women will continue to face, in  the  long-term,  the
    same socio-economic challenges as many other Albanian women  living  in
    impoverished families.  They will do so with the burden of  their  past
    experiences  weighing  upon  them,  and  they  may  face   stigma   and
    discrimination from certain individuals in  society.  However  if  they
    have the financial and emotional support of their families this can  be
    the "right, and safe, choice for them".  As Mr Chenciner puts  it,  for
    those who have this option available  to  them,  it  can  result  in  a
    "satisfactory outcome".


86. The socio-economic pathway may not however be available  to  all  VOTs.
    There will be some women for whom it is not possible to return to their
    families.   For persons in such categories  the  'return  options'  are
    limited to whether  they  wish  to  return  to  Albania  and  fend  for
    themselves, or whether to apply to enter the Albanian NRM  and  receive
    the assistance of the IOM and/or the relevant shelter.  It has not been
    suggested before us that the first option would, for the vast  majority
    of female VOTs, be reasonable. The focus of the evidence before us  has
    been the second pathway to reintegration.


87. Women taking that option are,  in  accordance  with  the  SOP,  met  on
    arrival and transported directly to one of the four shelters. If it  is
    considered that there is any risk posed  to  either  her  or  a  family
    member, it is likely that she will be placed at the government  shelter
    in Linza, which has a guard.  She will  be  allowed  to  stay  in  that
    shelter for anything between 3 months and 2 years.

88. Because of a lack of evidence, we are unable to make a finding  on  the
    quality or quantity of assistance provided to  returning  VOTs  by  the
    CARE package. It is surprising that neither party had much  idea  about
    this aspect bearing in mind the scope of this appeal. From what we  can
    tell, it appears to be a very similar  programme  to,  and  running  in
    tandem with, RAVT.


89. The evidence on the above matters is broadly consistent. The  areas  of
    dispute between the parties arising in respect of this  initial  period
    of resettlement within the shelters concerned (i) safety, including the
    risk of re-trafficking, (ii) the capacity of  the  shelters  (iii)  the
    quality of the care on offer in the shelters, and  (iv)  how  well  the
    support provided equips the VOT for life on leaving the shelter.




    Risk whilst living in a shelter


90. In respect of safety, three  discrete  risks  were  identified  by  the
    representatives for the appellants.


91. The first concerns  the  fear,  expressed  in  trenchant  terms  by  Mr
    Chenciner, that individual police  officers  or  local  officials  will
    betray the confidence of  the  VOT  and  tell  "vengeful"  male  family
    members  her  whereabouts.  The  motivation  for  doing  so  might   be
    conformity with societal norms, the belief that a  single  young  woman
    should not be living separately from her family; alternatively it might
    simply be corruption.   The former was a matter canvassed in AM & BM in
    the accepted evidence of Dr Schwandner-Sievers:


         79.   She gave information relating to procedures on return stating
         that when a single woman  was  returned  the  border  police  would
         interview her  to  check  whether  or  not  she  was  a  victim  of
         trafficking. The border police had made it clear  to  her  that  it
         would not be possible for a woman to hide her identity.  The border
         police would be likely to contact  the  families  of  a  victim  of
         trafficking, because  belief  in  the  family  was  so  strong  the
         families would be contacted in any  event  despite  the  case  that
         trafficking often was from families where abuse had  occurred.  The
         border police would contact the home police who would  contact  the
         family and the border police had stated the families  could  be  at
         the airport within three hours.  It  would  depend  on  the  police
         whether or not they would accept a woman's plea  that  they  should
         not contact her family.  If a woman objected to the  border  police
         returning her to her family they would suspect she was a victim  of
         trafficking and she would be offered a place in the  Linza  shelter
         or possibly at Different and Equal which was also in Tirana..."


92. We have heard uncontested evidence that  the  family  unit  remains  of
    great socio-economic importance in Albania. As such it is the norm  for
    young women to remain part of their father's household until such  time
    that they are married. This is a  pattern  reinforced  by  culture  and
    religious tradition; Mr Chenciner gives the example of the man who  has
    beaten his wife being released without charge after a 'cooling off'. In
    that context it is understandable that  the  first  port  of  call  for
    individual police officers, social workers or NGO staff  would  be  the
    returning VOT's family: that  is  where  she  is  presumed  to  belong.
    However we also  bear  in  mind  that  the  professionals  involved  in
    applying the SOP have received specialist training and have been  given
    very specific procedures to follow, none of which include contacting  a
    woman's family against her will. Dr  Schwandner-Sievers  conducted  her
    research in 2008. Whilst we do not discount the  possibility  that  the
    risk she identified may still be true of individual officers, and  that
    many professionals working within the context of the NRM  would  prefer
    ultimately, to see the VOT resettled with  her  family,  this  must  be
    balanced against the improvements there have been in  the  approach  to
    VOTs in general, and in returning entrants to the  NRM  in  particular.
    For instance it was clear from the UNP report that the vast majority of
    referrals into the NRM were from  police  stations  in  Albania;  these
    women were being taken to shelters not sent home to their  fathers.  We
    were shown no recent evidence  of  that  practice.   It  did  not,  for
    instance, feature in the detailed evidence given  to  Mr  Chenciner  by
    Genci Pjetri about on-arrival procedure. NGOs  consulted  for  the  TIP
    research reported that "police,  prosecutors  and  judges  demonstrated
    improved  understanding  of  a   victim-centred   approach   to   human
    trafficking".


93. There is however consistent evidence in  respect  of  corruption.   The
    Needs Assessment records that the majority of reports  and  respondents
    to that research cited corruption - in the form of  complicity  between
    local police/officials and  traffickers  -  as  a  "major  barrier"  to
    combating trafficking.  Mr  Chenciner  refers  to  the  report  by  the
    Institute for Democracy and  Mediation  concerning  the  pervasive  and
    persistent problem of "a high level" of corruption in Albanian society.
    That 2015 report found that  36%  of  public  respondents  admitted  to
    bribing the police  "very  often".  Professor  Haxhiymeri  offered  her
    anecdotal evidence that in her experience over the years she  has  come
    across several cases of police officers collaborating with perpetrators
    of domestic violence. The only prosecutions she was aware of took place
    in the early part of 2015 when two police officers  were  arrested  for
    working with traffickers. This accords  with  the  findings  in  the  -
    earlier  -  TIP  report  that  although  corruption  continues  to   be
    highlighted as an issue, there were  no  investigations  of  government
    officials complicit in trafficking offenses between 2013 and 2014.  The
    TIP also acknowledges that in 2014 the continuing problem of corruption
    has "hampered the efficacy of training".


94. Corruption is, by its very nature, hidden and not susceptible to audit.
    The fact that two officers have been recently prosecuted is a  positive
    sign that whilst corruption is  apparently  widespread  it  is  not  so
    endemic that prosecutions cannot  be  successfully  brought.   It  does
    however remain a serious  problem,  not  least  in  the  minds  of  the
    Albanian public who after many decades of living with bribery as a  way
    of life may find it difficult to see any  change.  In  this  regard  we
    accept the evidence that for many VOTs there is a fear that  they  will
    have to pay the police off -with either money or sexual  favours.  That
    subjective fear, whether it is well founded in respect of an individual
    officer or not, can impact upon personal  decisions  about  whether  to
    enter the NRM. We accept that there may be a  number  of  officers  who
    remain susceptible to  bribery.  We  accept  that  there  may  be  some
    individual officers who hold "traditional" and misogynistic views about
    how women should behave. In the absence of any hard data we are however
    unable to find that this is a general, objective real risk to all women
    entering the NRM.


95. The second aspect of safety relates to the risk  of  re-trafficking  by
    the same individual or gang who exploited the VOT originally.   This is
    clearly not a fanciful notion,  since  it  remains  part  of  the  risk
    assessment  carried  out  by  the  Albanian  police  and  social   work
    departments within the framework of the NRM, and in that  conducted  by
    the IOM. The Linza shelter is, we are told, "guarded 24/7".  We  accept
    that these actors on  the  ground  must  have  had  in  the  past  some
    objective experience of this danger, otherwise it would not feature  as
    it does, for instance, in the SOP.  We note the evidence given in AM  &
    BM to the effect that many VOTs  remain  under  the  control  of  their
    traffickers and  that  if  returned  to  Albania  contact  may  be  re-
    established. Women who are condemned by society as kurva may see little
    alternative to returning to their former "work"[6]. There is however  a
    complete lack of data on the phenomenon of women being abducted from or
    nearby shelters by waiting traffickers.  We  have  no  doubt  that  had
    there been instances of women disappearing from shelters over the  past
    few years this would feature in the evidence.  What  evidence  we  have
    about re-trafficking would appear to be confined to the risk  once  the
    VOT leaves the shelter, and we return to this matter below.


96. The third area of concern was that  the  VOTs  are  "marked"  as  women
    without protection who have already been forced into prostitution,  and
    as such are vulnerable to the attentions of new traffickers, or  simply
    predatory men looking to exploit and abuse them.  Professor  Haxhiymeri
    described the Linza shelter as "isolated"  and  a  long  way  from  the
    centre of town. In response to questions she clarified that it is about
    40 minutes (half walking, half by  bus)  to  Tirana  town  centre.   We
    accept her evidence that the centre has featured on Albanian television
    and that the local population know what the centre is. We  accept  that
    there may be some hostility towards, or prurient interest in the  women
    living there from local people; it may be for this reason that VOTs are
    always accompanied if they leave the Linza shelter. This is unpleasant,
    and could no doubt be frightening and  threatening,  especially  for  a
    woman who  has  experienced  sexual  violence.  We  note  the  accepted
    evidence of Dr Schwandner-Sievers in AM  &  BM  that  men  "haunt"  the
    shelters[7];  there  is  however  no  evidence  before  us   of   "new"
    traffickers having targeted women in Linza.  As implied in AM & BM, the
    modus operandi of traffickers has always been to target  the  na�ve  or
    desperate. Professor Haxhiymeri told us  that  the  disturbing  pattern
    emerging in that context is towards younger women.  It  seems  unlikely
    that women under the active protection of the shelters and  the  police
    would be the ones most at risk. Again, if there is a real risk  of  re-
    trafficking it may be once  the  VOT  has  left  the  shelter,  and  we
    consider this below.




    Services Available Within the Shelters

97. Whilst we have been given a lot of information  'on  paper'  about  the
    assistance offered by the IOM, CARE and the shelters, there was a  lack
    of precise evidence about how these services  are  actually  delivered.
    For instance we are told by the Needs Assessment, the UNP and IOM  that
    'childcare' is on offer. Professor Haxhiymeri agreed that some  support
    was provided.  We were however told little about the extent and quality
    of that childcare. Does it mean that a VOT  can  leave  her  baby  with
    another VOT whilst she goes to the bathroom? Does it mean that there is
    a cr�che where she can leave her child for a substantial period of  the
    day whilst she attends vocational training or counselling?   These  are
    not trivial considerations.  Without  reliable  information  about  the
    extent and quality of the services on offer it is not easy to draw  any
    detailed conclusions about what gain the VOT might derive from her time
    in a shelter.

98. We can say with certainty that  accommodation  is  provided.  Professor
    Haxhiymeri describes the conditions in  the  Linza  shelter,  when  she
    visited it some years ago, as "poor" and makes the point that the women
    then had little privacy.  We do note that other  victim  advocates  and
    respondents from NGOs expressed similar concerns to the authors of  the
    TIP report; although this is to be contrasted with the  conclusions  in
    the UNP report in which the accommodation is described as  "good".   We
    heard various figures about capacity, and the uptake  of  places.   The
    consistent theme of that  evidence  was  that  there  is  room  in  the
    shelters, none of which appear, at any stage, to have been full. We are
    therefore satisfied that for as long as there is funding, there will be
    capacity, and that there will be basic, safe accommodation  offered  to
    any returning VOT who wishes to avail herself of it.

99. We can say with certainty that other  basic  amenities  such  as  food,
    drink and heating are provided. A number of the sources  refer  to  the
    government's failure to make good on a promise to give  the  three  NGO
    shelters a reported $50,000 in order to feed VOTs but in the absence of
    any evidence to the contrary we are satisfied that the shelters managed
    to provide food from other sources:  if  women  were  starving  in  the
    shelters we consider that this would have been given prominence in  the
    evidence before us.

100. As to healthcare the UNP report  states  that  women  receive  "medical
    examinations and treatment" and that the costs of hospital  visits  are
    covered. Women are also provided with "psycho-social  counselling".  In
    contrast the TIP report - covering the same period - records  that  the
    mental health services in the  Linza  shelter  are  "inadequate",  that
    medical staff need training and that the funds  allocated  to  pay  for
    VOTs medical expenses were never in fact released,  resulting  in  VOTs
    having to pay their own bills. It is not  explained  in  what  way  the
    provision that does exist is  "inadequate".  When  we  asked  Professor
    Haxhiymeri about this she drew  a  distinction  between  "psycho-social
    counselling" and actual mental health therapy. She explained  that  the
    workers in the shelters  are  not  medically  qualified  and  are  only
    trained to deliver basic counselling. The treatment referred to in, for
    instance the UNP report, is confined to the dispensing  of  medication.
    Her conclusion is that whilst free mental health care is  available  in
    the shelters,  the  quality  is  very  low.  In  giving  this  evidence
    Professor Haxhiymeri again drew on her own experience but we note  that
    she has actually visited at least two of  these  shelters  herself  and
    that her evidence accords with the  information  provided  in  the  TIP
    report.

101. Taking all of the evidence in the round we are satisfied that there  is
    a basic level of healthcare provided in the shelters,  but  that  there
    must remain concerns about the quality and extent of  it,  particularly
    in relation to mental health treatment.   On the  evidence  before  us,
    such care is limited to the prescription of anti-depressants and  where
    available, counselling by shelter staff who have no formal training  in
    psychiatry or psychology.


102. The shelters also aim to provide the VOTs  with  some  foundation  upon
    which to start their new life. Variously referred to in the sources  as
    "vocational  training",  "education",   "individual   assistance"   and
    "employment counselling" we consider this under the general umbrella of
    'help'.  Concerns about the quality  of  such  help  are  expressed  by
    contributors - NGO staff, victim advocates and VOTs themselves - to the
    UNP report, the Needs Assessment  and  the  TIP.  Professor  Haxhiymeri
    acknowledges that VOTs do receive support in  the  shelters,  and  that
    over the past few years the NGOs in particular have sought to  "enrich"
    their services; she however expresses concern that the  measures  taken
    are "superficial" and that the effects "do not seem to last long".

103. The most detailed evidence about these services is to be found  in  the
    UNP report, which provides case-studies of ten VOTs, eight of whom  are
    female. That reveals that all of these women (and girls) received  some
    kind of  vocational  training  (cookery,  tailoring,  hairdressing)  or
    further education in a shelter.  Although there is  little  by  way  of
    detail about the quality or duration of  the  courses  offered  we  are
    satisfied that such courses are generally  available.   It  is  unclear
    whether VOTs are given a choice about whether they take  a  course,  or
    about its content,  nor  to  what  extent  that  those  with  childcare
    responsibilities are able to benefit from these provisions.

104. In summary we are satisfied that the shelters aim to  offer  more  than
    security, board and lodging. They attempt to enable VOTs to  deal  with
    the effects of their trafficking and to help  them  face  a  future  in
    society. As to the efficacy of these efforts, there is  limited  direct
    evidence, but what we were shown, we consider below.





    Life Outside the Shelters

105. It was  the  consistent  evidence  of  the  IOM,  the  UNP,  the  Needs
    Assessment, Mr Chenciner, Professor  Haxhiymeri  and  Ms  Mullan-Feroze
    that once admitted to a shelter, a VOT will be aware that  it  is  time
    limited.  No VOT entering a shelter is given  an  exit  date,  but  her
    departure date is determined following an assessment. We are  not  told
    to what the degree it will be influenced by her own wishes. There is  a
    'maximum spend' in each case of �2100, which is to cover  the  stay  in
    the shelter as well as reintegration 'on the  outside':  all  VOTs  are
    aware that they cannot be accommodated and supported indefinitely.   At
    some point, the VOT must either return to her family, or set out on her
    own if that  option  is  not  available,  and  it  is  in  this  latter
    endeavour,  the  parties  agree,  that  she  would  face  her  greatest
    challenge.


106. All of the evidence before us indicates that in this period women  face
    numerous obstacles, that include, but are  not  limited  to:  financial
    hardship,  difficulty  in  finding  secure  employment   and   housing,
    poverty, discrimination and stigma  (pertaining to the VOT as  well  as
    any children she might have), isolation and no, or severely restricted,
    access to mental health services.  As will be seen below it  is  argued
    on behalf of the appellants that the cumulative effect of such  factors
    renders internal flight as unreasonable for many VOTs;  it  is  further
    argued that the vulnerability of a VOT at this point places her  at  an
    unacceptably high risk of re-trafficking or other harm.

107. We do not accept that it is, in general, "impossible" for  a  woman  to
    live on her own in Tirana, as asserted  by  Professor  Haxhiymeri.  She
    refers in her evidence to her own organisation resettling survivors  of
    domestic violence in the city, living alone or with their children. The
    case studies in the UNP report reveal that  five  of  the  eight  women
    entered into employment after leaving the shelter, and of  these  three
    were living apart from family members, for instance 'T' who  is  paying
    her own rent, working  for  a  private  employer  as  a  chef  and  who
    describes herself as "confident and highly skilful".

108. Such women have been able to live alone in Tirana; women who have  been
    able to put the skills they have acquired in the shelters to good  use,
    and even to flourish in their new vocations.   For these  women,  there
    will be a meaningful net gain from packages such as that offered by the
    IOM:  the skills they have developed, sometimes with the support  of  a
    loan or grant, has given them economic  security  and  the  ability  to
    survive away from their families.


109. For less resilient or adaptable women however, the  path  to  financial
    independence is not so straightforward.  Professor Haxhiymeri describes
    the assistance offered by the shelters, the Albanian government or  the
    IOM as "superficial" and stressed that such  training  packages  rarely
    help women in the long run. The problem she identifies is that women in
    Albania tend to find work in the  low-skilled,  informal  sector  where
    employment is not secure or protected, and where wages rarely  keep  up
    with the costs of living: this is the "grey economy" discussed in AM  &
    BM[8]. All of the  evidence  supports  a  finding  that  the  financial
    constraints make survival in the cities difficult: we accept  Professor
    Haxhiymeri's evidence of her personal  experience  of  trying  to  find
    accommodation for survivors of domestic violence. Workers  at  her  NGO
    typically find that the cost of basic accommodation in Tirana, even  in
    the outskirts, is E200 per month  whereas  a  woman  working  in  those
    conditions will typically earn no more than E150.  The  respondents  to
    the research consistently reported that it is "very difficult" to  live
    alone because of the financial constraints women face, in particular in
    staying in employment and in paying rent.  The UNP report confirms that
    there is no provision for VOTs to have access to  social  housing,  and
    that they are therefore forced to rent in the private sector. The  high
    unemployment rate means that people are forced to  take  "any  kind  of
    job". The Needs Assessment succinctly summarises this situation:  "most
    victims are returning to the same place, facing the same problems  that
    they had before they were trafficked". The difference  now  being  that
    they must face such  daily  grind  whilst  living  with  the  physical,
    psychological and social consequences of that experience.

110. At paragraphs 147-151 of AM & BM, the Tribunal considered the  evidence
    of  Dr  Agnew-Davies  in  respect  of  the  psychological  effects   of
    trafficking. We adopt and underline the view  expressed  in  that  case
    that in all claims it is important to consider the circumstances of the
    individual, including her strength, age, and psychological make-up. For
    VOTs who have been through extreme  traumatic  experiences  it  is  not
    difficult  to  see  how  they  are  likely  to   suffer   psychological
    consequences such  as  complex  PTSD.    The  VOT  may  suffer  lasting
    physical damage as a result of her  experiences.  These  are  important
    factors which must be considered when assessing whether internal flight
    is reasonable for any individual VOT.  Whilst the evidence relating  to
    psychological support  services  for  VOTs  once  they  have  left  the
    shelters suggests some availability, that it is undoubtedly patchy  and
    in  many  cases  wholly  inadequate  as  we  have  observed  above.  An
    individual, because of her condition, may have difficulty in  accessing
    or engaging with such services that do exist.  She may be  required  to
    pay for mental health care, increasing her financial burden. These  are
    all matters relevant to the consideration of whether internal flight is
    reasonably available.


111. As to the social consequences of a past trafficking experience we  note
    the findings in AM & BM about social exclusion  of  women  labelled  as
    kurva, in the context of the tenacity of Northern Albanian  traditions.
     It might be thought that the increased migration from the  countryside
    to the cities might lead to a weakening  in  such  belief  systems,  as
    extended families leave the land and  break  down  into  smaller,  more
    independent units. Surprisingly we  were  shown  no  evidence  to  that
    effect, and in fact it was suggested by Professor Haxhiymeri that  such
    migration - primarily from North  to  South  -  has  had  the  opposite
    effect, of transporting conservative Geg social  mores  into  the  more
    liberal south.  The importance of the  family  unit  as  a  social  and
    economic construct was emphasised in all the evidence  before  us.   We
    accept her evidence that women living  on  their  own  are  immediately
    identifiable as being on the 'outside'; even if the  details  of  their
    history are not known, work colleagues and  neighbours  may  view  them
    with some suspicion. In some cases that suspicion will escalate to open
    prejudice and hostility.  We therefore find no reason  to  depart  from
    the general conclusions on this matter drawn by the Tribunal  in  AM  &
    BM.  Women living on their own are  likely  to  be  socially  distinct.
    Whilst  discrimination  and  stigma  certainly  exist  they  will   not
    generally constitute persecutory "serious harm" or  breach  Article  3,
    but this it nevertheless a factor to be  considered  cumulatively  when
    assessing  whether  internal  flight  is  reasonable  for   any   given
    appellant.


112. It is against this background that all of the witnesses, and the  civil
    society respondents  to  the  UNP  Report  and  the  Needs  Assessment,
    expressed concern about the risk of  VOTs  being  re-trafficked  during
    this critical phase of their  reintegration.  We  share  this  concern.
    Women who are socially isolated and suffering from the consequences  of
    their past experiences are already vulnerable;  where they  are  placed
    under the additional strain of financial hardship this can render  them
    even more susceptible to the  advances  of  those  who  would  seek  to
    exploit them.    The UNP report cites an NCATS audit  in  which  it  is
    acknowledged that 18% of the cases referred in the reporting period - a
    total of 16 women - had previously been trafficked and had been through
    the shelters at least once already.  The same is said  of  two  of  the
    eight women who constituted the case-studies in  the  UNP  report.   It
    must therefore be the case that for some women, the period  after  they
    leave the shelters can be risky. Whether an  individual  appellant  can
    demonstrate that she faces such a real risk must be determined  on  the
    facts, having regard to her personal circumstances and her age.

    THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

    Sufficiency of Protection

113. Article 7 of the Qualification Directive provides:
         1. Protection can be provided by:
         (a) the State; or
         (b)   parties    or    organisations,    including    international
         organisations, controlling the State or a substantial part  of  the
         territory of the State.
         2. Protection is generally provided when the  actors  mentioned  in
         paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to  prevent  the  persecution  or
         suffering of serious harm, inter alia, by  operating  an  effective
         legal system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  acts
         constituting persecution or serious harm,  and  the  applicant  has
         access to such protection.
         3. When assessing whether an international organisation controls  a
         State  or  a  substantial  part  of  its  territory  and   provides
         protection as described in paragraph 2, Member  States  shall  take
         into account any guidance which may be provided in relevant Council
         acts.

114. These minimum standards reflect the approach taken in our own  domestic
    jurisprudence: see Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2000] UKHL 37, Noune v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2000] EWCA Civ 306 and Bagdanavicius v Secretary  of  State   for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 1605,   Bagdanavicius  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2005]  UKHL  38,   AW  (sufficiency  of
    protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC).  The principles set  down  in
    these cases are distilled by Auld LJ in the Court of Appeal's  decision
    in Bagdanavicius as follows. Sufficiency of state  protection  means  a
    willingness and ability on the part of the receiving state  to  provide
    through its legal system a reasonable level  of  protection  from  ill-
    treatment. The effectiveness of the system provided  is  to  be  judged
    normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to prevent the form of
    persecution of which there is a risk, not just punishment of  it  after
    the event. Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection  in
    the receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded  fear  of
    persecution if she can show that its authorities know or ought to  know
    of circumstances particular to her case giving rise to  her  fear,  but
    are unlikely  to  provide  the  additional  protection  her  particular
    circumstances reasonably require.




    Internal Relocation

115. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads:


      1. As part of the assessment  of  the  application  for  international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


      2. In examining whether  a  part  of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


      3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
         to the country of origin.



116. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 the House of Lords make clear that the question of whether  internal
    flight is "reasonable" is not to be equated with the test under Article
    3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his  own  guidance  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:


         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:


           'The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to  do  so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
           observed in Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
           [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.  The  decision-
           maker must do his  best  to  decide,  on  such  material  as  is
           available, where on the spectrum the  particular  case  falls...
           All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts'.


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
          It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant.  There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving  priority
         to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the  place  of
         persecution.  There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country.  I do not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions
         in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not
         in  expressing  it.   The  humanitarian  object  of   the   Refugee
         Convention is to secure a  reasonable  measure  of  protection  for
         those with a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country
         or some part of it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up  of
         living standards around the world, desirable though of course  that
         is."

117. At 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR view  that  the  test
    is whether the individual will be able to  live  a  "relatively  normal
    life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by  their
    Lordships in Januzi[9]:


         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:


           '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness  of
           IRA [internal relocation  alternative]  is  to  assess  all  the
           circumstances of the individual's  case  holistically  and  with
           specific reference to the  individual's  personal  circumstances
           (including past persecution or fear thereof,  psychological  and
           health condition, family  and  social  situation,  and  survival
           capacities).  This assessment is to be made in  the  context  of
           the conditions in the place of relocation (including basic human
           rights,   security   conditions,   socio-economic    conditions,
           accommodation, access to health care facilities),  in  order  to
           determine the impact on  that  individual  of  settling  in  the
           proposed place of relocation and whether  the  individual  could
           live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion.  Very little, apart from the conditions in the country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."

118. The assessment on the individual characteristics of the  claimant  must
    include her personal history, and its relevance in the society in which
    she is relocating. See for instance VNM v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 47 [per Wilson LJ at 25]:

         "it is obvious that the  reasonableness  of  her  relocation  in  a
         different   part   of   Kenya   requires   consideration   of   the
         practicability of her  settling  elsewhere;  consideration  of  her
         ability convincingly to present to those in her new milieu a  false
         history relating to herself and  to  her  daughter,  including  the
         latter's paternity, and  a  false  explanation  for  their  arrival
         there;  and,  in  the  light  of  her   substantial   psychological
         vulnerability, consideration of her ability to sustain  beyond  the
         short term a reasonable life for them both on that false basis".




    COUNTRY GUIDANCE

119. The decision in AM & BM is now over six years old. The matter in  issue
    in these appeals was to  what  extent  recent  measures  taken  by  the
    Albanian government and others might have improved  the  situation  for
    female VOTs seeking internal flight.  Our remit was therefore  narrower
    than that of the Tribunal in AM & BM and  we  find  that  much  of  the
    guidance in that decision should remain  undisturbed.   Where  we  have
    amended or supplemented that guidance in respect  of  internal  flight,
    our findings are highlighted in bold below.  We add that the only other
    part of the country guidance in AM & BM which we have  found  necessary
    to amend was sub-paragraph (c) of the headnote.  The  country  guidance
    is as follows:



         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania:  trafficked women come from all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c)   Some women are lured to leave Albania with false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)   In the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials.  There is in general a Horvath-standard sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e)   There is now in place a reception and reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f)   Once asked to leave the shelter a victim  of  trafficking  can
             live on her  own.  In  doing  so  she  will  face  significant
             challenges including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,
             financial  hardship  and  uncertainty,  a  sense  of  physical
             insecurity and the subjective fear of being  found  either  by
             their families or former traffickers.  Some  women  will  have
             the capacity  to  negotiate  these  challenges  without  undue
             hardship. There will however be victims  of  trafficking  with
             characteristics,  such  as  mental  illness  or  psychological
             scarring, for whom living alone in these  circumstances  would
             not be reasonable.  Whether a particular appellant falls  into
             that category will call for a careful assessment  of  all  the
             circumstances.


         g)   Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that risk exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.

         h)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


   1) The social status and economic standing of her family
                      2)  The  level  of  education  of   the   victim   of
                         trafficking or her family
                      3) The  victim  of  trafficking's  state  of  health,
                         particularly her mental health
                      4) The presence of an illegitimate child
                      5) The area of origin
                      6) Age
                      7) What support network will be available.






    The Individual Appellants

120. Both Appellants have been found  to  be  VOTs.  Each  has  disclosed  a
    history of rape and exploitation,  compounded  by  rejection  by  their
    families. This evidence is accepted. It forms the basis of our decision
    in the individual claims, set out below. We first  address  the  issues
    that were common to both appeals.



    Dr Agnew-Davies


121. Neither  appellant  presented  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  medical
    evidence. On the facts that he had  found,  Judge  Saffer  nevertheless
    inferred that in each  case  it  would  be  "inconceivable,  given  the
    appalling level and period of ill treatment that  she  would  not  have
    suffered some form of psychological harm".   That this is  so  has  now
    been evidenced in two detailed reports by Dr Roxane Agnew-Davies.


122. Dr Agnew-Davies is a  Clinical  Psychologist  who  specialises  in  the
    impact of violence on women's mental health. She has been working  with
    victims of physical  and  sexual  abuse  for  over  25  years.  She  is
    presently the Director of Domestic Violence Training Limited,  her  own
    limited company. She provides training to other health professionals on
    how to work with victims of abuse.  She is an honorary research  fellow
    at the University of Bristol. Recent research projects she has run have
    been funded by the university and the Department of Health.  She has in
    the past had NHS contracts; the last one was with St George's  Hospital
    in London.  She was formerly the Head  of  Psychological  Services  for
    Women at Refuge, the  national  charity  for  women  escaping  domestic
    violence. She has provided evidence to the Tribunal in numerous appeals
    including AM & BM, and she has been accepted as an  expert  witness  by
    the High Court and Court of Appeal.

123. Dr Agnew-Davies saw each appellant  for  a  single  consultation  of  a
    little over four hours. She conducted a semi-structured  interview  and
    administered a number of psychological tests[10]  and  where  available
    had regard to  the  relevant  health  records  and  documentation.  She
    appends all the diagnostic criteria applied, the  relevant  tests,  and
    the transcript of her interview to her  report.  She  has  applied  the
    terms of the Istanbul Protocol. Further to her lengthy report  we  were
    given the opportunity to hear live telephone evidence  from  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies.

124. A matter arose during the hearing  as  to  the  weight  that  could  be
    attached to Dr Agnew-Davies' conclusions. Mr  Whitwell  questioned  why
    she had been  selective  in  her  application  of  the  Trauma  Symptom
    Inventory, one of the diagnostic tools used in her report. She did  not
    ask the  questions  from  the  scales  measuring  Sexual  Concerns  and
    Dysfunctional Sexual Behaviour, because "these items  are  often  found
    offensive and distressing by victims of sexual  abuse  without,  in  my
    experience, helping contribute  to  a  formulation"[11].   Mr  Whitwell
    wanted to know whether it would be  standard  practice  to  omit  these
    questions.  Dr Agnew-Davies explained that between 2000  and  2004  she
    and a colleague conducted research for Refuge. Looking at a study group
    of  500  women  they  found  that  these  particular  questions  caused
    distress, and were in fact unnecessary. She has adopted the practice of
    omitting them since then. This data has been published. She has  spoken
    publicly about her findings and has delivered training  in  conjunction
    with  a  Professor  at  the  Institute  of  Psychiatry.    No-one   has
    challenged their conclusions.    She  acknowledged  that  other  mental
    health  professionals  leaving  these  particular  questions  out  were
    usually people that she had trained, but explained that it  is  not  at
    all unusual for clinicians to tailor the questions asked  depending  on
    the patient.


125. We are grateful to Mr Whitwell for his thorough and  thoughtful  cross-
    examination of Dr Agnew Davies, and  to  Dr  Agnew-Davies  herself  for
    making herself available to give live  evidence.  We  have  taken  into
    account that these are reports written after a single consultation, but
    we are nevertheless satisfied that they are evidence that we can attach
    significant  weight  to.   That  is  because  Dr  Agnew-Davies   is   a
    professional applying objective tests, she is an expert in  her  field,
    and because the conclusions she reaches are entirely consonant with the
    accepted facts.




    Private Life


126. The appellants had, at the outset of these appeals, conceded that  they
    could not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  This
    provides that leave to remain should be granted where the applicant can
    show that she:
         (vi) ..is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK
    Upon reflection this concession was withdrawn.  That  was  because  the
    relevant test, contained at sub-paragraph (vi) of the  Rule,  would  in
    these cases be determined with reference to precisely  the  same  facts
    relied upon to show internal flight would be 'unduly harsh'.  This  was
    not, as we understood it, acceptance that as a matter of law  the  test
    of 'very significant obstacles to integration' is to  be  equated  with
    'unduly harsh'; it is simply that in these particular cases the outcome
    of both would be the same.




    Obligations to VOTs


127. Ms Khan submitted that in both cases the Secretary of State has  failed
    in her duty towards the appellants, both now recognised as VOTs.


128. It is accepted that the United Kingdom has an international  obligation
    to provide VOTs with assistance for their physical,  psychological  and
    social recovery.   This  arises  under  the  UN  Protocol  to  Prevent,
    Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons (the Palermo Protocol),  the
    Council of Europe Convention on Action  against  Trafficking  in  Human
    Beings (ECAT)[12], more recently  under  Directive  2011/36/EU  of  the
    European Parliament.


129. Article 6 of the Palermo Protocol provides:

         "2. Each State Party  shall  ensure  that  its  domestic  legal  or
         administrative system contains measures that provide to victims  of
         trafficking in persons, in appropriate cases:
         ...
         3. Each State Party shall consider implementing measures to provide
         for the physical, psychological and social recovery of  victims  of
         trafficking in persons ..."

130. ECAT provides, in similar terms:


                     Article 12 - Assistance to victims


         1  Each Party shall adopt such legislative or other measures as may
         be necessary to assist victims in their physical, psychological and
         social recovery. ...


         2  Each Party shall take due account of  the  victim's  safety  and
         protection needs".
         ...


                        Article 14 - Residence permit


      1. Each Party shall issue a renewable residence permit to victims,  in
         one or other of the two following situations or in both:


         a  the competent authority considers that their stay  is  necessary
         owing to their personal situation";

131. These obligations have been recognized by the courts  as  binding:  see
    for instance Hounga v Allen & Anor [2014] UKSC 47, EK (Article 4  ECHR:
    Anti-Trafficking  Convention)  Tanzania   [2013]   UKUT   00313.    The
    government discharges these obligations primarily through operation  of
    the  NRM.   The  Respondent's  Discretionary  Leave  to  Remain  Policy
    provides:


         "4.5 Trafficking cases


         Where the UK Competent Authority has  conclusively  identified  the
         applicant as a victim of trafficking and the personal circumstances
         of the case are so compelling that a grant of leave  is  considered
         appropriate, DL should be granted. The period of leave will  depend
         on the individual facts of the case but must not be  less  than  12
         months and 1 day and normally no more than 30 months  (2.5  years).
         The minimum period of leave ensures that a  victim  of  trafficking
         who is refused asylum but granted DL has a right of appeal  against
         the rejection of their asylum claim by virtue of  Section  83(1)(b)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".


132. That these obligations exist, and that they must be  met,  was  not  in
    dispute.   The question raised by Ms Khan is the extent to  which  they
    impose an ongoing duty of  review  on  the  Secretary  of  State.   She
    accepts that at the date of decision the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    aware of the material that is before us today. There was at  that  time
    no finding of fact that the women had been  trafficked,  no  conclusive
    grounds decisions and no evidence from Dr Agnew-Davies.  Nonetheless Ms
    Khan submits that the decisions to refuse leave have now been shown  to
    be 'not in accordance with the law'.  The obligations  to  provide  for
    their physical, psychological and social recovery do not, she  submits,
    depend on the information being provided prior to the date of decision.




133. Mr Whitwell accepts that where such information is  made  available  to
    the Respondent, a review should,  and  will,  take  place.  The  second
    appellant has written to request such a review (on the  8th  May  2015)
    and when the respondent looks again  at  her  case  the  new  material,
    including the findings of Judge Saffer and  the  report  of  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies, will be taken into account.  Mr Whitwell submits that this does
    not mean that the original decisions to refuse can be said to  be  'not
    in accordance with the law' for failure to meet  any  of  the  relevant
    obligations under international anti-trafficking agreements, since none
    of that material was available to the respondent at the  date  of  that
    decision.

134.  The  UK  government  is  obliged  to  comply  with  its  international
    commitments. Where, as  in  the  case  of  the  second  appellant,  new
    material is subsequently brought  to  the  respondent's  attention,  we
    agree that a review should take place.  This does not however mean that
    the existence of new material is capable of  retrospectively  rendering
    the original decision unlawful. In the present case it is accepted that
    the first appellant has not directly submitted any new material to  the
    Secretary of State  for her consideration. The second appellant has, in
    the course  of  the  proceedings  before  us,  done  so.   Mr  Whitwell
    indicated that should her appeal be dismissed on  asylum  grounds,  her
    case will be actively reviewed. We are  satisfied  that  this  approach
    complies with the UK's obligations, and in the  present  circumstances,
    no benefit can be accrued to  the  appellants  by  any  declaration  or
    direction by the Tribunal.


135. We would add that we heard some argument about  who  is  to  bring  new
    information and evidence to the Secretary of State's attention. We were
    referred to various policy statements suggesting  that  such  referrals
    can only be made by actors  such  as  the   'first  responder'  or  the
    'support provider'.   There is a  risk,  where  such  policy  documents
    exist, of the parties adhering to them so literally so as to lose sight
    of all common sense. If a referral is made by a 'first responder' or  a
    'support provider' that is all well and good. That does not prevent any
    other professional, be it a  legal  representative,  social  worker  or
    doctor, bringing any pertinent matters to the  respondent's  attention;
    where such a  referral  is  received,  outwith  the  framework  in  the
    respondent's policy, the international obligations are engaged.




    The first appellant

     Agreed Facts

136. The facts as found by First-tier Tribunal  Saffer  and  agreed  between
    the parties in respect of the first appellant are as follows:


     i) She is an Albanian national born in 1988.


    ii) She was born in a  village  in  Northern  Albania.  Before  leaving
        Albania that is where she lived with her parents, brother and  five
        sisters. Her parents and siblings still live there.


   iii) The first appellant's father is employed as a  security  guard  and
        her  siblings  are  unemployed.   She  is  from  a  poor   economic
        background.


    iv) Her family are "strict Muslims".


     v) The first appellant attended school for 8 years  at  primary  level
        until the age of 14. She then remained at home. Her movements  were
        restricted by her family. The first appellant was  not  allowed  to
        study or work thereafter.


    vi) In October 2013 the first appellant met a man (the trafficker)  who
        was visiting his  cousin  who  lived  locally  to  her.  The  first
        appellant began a secret relationship with him.  They  communicated
        using a mobile phone provided by him. The first appellant  met  the
        trafficker at his cousin's house every fortnight and she  spoke  to
        him on the phone every day.


   vii) The relationship was discovered by the first appellant's father and
        brother. She was beaten severely by her  father  and  brother.  The
        first appellant managed to run away  when  her  mother  and  sister
        intervened to assist her. She believes her father and brother would
        have killed her had they not been restrained.


  viii) The trafficker collected the first appellant took her to a flat  in
        Tirana where she was kept confined. He  told  the  first  appellant
        that her family were looking for her and wanted to  kill  her.  She
        was kept in the flat for 1 month after which she was forced to work
        as a prostitute in the flat. She was forced to have  non-consensual
        sexual intercourse with numerous men under the immediate  and  real
        threat of physical violence.  During  this  period  she  was  raped
        between 2 and 5 times a day for 6 weeks (between 80 and 200 times).


    ix) The first appellant planned to kill herself twice  by  jumping  off
        the balcony but was stopped by the trafficker.


     x) She was allowed to speak to her sister once on the  telephone.  Her
        sister told  her  that  her  family  knew  she  was  working  as  a
        prostitute and that her brother would  kill  her  if  she  returned
        home.


    xi) The trafficker arranged to obtain  an  official  passport  for  the
        first appellant and has kept it.


   xii) The trafficker, and another man, then drove the first appellant  in
        a car for a week before being put in the back of a lorry.  He  told
        her that there were two or three other girls in  the  back  of  the
        lorry. The trafficker told the first appellant that he expected her
        to have sex with 'clients' in the UK too. The lorry arrived in  the
        UK.


  xiii) The first appellant will not return to Albania voluntarily.


   xiv) She has no access to family support and cannot return to  her  home
        area.




    Medical Evidence


137. Dr Agnew-Davies had one clinical consultation with the first  appellant
    which lasted for four hours and ten minutes. Her report is  dated  14th
    April 2015.   The first appellant told Dr Agnew-Davies that before "all
    of this" she weighed 68 kilos. She now weighs 57.  She eats little  and
    sometimes goes for three days before she eats again. She  suffers  from
    "terrible" headaches and cannot sleep at  night.  She  told  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies that she feels panic or terror "most of the  time".  During  the
    course of their consultation the first appellant was variously observed
    to be distressed, shaking and at times "barely  able  to  breathe".  Dr
    Agnew-Davies noted that as they completed the Beck Depression Inventory
    the first  appellant  presented  unusually  severe  symptoms  of  motor
    retardation: "any movement at all seemed to be an effort".


138. In summary the report concludes that the first  appellant  exceeds  the
    clinical threshold for at least eight  of  the  nine  symptom  clusters
    associated  with  Major  Depressive  Disorder;  she  also   meets   the
    diagnostic criteria for chronic and complex PTSD.

139. The first appellant told Dr Agnew-Davies that she has  twice  attempted
    suicide in the past.  She tried to jump from  a  balcony  whilst  under
    control of her trafficker but he prevented her from doing so. Since her
    arrival in the UK she has taken an overdose of paracetamol.  At present
    she expresses a weak will to live and a moderate to strong wish to die.
    That is because her reasons for wanting to die outweigh the reasons for
    staying alive.   She thinks about it  continually  and  has  considered
    ways of doing it, but has not worked out the details.   She  repeatedly
    stated that she is frightened and convinced that she will be killed  by
    her father, brother or trafficker if she is  returned  to  Albania.  Mr
    Whitwell asked Dr Agnew-Davies to clarify whether (as it appeared  from
    the interview summary in  the  report)  the  first  appellant  had  not
    volunteered that she had taken  an  overdose,  and  had  in  fact  only
    disclosed that when prompted.  Dr Agnew-Davies confirmed that  she  had
    asked the direct question, but stated that this is perfectly  standard.
    Persons contemplating suicide very rarely  spontaneously  reveal  their
    intentions - it would almost always emerge through direct questioning.


140. As to the diagnosis  of  Major  Depressive  Disorder[13]  two  separate
    tests showed the first appellant's ratings  to  fall  into  the  severe
    range, to a degree not found in 99% of the population.  At present  she
    presents a moderate risk of suicide. She has found numerous reasons  to
    kill herself, but  none  if  any  to  offset  the  risk,  for  instance
    attachment to family or religious belief.   Dr  Agnew-Davies  does  not
    believe  that  this  diagnosis  adequately  captures  the   "fear   and
    interpersonal problems"  that  the  first  appellant  presented.    She
    therefore also  considered  the  criteria  for  a  diagnosis  of  Post-
    Traumatic Stress Disorder.  The first appellant  exhibits  all  of  the
    core symptoms of  intrusion,  avoidance,  negative  cognition/mood  and
    arousal (anxiety/fear).  The high ratings found in respect of  each  of
    these symptoms leads Dr Agnew-Davies  to  diagnose  Complex  PTSD:  the
    first appellant also exhibits altered affect regulation, altered levels
    of consciousness, altered perception of self,  altered  perceptions  of
    the perpetrator(s), altered world view and altered  relationships  with
    others.  In respect of this latter criteria Dr  Agnew-Davies  expresses
    "serious concerns" about the first appellant's  "capacity  to  function
    socially or interpersonally". She describes the first appellant as "one
    of the most isolated people I have encountered in my work over the last
    15 years".  The first appellant is not fit to work or give evidence. Dr
    Agnew-Davies does not think that the first appellant should  be  living
    alone without being monitored by statutory mental health services.  All
    of this is highly consistent with Dr Agnew-Davies' experience of  other
    women who have survived sexual and physical abuse and with the  account
    given by the first appellant herself.


141. The first appellant was prescribed a two week course of  Citalopram  in
    August 2014 but has not sought any further medication. Dr  Agnew-Davies
    notes that she was shown  correspondence  from  the  first  appellant's
    doctor's  surgery  indicating  that  a  number  of  appointments   were
    rearranged. Because of her concerns about the first appellant's current
    condition she recommends and requests that her report is  sent  to  the
    GP.


142. In respect of causation Dr Agnew-Davies  notes  the  first  appellant's
    evidence that she grew up in a strict and controlling family where  she
    experienced physical abuse (being beaten by her  father  and  brother),
    neglect and emotional abuse.  She witnessed domestic  violence  against
    her mother. Research shows that when one type of abuse  is  experienced
    and/or if  the  abuse  involves  terror  and  captivity,  the  risk  of
    developing problematic complex PTSD is increased, especially where  the
    first abuse  occurs  before  the  age  of  13.    The  first  appellant
    described a restricted childhood in a controlling, violent  home  where
    she was resigned to the idea of growing  up  to  forced  marriage.  She
    describes her strict Muslim father and brother as  "fanatics".  In  her
    oral evidence Dr Agnew-Davies confirmed  that  she  has  heard  similar
    accounts of abuse in childhood from  other  Albanian  VOTs.  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies does not believe that these early experiences fully account  for
    her condition, but they are likely  to  have  contributed  to  her  own
    powerlessness, helplessness and lack of self-worth. They are  secondary
    to the trauma caused by  the  trafficking.    Dr  Agnew-Davies  further
    considers whether the serious assault by the first  appellant's  father
    and brother (when they discovered her relationship with the trafficker)
    could itself  have  led  to  her  current  condition.  Dr  Agnew-Davies
    believes it to be a factor, but not  one  that  could  in  itself  have
    caused these symptoms. For instance, if  the  relationship  had  turned
    into a loving intimate partnership as the first  appellant  had  hoped,
    her symptoms  may  over  time  have  ameliorated.    The  severity  and
    complexity of the first appellant's symptoms are highly consistent with
    a history of repeated  sexual  abuse  by  different  perpetrators  over
    time[14].  Her lack of certainty over her immigration  status  and  her
    poverty in childhood could be aggravating, but not causal factors.   It
    is not possible  to  accurately  weigh  the  relative  impacts  of  any
    specific incident, but only to consider the cumulative impacts.


143. Dr Agnew-Davies states that  traumatised  victims  often  present  with
    physical symptoms and this is most likely where the victim is reluctant
    or unable to speak about her experience.  The first appellant reports a
    number of neurological and physiological problems all highly  congruent
    with her history of sexual abuse. Dr Agnew-Davies notes  that  she  has
    only ever seen the heightened sensitivity to  noise  exhibited  by  the
    first  appellant  in  other   victims   of   trafficking   for   sexual
    exploitation.  Dr Agnew-Davies has considered the possibility that  the
    first  appellant  is  exaggerating  or  feigning  her   symptoms,   and
    discounted it. The symptoms of  complex  PTSD  are  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, to  fake.  In  Dr  Agnew-Davies  professional  opinion  her
    psychological presentation was typical  of  a  history  of  abuse  (her
    emphasis).


144. Dr Agnew-Davies concludes her report by considering  how  each  of  the
    first appellant's symptoms clusters might impact  on  her  capacity  to
    cope and keep herself from harm. She finds:

     i)  The  first  appellant  experiences  unusually  severe  levels   of
        intrusion in the form of memories, flashbacks and  nightmares.  Her
        cognitive ability to make decisions to promote safety or  manage  a
        situation is grossly impaired. Whilst  experiencing  intrusions  to
        this degree the first appellant is ill-equipped to cope practically
        or emotionally with situations of threat;


    ii) The first  appellant  reacts  against  her  intrusive  thoughts  by
        avoidance. She actively  tries  to  defend  herself  against  these
        memories by avoiding them. This means that she is  highly  unlikely
        to seek help; these efforts to avoid being overwhelmed by traumatic
        memories paradoxically  increases  her  isolation  and  impede  her
        recovery;


   iii) The first appellant dissociates to a clinically significant extent.
        This is an unconscious reaction which is highly  likely  to  render
        her passive. She may appear apathetic or paralysed: this is part of
        a well-established pattern amongst victims of repeated  trauma  and
        it can impede efforts to escape situations of danger;


    iv) The first appellant is in a generally  heightened  state  of  fear.
        These arousal symptoms are very deleterious to her already  fragile
        mental health and aggravate her tendency to isolate herself,  which
        in turn aggravates her symptoms;


     v) As a function of her depression she lacks  energy,  motivation  and
        initiative and is more prone to contemplating suicide;


    vi)  Complex  PTSD  encompasses  a  range   of   severe   interpersonal
        disturbances that render a trauma  victim  at  a  greater  risk  of
        exploitation. She remains vulnerable to being led  into,  and  then
        trapped within, abusive situations because she may well resort to a
        well-established  pattern  of  fear  and  obedience.  It  is   very
        difficult  for  the  first  appellant  to  hide  her  symptoms  and
        disturbed  behaviours:  unscrupulous  others  could  identify   and
        exploit this.




145. At present the first appellant is not receiving any  treatment.   About
    half of adults who suffer from PTSD  can  recover  within  about  three
    months. Others may suffer symptoms for as long as 50  years.  In  cases
    where there are overlapping diagnoses  of  PTSD  and  Major  Depressive
    Disorder  relapse  is  far  more  likely;  a  complex  presentation  is
    associated with a more complex and  longer  term  recovery.  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies believes that the first appellant is extremely unlikely to  show
    a spontaneous improvement. The first appellant is  in  need  of  active
    intervention from home-based statutory mental health services to manage
    her suicidal ideas and acute symptoms. Any substantive  recovery  would
    only be possible in the long term:


         "[The first appellant] really needs trauma-focused  and  specialist
         treatment. However, trauma focused therapy can only start when  the
         sufferer feels safe in their environment, to a degree sufficient to
         withstand the emotional intensity  of  re-exposure  to  trauma  and
         cognitive re-processing...in effect, it is not  possible  to  start
         rebuilding the burning house until the fire has been put out"


146. In the UK the approved treatment would  involve  medication  prescribed
    in conjunction with  psychological  therapy.   To  be  successful  this
    process would need to  occur  in  a  non-threatening  environment  with
    clinicians that the patient  can  trust.   That  would  include  social
    security: "it is well established that social security is a significant
    predictor  of  recovery,  while  isolation  is  likely   to   cause   a
    deterioration in  mental  health".   In  this  regard  Dr  Agnew-Davies
    states:


         "If the outcome of proceedings was that [the first  appellant]  was
         to return to Albania, I think her mental health would significantly
         deteriorate and that  her  suicidal  ideation  would  significantly
         increase. I cannot predict the speed  or  rate  that  her  suicidal
         impulses will increase but I anticipate that there is a  high  risk
         she will attempt suicide immediately if notified that she was to be
         removed and would continue to present a high risk on return, making
         repeated attempts if unsuccessful.  My  opinion  is  based  on  the
         assessment of current suicide risk, [the first appellant]s  beliefs
         about Albania, her fear for her life or of being re-trafficked,  as
         well as of social rejection from the village"



    The first appellant: Our Findings


147. Our decision in the re-making of the first  appellant's  appeal  is  as
    follows.


148. The first appellant does not wish to return to  Albania.   She  is  not
    therefore eligible for the assistance offered by the  IOM  through  the
    RAVT programme.    She  would  however  still  receive  the  assistance
    offered by the Albanian government through the operation  of  the  NRM,
    which could include referral to a shelter. We were  shown  no  evidence
    that entry into the NRM is only available to those making  a  voluntary
    return.  The  question  is  whether  it  is  reasonable,  in  all   the
    circumstances, that she avail herself of this option.


149. We have accepted that the NRM  functions  well  and  that  that  border
    officers are now expected to implement the SOP. This does  not  include
    an option to contact the returning VOTs family against her  will.   The
    evidence before us does not disclose  a  general  objective  risk  that
    officials will act outwith that framework.   We find that  if  returned
    to Albania the likely outcome for the first appellant would be that she
    would be met on arrival,  processed  and  taken  to  one  of  the  four
    shelters. She would there be provided with accommodation, food  and  at
    least basic healthcare. She may have access to counselling provided  by
    a non-medically qualified member of staff.  She will  be  offered  some
    form of vocational training such as a hairdressing or  cookery  course.
    Having had regard to the medical evidence we have serious doubts  about
    the first appellant's ability to engage with, or benefit from,  such  a
    course. We note Dr Agnew-Davies' opinion that she is not currently  fit
    to work.  There are no features of the  first  appellant's  case  which
    would indicate that she would be treated as  a  "heavy  case".   It  is
    therefore likely that she will be required to leave the shelter after 3-
    6 months.


150. The socio-economic challenges to the first appellant at this point  are
    likely to be substantial. She has some  basic  education,  having  left
    school at 14, but would be presenting to prospective employers  at  the
    age of 27 with no experience at all of working in Albania bar her brief
    period of vocational training in the shelter.   The best-case  scenario
    would be that she would be employed by an NGO but  as  we  have  heard,
    these jobs are few  and  far  between  and  share  the  same  financial
    insecurity as the organisations themselves.  The  likelihood  would  be
    that she would have to find non-skilled  low  paid  employment  in  the
    'grey economy'.


151. The assessment made by Dr  Agnew-Davies  indicates  two  risks  to  the
    first appellant at this juncture: internal and external.  The  internal
    challenge is that the first appellant is suffering from  such  profound
    mental distress that she is unable to function 'normally'. She  suffers
    from such levels of fear and anxiety that her illness manifests  itself
    as physical symptoms such as shaking, pain, and  difficulty  breathing.
    She is not at present fit to work.   She has expressed an intention  to
    kill herself should she be returned to Albania, the risk  of  which  is
    assessed to be "high". Dr Agnew-Davies observed that she was one of the
    most "isolated" people she has met in 15 years of working with  victims
    of abuse.   In these circumstances we  are  satisfied  that  the  first
    appellant would face  substantial  difficulty  in  finding  or  keeping
    employment, and in turn accommodation.   She would be living  with  the
    constant subjective fear of discovery by her family - in such  a  small
    country not a fanciful threat. These internal challenges in  turn  give
    rise to external risks. Dr Agnew-Davies has set out  with  clarity  why
    the first appellant's condition would impair her  ability  to  function
    normally within society and to protect herself from  potential  danger.
    She suffers symptoms of intrusion, and in turn  avoidance,  to  such  a
    profound degree that  "her  cognitive  ability  to  make  decisions  to
    promote safety or manage a situation is grossly  impaired".  In  short,
    she would appear to the world outside as someone  with  serious  mental
    health  problems.  Dr  Agnew-Davies  states  that  it  would  be  "very
    difficult for the first appellant to hide her  symptoms  and  disturbed
    behaviours" and concludes from this  that  "unscrupulous  others  could
    identify and exploit this". We agree with that assessment.  The  nature
    and extent of the first appellant's illness would  severely  limit  her
    ability to function. Left to fend for herself she would suffer profound
    mental distress and her ability to protect herself from danger would be
    severely compromised.


152. We bear in mind Mr Whitwell's point  that  the  target  age  group  for
    traffickers is late teens/early twenties, and that  this  would  reduce
    the risk presented to the first appellant.  We have  however  also  had
    regard to the figures in the UNP Needs Assessment. Approximately 20% of
    the VOTs that featured in that study, and in the NCATS  annual  report,
    had been re-trafficked having been through the shelters once before. We
    find that someone with the particular vulnerabilities  that  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies has identified in the first appellant would be reasonably likely
    to fall within that group: we are satisfied that the least likely to be
    able to cope on their own will be the ones most likely to fall prey  to
    the traffickers.


153. Even if we are wrong about the risk of re-trafficking we are  satisfied
    that for the reasons set out above the first appellant would be  unable
    to live a  "reasonable"  or  "relatively  normal"  life  without  undue
    hardship should she live on her own in Albania. For that  reason  there
    is no safe internal relocation option available to this appellant;  her
    removal would therefore be a  breach  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
    Article 3 ECHR.  She has shown that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles  to  her  integration  into  Albanian  society  and  so  also
    qualifies for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules.

154. In the circumstances we have not considered it necessary to assess  the
    risk of suicide should the first appellant be forcibly removed from the
    United Kingdom.


    The second appellant

    Agreed Facts

155. The facts as found by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  and  agreed
    between the parties in respect of the second appellant are as follows:

     i) The second appellant is an Albanian national born in 1991. She  was
        born in North Albania.


    ii) Her family originate from Dukagjin, an area in the  middle  of  the
        Alps in Albania which  was  ruled  by  the  famous  Kanuni  i  Leke
        Dukagjinit. Her father came down from the mountains to make a  life
        working on the agricultural land.


   iii) The second appellant comes from a poor economic background.


    iv) The second appellant's father has very strict  traditional  beliefs
        and did not believe that women and girls should be educated.  Hence
        she was prevented from attending school after completing the  seven
        compulsory years of primary education.


     v) The second appellant met a man  (her  trafficker)  in  Albania  and
        entered into a relationship with him. The trafficker spent 7 months
        in jail in Albania during their  10  month  courtship.  The  second
        appellant left  Albania  on  15th  September  2013  using  her  own
        passport and went to Italy and then Belgium.


    vi) The day after they arrived in Belgium,  the  second  appellant  was
        forced by the trafficker to work as a sex slave. She was forced  to
        have non-consensual sexual intercourse with numerous men under  the
        immediate and real threat of physical violence. She was raped 4  or
        5 times a day for 8 weeks.


   vii) The second appellant escaped from a brothel in Belgium. She arrived
        in the UK on 21st January 2014 after being hidden in a lorry.


  viii) The second appellant has a son who was born in  June  2014  in  the
        United Kingdom. The father of her son is not known.


    ix) The second appellant  has  no  access  to  family  support.  It  is
        accepted that she faces a real risk of serious harm should  she  be
        returned to her father's home.  Additionally,  return  there  would
        place her back in the area from where she was trafficked and  where
        traffickers may still operate.


     x) The second appellant describes herself as having lived a  sheltered
        life in Albania and she has been told by others that  she  presents
        as younger than  her  years.  She  says  that  she  speaks  with  a
        distinctive Northern dialect.


    xi) The second appellant does not wish to return to Albania.



    Medical Evidence

156. Dr Agnew-Davies saw the second  appellant  on  one  occasion  for  four
    hours and interviewed her with the assistance of  an  interpreter.  She
    records that the second  appellant  "pinched  her  arm  and  wrung  her
    fingers" during the interview; her eyes were sad and her expression was
    pained. She was frequently tearful  and  at  points  her  voice  became
    uneven and her breathing ragged.


157. Her conclusions are that the second appellant presents  with  a  highly
    complex and chronic form of PTSD. The majority  of  her  trauma-related
    symptoms are related to her trafficking experience, but she did have  a
    number prior to her trafficking experience as a function of  oppression
    by her father: she attempted suicide in her teens.   She  also  suffers
    from chronic Major Depressive Disorder of moderate severity. The report
    notes that the diagnostic scales show her to be in the 'severe' range -
    for instance the results of the Trauma Symptoms Inventory indicate more
    severe distress than found in 97% of the population  -  but  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies has modified the results to 'moderate'  because  of  the  second
    appellant's commitment to, and engagement with, her son.  Similarly her
    risk of suicide is currently deemed to be low, as a function of  caring
    for her son in a secure  and  supported  environment.  Dr  Agnew-Davies
    however cautions that it could rapidly escalate if she anticipated that
    they would be returned to Albania:

         "In my professional opinion, [the  second  appellant]  is  rendered
         especially vulnerable by her mental illness and by  her  conviction
         that she and her son will be found and killed if they are  returned
         to Albania. At this stage in her recovery, she is  ill-equipped  to
         cope with any major change, especially one which removes  her  from
         her sense of safety and support network in the UK. In  my  opinion,
         her conviction that she would much  prefer  to  commit  suicide  is
         convincing and on which I think it highly  likely  that  she  would
         act."

158. The second  appellant  described  to  Dr  Agnew-Davies  suffering  from
    symptoms including intrusive memories and  feeling  constantly  scared.
    When she tries to sleep at night she is startled by what she thinks  is
    someone knocking on her window: in fact there is no-one there. The only
    night she can recall sleeping soundly  was  when  she  had  called  the
    police and they had reassured her that they were  patrolling  the  area
    and that there was no-one around.  She finds it impossible to relax and
    is haunted by thoughts such as "them" finding her and killing  her  son
    in front of her.  It is the thought of being captured which  makes  her
    contemplate suicide most often.    She feels shame, and  is  afraid  of
    her family: "I am a spoiled woman now and I will be forever judged as a
    bad woman".  Her physiological  symptoms  include  insomnia,  numbness,
    constant headaches and fatigue.  Asked  whether  she  stays  away  from
    certain people or places she said

         "...some day probably three months ago I  saw  someone  who  looked
         like [the man] and I froze. I couldn't do anything. I  couldn't  go
         forwards or backwards. I just froze and then I felt bad after that.
         I just wanted somewhere to sit. I didn't have any energy left in my
         body".


159. Dr Agnew-Davies believes that  the  symptoms  suffered  by  the  second
    appellant are primarily a function of her trafficking  experience,  but
    that they are complicated by  her  childhood  attachments.  The  second
    appellant described her father as "controlling and oppressive" and that
    she had frequently witnessed him beating her mother.  Although Dr Agnew-
    Davies has no current concerns about  this  history  impacting  on  the
    second appellant's ability to parent her son,  she  believes  that  her
    conditions, if left untreated, will have adverse implications  for  the
    long-term psychological health and  well-being  of  her  son.  In  oral
    evidence Dr Agnew-Davies was asked to comment on a  note  made  on  the
    second appellant's antenatal notes by a  midwife  to  the  effect  that
    there had been no domestic violence in her family home. Dr Agnew-Davies
    was unable to comment on that specific note but said that  it  did  not
    surprise her since she had in fact worked  on  a  randomised  trial  in
    which deficiencies had been found in primary care notes, in  particular
    a failure to capture domestic violence.  She has worked on a  programme
    to redesign the questions that are asked and it is now being rolled out
    across the country.


160. As with the first appellant, Dr  Agnew-Davies  finds  evidence  of  all
    four symptom clusters associated with PTSD.  In  respect  of  each  she
    records:

     i) The second appellant suffers intrusion more severely  than  99%  of
        the population. She describes being plagued by inescapable memories
        and thoughts, including flashbacks and nightmares. These intrusions
        can trigger suicidal thoughts.


    ii) The second appellant's symptoms of avoidance exceeded  those  found
        in 90%  of  the  population,  a  result  just  below  the  clinical
        threshold. Dr Agnew-Davies believes that this is because her  level
        of intrusion is so high she is unable to defend  against  traumatic
        recollections.   She generally  manages  to  avoid  these  thoughts
        whilst caring for her son, but  is  overwhelmed  by  them  when  he
        sleeps.


   iii) In addition to conscious avoidance many victims of  complex  trauma
        experience an involuntary response known as dissociation. This is a
        sub-conscious detachment from the  present  situation  in  which  a
        victim can become trapped and immersed in  isolated  recall  and/or
        flashbacks.   The second appellant exhibits a level of dissociation
        not found in 99% of the  population.   The  'freeze'  response  she
        described when seeing someone who looked like her trafficker  is  a
        "classic symptom of PTSD in the aftermath of trauma"


    iv) Dr Agnew-Davies found evidence of entrenched  negative  cognitions.
        The second appellant experiences persistent self-blame and shame.


     v) The second appellant exhibited physical signs of arousal during the
        interview when she was in a high state of agitation and there  were
        marked changes in her rate and depth of breathing. She was seen  to
        tremble and fidget. She experiences hot flushes and  sweating  even
        where the room temperature has  remained  constant.   Of  these  Dr
        Agnew-Davies observed: "the physiological changes that  I  observed
        are beyond any kind of wilful control  and  are  responses  of  the
        sympathetic branch of the nervous  system  (i.e.  responses  geared
        towards fight/flight/freeze responses in situations of danger)".

161. Dr Agnew-Davies specifically considers whether it is possible that  the
    second appellant is feigning her symptoms. She does not believe this to
    be the case. Many of the physiological  symptoms  were  witnessed,  not
    just described, and  Dr  Agnew-Davies  has  substantial  experience  in
    assessing such claims. For instance when she managed  the  UK  national
    domestic violence helpline she trained staff to detect women  who  were
    falsely claiming to be abused in order to  secure  accommodation.   The
    second appellant's responses were highly congruent  over  a  number  of
    standardised tests.  In conclusion Dr Agnew-Davies finds  that  she  is
    suffering from severe symptoms of chronic complex PTSD, complicated  by
    her  depressive  disorder.  These  conditions  cause  her   significant
    distress and impair her social functioning.


162.  Of  particular  concern  is  the  second  appellant's  high  level  of
    dissociation. This unconscious reaction can make her appear  "apathetic
    or  paralysed  in  a  psychological  state  long  known   as   'learned
    helplessness'. This state has grave implications because it can  impede
    efforts to escape situations of danger in  future...she  is  likely  to
    follow orders in a disembodied, dissociated state irrespective  of  her
    conscious will".  Further "she remains vulnerable to being led into and
    trapped within abusive relationships because she can easily lapse  into
    a well-established pattern of fear  and  obedience,  with  hopelessness
    about the possibility of escape:

         "...it is extremely common that  victims  of  childhood  abuse  and
         trafficking learn to comply with, not to  resist,  perpetrators  to
         reduce the risk of further violence".  Moreover she  cannot  easily
         hide  her  symptoms,  which  puts  her  at   greater   psychosocial
         vulnerability  because  unscrupulous  others  could  identify   and
         exploit her fear and compliance"

163. Dr Agnew-Davies identifies two positive factors in  her  assessment  of
    the second appellant. The first  is  the  presence  of  her  son:  "her
    devotion to her son and her determination to protect him  increase  her
    resilience and offset her symptomatology".   The  second  is  that  her
    condition  has  shown  some  improvement.  During  the  course  of  her
    pregnancy the second appellant accessed regular medical support. Her GP
    recorded her symptoms of headaches, gynaecological  and  urinary  tract
    infections, and observed that she appeared tearful, worried  and  slept
    badly. This led her to refer  the  second  appellant  for  counselling.
    This started in October 2014 and led to an  improvement  in  her  self-
    care. She was provided with coping strategies to deal with some of  her
    symptoms. The counsellor's notes accord with Dr Agnew-Davies assessment
    in respect of her son: "caring for her son was not  just  important  in
    giving her life a purpose but served to distract [the second appellant]
    from intrusive, painful memories, at least during  the  day".  Although
    the second appellant is still heavily dependent upon support Dr  Agnew-
    Davies finds that the medical, counselling and other  interventions  by
    authorities have had a positive impact upon her.  She is making  stable
    and significant progress.   Against these positive findings  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies sounds two notes of caution.  These gains are dependent upon the
    second appellant feeling secure, and any interruption or threat to that
    security will quickly lead to a deterioration in her mental health  and
    her ability to care for her son. The second is that the counselling  is
    not in itself going to enable her to recover: she still suffers from  a
    clinically significant  co-morbid  psychiatric  disorder  and  as  such
    requires further, substantial and long-term  treatment.  Her  symptoms,
    including fear, self-neglect and suicidal ideation, are  "barely  under
    control".


164. Dr  Agnew-Davies  is  unequivocal  in  her  assessment  of  the  second
    appellant's prognosis should she be returned to Albania.  Her intrusive
    memories are much more likely to be triggered there, and  her  symptoms
    of disassociation mean that it is highly likely that she will  "freeze"
    rather than take  adaptive  action  if  confronted  with  danger.   Her
    psychological profile severely reduces her capacity to  cope,  and  any
    deterioration thereof would negatively impact on her capacity to parent
    her son.  Dr Agnew-Davies does not believe that she is fit to  work  or
    live independently without a long-term support  package  such  as  that
    available to her in the UK.



    Our Findings


165. We re-make the decision in the second appellant's appeal as follows.


166. The second appellant does not wish to  return  to  Albania.   Like  the
    first appellant she is not therefore eligible for the IOM package,  but
    we are satisfied that she would gain entry into the Albanian NRM and be
    referred to a shelter.


167. She and her son would there be provided with  accommodation,  food  and
    basic healthcare. She may have access to counselling provided by a non-
    medically qualified member of staff.  She will be offered some form  of
    vocational training such as  a  hairdressing  or  cookery  course,  and
    although we are unable to make confident findings about the quality  or
    quantity of it, she would be offered some childcare to  enable  her  to
    attend these classes.  We are satisfied that the second appellant would
    be able to engage  with  these  services.  She  has  demonstrated  that
    ability in the UK where she has benefitted  from  medical  care,  ante-
    natal provision  and  counselling.  Her  son  gives  her  the  positive
    motivation to take part.  Because she has a young child  it  is  likely
    that she will be treated as a "heavy" case. Her  stay  in  the  shelter
    could be as long as 2 years.  She may therefore gain substantially from
    her time there.   In that length of time she could make  friends,  gain
    contacts and learn a skill to a relatively high standard.


168. The practical support offered by the  shelter  to  a  mother  like  the
    second appellant is a positive feature of the efforts of  the  Albanian
    government.  For some women in her position the net gain  made  in  the
    shelter will be of sufficient value to ensure that she can 'make it  on
    her own' once she leaves.   However our assessment must  focus  on  her
    particular characteristics and circumstances  of  as  set  out  in  the
    accepted facts and the findings of Dr Agnew-Davies.


169. The second appellant presents with a highly complex  and  chronic  form
    of PTSD as well as chronic Major  Depressive  Disorder.   Her  symptoms
    manifest in an external, physiological way,  as  well  as  causing  her
    internal  pain.   For  instance  in  their  consultation,  in  a  safe,
    welcoming and secure environment in the UK,  she  was  observed  to  be
    tearful, shaking, sweating and experiencing changes in breathing.   She
    described to Dr Agnew-Davies how she 'froze' and became paralysed  when
    she saw someone who looked like her trafficker.   These are indications
    that although she has made progress since her arrival in  the  UK,  the
    second appellant remains a highly vulnerable  individual.    Dr  Agnew-
    Davies believes that her conditions will stop improving should  she  be
    removed from the security of  the  UK;  in  fact  they  are  likely  to
    deteriorate.


170. These symptoms seriously compromise the second appellant's  ability  to
    cope, and to parent her son without long-term support.  Even in the  UK
    she continues to suffer from intrusive memories, particularly at  night
    when her son is asleep and the distraction he gives her during daylight
    hours is removed.   This leads to serious concerns about the risk  that
    the second appellant would attempt suicide should she  be  returned  to
    Albania, or perceive a threat that she and her son would be found:

         "...in my opinion, her conviction that she  would  much  prefer  to
         commit suicide is convincing and on which I think it highly  likely
         that she would act."

    She credibly describes being haunted by thoughts that  "they" will find
    her and kill her son in front of her.    We accept that these fears are
    far more likely to overwhelm her in a flat  in  Tirana  than  they  are
    likely to do in the UK.


171. Even with a relatively long stay in the shelter  the  second  appellant
    will, at some point, be required to leave and live on her  own.  As  we
    have found, this is not impossible, even for  a  woman  with  a  child.
    Professor Haxhiymeri told us about survivors of domestic violence  that
    her organisation has helped to relocate away from their families.   The
    second appellant is however  likely  to  face  significant  social  and
    practical obstacles. There will be the same difficulties that the first
    appellant will face in finding and keeping employment well paid  enough
    to secure accommodation. In the second appellant's case she  faces  the
    additional hurdle of paying for childcare.  She and her son  will  face
    the social stigma of living without their wider family. We accept  that
    even in the urban setting of Tirana this  small  family  unit  will  be
    likely to raise questions.  This will feed  into  the  subjective  fear
    that the second appellant  already  holds  about  being  found  by  her
    family, or her former traffickers.    In  this  regard  we  recall  the
    thoughtful conclusions of Wilson LJ in  VMN  that  when  assessing  the
    reasonableness of internal flight for  a  single  mother  consideration
    must be given to:

         "...her ability convincingly to present to those in her new  milieu
         a false history relating to herself and to her daughter,  including
         the latter's paternity, and a false explanation for  their  arrival
         there;  and,  in  the  light  of  her   substantial   psychological
         vulnerability, consideration of her ability to sustain  beyond  the
         short term a reasonable life for them both on that false basis".


172. Having taken all  of  those  factors  into  account  we  conclude  that
    internal flight is not a reasonable option for the second appellant and
    her son.  Although she has shown a degree of resilience, driven by  her
    impulse to be there for her child, we are far from satisfied  that  she
    will be able to cope upon return to Albania. Dr Agnew-Davies has  found
    her symptoms, including fear, self-neglect and suicidal ideation, to be
    "barely  under  control".   There  is  likely  to  be   a   significant
    deterioration in her condition should she be returned to an environment
    where she believes she and her son to be at  risk.  The  distress  that
    this will cause will be  alleviated  to  some  degree  by  the  support
    offered by a shelter, but on the evidence before us she is unlikely  to
    receive mental health treatment to the standard and  efficacy  required
    in her particular circumstances.


173. We therefore allow  the  appeal  of  the  second  appellant  on  asylum
    grounds and Article 3 ECHR. In the alternative she qualifies for  leave
    to remain under paragraph 276ADE because  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration in Albania.  Again, we have not considered
    it necessary to address the discrete issue  raised  as  to  a  possible
    violation of Article 3 arising from the risk of suicide.



    DECISIONS

174. The appeals of both appellants are allowed on asylum grounds.

175. Neither appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection  because  they
    are refugees.

176. The appeals of both appellants are allowed on human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeals are allowed on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


                     Appendix A - Error of Law Decision


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                             T D (1st appellant)
                             A D (2nd APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss S Khan, Counsel (1st appellant)
     Miss F Daley, Counsel (2nd appellant)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.  The first appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 15 March  1998.  The
second appellant is also a citizen of Albania, born  on  31  December  1991.
Their appeals were heard by Judge Saffer on 8 August 2014 and in  each  case
he dismissed the appeals against the decisions in respect of each  appellant
to remove her from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant made on 23  June
2014 and 20 May 2014 respectively, those  decisions  being  consequent  upon
the decisions to refuse their claims for asylum.

2. It is not at this stage necessary to set  out  the  appellants'  case  in
detail; it is sufficient to note that in  both  cases  the  appellants  were
trafficked from Albania,  forced  into  prostitution,  and  subjected  to  a
significant amount of sexual violence.  In both cases threats were  made  to
them by their families and Judge Saffer found that they would be at risk  in
their home areas in north Albania.

3. The respondent argues that  in  both  cases  there  would  be  sufficient
police  protection  and  support  in  Albania;  that  the  appellants  could
relocate; and, that it would be reasonable to expect  them  so  to  do,  the
fact that the second appellant has a young child notwithstanding.

4. Judge Saffer  dismissed  the  appeals  on  asylum  and  on  human  rights
grounds.  Having set out paragraphs 1.1.9  to  1.1.14  of  the  respondent's
Operational Guidance Note of July 2014 he concluded:-

      i. that the situation in Albania had changed significantly  since  the
         decision in AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT  80
         (IAC);

     ii. that the appellants would be able to internally relocate  initially
         to  the  shelters  available  and  within  the  support   framework
         provided; and, seek police protection;

    iii. that there was no risk that they would be tracked  down  in  either
         case by those who had formerly tricked them into prostitution or by
         their families; nor was he satisfied that they would be  forced  to
         work again as prostitutes or re-trafficked  given  the  package  of
         support  protection;  that  they  would  given  such   professional
         psychological support as required.

5. Both appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  ground  that  Judge
Saffer had erred in failing to give sufficient reasons  for  departing  from
AM and BM; and, that he erred with regard to the evidence upon which he  did
rely, as set out in the OGN; and, that he had not  properly  considered  the
specific circumstances of either appellant in judging whether, on the  basis
of the new evidence, they would not be at risk on return to Albania.

6. Permission to appeal was granted in both  cases  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Andrew who stated:

         "The grounds complain that the judge did  not  follow  the  country
         guidance case of AM and BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG  [2010]
         UKUT 80.  That he had not ..... because he took note of the OGN  in
         July 2014.  This is a policy document and not country  information.
         I accept that there is any arguable material error of  law  in  the
         determination."

7. We consider, having heard submissions  from  all  three  representatives,
that while Judge Saffer was entitled to take the Operational  Guidance  Note
into account, there is insufficient indication that  he  took  into  account
that this is in part a policy document produced by  the  respondent  setting
out her view of the risks on return to Albania;  in  addition  the  document
seeks to give guidance to caseworkers.

8. The OGN is clearly addressed to decision makers within  the  Home  Office
and whilst we accept that as Mr  Whitwell  submitted,  it  is  open  to  the
Secretary of State through  guidance  notes  to  give  instructions  to  her
caseworkers as to how they should reach decisions, it does  not  necessarily
follow that she can submit that this guidance  should  be  followed  by  the
Tribunal, nor did Mr Whitwell make such  a  submission.  Indeed,  had  Judge
Saffer actually read the document as a whole, he would  have  realised  that
the respondent accepts that  AM  &  BM  is  still  good  law  and  expressly
requires at 1.1.15 a careful analysis of individual circumstances.

9. It cannot be discerned from the determination that Judge  Saffer  engaged
with the evidence set out in section 2 to 7 of the OGN,  much  of  which  is
critical of the facilities offered to those who have been trafficked  rather
than the  policy  summary  as  set  out  in  his  determination.   There  is
insufficient indication in his determination of  any  nuanced  fact-specific
consideration  as  to  how  the  changes,  and  indeed  in  the  systems  of
protection put in place by  the  Albanian  government  of  for  that  matter
funded by the British government would be  suitable  for  either  appellant.
That changes were afoot was a matter considered in AM & BM but  rather  than
engage with that decision and give sufficient  reasons  for  departing  from
it, Judge Saffer simply chose not to follow it. That is an error of law.  It
is unlawful for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to seek not to follow a  Country
Guidance case on the basis  not  of  evidence  but  of  a  gloss  placed  on
background evidence by one party to adversarial proceedings.

10. Accordingly, for these reasons, we are satisfied that  the  decision  of
Judge Saffer involved the making of an error of law.  We therefore set  them
aside.

11. It is our view the guidance of these appeals are  suitable  for  country
guidance and accordingly, they will be listed for Case Management Review  on
15 January in Manchester before Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson when a  decision
will be made as to the  future  conduct  of  these  appeals  and  directions
given.




Signed                                  Date:  31 December 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




        Appendix B - Documents and Reports before the Upper Tribunal

     Expert Reports before the Upper Tribunal with Supplementary Country
                                  Documents


Dr Haxhiymeri Report:

|Date       |Source                     |Description                        |
|17 April   |Dr Edlira Haxhiymeri       |Report for TD (Albania) and AD     |
|2015       |                           |(Albania)                          |
|January    |International Organisation |United Nations Programme 'Support  |
|2015       |for Migration (IOM)        |to Social Inclusion in Albania' -  |
|           |                           |Profile of the Situation of        |
|           |                           |trafficking victims and efforts for|
|           |                           |social inclusion                   |
|2014       |Produced for the           |Human Trafficking in the Western   |
|           |International Organisation |Balkans, Needs Assessment, IOM     |
|           |for Migration by the       |Development Fund                   |
|           |Research Communication     |                                   |
|           |Group                      |                                   |
|2009       |Centre For Legal Civic     |Report on "The development and     |
|           |Initiatives                |implementation of the Albanian     |
|           |                           |legislation to combat human        |
|           |                           |trafficking in human beings, with a|
|           |                           |focus on the protection of rights  |
|           |                           |of victims of trafficking"         |
|2013       |Different & Equal          |Annual Report                      |
|10 April   |Stop Corruption Website    |Link:                              |
|2015       |                           |http://www.stopkorrupsionit.al/    |
|10 April   |Transparency International |Link:                              |
|2015       |Website                    |www.transparancy.org/cpi2014/result|
|           |                           |s                                  |

Dr Robert Chenciner Report:

|Date          |Source                   |Description                       |
|15 April 2015 |Robert Chenciner         |Final Report                      |
|2014          |Tjeter Vizion,           |Project title: Improvement of     |
|              |AssistiMPACT (EU funded  |identification referral and       |
|              |website)                 |protection of victims of          |
|              |                         |trafficking through the activities|
|              |                         |of Mobile Unit,                   |
|24 June 2014  |World Vision             |New smartphone app, hotline make  |
|              |                         |reporting human trafficking       |
|              |                         |possible for more Albanians       |
|27 March 2015 |Qendra sociale " Vatra" /|Netzkraft Movement: Topics -      |
|              |Psycho-Social Centre     |Women's policy / social policy /  |
|              |"Vatra"                  |disabled persons / aid            |
|              |                         |organisation                      |
|07 January 15 |Institute for Democracy  |Police Integrity and Corruption in|
|              |and Mediation (IDM)      |Albania                           |
|30 April 2014 |Immigration and Refugee  |Responses to Information Requests:|
|              |Board of Canada          |Albania - Domestic violence,      |
|              |                         |including legislation, state      |
|              |                         |protection and support services   |
|              |                         |available to victims              |
|12 April 2015 |Radio Free Europe Radio  |How Long Can You Keep A Secret?   |
|              |Liberty                  |For Kosovo's Wartime Rape Victims,|
|              |                         |The Answer Is: Maybe Forever      |
|2006          |International Migration  |PART III International Migrant    |
|              |Outlook                  |Remittances and their Role in     |
|              |                         |Development                       |
|10 October 13 |Office for Democratic    |Albania, Parliamentary Elections, |
|              |Institutions and Human   |23 June 2013 Final Report         |
|              |Rights                   |                                  |
|11 June 2007  |Council of the European  |2807th Justice and Home affairs   |
|              |Union                    |Council meeting: 12 and 13 June   |
|              |                         |2007 -  International             |
|              |                         |multi-criminal mafia activity:    |
|              |                         |Council conclusions setting EU    |
|              |                         |priorities for fight against      |
|              |                         |organized crime based on the 2007 |
|              |                         |organised crime threat assessment |
|7 September   |The Guardian - UK news   |Albanian mafia targets Britain    |
|1999          |                         |                                  |
|10 March 13   |There Must be Justice    |SHAPE OF THE ALBANIAN ORGANIZED   |
|              |                         |CRIME: Albanian Mafia Clan        |
|              |                         |Keljmendi List                    |
|16 October    |International Business   |Tip Of The Iceberg: French Police |
|2012          |Times                    |Arrest Albanian Heroin            |
|              |                         |Traffickers, But Balkan Criminal  |
|              |                         |Gangs Tighten Grip Across Europe  |
|10 January    |Digital Journal          |Organised Albanian crime          |
|2013          |                         |destabilising Greece              |
|16 October    |Osservatorio Balcani e   |The Albanian mafia under          |
|2013          |Caucaso - Italian journal|investigation                     |
|11 December   |Independent Balkan News  |Clashes between government and    |
|2013          |Agency                   |opposition on the figures of      |
|              |                         |criminality in Albania            |
|23 June 2014  |The World Post           |Police Destroy Over 40 Tons Of    |
|              |                         |Marijuana In Lawless Albanian     |
|              |                         |Village                           |
|16 June 2014  |Daily Mail Online        |Albanian drug dealers torched     |
|              |                         |�3.bn of cannabis in Lazarat to   |
|              |                         |destroy evidence                  |
|27 April 2011 |Haaretz - leading Israeli|Israeli sex trafficker linked to  |
|              |newspaper, via           |the Albanian mafia sentenced to 18|
|              |Underground Serbian Cafe |years in Russia                   |
|01 July 2009  |South Wales Argus        |Jail for Newport sex traffickers  |
|              |                         |who sold woman for �2000          |
|11 April 2012 |The Independent          |Albanian murder suspect arrested  |
|27 June 2011  |Refworld                 |2011 Trafficking in Persons       |
|              |                         |Report: Albania (Tier 2), Country |
|              |                         |narratives                        |
|04 June 2008  |Refworld                 |Trafficking in Persons Report 2008|
|              |                         |- Albania (Tier 2 Watch list)     |
|19 June 2013  |Refworld                 |2013 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) |
|              |                         |Report: Albania (Tier 2, Watch    |
|              |                         |List), Country narratives         |
|19 June 2014  |US Department of State   |Trafficking in Persons Report 2014|
|              |                         |Albania                           |
|27 February   |US Department of State   |2013 Human Rights Reports: Albania|
|2014          |                         |                                  |
|2004          |International Centre for |The Kanun in present day Albania, |
|              |Minority Studies and     |Kosovo, and Montenegro            |
|              |Intercultural Relations  |                                  |
|              |(IMIR)                   |                                  |
|29 April 2012 |Violence is not our      |Albania: Virginity pressures bring|
|              |Culture                  |women to the operating table      |
|18 September  |Balkan Insight           |Albanians See Police as Corrupt,  |
|2014          |                         |Surveys Say                       |
|25 March 2015 |Institute for Democracy  |Representative Profile            |
|              |and Mediation: OSCE      |                                  |
|              |Network                  |                                  |
|19 April 2013 |US Department of State   |Country Reports on Human Rights   |
|              |                         |Practices fir 2012: Albania       |
|2 January 2012|Regional Anti-Corruption |In Albania, an underfunded        |
|              |Initiative:  Southeast   |healthcare system leads to bribery|
|              |European Times           |                                  |
|4 December    |Albania by Europe-cities |Healthcare in Albania             |
|2014          |                         |(www.europe-cities.com)           |
|2006          |World Health Organisation|WHO-AIMS Report on Mental Health  |
|              |(WHO) / Ministry of      |system in Albania                 |
|              |Health Albania           |                                  |
|24 September  |Travel.state.gov / US -  |Medical facilities and health     |
|2013          |US Consular information  |information                       |
|              |for travellers           |                                  |

Country Documents before the Upper Tribunal:

|Date          |Source                   |Description                       |
|                                                                           |
|Undated                                                                    |
|Undated       |International            |Reintegrating Albanian Victims of |
|              |Organisation for         |Human Trafficking, Package        |
|              |Migration (IOM)          |Information                       |
|Undated       |International            |Information Sheet                 |
|              |Organisation for         |                                  |
|              |Migration (IOM)          |                                  |
|Undated       |International            |Victim of Trafficking: Interview  |
|              |Organisation for         |Assessment Form                   |
|              |Migration (IOM)          |                                  |
|                                                                           |
|2011                                                                       |
|2011          |Ministry of Inferior:    |Standard Operating Procedures for |
|              |Office of the National   |the Identification and Referral of|
|              |Coordinator on Combating |Victims of Trafficking and        |
|              |Trafficking Persons      |Potential Victims of Trafficking  |
|2011          |WAVE Report              |Albania extract                   |
|                                                                           |
|2012                                                                       |
|12 February   |SIT Graduate Institute / |Unlocking the Roots of Stigma     |
|2012          |SIT Study Abroad: SIT    |Towards Victims of Trafficking in |
|              |Digital Collections      |Albania                           |
|                                                                           |
|2013                                                                       |
|February 2013 |European Scientific      |Trafficking in Human Beings:      |
|              |Journal (Vol. 9, No. 4   |Paradigms of a Successful         |
|              |ISSN: 1857-7881)         |Reintegration into Society        |
|              |                         |(Albanian Case)                   |
|1 May 2013    |UK Home Office           |Operational Guidance Note Albania |
|                                                                           |
|2014                                                                       |
|2014          |OSCE Office for          |Guiding Principles on Human Rights|
|              |Democratic Institutions  |in the Return of Trafficked       |
|              |and Human Rights (ODIHR) |Persons                           |
|29 January    |Committee of the Parties |Report submitted by the Albanian  |
|2014          |to the Council of Europe |authorities on measures taken to  |
|              |Convention on Action     |comply Committee of the Parties   |
|              |against Trafficking in   |Recommendation CP (2012) 1 on the |
|              |Human Beings             |implementation of the Council of  |
|              |                         |Europe Convention on Action       |
|              |                         |against Trafficking in Human      |
|              |                         |Beings                            |
|21 May 2014   |ABC News                 |Albanian Girls Trafficked For Sex,|
|              |                         |Albanian Girls Kidnapped, Devoured|
|              |                         |Into a World of Prostitution      |
|16 June 2014  |Net Hope                 |Helping Albanians Report          |
|              |                         |Trafficking and Save Lives        |
|19 June 2014  |US Department of State   |Trafficking in Persons Report 2014|
|              |                         |Albania                           |
|20 June 2014  |Embassy of the United    |Time to End the Shame of Modern   |
|              |States Tirana, Albania   |Slavery in Albania                |
|17 July 2014  |UK Home Office           |Country Information and Guidance  |
|              |                         |Albania - Trafficking             |
|19 September  |Home Office              |Country Information and Guidance  |
|14            |                         |- Albania: Trafficking            |
|26 September  |Mary Ward Loreto         |Albania Hope, United Religious    |
|14            |Foundation               |Against Trafficking (URAT) - 3    |
|              |                         |month report (September 2013 -    |
|              |                         |March 2014)                       |
|30 September  |National Crime Agency    |Strategic Assessment: The Nature &|
|2014          |(NCA)                    |Scale of Human Trafficking in 2013|
|October 2014  |European Commission      |Albania Progress Report,          |
|              |                         |Enlargement Strategy              |
|                                                                           |
|2015                                                                       |
|19 February   |British Embassy Tirana   |Letter: Albania: Trafficking:     |
|2015          |                         |National Reception Centre / IOM   |
|25 February   |Amnesty International    |Amnesty International Report      |
|2015          |                         |2014/15 Albania                   |
|March 2015    |Foreign & Commonwealth   |Human Rights & Democracy: The 2014|
|              |Office                   |Foreign & Commonwealth Office     |
|              |                         |Report                            |
|March 2015    |Women Against Violence   |WAVE Report 2014: Specialized     |
|              |Europe (WAVE)            |Women's Support Services and New  |
|              |                         |Tools for Combating Gender-based  |
|              |                         |Violence in Europe [Country       |
|              |                         |Profile - Albania]                |
|26 March 2015 |International            |Email and Written Statement on    |
|              |Organisation for         |Reintegrating Albanian Victims of |
|              |Migration (IOM)          |Human Trafficking Project         |
|22 April 2015 |International            |Emails and Additional Evidence    |
|              |Organisation for         |(including: Reintegrating Albanian|
|              |Migration (IOM)          |Victims of Human Trafficking      |
|              |                         |November 2013 - April 2015;       |
|              |                         |European Commission/IOM,          |
|              |                         |coordinated approach for the      |
|              |                         |reintegration of Victims of       |
|              |                         |Trafficking (CARE); IOM           |
|              |                         |information on CARE; IOM, Counter |
|              |                         |Trafficking; and Gewaltfreileben  |
|              |                         |on CARE.                          |



-----------------------
[1] At the time of the UNP report in January 2015 this equated to
approximately � 70
[2] page 158
[3] De Waal, C in Pichler, R ed. (2014) Legacy and Change: Albanian
Transformation from Multidisciplinary Perspectives at 123
[4] Institute for Democracy and Mediation (2015) Police Integrity and CE70
[5] page 158
[6] De Waal, C in Pichler, R ed. (2014) Legacy and Change: Albanian
Transformation from Multidisciplinary Perspectives at 123
[7] Institute for Democracy and Mediation (2015) Police Integrity and
Corruption in Albania
[8] Ashiana is a charity which supports women from BME and refugee
communities who have experienced domestic abuse, including forced marriage
and "honour" based violence, or who have been trafficked to the UK for the
purpose of domestic slavery or sexual exploitation.   Access to the
trafficking project at Ashiana is contingent upon a woman being given a
positive Reasonable Grounds decision by the CA and their support is focused
on enabling a woman to access her rights and entitlements under the Council
of Europe Convention on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings.

[9] Paragraph 212 of AM & BM
[10] ibid, paragraph 63
[11] See for instance paragraph 156
[12] See for instance Lord Hope of Craighead at 47.
[13] Clinical Outcomes of Routine Evaluation (CORE),  Beck Anxiety
Inventory, Beck Depression Inventory (II), Trauma Symptom Inventory and the
Beck Suicide Scales
[14] See for instance paragraph 3.7.1 of the report related to the first
appellant
[15] UK Signed this on the 23 March 2007, ratified it on the 17 December
2008 and it came into force in the UK on the 1 April 2009
[16] As defined by the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-V)
[17] Dr Agnew-Davies cites research by Herman (1992), Van der Volk & Fisler
(1995), Jones et al (2001) and Mechanic (2004)

