
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

   ER and Others (EU national; self-sufficiency; illegal employment) Ireland
                                                          [2006] UKAIT 00096



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                            Date of Hearing:  26
September 2006
                                  Promulgated on: 18
                                December 2006
                                   Before:

                       Senior Immigration Judge Grubb
                      Senior Immigration Judge Southern


                                   Between



                                                                  Appellants


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:          Mr B Cox, Counsel of the Law Centre (NI)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Payne, Counsel instructed by the Treasury
Solicitor


An EU (EEA) national child cannot establish a right of residence based  upon
self-sufficiency  where  the  resources  relied  upon  are  derived  from  a
parent's employment or self-employed when there is no lawful basis for  that
parent's  residence  or  employment  (or   self-employment)   in   the   UK.
Consequently, the parent/carer can derive no right  of  residence  under  EU
law in such circumstances either.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This reconsideration concerns the appeal of an EU national child,  his
     parents and sister each of whom claims a right  of  residence  in  the
     United Kingdom under EU law.  The  first  and  fourth  appellants  are
     married and are nationals of the Philippines (the mother and  father).
     The third appellant is their son who was born in Northern  Ireland  on
     13 May 2004 and so, by virtue of the jus soli rule then applied by the
     Republic of Ireland to questions of nationality, is a citizen  of  the
     Republic of Ireland.   The second appellant is the daughter and sister
     respectively of the other appellants and is  also  a  citizen  of  the
     Philippines.

  2. The facts are as follows and do not appear to be a matter of  dispute.
      The family is from the Philippines.  The first appellant (the mother)
     was issued with a work permit in Manila on 23 July  2002  and  entered
     the United Kingdom on 30 July 2002.   She  took  up  employment  as  a
     senior care assistant with a private nursing  home  (Strathearn  Court
     Nursing Home) in Belfast,  Northern  Ireland  which  was  owned  by  a
     company called Four Seasons Health Care Ltd.  On 18 August  2003,  the
     fourth  appellant  (the  father)  and  the  second  appellant   (their
     daughter) came to live with her in Belfast.  On 6 September 2003,  her
     husband also began to work for Four Seasons.

  3. On 13 May 2004, the third appellant - the son of the first and  fourth
     appellants - was born in the  Ulster  Hospital  in  Dundonald.   As  a
     result, he is an Irish national and he was issued with a  passport  by
     the Republic of Ireland on 3 July 2004.

  4. The mother's leave to remain and work permit was due to expire in July
     2004.  The same is also true for the father.  An extension was  sought
     but it seems that all did not go  smoothly  and  her  leave  and  work
     permit were not renewed.  From the end of July 2004 (the precise  date
     is not clear from the papers), the appellants  have  been  in  the  UK
     without leave.  The mother was told by her employers  that  she  would
     have to return to the Philippines.  However,  the  mother  and  father
     continued to be employed by Four Seasons and that was the situation at
     the date of the Secretary of State's decision and has remained so ever
     since.

  5. On 16 August 2005, an application was made  on  behalf  of  the  third
     appellant for a residence permit under EU law.  He claimed a right  of
     residence in the UK under Article 18 EC Treaty and Directive 90/364 as
     a self-sufficient EU citizen.   Applications were also made on  behalf
     of his parents and sister for leave to remain as  his  family  members
     under paragraph 257C of the Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in
     Immigration Rules, HC 395).

  6. On 13 January 2006, the Secretary of State refused the applications on
     the basis that he was not satisfied that the appellants would be  able
     to support themselves without recourse to public funds  or  by  taking
     employment.  The latter being prohibited for the parents by virtue  of
     paragraphs 257C and 257D of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appellants
     appealed.  In a determination promulgated on 17 July 2006, Immigration
     Judge S  Gillespie  dismissed  the  appeals.   The  appellants  sought
     reconsideration which was ordered by a Senior Immigration Judge on  31
     July 2006.

The relevant EU and domestic legal provisions

  7. We begin with the principal EU  and  domestic  legal  provisions  that
     govern this appeal.   These  are  fully  set  out  in  the  Tribunal's
     decision in MA  (EU  national;  self-sufficiency,  lawful  employment)
     Bangladesh [2006] UKAIT 00090 whose text we gratefully adopt here.  As
     in that case, throughout this determination we refer to the rights  of
     free  movement  and  residence  of  EU  nationals  although  the   EEA
     Regulations in fact apply to the slightly  broader  category  of  "EEA
     national" as defined in regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

  8. The third appellant (as a young child) does not rely upon any economic
     right to move to and reside in the UK as, for  example,  a  worker  or
     self-employed person.  Rather,  he  relies  upon  the  right  of  free
     movement and residence of an EU national found in  Article  18  of  EC
     Treaty which is in the following terms:

           "1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States, subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in this  Treaty  and
           by the measures adopted to give it effect.

           2. If action by the Community should prove necessary  to  attain
           this objective and this Treaty has not  provided  the  necessary
           powers,  the  Council  may  adopt  provisions  with  a  view  to
           facilitating the exercise of the rights referred to in paragraph
           1. The Council  shall  act  in  accordance  with  the  procedure
           referred to in Article 251."


  9. As Article 18(1) makes clear, the right to move and reside is  subject
     to limitations and conditions laid down in measures adopted to give it
     effect.  Those measures were originally laid  down  in  EEC  Directive
     90/364 but were replaced with effect from 30 April 2006  by  Directive
     2004/38.

 10. Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38 states that:

           "All Union citizens shall have the right  of  residence  on  the
           territory of another Member State for a period  of  longer  than
           three months if they:
           ...
           (b) have sufficient resources for themselves  and  their  family
           members not to become a burden on the social  assistance  system
           of the host Member State during the period of residence and have
           comprehensive sickness insurance in the host Member  State;  ...
           ".

 11. The Directive further provides that  the  exercise  of  the  right  of
     residence should not impose an "unreasonable  burden"  on  the  social
     assistance system of the host Member State during an initial period of
     residence for three months (Recital 10 and Art 14(1))  or  during  the
     extended period of residence beyond three months (Recital 16  and  Art
     14(2)).

 12. In addition,  Article  7(2)  of  the  Directive  confers  a  right  of
     residence upon certain persons (not themselves EU nationals)  who  are
     family members of an EU national who has a right  of  residence.   For
     present purposes, those family members include direct relatives in the
     ascending line providing they are dependent upon the EU national  (Art
     2(2)(d)).  Likewise, the Directive makes provision  for  other  family
     members, for example siblings but again only  providing  they  are  or
     were dependent upon, or members of the household of, the  EU  national
     in another EU country (Art 3(2)).

 13. Directive 90/364  was  transposed  into  UK  law  by  the  Immigration
     (European Economic Area) Regulations  2000,  SI  2000/2326  (the  "EEA
     Regulations 2000").   However, with effect from  30  April  2006,  the
     latter were replaced  by  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
     Regulations 2006, SI 2006/1003 (the "EEA Regulations 2006")  in  order
     to give effect to Directive 2004/38.   The EEA Regulations  2006  take
     effect  retrospectively.   Schedule  4,  paragraph   5(1)   of   those
     Regulations provides that any appeal pending on 30 April 2006  against
     an EEA decision taken under the 2000 Regulations shall be treated as a
     pending appeal against a corresponding  EEA  decision  under  the  EEA
     Regulations 2006.   As a consequence, they are the  relevant  domestic
     provisions to be applied by us and the  third  appellant's  appeal  is
     treated as being an appeal against a refusal to issue  a  registration
     certificate.

 14. The EEA Regulations 2006 define those EEA nationals who are "qualified
     persons" and entitled to recognition of their  free  movement  rights.
     Regulation 6(1)  includes  within  that  category  "a  self-sufficient
     person".  In turn, Regulation 4(1)(c)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006
     states that:

           "(c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-


                 (i) sufficient resources not to  become  a  burden  on  the
                 social assistance system of the United Kingdom  during  his
                 period of residence; and


                 (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in  the  United
                 Kingdom; ... ."

 15. It is this provision which is relied upon by the third appellant.  The
     level  of  resources  required  is  that  which  is  enough  to  avoid
     eligibility to social assistance in the UK.  Regulation 4(4) states:

           "(4)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (1)(c)  and  (d)   and
           paragraphs (2) and (3), the resources of  the  person  concerned
           and, where applicable, any family members, are to be regarded as
           sufficient if they exceed the maximum level of resources which a
           United Kingdom national and his family members may possess if he
           is to become eligible for social  assistance  under  the  United
           Kingdom benefit system."

 16.  Thus,  the  right  of  movement  and  residence  is  dependent   upon
     establishing (1) self-sufficiency in the sense of sufficient resources
     to avoid  reliance  on  the  social  security  system;  and  (2)  that
     comprehensive health insurance is in place for the whole family  (see,
     Ali v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 484 and now, W(China) and X(China)  v  SSHD
     [2006] EWCA Civ 1494).

 17. In keeping with Directive 2004/38, the EEA Regulations 2006  confer  a
     derivative right of free movement and residence  upon  certain  family
     members of an EU national exercising a right such  as  that  found  in
     Article 18 EC Treaty.  Where  that  is  the  case,  the  whole  family
     (including the family members) must  be  self-sufficient.   Regulation
     4(2) requires that the EU national's "family members" are also covered
     by comprehensive sickness insurance and the total  resources  of  that
     individual and his family are adequate to avoid them becoming a burden
     on the social assistance system.  It provides as follows:

           "4(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family members
           of the person concerned reside in the United Kingdom  and  their
           right to reside is dependent upon their being family members  of
           that person-


           (a) the requirement for that person to have sufficient resources
           not to become a burden on the social assistance  system  of  the
           United Kingdom during his period  of  residence  shall  only  be
           satisfied if his resources and those of the family  members  are
           sufficient to avoid him and the family members becoming  such  a
           burden;

           (b) the  requirement  for  that  person  to  have  comprehensive
           sickness insurance cover in the United  Kingdom  shall  only  be
           satisfied if he and his family members have such cover."

 18. Apart from  spouses  (and  civil  partners),  the  rights  of  "family
     members" apply, for example, to direct ascendants (such as parents  or
     grandparents) of an EU national but only if they  are  dependent  upon
     that EU national (see, reg  7(1)(c)  and  Art  2(1)(d)  respectively).
     Likewise, as we have seen, siblings would only be covered if they  are
     or were dependent upon, or  members  of  the  household  of,  the  EEA
     national in another EEA country (reg 8(1) and (2)).  That is  not  the
     situation here.  It is, of course, not suggested in this case that the
     parents or sister are dependent upon the first appellant.  Indeed,  it
     is the converse here.  Thus, only  the  third  appellant  is  directly
     covered  by  the  Directive  or  EEA  Regulations  2006.   The   other
     appellants rely upon the Court of Justice's decision in Chen.

 19. Chen also concerned an EU national child living  in  the  UK  who  had
     Irish nationality as a result of being born in Northern Ireland.   She
     lived with her parents who were Chinese nationals.   As  a  result  of
     income derived from her parents' Chinese business, the child's  mother
     had sufficient resources to support herself and the child.  They  also
     had comprehensive health insurance.  As regards the child,  the  Court
     of Justice held that she had a right of residence as a self-sufficient
     person by virtue of  Article  18  of  the  EC  treaty  and  (the  then
     applicable) Directive 90/364.  It was not necessary  that  she  should
     have the resources personally.  It  was  sufficient  that  there  were
     adequate resources available to her from her mother that made her self-
     sufficient.   As regards her mother (who was her primary  carer),  the
     Court recognised that she was also entitled to reside  in  the  UK  in
     order to permit the child to exercise or enjoy its own EU right.   The
     Court of Justice said (at para [45]):

           "... a refusal to allow the parent,  whether  a  national  of  a
           Member State or a national of a non-member country, who  is  the
           carer of a child to whom Article  18  EC  and  Directive  90/364
           grant a right of residence, to reside with  that  child  in  the
           host Member State would deprive the child's right  of  residence
           of any useful effect. It is clear  that  enjoyment  by  a  young
           child of a right of residence necessarily implies that the child
           is entitled to be accompanied by the person who is  his  or  her
           primary carer and accordingly  that  the  carer  must  be  in  a
           position to reside with the child in the host Member  State  for
           the duration of such residence ... ."

 20. In relation to self-sufficiency, there is no doubt that the  Court  of
     Justice required that the child and her carers had adequate  resources
     not to be a burden on the social security system and were  covered  by
     comprehensive health insurance (see GM  and  AM,  at  paras  [41]-[42]
     andnow, W(China) and X(China) v SSHD).

 21. Finally, we set out, as relevant to this appeal, paragraphs  257C  and
     257D of the Immigration Rules which deal with the requirements for the
     grant of leave to enter or remain as a parent/carer or sibling of what
     might be termed a "Chen child".

           "257C The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
           enter or remain as the primary  carer  or  relative  of  an  EEA
           national self-sufficient child are that the applicant:


           (i) is:
                 (a) the primary carer; or
                  (b) the parent; or
                  (c) the sibling,
                 of an EEA national under the age of 18 who has a  right  of
                 residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  2006   EEA
                 Regulations as a self-sufficient person; and


           (ii) is living with the EEA national or is seeking entry to  the
           United Kingdom in order to live with the EEA national; and


           (iii) in the case of a sibling of the EEA national:
                 a) is under the age of 18 or has current leave to enter  or
                    remain in this capacity; and
                 b) is unmarried, has not formed an independent family  unit
                    and is not leading an independent life; and


           (iv) can, and  will,  be  maintained  and  accommodated  without
           taking employment or having recourse to public funds;  and ...."


 22. Paragraph 257D states that

           "Leave to enter or remain  is  to  be  subject  to  a  condition
           prohibiting employment and recourse to public funds."


Right of appeal

 23. There is no doubt that  the  third  appellant  -  who  was  refused  a
     residence document as an EU national - has a right of  appeal  against
     that decision  (now) under regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations  2006.
     The position is less clear for the remainder of the family.   In  each
     of the decisions made in respect of the parents and sister  to  refuse
     them leave to remain under paragraph 257C, the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision letter points out that there is "no right of  appeal  against
     this  decision".   That  was  disputed  by  those   representing   the
     appellants in a letter dated 31 January 2006 but, so  far  as  we  can
     tell, was not raised again.  It was not raised before the  immigration
     judge or before us.  In preparing this  determination  it  has  become
     clear to us that the  Secretary  of  State  was  in  fact  correct  in
     relation to the first, second and fourth appellants.

 24. Each of their applications for leave  to  remain  was  made  when  the
     individual did not have existing leave to enter or remain in the UK  -
     that leave  ran  out  in  July  2004.   Consequently,  these  are  not
     variation appeals.  As such the  decisions  do  not  fall  within  the
     definition  of  an  "immigration  decision"  in  section  82  of   the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The position  would  be
     rescued if they fell within the definition of "family  members"  under
     the EEA Regulations 2006.  The decisions made against them could  then
     be construed as "EEA decisions"  because,  however  expressed  by  the
     Secretary of State in  reaching  his  decisions,  they  would  concern
     entitlements to an EEA document confirming their  right  of  residence
     under the EEA Regulations 2006 (see definition of  "EEA  decision"  in
     reg 2(1)).  However, as we have already stated, they are  not  "family
     members" of an EEA national as defined in those Regulations which are,
     therefore, not applicable to  them.   Their  rights,  if  any,  derive
     directly from the principal EU legislation.

 25. Although this was not an issue taken before us, it relates directly to
     the Tribunal's jurisdiction which cannot be established  by  agreement
     of the parties or by concession.  We cannot turn a 'blind eye' to  it.
     It follows that the only reconsideration that is before us is that  of
     the third appellant - the EU national.   However, we do  not  consider
     that this will ultimately affect the practical  outcome  for  all  the
     appellants as their EU rights are inextricably linked.  If  the  third
     appellant is able to establish his right of residence, the  rights  of
     the other appellants will follow as a matter of course and, obviously,
     the converse is equally true.  For this reason, it is convenient if we
     continue to refer to the family members as if they were the appellants
     in this appeal.

Self-sufficiency

 26. The central issue in this case is  whether  the  third  appellant  has
     established a right to reside in the UK based  upon  self-sufficiency.
     If he has, the rights of his parents and sister follow on the basis of
     the Chen decision.

 27. As we indicated earlier,  the  right  of  movement  and  residence  is
     dependent upon establishing that the EU national and  his  family  are
     (1) self-sufficienct in the sense of  sufficient  resources  to  avoid
     reliance  on  the  social  assistance  system;  and  (2)  covered   by
     comprehensive health insurance.

     The need for comprehensive health insurance

 28. As regards the requirement for comprehensive health insurance,  it  is
     clear from a  policy  document  at  pages  49-50  of  the  appellants'
     reconsideration bundle that the family has been covered since 8  March
     2006.  Although it was not a point taken by the Secretary of State  in
     refusing the applications, it seems that this  element  of  the  self-
     sufficiency requirement was at least satisfied  at  the  date  of  the
     hearing before the immigration judge.  That undoubtedly suffices (see,
     SGC and others (EEA - Date of Decision  -  1999  Act)  Ireland  [2005]
     UKAIT 00179 at para [25]).   In the light of  this,  we  say  no  more
     about this requirement and move on to the issue of resources.

     The appellants' case

 29. Mr Cox provided us with a brief, but helpful, skeleton argument  which
     he further developed in his oral submissions.  He submitted  that  the
     immigration judge had erred in law in deciding that the appellants had
     failed to establish rights of residence under EU  law.   He  submitted
     that the third appellant was a self-sufficient child who had  a  right
     of residence under EU  law.   Consequently,  by  virtue  of  Chen  and
     another v SSHD (Case C-200/02) [2005] INLR  1,  his  parents  and  his
     sister also had established a right to reside.

 30. First, Mr Cox relied upon the income of the parents, initially  earned
     lawfully - at a time when they were entitled to,  and  not  prohibited
     from working.  Although they ceased to have the right to work  at  the
     end of July 2004 when their leave and work permits ended, by that time
     the third appellant had established his right to reside under EU  law.
     The prohibition in paragraphs 257C and 257D of the  Immigration  Rules
     could not operate unilaterally to prevent  the  parents  from  working
     once their son's right (and hence their own rights) were  established.
     Adopting the argument of Ms Nuala Mole of the AIRE Centre  London  set
     out in her legal opinion at paragraphs 54 and  55,  Mr  Cox  submitted
     that the prohibition on employment was an unlawful restriction  as  it
     did not pursue "the objective that [the appellants] should not  be  an
     unreasonable burden on the social assistance system."

 31. Second, as we understood Mr Cox's submissions, he also relied upon the
     continued earnings of the parents since July 2004  albeit  that  there
     was no lawful basis for them working during that time.   He  submitted
     that we should disregard the child benefit that the mother received in
     relation to the children.  The latter, he submitted, did not impose an
     'unreasonable burden'  upon  the  social  assistance  system  in  this
     country.


     Child benefit issue

 32. We deal first with the argument that the first appellant has  been  in
     receipt of child benefit.  It is accepted that she has tried  to  stop
     payment but has failed because she is entitled to it as of right.   Mr
     Payne relied upon this as showing the family are not  self-sufficient.
     We reject this argument.

 33. In our view, child benefit is not the  type  of  benefit  which  falls
     within the prohibited category of "social  assistance  system  of  the
     United Kingdom" referred to in reg 4(2) and (3) of the EEA Regulations
     2006.   The latter means social security support which is paid by  the
     state because the individual is unable  to  support  themselves.   The
     reference to the UK's "social assistance" system must  be  interpreted
     in the light of the purpose for which it was  included,  namely  as  a
     base-line to "self-sufficiency" in order to exclude those who are  not
     able to support themselves.  Regulation 4(4) of  the  EEA  Regulations
     2006 makes it clear that, in effect, what is  required  is  sufficient
     resources to avoid eligibility for state support because  of  lack  of
     resources.  Often this will mean that the family's resources are  such
     that they are eligible for income support.  By contrast, child benefit
     is paid as of right to parents irrespective of their own resources: it
     is paid to the poor and the rich alike.  It simply cannot be the  case
     that an independently wealthy family of an  EU  national  child  would
     fail to be regarded as "self-sufficient" merely because they  received
     child benefit payable to them as of right  and  which,  as  this  case
     shows, they could not stop being paid.

 34. There is, however, a further point.  Whilst our reasoning above  deals
     with the EEA Regulations 2006 and the right of the third appellant, it
     does not directly deal with the cases of the other appellants who seek
     leave under paragraph 275C of the Immigration Rules as his parents  or
     sister.  Paragraph 257C(iv) requires that the other appellants be able
     to maintain and accommodate themselves "without...having  recourse  to
     public funds".   Paragraph 257D states that a condition of  any  leave
     granted  will  be  a  prohibition  on  "recourse  to  public   funds".
     Paragraph 6 of the Rules defines  "public  funds"  to  include  "child
     benefit".   Because of the mandatory  nature  of  child  benefit,  the
     parents are, and will be, in receipt of public funds.  Does this  mean
     that they and the sister cannot  meet  the  requirement  of  paragraph
     257C?  We think not.  In their  current  circumstances,  they  are  in
     receipt of public funds but they are not being maintained by  recourse
     to them.  They have sufficient resources from their income to  support
     themselves without recourse to what  they  receive  by  way  of  child
     benefit.  Assuming that  continues,  they  meet  the  requirements  of
     paragraph 257C(iv).

 35. We now turn to consider the income available to the family and whether
     that establishes that they are self-sufficient.  Mr Cox's  submissions
     invite us to consider the following issues:
              i) can the appellants rely upon the income  arising  from  the
                 lawful employment of the parents up  to  the  end  of  July
                 2004?;
             ii) can the appellants rely upon the income arising from  their
                 continued employment after July 2004 when they had no leave
                 to remain or permission to work?


     'Lawful employment'

 36. What is said is that  this  income  can  be  taken  into  account  and
     establishes the self-sufficiency requirement.  If this is correct, the
     immigration judge clearly made a material error of law in reaching his
     decision.  Unfortunately, he made no  findings  whether  their  income
     would in fact be adequate to support them.  That is a matter which  we
     need  only  return  to  if  we  consider   the   immigration   judge's
     determination to contain a material error of law.

 37. Mr Cox referred us to the Court of Justice's decision in Chen at paras
     [29], [30], [31] and [33].  He submitted that the Court had  indicated
     that there could be no restrictions upon the origins of the  resources
     (see in particular para [30] of the judgment).  Likewise, he  referred
     us to the Court of Justice's decision in Commission  v  Belgium  where
     the income of the partner of an EU national was held to be relevant in
     assessing whether he was 'self-sufficient'.   Mr  Cox  submitted  that
     the Tribunal's decision in GM and AM (EU national; establishing  self-
     sufficiency) France [2006] UKAIT 00059  was  distinguishable.   There,
     the Tribunal was concerned with an EU national child whose parent  was
     not working but it was argued that he should be  entitled  to  despite
     the prohibition in paragraphs 257C and 257D of the Immigration  Rules.
     The Tribunal only concluded he could not succeed because  the  child's
     right had not been established since his  father  was  dependent  upon
     central  NASS  funding,  being  a  failed  asylum-seeker.   Here,   by
     contrast, the parents were working lawfully - they had an  independent
     right to remain and work in the UK until the end of July 2004.   Their
     income could therefore establish the family's  self-sufficiency.   Any
     prohibition upon them working was then contrary to EU law.

 38. Mr Payne, who represented the Secretary of State, provided us  with  a
     detailed and helpful skeleton which he put before us  in  relation  to
     this and two other reconsiderations that were in our list.  We  intend
     no discourtesy if we do not set out his very full argument in  detail.
     At root, he submitted that the appellants  could  not  rely  upon  the
     'lawful' employment period to establish  self-sufficiency  because  by
     the date of the decision - and the hearing  -  the  parents  were  not
     lawfully employed.  He submitted that it was clear from the  Court  of
     Justice's decision in SSHD v Akrich (Case 109-01) [2004] INLR  36  and
     the Advocate General's opinion in Jia v Migrationsverket (Case C-1/05)
     (opinion given, 27 April 2006) that a third country national  who  was
     not lawfully present in a Member State could not derive any EU rights.
      He submitted that the appellants were, in  effect,  in  pari  materia
     with the appellants in GM and AM and the self-sufficiency of the first
     appellant could not be established by reliance on the  income  of  the
     parents.

 39. We understand Mr Payne's submissions - which he also made  in  another
     reconsideration listed before us on  the  same  day  -  to  entail  an
     acceptance by the Secretary of State that reliance may be placed  upon
     income derived from employment pursuant to an independent right  under
     national law to remain and work in the UK.  If  correct,  then  it  is
     only the issue of whether reliance can be placed upon  income  derived
     from 'illegal employment' which arises in this case.

 40. It may well be correct that, as we should assess the situation  as  at
     the date of the hearing before the immigration judge, any rights which
     could have been derived from the lawful employment of the parents had,
     by that time, lapsed.  We see considerable force in this argument.  We
     prefer, however, to meet head on the argument that the parents' income
     obtained from lawful employment  could  in  principle  establish  that
     their family was self-sufficient.

 41. The issue arose in a case heard by the Tribunal two weeks  before  the
     present one and now reported as MA  and  others  (EU  national;  self-
     sufficiency; lawful employment) Bangladesh  [2006]  UKAIT  00090.   In
     that case, the Tribunal concluded that self-sufficiency could  not  be
     established by reliance upon income derived from lawful employment  in
     the UK by the parents of an EU child who are  in  the  UK  on  limited
     leave for a temporary and specific purpose or temporary  admission  in
     situations where the parents seek themselves to derive an EU right  to
     reside as a consequence.  The Tribunal dealt,  in  essence,  with  the
     same arguments presented in this case by Mr  Cox  and  rejected  them.
     The Tribunal's reasoning can be  found  at  paragraphs  [42]-[46]  and
     [48]:

           "42. First, the presence of the child's parents in the UK is not
           only necessary for her to exercise her right  of  residence  but
           also to establish it.  This is  so  whether  one  looks  at  the
           income derived from their current employment  or,  if  permitted
           despite the Immigration Rules, in the  future.   The  underlying
           purpose of recognising the derivative rights of  family  members
           to accompany or join an EU national exercising Treaty rights  in
           another EU country is not engaged here anymore than it was in GM
           and  AM.   In  our  view,  the  EU  national's  right  must   be
           established independently of the presence of the family  members
           in the UK  before  they  may  derive  any  rights  from  EU  law
           themselves.  This, it may be said, is because the right  is  the
           right of the EU national.  It is  an  individual  right,  not  a
           family right (although it has consequences for the family);  and
           it must be established on an individual, not a family basis.


           43. Second, we do not see any basis  for  deciding  that  income
           derived from the first and second appellants' current employment
           can establish their daughter's right to reside.  The circularity
           in establishing the child's rights and then the parents'  rights
           is no less apparent in these appeals.  Here, the  child's  self-
           sufficiency is dependent upon her parents  working.   They  only
           have a temporary basis for doing so for so  long  as  they  have
           limited leave and are permitted to work.  Once that  leave  runs
           out, there would be no lawful basis  for  working.   Indeed,  it
           seems to us that it is only because of  these  applications  and
           subsequent appeals that the leave did not terminate in  December
           2005 but was continued under s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971.
           The only basis for their right to work would  then  have  to  be
           derived from EU law.  The moment that occurred and they  derived
           a right to reside and - it would have to be said -  to  continue
           working, the position would be indistinguishable from that in GM
           and AM.  The circularity would be complete - their right to work
           would now sustain the child's right and through  her  their  own
           derived right would continue.


           44. Third, our conclusion accords with a proper understanding of
           the notion of 'self-sufficiency'  and  the  distinction  between
           free movement in reliance upon economic and, alternatively, non-
           economic rights.


           45. An EU national who  claims  to  be  self-sufficient  is  not
           asserting a right to enter and reside in another EU state on the
           basis of economic activity in that  country.   If  he  were,  he
           would be seeking to enter, for example, as  a  worker  or  self-
           employed person.   Rather, he relies upon  his  resources  which
           exist independently of any economic activity in the host  Member
           state.  Once that is established,  his  family  members  have  a
           derivative right to accompany or join him.  If they did not, the
           EU national's right of  free  movement  might  be  inhibited  or
           effectively  denied  to  him.   In  addition,  the  central   EU
           legislative instruments give family members a right to  work  in
           that the host Member state.   But, their right to work is not  a
           recognition of the right to engage in economic activity per  se.
           Rather, it is simply a reflection of the underlying principle of
           EU law because otherwise they (and hence the EU national)  might
           be inhibited from moving within the EU if  family  members  were
           not allowed to carry on, what for them, is an  important  aspect
           of their everyday lives.   The economic activity of  the  family
           members does not establish - nor could it in the context  of  an
           EU national worker or self-employed person - the  EU  national's
           right.  That arises a priori and independently of  any  economic
           activity by the EU  national  or  his  family  in  the  host  EU
           country.


           46. By contrast, in the Chen-type case the EU national can  only
           establish his right by reliance upon economic  activity  in  the
           host Member state, not, of course, economic activity by  himself
           but rather by his family members.  We see no reason  to  distort
           the usual situation simply because the EU national  is  a  child
           and is dependent upon others  for  support  and,  unusually,  is
           already present in the host EU country with his  family  members
           rather than seeking to enter it with is family.  Here  too,  the
           right of free movement based upon self-sufficiency cannot depend
           upon resources derived from employment  engaged  in  by  the  EU
           national or his family members in the UK.
           ...
           48. In the result, therefore, the reasoning of the  Tribunal  in
           GM and AM is  applicable  where  an  EU  national  child  places
           reliance upon income derived from a parent lawfully  working  in
           the UK during  a  period  of  limited  leave  restricted  for  a
           specific purpose or, which is not this case, who is on temporary
           admission  and   not   prohibited   from   working.    In   such
           circumstances, a Member State is entitled to restrict the rights
           of employment of non-EU nationals, in particular  to  limit  the
           duration of their permission to work  just  as  it  is  entitled
           effectively to prohibit their ability to work (see, W(China) and
           X(China)).   When it does so, that individual  cannot  derive  a
           right to reside as a "family member" of an EU  national  because
           that income cannot be taken into account in order  to  establish
           the EU national's right of residence on a self-sufficient basis.
           "

 42. We agree with and adopt  as  our  own  the  Tribunal's  reasoning  and
     conclusion in MA and others.    Nothing  we  have  heard  in  argument
     before us leads us to take a different view.  Self-sufficiency  cannot
     be established by reliance upon the income of family members of an  EU
     national child who are lawfully employed or  in  business  in  the  UK
     during a period of limited leave  restricted  to  a  specific  purpose
     where the effect of that will be to create rights of residence  in  EU
     law not just for the EU  national  but  also  derivatively  for  those
     family members themselves.  In this way,  the  decision  in  MA  is  a
     complete answer to Mr Cox's reliance upon the parents'  income  up  to
     the end of July 2004.  The latter income could not establish that  the
     third appellant (their son) was self-sufficient and thus  neither  he,
     nor the other appellants, can thereby derive any right  to  reside  in
     the UK.

     'Illegal' employment


 43. What then  of  the  parents'  income  obtained  from  their  continued
     employment since  July  2004?   There  is  no  doubt  that  they  have
     continued to  work  without  permission  and,  in  that  sense,  their
     employment has been 'illegal'.  We are driven  to  conclude  that  the
     parents' illegal income cannot establish their child's (and their own)
     right of residence  based  upon  self-sufficiency  for  the  following
     reasons

 44. First, if reliance cannot be placed upon income obtained  lawfully  by
     the parents, a fortiori it cannot  be  relied  upon  if  derived  from
     illegal working.  Any other outcome would be inconceivable.

 45. Second, there is a substantial body of jurisprudence within the  Court
     of Justice that eschews reliance upon EU rights where  the  individual
     has no lawful basis for being in the host  Member  State.   Thus,  for
     example, the Court has excluded from the purview  of  the  Association
     Agreements, nationals of those  countries  who  are  seeking  to  take
     advantage of such an agreement but are unlawfully in the  relevant  EU
     country.  Hence, in R v SSHD ex parte Kondova (Case  C-239/99)  [2001]
     ECR I-6427, the Court concluded that a Bulgarian  national  could  not
     take  advantage  of  the   EU-Bulgarian   Association   Agreement   in
     circumstances where she was an  illegal  entrant,  having  entered  by
     deception.  Likewise in R v SSHD ex  parte  Gloszczuk  (Case  C-63/99)
     [2002] INLR 357, the Court reached the same conclusion in relation  to
     a Polish national who had entered the UK by deception  and  sought  to
     rely upon the EU-Polish Association Agreement.  An identical  approach
     and outcome has recently been proposed by the Advocate General in  his
     advisory opinion to the Court in R(Tum and Dari) v SSHD (Case C-16/05)
     (delivered on  12  September  2006)  which  concerned  the  EU-Turkish
     Agreement.  It could, of  course,  be  argued  that  these  cases  are
     entirely  distinguishable  as  they  concern  the  interpretation   of
     Association Agreements and do not concern  the  free  movement  of  EU
     nationals and their family members.  Of course, care must be taken  in
     directly  reading  across  reasoning  applicable  in  one  context  to
     another.   Nevertheless,  the   Court   of   Justice's   approach   to
     establishing rights in  the  context  of  the  Association  Agreements
     shows, at least, that EU law does not encourage conduct  which  flouts
     domestic national immigration controls.

 46. Just such an approach is applied by the  Court  to  EU  nationals  and
     their family members who seek to derive rights of  free  movement  and
     residence.  The leading case is Akrich.   Mr  Akrich  was  a  Moroccan
     national who had been twice deported from  the  UK.   He  subsequently
     returned clandestinely and married a British national.  He  was  again
     deported, on this occasion to Ireland where his  wife  now  lived  and
     worked.  She returned to the UK and Mr  Akrich  sought  entry  on  the
     basis that he was the spouse of a  returning  national  who  had  been
     exercising EU rights in another Member State relying on R v  SSHD,  ex
     parte Surinder Singh (Case C-370/90) [1992] ECR I-4265.   That  latter
     case would undoubtedly have given rise to such a right were it not for
     Mr Akrich's irregular immigration  status.   Relying  upon  that,  the
     Court held that Mr Akrich had no EU right to move to and reside in the
     UK.  In order to benefit from an EU right of free movement as a family
     member, the individual must be lawfully resident  in  a  Member  State
     before he can claim a right of movement.  Mr Akrich was  not  lawfully
     resident either in the  UK  which  he  had  entered  in  breach  of  a
     deportation order or in  Ireland.    The  Court  emphasised  that  Mrs
     Akrich's right to work in Ireland or to return  to  the  UK  following
     that work could not be inhibited by the inability to be accompanied by
     her husband as they had no lawful  basis  for  residence  together  in
     either country.

 47. The Court's decision in Akrich was considered by the Advocate  General
     in his advisory opinion to the Court in Jia to which Mr Payne referred
     us.  In that case, an EU national (a German citizen) was working as  a
     self-employed person in another Member State (Sweden).   Her  husband,
     who was a Chinese national,  was  residing  with  her.    The  elderly
     mother of her spouse came from China to visit them on a visa valid for
     90 days.  During that time she made an  application  for  a  residence
     permit as a dependent family member of her son.   The Advocate General
     concluded that Akrich was of general application.  Access  to  the  EU
     was a matter for the domestic law of the Member  State  through  which
     the non-EU national sought entry.  EU rights  of  free  movement  only
     applied to movement by an EU national and his family within the EU.  A
     non-EU family member who was seeking entry could only claim a right of
     permanent residence  under  EU  law  if  they  were  already  lawfully
     resident in a Member State.  The Advocate General reasoned that lawful
     residence required more than lawful presence.  It  required  admission
     for at least a period of a year with a view  to  permanent  residence;
     admission for a shorter period or for  a  specific  temporary  purpose
     would not do.  On the facts, the applicant was not  lawfully  resident
     in Sweden as she was admitted only for a short time (90 days) and  for
     the limited purpose of a visit.  As a result, she could  not  claim  a
     right to reside with her son and his wife under  EU  law:  her  rights
     were governed by Sweden's domestic immigration law.

 48. Mr Payne relied upon Akrich and Jia and the fact that the  parents  in
     this appeal have no lawful basis for residing in the UK.  The Advocate
     General's opinion is a strong reaffirmation  of  Akrich  and,  indeed,
     patently goes beyond it when defining the scope of 'lawful residence'.
       That may or may not  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Justice.   We  also
     recognise that Akrich and Jia are  not  directly  concerned  with  the
     establishment of an EU citizen's rights but only  those  of  a  non-EU
     family member.  This appeal is, of course,  concerned  with  both  but
     principally that of the EU national from  whom  the  other  appellants
     derive  their  rights.   That  may  be  thought  to  be  an  important
     distinction.  Given, however, that the rights  here  are  inextricably
     bound up together, we consider that, if applicable, Akrich  should  be
     understood as denying the establishment of rights  by  both  if  based
     upon the illegal status of the family  member.   It  would  be  wholly
     artificial to approach this sort of case otherwise.   Mr Cox submitted
     that Akrich could be distinguished since the parents had (if  only  in
     the past) been lawfully resident and working in  the  UK.    The  fact
     that the parents  were  admitted  lawfully  does  not  disguise  their
     illegal presence now and it is the latter which is at the heart of the
     Akrich decision.  Indeed, if the Advocate General's opinion in Jia  is
     followed by the Court, the distinction would have  no  arguable  basis
     whatsoever.  It would, we apprehend, further support the  decision  in
     MA where the parents of the EU national child are lawfully present  on
     a temporary basis and for a specific limited purpose (including  those
     on temporary admission).

 49. On the basis of Akrich and the other cases we  have  referred  to,  we
     have concluded that the  appellants  cannot  establish  EU  rights  of
     residence based upon income derived from employment or self-employment
     at a time when they have no lawful basis for residence in  the  UK  or
     for working.

 50. Third, the appellants must fail as a result of the Court  of  Appeal's
     decision in W(China) and X(China) v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1494.   The
     case was decided after the hearing in this appeal.  As it is a binding
     authority upon us and provides further support to a conclusion we  had
     already  reached,  we  did  no   consider   it   necessary   to   seek
     representations from the parties upon it.

 51. In that case, the appellants  were  partners  and  Chinese  nationals.
     They entered the  UK  illegally  and  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum.
     About six months later, they went to the Republic of Ireland where the
     female appellant gave birth to a daughter who  as  a  result  acquired
     Irish nationality.  They returned to the  UK  and,  in  reliance  upon
     Chen,  they  claimed  an  EU  right  of  residence  based  upon  self-
     sufficiency.  They relied upon  income  earned  by  the  male  partner
     (father) - employment for which he did not have permission and so,  in
     the sense we have used it, his employment (and resulting  income)  was
     'illegal'.  The Court of Appeal held that the IAT had been correct  to
     decide that the parents had failed to establish that their  child  was
     'self-sufficient' and hence she - and consequently they also - had  no
     rights of residence in the UK.   The Court  of  Appeal  offered  three
     reasons.  First, the parents did not have medical insurance  and  this
     was a requirement of self-sufficiency under EU law.  Second,  reliance
     could not be placed upon the father's income derived  from  employment
     when he had no lawful basis for the work.  Buxton LJ (with whom Sedley
     and Dyson LJJ agreed) considered that the point was a  short  one  (at
     para [16]):

           "16... As interpreted by the ECJ in Chen, the article  18  right
           of [the child] and the associated right of  her  custodians  can
           only be lawfully asserted under the strictly limited  conditions
           imposed by Directive 90/364. Those conditions are pre-conditions
           not merely to the exercise but also more  fundamentally  to  the
           existence of the  right  in  any  particular  case:  article  18
           stating in terms that "the right" to move and reside is  subject
           to the limitations and conditions laid down in, e.g.,  Directive
           90/364. The right accordingly does not exist if [the child] does
           not  have  access  to  the  relevant  resources.  There  is   no
           suggestion that under article 18 the host state  is  obliged  to
           take positive steps to make resources available to  an  entering
           EU citizen: [Counsel for  the  appellants]  understandably  drew
           back from any suggestion that the  state  would  be  obliged  to
           provide support for a custodian without resources in the  shape,
           for instance, of disablement benefit. By  the  same  token,  the
           state is not obliged to adjust its domestic law in order to make
           available to the EU citizen resources that would  not  otherwise
           be available to him, so that he can fulfil the pre-condition  to
           the existence in his case of the article  18  right:  the  right
           which has to exist before he can require the state to adjust its
           domestic law in deference to it."

 52. Counsel for the appellants had argued that Article  2.2  of  Directive
     90/364 (the predecessor  in  substance  of  Article  23  of  Directive
     2004/38) entitled the father of the child to  work.   Buxton  LJ  gave
     this argument short shrift (at para [18]):

           "By the same token, [counsel  for  the  appellants]  said,  [the
           mother], as not the dependent but the Chen-recognised  custodian
           of [the child], should be entitled to take  up  employment.  But
           that requires it to be established that [the  child]  is  indeed
           entitled to residence within the United Kingdom, and she is  not
           so entitled, under Chen,  unless  her  custodian  can  meet  the
           resources requirement of the Directive."

 53. Perhaps  even  more  broadly,  Sedley  LJ,  in  his  short  concurring
     judgment, dismissed the idea that parents  could  claim  a  derivative
     right to work when the child had none (at para [27]):

           "Neither the child nor  the  parents  can  lawfully  work  here,
           unless - and [counsel for the appellants] contends that this  is
           the case - the child's status makes  it  unlawful  to  deny  the
           parents the right to work. There would be force in this argument
           if the child herself had a Treaty right to work  here;  but  she
           has none, and her parents cannot therefore  claim  a  derivative
           right to work. In this regard they are not in the same  position
           as the claimant in Chen, who had resources originating in  China
           which made her, and thereby the child,  self-sufficient  in  the
           UK. [Counsel for the appellant's] argument on  self-sufficiency,
           if sound, would have to apply to any EU  citizen  seeking  entry
           under Art. 18 EC and would defeat the prior conditions envisaged
           by the Article itself and explicitly enacted by the Directive."

 54. Suffice for us to note here that Sedley LJ's reasoning is support  for
     the approach of the Tribunal in its recent  case  law.   It  is,  with
     respect, a more pithy statement of the 'circularity'  argument  relied
     upon by the Tribunal in GM and AM and later in MA.

 55. Finally, the Court approved the reasoning of the IAT that  because  of
     the illegality of the father's employment the  resources  relied  upon
     were unstable. The reasoning was as follows:

           "It appears that [the father's] employment exposes both  himself
           and his employer to criminal sanctions. In any event as a matter
           of fact, in such circumstances, the  employment  and  the  funds
           deriving from it cannot be regarded as anything other than of an
           ephemeral nature. Employment  which  has  no  proper  or  lawful
           prospect  of  permanence  cannot  be   regarded   as   providing
           sufficient resources for the maintenance either of  [the  child]
           alone or of her and the Appellants. It is not suggested that any
           other funds are  available  to  the  family.  Accordingly,  [the
           child] is not in a position to exercise the right  of  residence
           secured by Directive 90/364 because she does not have sufficient
           resources to prevent herself becoming a  burden  on  the  social
           assistance system of the host Member State during her period  of
           residence. If, as we think, that  requirement  applies  also  to
           [the parents], they also fail to fulfil it."

 56. In our view, this reasoning is directly applicable here.   Because  of
     their illegal status, the appellants' employment is no less precarious
     than that considered by the IAT.


     Conclusion

 57. For these reasons, we have concluded that the appellants  have  failed
     to establish that they are 'self-sufficient'  based  upon  the  income
     derived first from the lawful employment of the parents  and  latterly
     the unlawful employment of the parents.  The immigration judge reached
     the correct conclusion in law that the appellants appeal based upon EU
     rights must fail.

Other grounds


 58. In his skeleton, Mr Cox sought to rely  upon  his  grounds  of  review
     which challenged the  immigration  judge's  decision  in  relation  to
     fairness and under Article 8.   Reconsideration  was  not  ordered  on
     these grounds but he sought to resurrect them relying on AH (Scope  of
     s103A reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038.  Mr Cox did not press
     these matters in his oral submissions.  We do not consider that  there
     are any good reasons for re-opening  these  grounds  rejected  by  the
     Senior Immigration Judge.  However, out of deference to him,  we  will
     deal with them albeit we can do so shortly.

 59. First, the unfairness argument: that is based upon an  assertion  that
     further leave has been granted to  other  nursing  colleagues  of  the
     mother who were of  Philippine  nationality.   The  immigration  judge
     dealt with this in paragraph [14] of his determination.  Having  heard
     oral evidence, he concluded that the evidence was far from  clear  and
     he was not satisfied that the Secretary of State was obliged to act in
     relation to the appellant  (mother)  simply  because  he  did  so  for
     others.  The immigration judge expressed himself briefly but we do not
     consider that he erred in law.  He referred to the evidence  he  heard
     and concluded it was not clear.  We have to say  that  we  agree:  the
     evidence in the written statements of the mother and another nurse (at
     pages 1-3 and 4-5  respectively  of  the  appellants'  reconsideration
     bundle) is not clear.  It may be that the  only  application  made  on
     behalf of the mother was the EEA application (by contrast, of  course,
     to the other nurses).  We cannot be confident one way or another.   In
     any event, to establish a public law claim based upon abuse  of  power
     in these circumstances, namely inconsistency, requires clear  evidence
     of patent unfairness (see, e.g., Rashid v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  744;
     [2005] INLR 550).    On  no  basis,  could  the  material  before  the
     immigration judge justify such a finding.

 60. Second, the Art 8 argument: that is based upon the immigration judge's
     failure to take account of the mother's  outstanding  application  for
     discretionary leave.  True it is that he did not refer to this in  his
     consideration of Art 8 in paragraph [15]  of  his  determination.   He
     referred to Huang and the ability of  the  family  to  return  to  the
     Philippines and live together as a  family.    The  immigration  judge
     correctly decided that none of the  appellants  had  an  EU  right  to
     reside in the UK.  There was nothing before him to  suggest  that  the
     family could not return to the Philippines and live there even  though
     the third appellant is  an  Irish  national.   The  immigration  judge
     applied the Huang's 'truly exceptional' test.  His conclusion that the
     appellants  had  not  established  a  breach  of  Art  8  is  entirely
     sustainable both in relation to 'proportionality' but  also  in  their
     failure to show that  any  interference  with  their  family  life  is
     sufficiently serious to engage their Art 8 rights.


Decision

 61. For the foregoing reasons, the immigration judge  did  not  materially
     err in  law  and  -  subject  to  the  proviso  that  only  the  third
     appellant's appeal was properly before him - the decision  to  dismiss
     the appeal stands.



                                                                     A GRUBB
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
                                                             Date:
