
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BF (Tirana - gay men) Albania CG [2019] UKUT 00093 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Tuesday 16 October to Thursday 18 October  |On 26 March 2019              |
|2018                                          |                              |
|and Tuesday 23 October 2018                   |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                BF (ALBANIA)
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan and Ms J Smeaton, Counsel, instructed
                    by SMA Solicitors for the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, Counsel, instructed by Government
                    Legal Department for the Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE


      i) Particular care must  be  exercised  when  assessing  the  risk  of
         violence and the lack of sufficiency of protection for  openly  gay
         men whose home area is outside Tirana, given the evidence of openly
         gay men from outside Tirana encountering violence as  a  result  of
         their sexuality. Such cases will turn on  the  particular  evidence
         presented.
     ii) Turning to the position in Tirana, in general, an openly  gay  man,
         by virtue of that fact alone, would not have an  objectively  well-
         founded fear of serious harm or persecution on return to Tirana.
    iii) There is only very limited evidence that  an  individual  would  be
         traced to Tirana by operation of either the registration system  or
         criminal checks at the airport. However, it  is  plausible  that  a
         person might be traced via family or other connections  being  made
         on enquiry in Tirana.  Whether an openly gay man might be traced to
         Tirana by family members or others who would wish  him  harm  is  a
         question for determination on the evidence in each  case  depending
         on the motivation of the family and the extent of its hostility.
     iv) There exists in Tirana a generally effective system  of  protection
         should an openly gay man face a risk of harm in that city  or  from
         elsewhere in Albania.
      v) An openly gay man may face discrimination in  Tirana,  particularly
         in  the  areas  of  employment  and  healthcare.  However,  whether
         considered individually or cumulatively, in general  the  level  of
         such discrimination  is  not  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to
         persecution. Discrimination on grounds  of  sexual  orientation  is
         unlawful in Albania and there are avenues to seek  redress.   Same-
         sex relationships are not legally recognised in  Albania.  However,
         there is no evidence that this causes  serious  legal  difficulties
         for relationships between openly gay men.
     vi) In general, it will not be unduly harsh for an openly  gay  man  to
         relocate to Tirana, but each case  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
         facts,   taking   into   account   an    individual's    particular
         circumstances, including  education,  health  and  the  reason  why
         relocation is being addressed.





















                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

|                                                 |               |
|Description                                      |Paragraphs     |
|INTRODUCTION                                     |1-17           |
|Country Guidance                                 |1-10           |
|The Appellant's Appeal                           |11-17          |
|THE LAW                                          |18-48          |
|Introduction to the Protection Claim             |18-21          |
|Particular Social Group                          |22-24          |
|Living Openly                                    |25-34          |
|"The Silence Fallacy"                            |35-37          |
|Sufficiency of Protection                        |38-41          |
|Internal Relocation                              |42-43          |
|Discrimination in Status of Gay Relationships    |44-47          |
|Existing Country Guidance                        |48             |
|THE EVIDENCE                                     |49-250         |
|Country Specific Evidence                        |49             |
|The Expert                                       |50-67          |
|Summary of Ms Young's Evidence                   |54             |
|General Observations about Ms Young's Evidence   |55-67          |
|A: Legislative Framework, Implementation,        |68-124         |
|Corruption, Societal Attitudes and Role of LGBTI |               |
|NGOs                                             |               |
|Legislative Framework Affecting LGBTI Individuals|68-88          |
|in Albania and its Implementation                |               |
|Corruption in Albania                            |89-95          |
|Societal Attitudes                               |96-106         |
|Role of LGBTI NGOs                               |107-117        |
|Findings on the Legislative Framework,           |118-124        |
|Implementation, Corruption, Societal Attitudes   |               |
|and Role of LGBTI NGOs                           |               |
|B: Situation Faced by an Openly Gay Man in Tirana|125-186        |
|Risk of Harm to Openly Gay Men in Tirana         |125-155        |
|Risks from Family Members in Tirana              |156-162        |
|Discrimination in Tirana                         |163-169        |
|Findings on the Situation Faced by an Openly Gay |170-186        |
|Man in Tirana                                    |               |
|C: Sufficiency of Protection in Tirana           |187-229        |
|The Police                                       |187-205        |
|The Prosecutors and the Judiciary                |206-208        |
|The Commissioner for Protection from             |209-217        |
|Discrimination                                   |               |
|The People's Advocate                            |218-220        |
|Findings on Sufficiency of Protection            |221-229        |
|D: Internal Relocation                           |230-250        |
|Relocation to Tirana                             |230-232        |
|Employment and Accommodation                     |233-237        |
|Socio-Economic Factors                           |238-241        |
|Findings in Relation to Internal Relocation      |242-250        |
|COUNTRY GUIDANCE                                 |251            |
|THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL                           |252-264        |
|Summary of Conclusions on the Appellant's Appeal |265            |
|ANNEX A: ERROR OF LAW DECISION                   |Page 78        |
|ANNEX B: INDICES TO BUNDLES OF BACKGROUND        |Page 84        |
|EVIDENCE                                         |               |






































                                  GLOSSARY

ACPD Albanian Center for Population and Development
API  Asylum Policy Instruction
CPD  Commissioner for Protection against Discrimination
CPIN Country Policy and Information Note
ECRI European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
ERA  Equal Rights Association
FFM  Fact-Finding Mission
FtTJ First-tier Tribunal Judge
HO   Home Office
HRW  Human Rights Watch
ICI  Independent Chief Inspector
ILGA-Europe   European Region of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender
                    and Intersex Association
LGBT     Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans
LGBTI         Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex
MSWY     Ministry of Social Welfare and Youth
NAP      National Action Plan
NGO      Non-Governmental Organisation
OMSA     Open Mind Spectrum
OSCE     Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
PA       People's Advocate
PRIDE         Promoting Rights, Inclusiveness, Dignity and Equality
UNDP     UN Development Programme
USSD     United States State Department
WHO      World Health Organisation






















                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

Country Guidance


1.   This is a decision to which  we  have  both  contributed.   The  issues
    which we have to consider relate to gay men in Albania.

 1.  The  existing  country  guidance  is  IM  (Risk,  Objective  Evidence,
    Homosexuals)  Albania  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00067  ("IM")  which  can  be
    summarised as follows:


      i) Other than two incidents in 1994 and 2001, there was no evidence to
         suggest that there  is  generalised  treatment  of  homosexuals  in
         Albania which is of a persecutory nature  or  in  breach  of  their
         human rights ([5]);
     ii) Equally, there is no evidence apart from a single incident in  1994
         that homosexuals in Albania are treated  adversely  by  the  police
         although there is evidence that  those  detained  and  arrested  by
         police on suspicion of criminal activity may  be  ill-treated  ([5]
         and [6]);
    iii) There is therefore "no country background evidence which supports a
         reasonable likelihood that  homosexuals  as  such  in  Albania  are
         subject to any action on the part either of  the  populace  or  the
         authorities which would amount to persecution for the  purposes  of
         the Refugee Convention or would be in  breach  of  their  protected
         human rights."


 2. The question posed for country guidance in this appeal which is that of
    an openly gay man is as follows:


         "Whether there is a sufficiency of  protection  from  harm  by  the
         state for the appellant in his home area  in  Albania  and  if  not
         whether  there  is  protection  available  for  him  in  Tirana  or
         elsewhere.  If  it  is,  whether  it  is  reasonably  open  to  the
         appellant to relocate to Tirana (or elsewhere) in the light of  his
         sexual orientation as a gay man."


 3. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant suffered persecution  in  his
    home area (in the north of Albania).  He  accepts  that  the  Appellant
    could not be expected to return there because this would require him to
    have day to day contact with his former  persecutors.   The  Respondent
    also accepts that there "remains a question mark about  the  degree  of
    protection [the Appellant] would  expect  to  receive  from  the  local
    police".  Although the  Respondent  did  not  concede  that  all  areas
    outside Tirana are similarly unsafe for return (which may  be  relevant
    to the determination of that  issue  in  other  appeals),  he  did  not
    suggest that there is any location  other  than  Tirana  to  which  the
    Appellant could return.


 4. As a result, the areas on which we heard evidence  have  also  narrowed
    which delineates the extent of the issues  on  which  we  are  able  to
    provide general guidance.  The Respondent describes  the  position  for
    gay men outside Tirana as potentially "more challenging and  isolating"
    but contends that Tirana has, on the evidence, a more liberal  society.
    Although the Respondent does not necessarily concede that the  risk  of
    street or domestic violence to openly gay men exists in  all  parts  of
    Albania outside Tirana, given the  Respondent's  concession  about  the
    risk to the Appellant in the north of Albania, the  evidence  we  heard
    has been focussed on the risk or sufficiency of protection in Tirana.


 5. Accordingly, our consideration of risk, sufficiency of  protection  and
    internal relocation is limited to the  position  in  Tirana.   When  we
    refer to Tirana, we intend to mean the wider conurbation  except  where
    we refer expressly to any narrower  area.   We  explain  later  in  our
    decision the extent to which the guidance in IM stands in consequence.


 6. Although the country specific evidence mostly refers in  general  terms
    to LGBT or LGBTI individuals, the focus of the expert report is on  the
    position of gay men in Albania and that is the  only  factual  scenario
    before us.  When we refer to gay men,  we  acknowledge  and  understand
    that this is a general term which can include  bisexual  men,  men  who
    have sex with men and men who identify as or may be perceived as gay by
    those who are not.  However, although there may be an  overlap  between
    the factors affecting the various LGBTI groups, there are likely to  be
    different  considerations  applying,  for   example,   to   transgender
    individuals. It would be inappropriate to consider those  issues  in  a
    factual  and  evidential  vacuum.   In  giving  country  guidance,   we
    determine only the position for openly gay men returning to Albania and
    for reasons we give above only to Tirana.


 7. In terms of what we mean by "openly gay", although Mr Chelvan  provided
    us with some examples of ways in which he said an openly gay man  might
    expect to be able to behave, the parties and Ms Young  were  unable  to
    offer us any useful definition. We therefore provide our  understanding
    of that term.  It cannot be understood as involving the same  behaviour
    for each gay man.  Gay men, as with heterosexual men, may exhibit their
    sexuality in different ways.  We consider an appropriate definition  as
    being someone who does not conceal his sexuality except insofar  as  he
    wishes to do so for reasons other than a fear of persecution.


 8. The Appellant accepts that  there  have  been  legislative  changes  in
    Albania decriminalising homosexuality and providing  sanctions  against
    discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation. The  Appellant's  case
    is that these changes have not been  adequately  implemented  and  that
    societal attitudes still give rise to a real risk of  violence  whether
    in public or within the family.  It is accepted  that  there  are  some
    mechanisms for redress, but those mechanisms are not effective  due  to
    the deficiencies in implementation of the law.  There is no sufficiency
    of protection to guard against the real risk even  in  Tirana.   It  is
    also claimed that the  level  of  discrimination  against  gay  men  in
    Albania, even in Tirana, is such that it amounts  to  persecution.   In
    relation to relocation to Tirana, it is also argued that, as a newcomer
    to the community, a gay man would be asked questions about  family  and
    background leading to his identification as gay and consequent risk  on
    that account.  In addition, criminal checks  made  on  arrival  at  the
    airport or other sharing of information during the registration process
    with the Albanian authorities in a person's home area would lead to the
    individual being traced to Tirana and thereby lead to a  real  risk  of
    further harm.


 9. The Respondent's case is that, although the legislative changes made in
    Albania in relation to gay rights "have  been  described  as  the  most
    progressive in the region", there is a degree of disconnect between, on
    the one hand, the will of the government in enacting those laws and the
    demonstration by public officials  of  a  willingness  and  ability  to
    partner with LGBT activists to reform and implement  training  and,  on
    the  other,  the  change  to  societal  awareness  and  attitudes.  The
    Respondent accepts that the conservative  nature  of  Albanian  society
    means that a gay man may face incidents of intolerance, discrimination,
    physical and psychological violence, job loss,  eviction,  threats  and
    rejection by their family.  However, it is argued  that  the  level  of
    such risk and discrimination does not, by reason of its  frequency  and
    nature, reach the threshold of persecution.   There  would  also  be  a
    sufficiency of  protection  offered  by  the  police  and  other  state
    institutions to guard against or to offer redress against such risk and
    discrimination.  It is asserted  that  Tirana  is  a  more  modern  and
    liberal  environment  than,  for   example,   the   more   traditional,
    conservative north of Albania. It is argued that the disconnect between
    the passing of laws prohibiting discrimination  on  grounds  of  sexual
    orientation and the implementation of those laws which might impact  on
    the ability to protect is less pronounced in  Tirana.   The  Respondent
    argues that the socio-economic position in Tirana would enable a young,
    gay man to find employment and accommodation.  It  would  therefore  be
    reasonable for a gay man to relocate to the capital.

The Appellant's Appeal


10. The Appellant was born in Has in the  north-east  of  Albania.   He  is
    currently aged twenty-four and first arrived in the UK in  March  2015.
    During his first period of time here,  on  18  November  2015,  he  was
    sentenced to a period of 28 days' imprisonment for an offence of sexual
    assault on a female. The Appellant says that the  reason  he  committed
    the offence was to prove to his Albanian friends that he was  not  gay.
    It is not now disputed that he is gay.  The Appellant was removed  from
    the UK to Albania on 17 December 2015 as an  illegal  entrant  and  was
    next encountered having returned to the UK  (again  unlawfully)  on  29
    April 2017 whereupon he claimed asylum.  The basis for his claim is his
    sexual orientation. This was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
    That finding was not challenged by the Respondent and was preserved  in
    the error of law decision.


11. In terms of risk on return to Albania, the Appellant's account is  that
    whilst in the UK on the first occasion, he had  a  one-night  encounter
    with a man named Pirro.  A photograph of them together  was  placed  on
    Facebook and seen by the Appellant's friends in Albania who beat him up
    on his return there when they found out that he was  gay.   His  father
    also found out about the photograph and also beat him over a  prolonged
    period until the Appellant succumbed to his  father's  demand  that  he
    should marry the daughter of a business associate.  Having agreed to do
    so, her family also became aware of his sexuality and they too attacked
    him.  When he returned home, his father beat him again.  We do not need
    to go further into the particulars  of  the  accepted  attacks  on  the
    Appellant; suffice it to say that he was driven to consider suicide but
    passed out and woke up in a hospital apparently local to his home area.


12. When the Appellant left hospital in late 2016, he went to Tirana  where
    he remained until he returned to the UK. A  friend  provided  him  with
    work in a car-wash and accommodation for part of the  period  (although
    he also says that he slept rough and in hotels for part of  the  time).
    The Appellant did not disclose his sexuality to his  friend.   He  also
    says that it was always his intention to leave Tirana and  to  come  to
    the UK which he then did.


13. By a letter dated 22 June 2017, the Respondent refused the  Appellant's
    asylum claim.  He did not accept the claim as credible and disputed the
    Appellant's sexuality. In her decision promulgated on 4 September 2017,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.
    Although she accepted the factual basis of  his  claim  (including  his
    sexual orientation), she did not accept that he would  be  at  risk  on
    return for a number of reasons.  First, she found that he would conduct
    himself discreetly on return.  She did not therefore  accept  that  his
    sexual orientation would be discovered.   Second,  she  found  that  he
    could safely return to Tirana where he would be protected by the police
    and NGOs and could access a shelter provided by one of those NGOs.


14. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Smith  on  all  grounds  on  25
    January 2018.  By his decision promulgated on 1 May 2018, UTJ Kopieczek
    accepted a concession by the  Respondent  that  the  decision  of  FtTJ
    O'Garro contained various errors of law and set  aside  that  decision.
    His error of law decision is annexed to this decision as "Annex A".  In
    broad terms, those errors are the FtTJ's  finding  that  the  Appellant
    would conduct himself discreetly on return, that protection by NGOs  is
    relevant to the issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection  and  that  some
    background material was left out of account when judging sufficiency of
    protection and internal relocation.  The FtTJ had also failed to make a
    finding on whether the Appellant had  suffered  past  persecution  when
    assessing future risk.  Judge Kopieczek preserved the factual  findings
    made by FtTJ O'Garro save as infected by the errors of law.


15. The Respondent accepts that the Appellant will wish to lead an  "openly
    gay life" in Tirana.  He does not wish  to  pretend  that  he  has  any
    interest in a sexual relationship with a woman.  He  would  tell  those
    who asked about why he does not have a girlfriend that this is  because
    he is gay. The Appellant's oral evidence was that  he  would  not  tell
    those he meets of his sexuality immediately on meeting them  but  would
    wish to reveal his sexuality when he gets to know people at a  time  of
    his choosing.


16. The Appellant's appeal is  on  protection  grounds  only.   He  is  not
    pursuing a claim that removal to Albania would  breach  his  Article  8
    ECHR rights.


THE LAW

Introduction to the Protection Claim


17. In order to be recognised as a refugee an appellant must show  that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for one of five reasons set  out
    in Article 1(A) of the 1951 Refugee  Convention  i.e.  for  reasons  of
    race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or
    political opinion.  The 1951 Convention is interpreted in European  law
    through Council Directive 2004/84/EC ("the  Qualification  Directive").
    The Qualification Directive is  incorporated  in  UK  law  through  The
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations 2006 and the Immigration Rules.


18. Article 9 of the Qualification Directive sets out what is meant  by  an
    act of persecution within Article 1(A) as follows (so far  as  relevant
    to this appeal):


         "1.  Acts of persecution within the meaning of article  1A  of  the
         Geneva Convention must:
          a) be sufficiently serious by their nature or  repetition  as  to
             constitute a  severe  violation  of  basic  human  rights,  in
             particular the rights from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
             under  Article  15(2)  of  the  European  Convention  for  the
             Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or
          b) be an accumulation of various measures,  including  violations
             of human rights which is sufficiently severe as to  affect  an
             individual in a similar manner as mentioned in (a).
         2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in  paragraph  1,  can  inter
         alia, take the form of:
         (a)  acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of  sexual
         violence;
         (b)  legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures  which
             are in themselves discriminatory or which are implemented in a
             discriminatory manner;
         ...
         (f)  acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature.
         3.   In accordance with Article 2(c), there must  be  a  connection
             between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and  the  acts  of
             persecution."


19. We have already noted that the Appellant does not pursue an  Article  8
    ECHR  claim.   The  only  human  right  which  is   relevant   to   our
    consideration, therefore, is Article 3 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on  Human  Rights  which  prohibits  torture,  inhuman   or   degrading
    treatment.  It is  an  absolute  right  from  which  there  can  be  no
    derogation.  An appellant must show that there are substantial  grounds
    for believing that there is a real risk that the consequence of removal
    would violate his rights under Article 3.


20. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to establish his claim and that
    there is a real risk that  he  will  be  subjected  to  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to  Albania.  We  do  not  accept  Mr  Chelvan's
    submission that this generally understood standard is affected  by  the
    reference to a "one in ten chance" in the speech of  Dyson  JSC  in  HJ
    (Iran) and HJ (Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31; [2011] 1 AC 596 ("HJ  (Iran)")  at  [91].   The  entire
    citation is that:


         "...it may be debatable whether a gay man would be at real risk of
         persecution (in the Convention sense) if, on returning to  his  own
         country, he would face a one in ten risk of  being  prosecuted  and
         made to pay a fine, or sent to prison for a month.  But if he would
         face a one in ten risk of being prosecuted and sentenced  to  death
         by public hanging from a crane there could only be one answer".


    As is clear from the reference read in context, Dyson  JSC  was  simply
    comparing the gravity of the ill-treatment which might be suffered  (by
    reference back to what is said at [90]).  The assessment of  risk  must
    be considered at the date of the hearing before us.


Particular Social Group


21. It is common ground that the Convention reason which  applies  in  this
    case is membership of a particular social group.  This is explained  in
    Article 10 of the Qualification Directive as follows:


         "1.  Member States shall take the following elements  into  account
         when assessing the reasons for persecution:
         ...
         (d)  a group shall be considered to form a particular social  group
         where in particular:
            - members of that group share an innate  characteristic,  or  a
              common background
             that cannot be changed, or share a  characteristic  or  belief
             that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a person
             should not be forced to renounce it, and
            - that group has a distinct identity in the  relevant  country,
              because it is perceived
             as being different by the surrounding society;
         depending  on  the  circumstances  in  the  country  of  origin,  a
         particular social group might include a group  based  on  a  common
         characteristic of sexual orientation.  Sexual orientation cannot be
         understood to include acts considered to be criminal in  accordance
         with national law of the  Member  States:  Gender  related  aspects
         might  be  considered,  without  by  themselves  alone  creating  a
         presumption for the applicability of this Article."


22. In the case of AA v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2006]
    UKAIT 00061, the AIT (as it then was) had to consider a  risk  said  to
    arise  not  because  of  individual  circumstances  of  the  particular
    appellant, but because of the belonging to or perception  of  belonging
    to  a  particular  class  of  persons.   The  AIT  held  that  in  such
    circumstances, the appellant needs  to  show  "only  that  there  is  a
    consistent pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone  returning  in
    those circumstances faces a real risk of coming to harm even though not
    everyone does".  That approach was upheld by the Court of Appeal in  AA
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ
    149:


         "The issue is whether the evidence establishes a real risk.  The
         Appellant does not need to show a certainty or probability that all
         failed asylum seekers returned involuntarily will face serious ill-
         treatment upon return.  He needs to show only that there is a
         consistent pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone returning
         in those circumstances faces a real risk of coming to harm even
         though not everyone does."


23. Mr Chelvan does not argue that this approach does not  apply  but  adds
    the caveat that, when looking at  the  group  to  which  the  Appellant
    belongs, we should consider the position of openly gay  men  in  Tirana
    and not simply gay men in Tirana.  We accept that this is  the  correct
    approach.

Living Openly


24. We have referred in the introduction to our definition of an openly gay
    man as being someone who does not conceal his sexuality except  insofar
    as he wishes to do so for reasons other than  a  fear  of  persecution.
    This is consistent with what was said  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the
    leading cases of HJ (Iran).  It  is  common  ground  that  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment applies here.  There is however a dispute  as  to  the
    guidance which emerges from the judgment.  Mr Chelvan relies on what is
    said by Lord Rodger JSC at [82] as follows:


         "The approach to be followed by tribunals
         82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality.
             If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
         satisfied on the available  evidence  that  gay  people  who  lived
         openly would be liable to persecution in the applicant's country of
         nationality.
             If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
         applicant would do if he were returned to that country.
             If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
         exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution - even if he could avoid  the  risk  by  living
         "discreetly".
             If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
         applicant would in fact live discreetly and so  avoid  persecution,
         it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.
             If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
         live discreetly simply because that was how he himself  would  wish
         to live, or because of  social  pressures,  e  g,  not  wanting  to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount  to
         persecution and the Convention does not  offer  protection  against
         them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which  means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.
             If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would  follow  if  he  were  to  live
         openly  as  a  gay  man,  then,  other  things  being  equal,   his
         application should be accepted. Such a person  has  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the  ground  that
         he could avoid the persecution by living  discreetly  would  be  to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -  his
         right to live freely and openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear  of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing  him  to  live
         freely and openly as a gay man without  fear  of  persecution,  the
         receiving state  gives  effect  to  that  right  by  affording  the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."


    He points out that it was Lord Rodger's guidance  which  was  expressly
    approved by Lord Walker ([86] and [98]), Lord Collins ([11]) and  Dyson
    JSC at [132].


25. Mr Thomann relies on the guidance given by Lord Hope at [35]  and  [15]
    of the judgment:


         "The test
         35. This brings me to the test that should be adopted by the  fact-
         finding tribunals in this country. As Lord  Walker  points  out  in
         para 98, this involves what is essentially an individual and  fact-
         specific inquiry. Lord Rodger has described the  approach  in  para
         82, but I would like to set it out in my own words. It is necessary
         to proceed in stages.


         (a) The  first  stage,  of  course,  is  to  consider  whether  the
         applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that
         orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as  a  member  of
         the particular social group. But I would regard this  part  of  the
         test as having been satisfied if the applicant's case is that he is
         at risk of persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his
         past history shows that this is in fact the case.


         (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which  are
         directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of  the
         inquiry is directed to what will happen in  the  future.  The  Home
         Office's Country of Origin  report  will  provide  the  background.
         There will be little difficulty in holding that in  countries  such
         as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed to be gay are
         persecuted and that persecution is something that may reasonably be
         feared. The question is how each applicant, looked at individually,
         will conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
         he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will  come
         in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
         no part in this inquiry.


         (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be able
         to do in the country of his nationality everything that he  can  do
         openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not the test. As
         I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was  not  directed  to
         reforming the level of rights in the country of origin. So it would
         be wrong to approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the
         Convention is to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that  he  can
         live as freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to
         do if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to  everyone  the
         human rights standards that are applied by  the  receiving  country
         within its own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will
         happen in the country of origin.


         (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well founded.


         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
         founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has,  the  causative
         condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426,  para  5  will  have
         been established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum"
         ...
         "15. The guarantees in the Universal Declaration are fundamental to
         a proper understanding of the Convention. But the Convention itself
         has, as the references in para 12 show, a more limited purpose.  It
         is not enough that members of a particular social group  are  being
         discriminated against. The contracting states did not undertake  to
         protect  them  against  discrimination  judged  according  to   the
         standards in their own countries. Persecution apart, the Convention
         was not directed to reforming the level of rights prevailing in the
         country of origin. Its purpose is to provide the protection that is
         not available in the country of nationality where there is a  well-
         founded fear of persecution, not  to  guarantee  to  asylum-seekers
         when they are returned all the freedoms that are available  in  the
         country where they seek refuge. It  does  not  guarantee  universal
         human rights. So the conditions that  prevail  in  the  country  in
         which asylum is sought have no part to play,  as  matter  of  legal
         obligation binding on all states  parties  to  the  Convention,  in
         deciding whether the applicant is entitled to seek asylum  in  that
         country: Januzi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]
         UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC 426, paras 16, 46. As Laws LJ said in  Amare  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1600,
         [2006] Imm AR 217 para 31:


             "The  Convention  is  not  there  to  safeguard   or   protect
             potentially affected persons from having to  live  in  regimes
             where pluralist liberal values are less respected,  even  much
             less respected, than they are here.  It  is  there  to  secure
             international  protection  to  the  extent   agreed   by   the
             contracting states."."


26. In summary, as we understand Mr Chelvan's submission, it is  that  Lord
    Hope draws attention to cultural or religious reasons as well as social
    pressures for concealing sexuality whereas Lord Rodger refers  only  to
    the latter. Lord Hope distinguishes between  concealment  for  fear  of
    persecution and behaviour which is triggered  by  those  other  factors
    whereas Lord Rodger, in Mr Chelvan's submission, does not spell out the
    distinction in quite the same way.  In essence, Mr Chelvan says,  if  a
    gay man is unable to live as openly and freely as he would like and  as
    he is able to do in the country of  refuge,  then  he  is  entitled  to
    protection against return.


27. Ultimately, we are unclear how the distinction which Mr  Chelvan  seeks
    to draw makes any difference in this case.  However, in  light  of  the
    submissions made, it may assist if we offer  our  observations  on  the
    argument.


28. First, referring to the judgment in HJ (Iran), when his speech is  read
    as a whole, Lord Hope clearly did not consider himself to be  departing
    in any way from the guidance given by Lord Rodger.  He refers  to  Lord
    Rodger's approach without dissent and says simply that he  "would  like
    to set it out in [his] own words".  The other members of the Court  did
    not voice any dissent with his opinion and nor did Lord Rodger draw any
    distinction between his guidance and that of Lord Hope.


29. Second, insofar as there is any difference between Lord  Hope's  speech
    and the guidance of Lord Rodger, there is no distinction  in  substance
    and any difference seems to us to amount to only this.  At  [35(b)  and
    (c)], Lord Hope draws a distinction between  a  person  seeking  asylum
    based on a fear of persecution if he behaves as he  would  wish  and  a
    person seeking asylum because he is not able to live as openly  in  the
    country of return as he may be able to do in  the  country  of  asylum.
    Lord Hope sets out that distinction at [35(c)].  In the following  sub-
    paragraph, he refers to an applicant concealing his sexuality not  only
    due to social pressures but also for cultural or religious reasons.


30. In the case of  HL  (Malaysia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 834, the Court  of  Appeal  dealt  with  the
    issue of whether there is in fact any distinction to be  drawn  between
    the speeches of Lords Rodger and Hope as follows:


         "10....Mr Sheldon submits in essence that  Lord Hope's  statement
         that "the fact that the appellant will not be able  to  do  in  the
         country of his nationality everything that he can do openly in  the
         country whose protection he seeks is not the test"  conflicts  with
         Lord Rodger's declaration that the Convention protects  "his  right
         to live freely and openly as a gay man".


         11.  In the course of  his  submissions  this  morning  Mr Sheldon
         submitted that this latter proposition is very much  the  focus  of
         Lord Rodger's approach. For my part I do not consider that there is
         any inconsistency between the observations of Lord Hope and  those
         of Lord Rodger. First, it is important to notice that both of their
         Lordships insist that an asylum applicant  cannot  be  required  to
         conceal or dissemble or be discreet out of a  fear  of  persecution
         because of his sexual orientation. It is plain to me that Lord Hope
         puts this proposition quite as strongly as does  Lord  Rodger.  For
         emphasis I repeat this sentence from paragraph 35  in  Lord Hope's
         judgment:
         "But he cannot and must not be expected to conceal aspects  of  his
         sexual orientation which he is  unwilling  to  conceal,  even  from
         those whom he knows may disapprove of it."


         12.  Next, Lord Rodger's insistence that  the  Convention  protects
         the right to live freely and openly as a gay  man  is  in  my  view
         entirely consistent with Lord Hope's reminder that the  Convention
         does not guarantee universal human rights. Both these  propositions
         are, with respect, true and important. "To live freely  and  openly
         as a gay man" means what it says, no more, no  less.  It  does  not
         necessarily require all the congenial cultural encouragement  of  a
         liberal and tolerant society.


         13.  Thirdly, I should emphasise that,  even  if  in  a  particular
         country a gay person might not live freely and openly as  such,  an
         applicant will not be entitled to refugee status if he would behave
         discreetly for reasons quite other than a fear of  persecution.  In
         such a case there is no nexus between the possible  persecution  of
         overt  gays  and  the   applicant's   conduct.   In   my   judgment
         Immigration Judge Turquet was quite right to say at paragraph 28:


             "It should always  be  remembered  that  the  purpose  of  the
             exercise to separate out those who are entitled to  protection
             because their fear of persecution is well-founded  from  those
             who are  not.  The  causative  condition  is  central  to  the
             inquiry. This makes it necessary to  concentrate  on  what  is
             actually likely to happen to the applicant."


         14.  It seems to me that the structured approach in  Lord  Rodger's
         guidance at paragraph 82, though of course important, was not, with
         respect, intended as a straitjacket in  these  cases.  Lord  Rodger
         himself recognises the importance of the question why a person  who
         is gay might act discreetly in his country of  origin  if  returned
         there. I should note two short passages which I have not so far set
         out. In his judgment at paragraph 75 Lord Rodger says this:


             "75. In my view the core objection to the  Court  of  Appeal's
             approach is  that  its  starting  point  is  unacceptable:  it
             supposes that at least some applications  for  asylum  can  be
             rejected on the basis that the particular applicant could find
             it reasonably tolerable to  act  discreetly  and  conceal  his
             sexual identity indefinitely to avoid suffering severe harm."


         I emphasise the last words. Likewise at paragraph 76:


             "No-one would proceed on the basis  that  a  straight  man  or
             woman could find it reasonably tolerable to conceal his or her
             sexual identity indefinitely to avoid  suffering  persecution.
             Nor would anyone proceed on the basis  that  a  man  or  woman
             could find it reasonably tolerable to conceal his or her  race
             indefinitely to avoid suffering persecution."


         Throughout, as it seems to me, the focus and emphasis is  upon  the
         fear of persecution in the particular case."


31. We do not accept Mr Chelvan's  additional  submission  that  we  should
    ignore the judgment in HL (Malaysia) simply because it has  never  been
    followed.  It is a judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  therefore
    binding on us unless overruled.  Mr Chelvan submits that  the  judgment
    in HL (Malaysia) is inconsistent with what was said by Lord Dyson in RT
    (Zimbabwe) v Home Secretary [2012] UKSC 38, [2013] 1 AC 152 (with whose
    judgment the other Law Lords agreed) and for that reason should not  be
    followed.  Mr Chelvan submitted that Lord Dyson there rejects  what  Mr
    Chelvan describes as the argument based on "cultural relativism".   The
    only passage of RT (Zimbabwe) to which Mr Chelvan directs our attention
    on this issue is  [18]  where  Lord  Dyson,  delivering  the  unanimous
    judgment of the Court, referred only to "social pressures" and not also
    cultural or religious reasons as Lord Hope had done in his formulation.
     We do not though discern Lord Dyson's judgment to be  a  comment  that
    cultural or religious reasons cannot be pressures that might  influence
    an applicant to conceal his sexuality.  In RT (Zimbabwe),  the  reasons
    were social in nature and any wider issues did not arise.  At  [18]  of
    the Supreme Court judgment, Lord Dyson is referring to the  submissions
    of Mr Fordham and agreeing  with  them  rather  than  laying  down  any
    additional or alternative  formulation.   The  reference  there  to  HJ
    (Iran) is to [61] of Lord Rogers'  speech  where  he  was  specifically
    considering an example of a person  being  subject  to  pressures  from
    society. The fact that he refers to those as  "social  pressures"  does
    not mean that he was excluding other reasons why a person might  choose
    to behave discreetly.  Indeed, in setting out the example at [61], Lord
    Rogers refers to "prevailing culture" indicating that  what  was  there
    under consideration is how an applicant might be influenced by both the
    society and culture which would surround him on return.


32. We also note that although HL (Malaysia) preceded  the  hearing  in  RT
    (Zimbabwe) it was not referred to by the parties.  It was not suggested
    in RT (Zimbabwe) that any  distinction  is  to  be  drawn  between  the
    speeches of Lords Rodgers and Hope in HJ (Iran).  We also fail  to  see
    how what is said by Lord Dyson in RT (Zimbabwe) differs  from  what  is
    said by Lord Hope in relation to the extent of  protection  offered  by
    the Refugee Convention  in  these  cases;  the  essential  question  is
    whether an individual will conceal aspects of his sexuality because  he
    fears persecution or a real risk of serious harm (unless of  course  an
    applicant is relying also on Article 8 ECHR in which case  interference
    with private life may import wider considerations).


33. In short summary of the above, the essential question which arises from
    HJ (Iran) is how an individual will behave on return and  why  he  will
    behave in that way.  If his behaviour is adapted by concealment of  his
    orientation because of an objectively well-founded fear of  persecution
    or real risk of serious harm, he is entitled  to  protection.   If  his
    behaviour is adapted for other reasons,  then  he  is  unlikely  to  be
    recognised as a refugee.

"The Silence Fallacy"


34. That brings us on to the Appellant's  other  argument  which  seeks  to
    widen the guidance in HJ (Iran).  Mr Chelvan submits  that  because  of
    the "heteronormative culture" of Albanian society, those  who  "deviate
    from the heterosexual narrative" are  at  risk  because  they  will  be
    perceived as different.  Mr Chelvan submits that a gay man  in  Albania
    would, in order to avoid risk, have to "prove a heterosexual narrative"
    (i.e.  "prove  straight")  in  order  to  conceal  his  actual   sexual
    orientation. For that reason, irrespective of whether he  would  behave
    discreetly for his  own  reasons  or  not,  he  would  be  entitled  to
    protection because he could not be expected to behave in  a  way  which
    runs completely contrary to his sexual orientation.


35. That argument considered by the Court  of  Appeal  in  LC  (Albania)  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  1  WLR  4173  at
    [52(vii)] is as follows:


         "To an extent, Mr Chelvan went further  than  the  intervener.   He
         submitted  that,  in  drawing  a  distinction  between  forced  and
         voluntary  modification,  the  fourth  limb  of  the  guidance   is
         misconceived, because being discreet about his  sexual  orientation
         can never in practice protect a gay man from persecution because of
         what he describes as "the silence fallacy"  in  sexual  orientation
         cases,  ie  an  assumption  that,  in  a  homophobic  homeland,  an
         individual will be safe as long as he is silent  about  his  actual
         sexual orientation.  For that proposition, he relied upon a  number
         of authorities, including SW (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT  251  (IAC)  ...
         and other Jamaican cases to the same effect; and Hysi  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2005]  INLR  602  in  which  this
         court found that it would be unrealistic for the appellant  to  lie
         about  the  relevant  characteristic  in  that  case,  namely   his
         ethnicity.  However, in my view, a submission  that  Albania  is  a
         country where it is  impossible  for  a  gay  man  to  avoid  being
         perceived  as  gay  without  engaging  in  some  form  of  positive
         behaviour, as Mr Chelvan suggests, would  require  some  evidential
         basis.  There is no such basis here...


         (viii)   Nor do I find persuasive Mr Chelvan's submission that  the
         claimant's concealment of his sexual orientation in  Albania  would
         not be voluntary, as the First-tier Tribunal found that his  choice
         to be discreet on return was not a purely internal choice, but  was
         "motivated by social pressure"... In passing, I note the tribunal's
         finding that, on return, the claimant would not be at risk from his
         family ...but  the  submission  is  conclusively  answered  by  the
         judgments in HJ (Iran)  which  draw  a  clear  distinction  between
         concealment of sexual orientation "in response to social  pressures
         or for cultural or religious  reasons  of  his  own  choosing"  and
         concealment  because  of  a  fear  of  persecution,   because   the
         Convention  does  not  afford  protection  against   these   social
         pressures.. and so an applicant cannot claim  asylum  in  order  to
         avoid them": see para 36 per Lord Hope DPSC, and para 61  per  Lord
         Rodger JSC.  With respect to the submission of Mr  Chelvan  to  the
         contrary, that must be right; because, whilst no doubt  varying  in
         nature and  extent,  such  social  pressures  are  present  in  all
         countries, including the UK.  I specifically  reject  Mr  Chelvan's
         submission that, in  some  (unspecified)  way,  the  scope  of  the
         Qualification Directive  is  different  from  that  of  the  Geneva
         Convention."


36. With respect, we agree with  the  Court  of  Appeal's  analysis  of  Mr
    Chelvan's argument. However, as a matter of law,  his  submission  does
    not appear to us to add  to  the  legal  test  which  we  have  already
    posited: how will an appellant choose to behave on return, why will  he
    choose to behave in that way and is that choice of behaviour to avoid a
    well-founded fear of persecution?   Whether that test is met depends on
    the evidence which we address below.

Sufficiency of Protection


37. The  test  in  relation  to  whether  there  exists  a  sufficiency  of
    protection to protect against a risk which arises  in  the  country  of
    return is set out in the leading  case  of  Horvath  v  Home  Secretary
    [2001] 1 AC 489 at 510f (in the speech of Lord Clyde) as follows:


         "There must be  in  place  a  system  of  domestic  protection  and
         machinery for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  actings
         contrary to the purposes which  the  Convention  requires  to  have
         protected.  More importantly there must be an ability and readiness
         to operate that machinery."


38. Lord Clyde added at 511c that "it will require cogent evidence that the
    state which is able  to  afford  protection  is  unwilling  to  do  so,
    especially in the case of a democracy".


39.  There  was  substantial  agreement  between  the  parties  as  to  the
    appropriate test.  Mr Chelvan however takes issue with the Respondent's
    case because he says that the Respondent relies on the work of the LGBT
    NGOs operating in Albania as agents of protection.   Our  attention  is
    drawn to Article 7 of the Qualification Directive which sets out  those
    who may be considered to be agents of protection as follows:


         "1.  Protection can be provided by:
          a) The State; or
          b)   Parties   or    organisations,    including    international
             organisations, controlling the State or a substantial part  of
             the territory of the State.
         2.   Protection is generally provided when the actors mentioned  in
             paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to prevent  the  persecution
             or suffering of serious harm,  inter  alia,  by  operating  an
             effective legal system  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and
             punishment of acts constituting persecution  or  serious  harm
             and the applicant has access to such protection.
             ..."


40. We do not understand the Respondent to be relying on the LGBT  NGOs  as
    State agents of protection. We agree with  the  Appellant's  submission
    that those organisations are not actors of protection.   However,  they
    are capable of being part of the apparatus which  holds  the  State  to
    account in the provision of such protection as is included in the legal
    framework operating in Albania and to that  extent  we  agree  with  Mr
    Thomann that their presence and the  work  they  do  in,  for  example,
    making complaints on behalf of individuals affected  by  discrimination
    is relevant to the issue of sufficiency of protection.

Internal Relocation


41. The test in relation to whether a person at risk in  one  area  of  the
    country of return can be expected to relocate to another part  of  that
    country where the risk does not exist or where protection is  available
    from risk in the home area is set out in the speech of Lord Bingham  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AH  (Sudan)  and  others
    [2007] UKHL 49 as follows:


         "5.  In paragraph 21 of my opinion  in Januzi I  summarised  the
         correct approach to the problem of  internal  relocation  in  terms
         with which all my noble and learned friends agreed:


             "The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so . . . There is, as Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls. . . . All must depend on a fair assessment of  the
             relevant facts."


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
         It is, or should be, evident that the enquiry must be  directed  to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
         consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
         persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
         to, consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in  the  home
         country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
         in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
         expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
         to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
         founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
         it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
         around the world, desirable though of course that is."


42. Mr Chelvan queried in his closing submissions  whether  the  Respondent
    also relies on [42] of the judgment in AH (Sudan) to  the  effect  that
    the Appellant is in no worse position than any other openly gay man  in
    Tirana and can therefore be expected to relocate.  We do not understand
    Mr Thomann to be making that argument.  Paragraph [66] of  his  closing
    submissions cites [5] of the House of  Lords'  judgment  which,  albeit
    making clear that the general conditions prevailing  in  the  place  of
    return are relevant,  confirms  that  the  situation  is  that  of  the
    particular applicant.

Discrimination in Status of Gay Relationships


43. A further legal issue between  the  parties  concerns  the  absence  of
    recognition in Albanian law of the status of relationships between  gay
    men either as civil partnerships or marriages in the context of whether
    discrimination on  this  basis  individually  or  combined  with  other
    discrimination makes out a case of persecution.


44. Mr Chelvan drew our attention to the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  SB
    (India) and CB (India) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 451.  As the headnote  to  the  judgment  makes  clear,
    those cases were concerned with  a  claim  that  removal  would  breach
    Article 8 ECHR.  As we have already noted, the Appellant does not  make
    a claim that Article 8 would be breached.  Mr Thomann submits that this
    judgment shows that, in an Article 8 case, it will only be where  there
    is  a  flagrant  breach  of  such  rights   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.  Mr Chelvan argues that  a  flagrant  breach  is  not
    required and that the Court of Appeal's judgment is to be distinguished
    from this case because the Court was there  considering  removal  to  a
    country (India) which is not a  signatory  to  the  ECHR  whereas  here
    Albania is a signatory.


45. We consider this submission to be misconceived.   The  reason  why  the
    Court of Appeal considered SB  (India)  to  be  a  "foreign  case"  has
    nothing to do with whether the country of return is within  or  outside
    the jurisdiction of the Strasbourg Court but because of the  nature  of
    the obligation of the country effecting the removal.  Referring to case-
    law as far back as Ullah v Special Adjudicator [2004]  2  AC  323,  the
    Court of Appeal distinguished between positive obligations of a  member
    state where what is at issue is measures being taken within that  state
    and negative obligations inherent in the removal process not to  remove
    to a country where a person's human rights will be breached.   Although
    there is reference in the judgment to the country  of  return  being  a
    "non-Convention country" that does not in our view affect the essential
    point made by reference to Ullah that what is in  issue  in  a  foreign
    case is not the direct responsibility  of  the  member  state.   As  Mr
    Thomann  observed  and  we  accept,  there   is   perhaps   even   less
    responsibility imposed on a state returning  to  another  member  state
    because the individual has the option  of  petitioning  the  Strasbourg
    Court directly if his own state is failing in its obligations.


46. Mr Chelvan confirmed that the Appellant is not pursuing  an  Article  8
    ECHR ground.  Insofar as he seeks to rely  on  discrimination  engaging
    the Refugee Convention,  whether  the  discrimination  in  question  is
    sufficient to amount to persecution depends on the evidence and we deal
    with that when making our findings below.


Existing Country Guidance


47. We have set out in the introduction section, the headline  findings  of
    the existing country guidance in IM. Although Mr Chelvan  submits  that
    the decision of UTJ Kopieczek in KL (Albania) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department (AA/02967/2014 - unreported) is a more reliable and
    up-to-date consideration of  the  country  evidence  than  the  country
    guidance, the  latter  is  unreported  and  Judge  Kopieczek  expressly
    disavowed any intention to establish any point of principle or  general
    guidance.  Whether  he  did  so  under  a  misapprehension  as  to  the
    existence of other country guidance which had in fact been withdrawn is
    neither here nor there.  It is part of our function to  decide  whether
    the existing country guidance still holds good and the extent to  which
    it may need varying.

THE EVIDENCE

Country Specific Evidence


48. We received a bundle and supplementary bundle  of  background  evidence
    jointly submitted by both parties.  We  refer  to  documents  in  those
    bundles hereafter as [B/xx] and [E/xx] respectively.  We also  received
    a bundle of evidence of material relating specifically to the Appellant
    to which we refer hereafter as [A/xx]. The indices  to  the  background
    evidence bundles are reproduced as Annex B to this decision.   We  also
    received some additional documents which are listed after the  indices.
    To simplify references hereafter to the main reports that  we  need  to
    consider, those are summarised below:


    1) United Nations' Organisations:
    The UN Development Programme in conjunction with US Aid  has  issued  a
    report entitled "Being LGBTI in Eastern  Europe:  Progress,  Drawbacks,
    Recommendations" dated 3 December 2017 and an associated country report
    in relation to Albania (together referred to  hereafter  as  "the  UNDP
    2017 Report") ([B/565-605]).  The UNDP 2017 Report  is  based  on  data
    from several  sources  including  a  national  round  table,  community
    dialogues,  interviews,  field  visits  and  focus  groups  with  LGBTI
    individuals, discussions with stakeholders and LGBTI organisations  and
    a desk review of published material (see Executive Summary at [B/567]).




    2) European Union:
    These include:
    (a)   The  European  Council's  Conclusions  on  the  Enlargement   and
         Stabilisation and Association Process in relation to  a  number  of
         countries including Albania and dated 26 June 2018  is  at  [B/112-
         139] (the "EU Conclusions Document").  The EU Conclusions  Document
         includes a summary of the progress made  by  Albania  in  its  move
         towards accession talks with the  EU  and  identifies  steps  which
         still need to be taken.
    (b)  The European Commission's  Staff  Working  Document  reporting  on
         Albania for 2018 and dated 17 April 2018  ("the  EU  2018  Report")
         ([B/218-324]).
    (c)  The Commission's Staff Working Document reporting on  Albania  for
         2016 ("the EU 2016 Report") ([E/1-95]).
    (d)  An undated  report  issued  by  the  Council  of  Europe  entitled
         "Preventing and  Combating  Discrimination  on  Grounds  of  Sexual
         Orientation and Gender Identity" ("the EU  Discrimination  Report")
         (B/722-723]).


    3) ILGA-Europe
    ILGA-Europe is the European Region of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans
    & Intersex Association (ILGA).  We have before us a number  of  reports
    published by ILGA-Europe:
    (a)  The "Annual Review of the Human Rights Situation of Lesbian,  Gay,
         Bisexual, Trans and Intersex People in Europe 2017 - Albania" dated
         17 May 2017 ("the ILGA 2017 Review") (dealing with the position  as
         at end December 2016) ([B/364-367 and B/618-621]).
    (b)  The Annual Review of the Human Rights Situation of  Lesbian,  Gay,
         Bisexual, Trans and Intersex People in Europe 2018 - Albania  dated
         14 May 2018 ("the ILGA 2018 Review") (dealing with the position  as
         at end December 2017) ([B/182-183]).
    (c)  The LGBTI Enlargement Review 2017 dated 17  May  2018  ("the  2017
         ILGA Enlargement Review") ([B/151-181])
    (d)  A document entitled "Albania and  FYR  Macedonia  accession  talks
         recommended" dated 19 April 2018 [B/212-213] ("the ILGA Document").


    (4) The Home Office
    (a)  The Home Office  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled
         "Country Policy and Information Notice: Albania: Sexual Orientation
         and Gender Identity" (version 4.0 dated May 2017)  ("the  May  2017
         CPIN") ([B/623-662]).
    (b)  Country Policy and Information Note entitled "Albania:  Background
         information  including   actors   of   protection,   and   internal
         relocation" (version 2.0 dated July 2017  ("the  July  2017  CPIN")
         (Tab [21] of second supplementary bundle of authorities)
    (c)  Country Policy  and  Information  Note  entitled  "Albania:  Women
         fearing domestic abuse" (version 2.0 December 2017) ("the  December
         2017 CPIN") (with additional documents).
    (d)  "Report of  a  Fact-Finding  Mission,  Albania:  Conducted  on  31
         October to 7 November 2017" dated February 2018 ("the FFM  Report")
         (B/401-560]).  Although that  fact-finding  mission  was  concerned
         predominantly with the situation for  female  victims  of  domestic
         violence, it has some limited relevance to the issues before us.
    (e)   A  report  entitled  "Asylum  Claims  on  the  Basis  of   Sexual
         Orientation, Experimental Statistics"  dated  November  2017  ("the
         Home Office Statistics") ([B/608-617]).
    (f)   Home  Office,  Asylum   Policy   Instruction   entitled   "Sexual
         Orientation in Asylum Claims" (version 6.0  dated  3  August  2016)
         ("the API") ([B/729-769]).


    (5) Documents issued by other  States,  Non-Governmental  Organisations
    ("NGOs") and other bodies:
    (a)  The United  States  Department  of  State  report  entitled  "2017
         Country Report on Human Rights Practices: Albania" dated  20  April
         2018 ("the USSD 2017 Report") ([B/186-211]).
    (b)  A Human Rights  Watch  article  dated  7  November  2017  entitled
         "Sheltering Albania's Gay Youth from Virulent Homophobia" ("the HRW
         Article") ([B/606-607]).
    (c)  An Albanian Helsinki Committee article entitled "Public Appeal for
         the Rights and Freedoms of the LGBTI in Albania" dated 17 May  2017
         ("the Helsinki Committee Article") ([B/622]).
    (d)  A LGBTI Equal Rights Association for Western  Balkans  and  Turkey
         article entitled "Open Lectures on LGBTI Rights in  Albania's  High
         Schools Face Homophobic Backlash"dated  30  March  2018  ("the  ERA
         Article") ([B/397-400]).
    (e)   The  Independent  Chief  Inspector  of  Borders  and  Immigration
         "Inspection of Country of Origin Information,  March  2017  report"
         ("the ICI Report") ([B/663-718]).   The  ICI  Report  is  a  report
         issued by David Bolt, the  Independent  Chief  Inspector,  but  the
         section in relation to Albania is written by Dr  Enkeleida  Tahiraj
         who is a Visiting Senior Fellow at the London School of  Economics.
         The ICI Report comments  on  the  Home  Office  Country  of  Origin
         Information report  entitled  "Minority  Groups,  Albania,  October
         2016"  and  "Sexual  Orientation  and  Gender  Identity,   Albania,
         December 2016".  The comments from the ICI Report insofar as  those
         were accepted by the Home Office are included in the May 2017  CPIN
         Report.  However, our attention was  also  drawn  to  some  of  the
         comments which were not accepted and therefore not incorporated.


The Expert


49. Ms Antonia Young has provided an expert report  dated  29  August  2018
    ([B/4-72]) in which she  covers  a  wide  range  of  topics  concerning
    corruption in Albanian  institutions,  the  position  of  and  societal
    treatment of LGBT+ individuals, the  ability  and  willingness  of  the
    Albanian Government and Police to provide  protection  to  that  group,
    domestic  violence  in  Albania  and  the   possibility   of   internal
    relocation.  We will refer to the detail of her report when we come  to
    consider the detail of the evidence below.   The  Respondent  was  also
    given the opportunity to ask written questions of  Ms  Young  prior  to
    finalisation of her report, the answers to which appear at [B/79-93].


50. Following the completion of Ms Young's  evidence  at  the  hearing,  Mr
    Thomann produced a small number of  documents  concerning  one  of  the
    LGBTI NGOs, PINK Embassy on which Ms Young's comment  was  sought.   We
    permitted that to be done by a short series of written questions agreed
    between the parties to which Ms Young was invited to  respond  also  in
    writing.  To assist  her  responses,  the  Appellant's  representatives
    provided Ms Young  with  a  note  of  her  oral  evidence.  Instead  of
    confining her response to the  questions  asked,  Ms  Young  sought  to
    expand upon the answers she gave in oral evidence.

51. Ms Young has a  BA  degree  in  anthropology  from  the  University  of
    California.   She  is  a  dual  British/US  citizen  and  also  has   a
    Certificate  in  Social  Work  issued  by  Edinburgh  University.   She
    currently holds various honorary, unpaid positions.  She  has  been  an
    Honorary Research Fellow in the Research Unit in  South  East  European
    Studies at the University of Bradford since 1992.  She  is  a  Research
    Associate  in  the  Department  of  Sociology/Anthropology  at  Colgate
    University in the US although she has only  limited  activity  in  this
    latter role.


52. Ms Young has provided expert evidence in relation to  the  Balkans  for
    five decades with a particular emphasis on Albania and Albanians  since
    1989.  She visits Albania at least once per year,  usually  for  a  few
    weeks at a time.  She has not however lived there and accepts that  she
    speaks only  limited  Albanian.  Ms  Young  has  written  a  number  of
    publications relating to the Balkans.  According  to  her  CV,  one  of
    those focussed on gay rights but we have not  been  provided  with  the
    titles nor the article in question.  She has served on  various  boards
    of study and has led study tours in the region.   She has  also  spoken
    at various conferences in the region.  Ms Young has also served  as  an
    OSCE election supervisor and observer in the  region  since  1997.  She
    advised the US Embassy in Tirana on the social and political  situation
    in Northern Albania from 2008-2010.  She was involved in the setting up
    of the Centre for Peace Studies and  Reconciliation  of  Bloodfeuds  in
    Albania in 1996.  She has also worked with Bloodfeud Mediators.

Summary of Ms Young's Evidence


53. A theme running through Ms Young's evidence is that the changes made by
    anti-discrimination legislation and the offices created for victims  to
    obtain  protection   and   pursue   grievances   were   brought   about
    predominantly because of Albania's desire to join the  EU  and  do  not
    reflect a real change in attitudes. She says  that  Albania  remains  a
    place of corrupt institutions  which  are  resistant  to  change.   She
    considers that any changes are ineffective and that openly gay men in a
    conservative family- orientated and macho society  intolerant  of  same
    sex behaviour would be at  risk.  That  risk  ranges  from  attacks  by
    homophobic gangs in Tirana and an unsupportive  police  force  who  are
    hostile to LGBTI individuals to a setting where openly gay people would
    face discrimination and have great difficulties in obtaining employment
    and accommodation for which family connections are an essential driver.
     The reach of the family and the enquiring nature of  Albanian  society
    is such that the news of  re-registration  in  Tirana  will  reach  the
    family elsewhere in the country as would mere  presence  in  the  city,
    news of which would pass by gossip.  She accepts that things are better
    in Tirana compared to elsewhere in the country  but,  even  there,  the
    only viable area for relocation is  an  expensive  area  known  as  the
    "Blloku" where the former communist cadre once lived, and which is  now
    the location of bars and clubs some of which are gay-friendly.

General Observations about Ms Young's Evidence


54. Ms Young's evidence has been given judicial scrutiny in  other  appeals
    before the tribunal as well as the Court of Appeal in  (MF  (Albania  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 902: [16] to
    [18]).   The Court made certain criticisms of her evidence but accepted
    at [16] that Ms Young's summary of her  qualifications  and  experience
    shows that she  has  "considerable  experience  of  Albania"  (in  that
    particular case in the context of blood feuds).  She also, very fairly,
    draws attention to the criticism in her CV and acknowledges the need to
    be more objective in her assessment of cases.


55. Specific to the Appellant in this case, Ms Young has expressed her view
    on the risk which he might suffer if returned to his home area, whether
    in her view he could obtain sufficient protection and whether he  could
    relocate within Albania.  She has criticised the Respondent's  decision
    letter.  Whilst we take account of the general issues  which  Ms  Young
    raises  in  that  section  of  her  report  which  may  impact  on  our
    consideration, ultimately, the issues of level of risk, sufficiency  of
    protection and ability to relocate internally are all questions for the
    Tribunal to determine. This has informed an approach where Ms Young has
    expressed views on issues that are for us to decide  as  the  Court  of
    Appeal also remarked in MF (Albania) at [16].


56. An expert witness is  someone  who  has  specialised  knowledge  and/or
    academic qualifications to provide opinions in a particular  field  and
    is qualified to give an opinion to assist  the  Tribunal  to  determine
    those issues.  In order for the Tribunal to determine the weight  which
    should be attached to the expert evidence,  it  is  necessary  for  the
    Tribunal to examine the sources which are relied upon by the expert, if
    and insofar as the source is not the expert's personal experience.   It
    is not enough for the expert to simply say that "x  is  the  position";
    the Tribunal needs to be told why the expert has reached that view.


57. Ms Young's report in several passages  does  not  clearly  identify  or
    cross-reference the sources of her information.  On some points, it was
    also unclear whether  she  had  regard  to  contemporary  evidence  and
    reports. She conceded more than once in her oral evidence that some  of
    her evidence derives from "word of mouth" or "anecdotal evidence".   It
    was unclear whether all those whom she consulted on certain issues have
    current connections to Albania (insofar as we were able to identify the
    source of her information).


58. Previously uncited material emerged during Ms Young's oral evidence. We
    permitted her to give that evidence notwithstanding  that  it  was  not
    referred to in her written report. Mr Thomann  did  not  object.   This
    evidence included reliance on certain cases of Albanian appellants  for
    whom she has provided written reports in their asylum appeals.  We were
    not told about the timing of the claims or their underlying facts which
    may be relevant to the degree of reliance which could be placed on them
    nor were we given copies of any decisions relating to these cases.   We
    do not know whether the facts relied on by  Ms  Young  were  tested  in
    evidence or whether they were accepted by the tribunals who  determined
    the appeals.


59. One example serves to illustrate our concern.  Ms Young was asked in re-
    examination about the sufficiency of the police and  their  willingness
    to protect.  She referred in her answer to the case of a police officer
    who had refused to  follow  instructions  to  let  people  through  the
    airport (as an illustration of the continued taking of  bribes  by  the
    police). The police officer had been threatened for  that  refusal  and
    had to leave the country.  Ms Young wrote a report for the appeal which
    she said was "ongoing".  When this was probed, she  admitted  that  the
    appellant's appeal had been dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    was to be re-heard.  When Mr Thomann asked whether  the  facts  of  the
    claim had been accepted notwithstanding the dismissal of the appeal, Ms
    Young said that she "believed so".  Her reliance on a  case  where  she
    did not know or had not checked whether the  facts  had  been  accepted
    undermines the reliability and relevance of her evidence.


60. When Ms Young was taken to  documents  suggesting,  for  example,  that
    there had been improvements in the conduct  of  the  police,  she  also
    accepted that she "gets to hear all the negatives" in terms of "reports
    not written up" and would not therefore agree with views  expressed  in
    published documents including from LGBTI  NGO  representatives  on  the
    ground in Albania that the behaviour of the police had improved.   That
    was repeated when she said that she "supposed [she was]  going  by  the
    people she had interacted with" in answer  to  another  question  about
    people not reporting incidents.  These answers again appear to be based
    on claims by Albanian asylum seekers in the  UK  and  information  from
    others who have told her about incidents which she  confirmed  are  not
    included as specific examples in her report.


61. Ms Young's recent visit to Albania was for a period  in  May  2018,  in
    part to conduct enquiries in relation  to  this  appeal.   During  this
    visit Ms Young met representatives of the NGOs groups supporting  LGBTI
    individuals in Albania, in particular Tirana (who we identify later  in
    this decision).  However, she was not  able  to  provide  more  than  a
    general account of their circumstances by reason of their apparent lack
    of interest and, on her own admission, her failure to  explore  matters
    in detail.  She acknowledged that she failed to ask  them  about  their
    own experiences as LGBTI individuals (the  risks  they  faced,  whether
    they had cause to report incidents  to  the  police  on  their  own  or
    others' behalf, if so how frequently and what reaction they  received).
    She does not appear to have discussed with  these  individuals  whether
    there is a risk from the homophobic gangs that  she  said  continue  to
    exist in Tirana.  Ms Young visited a "gay-friendly" bar in  Tirana  but
    admitted that she had done so during an afternoon when it was not  very
    busy and that she had not spoken to anyone in those  bars  about  their
    experiences as openly gay men.  She also  met  with  an  anthropologist
    friend from the university in Tirana and had  been  introduced  to  her
    students but did not ask if any  of  them  were  openly  gay  and  what
    problems they had faced if they were.  She did not ask the director  of
    the STREHA shelter for LGBTI individuals whether she  could  visit  the
    shelter and/or speak with any of the individuals who they had assisted.
    Ms Young did not attempt to speak with either the Government Ministries
    with responsibility for minority rights, the People's  Advocate  ("PA")
    or the Commissioner for Discrimination  ("CPD").   When  Ms  Young  was
    asked by the Respondent in his written questions about  the  impact  of
    the PA and CPD, she admitted that she was unaware of the  existence  of
    those organisations.


62. We were also concerned about Ms Young's understanding of  LGBTI  issues
    and individuals.  When asked what she considered was meant  by  "openly
    gay" in discussing whether one of the NGO  representatives  was  openly
    gay she said it was "hard to say.  Maybe he is not.  He was openly  gay
    at the conference in South of  Albania.   International  conference  in
    2012".  In response to a question about a man Ms Young thought she  may
    have spoken to during her visit to the PINK Embassy offices,  she  said
    that she had assumed he was openly gay because he worked for  that  NGO
    but  "he  may  not  have  seemed  gay  outside  as   he   was   dressed
    traditionally. Smartly. Short haircut."  We were therefore  unclear  as
    to the basis of Ms Young's understanding of LGBTI individuals and their
    ability to openly express their sexuality.


63. A feature of Ms Young's oral evidence was to rebuff any suggestion that
    there  had  been  positive  changes  in  Albania  except  a   reluctant
    acknowledgement that certain developments "should be helpful" or "ought
    to assist".  It is open to an expert  to  reject  propositions  put  to
    them, but sustainable reasons are required supported  either  by  their
    own experience or reference  to  other  evidence.   We  illustrate  our
    concerns as to whether  this  has  been  Ms  Young's  approach  by  one
    example. During cross-examination, Ms Young was taken to  the  EU  2018
    Report  at  [B/240]  which  provides  figures  for  the  investigation,
    prosecution and conviction  rates  in  the  fight  against  corruption.
    Those are stated to have increased between 2016 and 2017  and  specific
    figures are given in support of that increase.   Notwithstanding  that,
    when Ms Young was asked about this positive trend in cross-examination,
    she first asked "what is the  positive  trend?"  to  which  Mr  Thomann
    responded that she was just being asked whether she agreed or disagreed
    it was positive she replied "I don't  agree.   There  is  no  vetting".
    When she was asked if she had read the document before  she  said  that
    she "probably had" and when asked again how she assessed  the  increase
    in overall convictions and referrals and whether that was not positive,
    she finally responded in the affirmative.    She refused to  recognise,
    even when confronted with background evidence to the contrary, that any
    changes were being made until forced to accept that  the  material  did
    tend to support what was being suggested.


64. Despite our reservations, we consider that  Ms  Young  has  nonetheless
    been able to provide us with some  insight  into  aspects  of  life  in
    Albania  and  has  provided  some  assistance  in   relation   to   the
    circumstances faced by openly gay  men.   We  accept  that  Ms  Young's
    experience of Albania and her research  provides  her  with  expertise,
    particularly  in  commenting  on  some  of  the  institutions  and  the
    development of those institutions.   We  can  give  her  evidence  less
    weight though when it comes to her knowledge of the  current  position,
    particularly for gay men, for the reasons we indicate above.


65. We have also taken into consideration other  evidence,  in  particular,
    the opinions expressed by those who are familiar with the position  for
    LGBTI individuals in Albania, particularly Tirana, by reason  of  their
    involvement  with  NGOs  supporting  such  individuals  and  their  own
    personal experiences. We provide a list of the main interlocutors:

   1) Kristi Pinderi:
      A LGBTI activist from Albania, founder member and leader of  Pro-LGBT,
      currently  living  in  Canada.   Ms  Young  explains  that   she   has
      communicated with him by e mails none of which are produced.  She told
      us that Mr Pinderi has claimed asylum in Canada but was unable to tell
      us on what basis or  whether  his  claim  has  been  accepted  by  the
      Canadian authorities.  We have in the bundle a  document  produced  by
      him dated 15  April  2018,  entitled  "Expert  Opinion  Regarding  the
      Situation of Albanian LGBT People and a Review of Legislation Vs  It's
      Enforcement" ([B/325-336]) which we refer to hereafter  as  his  "2018
      statement".  We were not told the purpose for which this document  was
      produced;  it  is  not  suggested  that  it  was  prepared  for  these
      proceedings.
   2) Xheni Karaj:
      Leader of Alliance LGBT, also known as Aleanca.  Ms Young did not meet
      Ms Karaj during her visit in May 2018 but has corresponded with her in
      the past.
   3) Vasilika Hysa:
      A representative from Aleanca (Alliance LGBT) who Ms Young met in  May
      2018.
   4) Arber Kodra:
      Executive Director of Open Mind Spectrum ("OMSA") who Ms  Young  first
      met at an international conference in the South of  Albania  in  2012.
      She met with him during a visit to Albania in August-September 2017.
   5) Marsida Cela:
      Director of STREHA, the NGO which runs the LGBTI  shelter  in  Tirana.
      Ms Young met with Ms Cela in May 2018.
   6) Altin Hazizaj:
      A lawyer, LGBT activist and chairman of the PINK  Embassy.   Ms  Young
      met him in May 2018 when she also visited the  PINK  Embassy  offices.
      Following  the  hearing,  the  Respondent  also  provided  an  article
      recording an  interview  with  him  in  October  (which  we  refer  to
      hereafter as his "October interview").  That document is to  be  found
      with the additional documents.  Ms Young was  invited  to  comment  on
      this article in the post-hearing questions.


66. We now turn to address the evidence under the following headings.


A:   Legislative Framework, Implementation, Corruption,  Societal  Attitudes
    and Role of LGBTI NGOs

Legislative  Framework  Affecting  LGBTI  Individuals  in  Albania  and  its
Implementation

67. The Republic of Albania is a parliamentary democracy.  The  legislative
    authority is vested by Albania's constitution in the  Assembly.   There
    is both a prime minister and president.  The prime minister  heads  the
    government.  The president has limited powers. The last elections  were
    held in June 2017.  The current prime minister is Edi Rama, the  leader
    of the Socialist Party of Albania.


68. The Constitution  enshrines  protection  of  the  rights  of  citizens,
    including protection from discrimination ([B/569-70]).  The  rights  of
    LGBTI individuals are not covered  specifically  in  the  Constitution.
    However, two  National  Action  Plans  ("NAPs")  are  the  main  policy
    documents for protecting their rights ([B/567]).  Those NAPs relate  to
    the periods 2012-2014 and 2016-20.  The NAPs involve the  strengthening
    of links between the civil society organs and  government  institutions
    as well as improving public debate and awareness.


69. It is accepted that there have been legislative changes to improve  the
    position of the LGBTI community in recent years which include:


    1995: Same sex activity decriminalised.  The age of sexual consent  for
    heterosexual couples applies equally to same-sex couples.
    2010: Anti-Discrimination law  passed  by  Parliament  which  prohibits
    discrimination on grounds of sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity
    ([B/600]).
    2012: Parliamentary approval of the  Law  on  Pre-University  Education
    including gender and sexual orientation among  prohibited  grounds  for
    discrimination in education for both students and teachers ([B/600]).
    2013:  By  an   amendment   approved   by   Parliament,   following   a
    recommendation of the CPD and the PA,  sexual  orientation  and  gender
    identity became protected classes under the country's  hate-crime  laws
    (B/600]).
    2015: Law on Administrative Procedures and Labour  Code  also  amended,
    including sexual orientation and gender identity as a prohibited ground
    for discrimination ([B/600]).


70. Where the parties to this appeal part company is  in  relation  to  the
    implementation of these laws.  The Respondent's case is  that  progress
    is being made in changing  societal  attitudes  by  raising  awareness,
    training of key groups of officials and cooperation between  Government
    and the relevant NGOs.  The Appellant's case is  that  there  has  been
    inadequate if any implementation of the  laws,  that  institutions  are
    corrupt and therefore pay "lip-service" to any changes and  insofar  as
    they have effected any changes, the institutions are doing so  only  to
    improve Albania's chances of acceding to the EU. This is  the  position
    adopted by Ms Young.


71. The implementation steps involved with the NAP 2012-14 are set  out  in
    the UNDP 2017 Report ([B580]):


         "(i) Engagement of the line ministries, CPD, the People's  Advocate
             Office and international organizations;
         (ii) Addressing LGBTI issues with donors,  agencies,  international
             community in Albania and in Europe;
         (iii)    Provision of training for police  officers  and  education
         workers;
         (iv) Interaction and cooperation with other human rights NGOs;
         (v)  Conducting research on the legal framework;
         (vi) Legislative proposals;
         (vii)    Public awareness-raising, and;
         (viii)   Provision of a safe  shelter  in  Tirana  to  young  LGBTI
             people who are obliged to leave home."


    Ms Young was unable to identify  any  omissions  in  this  strategy  or
    amendments which ought to be made to it.


72. In April 2015, the Ministry of Education signed a cooperation agreement
    with the  LGBT  NGOs  to  provide  lectures,  presentations  and  other
    awareness-raising  activities  in   schools   ([B/648]).    That   such
    presentations have taken place is evident from other evidence  ([B/397-
    400]; [B/214-6]).   Although  there  is  evidence  of  a  backlash  and
    ridicule from some quarters, we note in the  article  at  [B/398]  that
    "[s]tudents gave positive reviews about the  presentations  and  deemed
    them very helpful in order to understand  the  challenges  their  LGBTI
    peers face and why a more supportive environment is needed.  During and
    after lectures, many teachers and psychologists expressed their support
    for these lectures as well."  The Respondent was unable to  provide  us
    with information about the identity of the author of this article.


73. Ms Karaj expressed support on television for  the  training  which  she
    described as a project of "the LGBTI community  in  collaboration  with
    the Municipality of Tirana and the Ministry of Education." (as reported
    in the article at [B/214-216]).  There has also been training of police
    officers by LGBT NGOs.  We will deal with that in more detail  when  we
    come to look at sufficiency of protection below.


74. The UNDP 2017 Report makes the following comment about such initiatives
    ([B/580]):


         "Many of these activities have been  undertaken  by  civil  society
         organizations.  Several legislative reforms have taken place  since
         the first plan, but a wide gap in  implementation  remains  at  all
         levels.  This is particularly problematic at the regional and local
         level,  where  LGBTI  people  are  subject  to  various  forms   of
         discrimination in their daily life."


75. As to NAP 2016-20, the UNDP 2017 Report describes this as follows:


         "The priorities and objectives outlined in the  NPA  2016-2020  are
         based on needs as prioritised by the  LGBTI  community  itself,  as
         well as on an analysis of gaps and failures  in  implementation  of
         the 2012-2014 action plan.  Expertise for the  preparation  of  the
         NPA was provided by the Council of Europe's SOGI Unit.   The  LGBTI
         NPA 2016-2020 was drafted by the Ministry  of  Social  Welfare  and
         Youth (MoSWY) and approved for implementation  by  legislation  and
         policy development with the following priorities:
         (i)  Safety and protection of rights, and;
         (ii) Access to services."


76. The PINK Embassy is reported (in the May 2017 CPIN) to  have  said  the
    following ([B/638]):


         "Albania marks another milestone towards advancing  the  rights  of
         LGBTI  community.   Today  the  Albanian  Government  approved  the
         National Action Plan for LGBTI people in the  Republic  of  Albania
         for the years 2016-2020.   The  adoption  of  this  document  is  a
         tremendous victory for the LGBTI community since  the  adoption  of
         the Law on Protection from Discrimination, in early  2010,  as  the
         government had not passed many political initiatives in support  of
         human rights of every LGBTI individual in Albania.
         The national plan foresees a model of  change,  including  measures
         for legislation, social policy, public administration and services,
         in order to create a culture of inclusion and openness to diversity
         and contribute further to the strengthening of the LGBTI community.
         PINK Embassy welcomes the adoption of the National Action Plan  and
         wishes to exceptionally thank the Ministry of  Social  Welfare  and
         Youth, which lobbied and supported this initiative from  the  first
         day.
         To achieve the goals and objectives of the  Plan  interventions  at
         several levels are  foreseen  including  legislative  developments,
         policies, aligning with other policies and strategies of inclusion,
         programming and provision of standardized training of  professional
         staff and service providers."


77. The 2017 ILGA Enlargement Review ([B158]) draws  attention  however  to
    the abolition of the Ministry of Social Welfare and Youth following the
    2017 elections and calls for urgent clarification of what  will  happen
    with the implementation of the NAP following that dissolution. It notes
    that the mandate of the MSWY has been split  between  other  ministries
    and also draws attention to implementation being  lacking  and  further
    improvements being required.


78.  The  EU  2018  Report   makes   the   following   observations   about
    implementation of the 2016-2020 NAP ([B/248]):


         "Despite the fact that the Constitution does not include references
         to  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity,   Albania's   anti-
         discrimination   legislation   prohibits   discrimination   against
         lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex  (LGBTI)  persons.
         However, more efforts are needed  to  protect  LGBTI  persons  from
         discrimination.  An  inter-ministerial  team  responsible  for  the
         monitoring of the 2016-2020 National Action Plan for LGBTI  Persons
         in Albania is functional.  Police officers, prosecutors and  gender
         focal points  of  line  ministries  have  been  given  training  on
         preventing discrimination on the basis of  sexual  orientation  and
         gender identity.  According to LGBTI  organisations,  the  attitude
         and awareness of the police has improved  significantly  in  recent
         years.  The donor-funded shelter for LGBTI persons has continued to
         provide care, support and advocacy to homeless  LGBTI  individuals.
         During the reporting period, no court rulings in cases  related  to
         sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  have  been  made.    In
         addition, public awareness and acceptance of LGBTI  persons  remain
         low, particularly in rural areas.  Hate speech  and  discriminatory
         language continue to be a problem in the  media  especially  online
         media.  On a positive note, the sixth edition of Tirana  Gay  Pride
         took place without any incident."


79. Various organisations have criticised the implementation of  the  legal
    framework as follows.


          a) The UNDP 2017 Report at [B/603] notes that:


             "Although  the  institutional  environment  is   changing   in
             positive ways, the effects of legal  and  policy  improvements
             are not yet visible, because they are  not  being  applied  in
             practice.  The lack of enactment of  legal  and  institutional
             measures  shows  that  the   government   has   endorsed   its
             responsibility to protect the rights of LGBTI people  more  to
             satisfy the demands of the international community  -  and  in
             order to meet the requirements for EU membership in particular
             - rather than  as  a  civil  duty  towards  LGBTI  citizens...
             Distrust in the judiciary system has forced  LGBTI  people  to
             almost ignore its existence and not use it  to  seek  redress.
             This explains the low  numbers  of  reported  cases,  lack  of
             judicial  prosecutions  and  lack  of  data  on  hate  crimes.
             Because  LGBTI  people  know  that   public   employees   hold
             discriminatory attitudes, they  do  not  adopt  the  means  of
             making  a  legal  complaint  against  public  institutions  or
             employees,  despite  facing  institutional  discrimination  in
             education,   healthcare,   and   employment   settings.    The
             remarkable work of the NHRI institutions  is  reduced  in  its
             effectiveness by the resistance of institutions  that  do  not
             follow the PA and CPD recommendations and sanctions.
             Failure  to  recognize  discrimination  based   on   SOGI   is
             widespread, because law  enforcement  officials,  judges,  and
             public administration  officials  are  not  trained  on  anti-
             discrimination.  As consequence,  LGBTI  victims  struggle  to
             obtain justice."


         b) The ILGA Document at [B/212] records:


             "With the score of 33% on our Rainbow Map, Albania is not only
             ahead of most of its neighbours (except Montenegro with  39%),
             but also a number of EU  member  states.   Overall  the  legal
             framework in Albania includes general  guarantees  of  respect
             for human  rights,  and  the  human  rights  of  LGBTI  people
             specifically.  Furthermore, a dedicated action  plan  for  the
             promotion and protection of the human rights of  LGBTI  people
             is in place  in  Albania  and  LGBTI  activists  enjoy  strong
             connections to a number  of  policy  makers  and  politicians.
             However, implementation falls short of the  image  painted  on
             paper. Public attitudes remain highly  negative,  hate  speech
             and discriminatory language continue to be a problem in  media
             coverage and on line, and steps should be taken  to  introduce
             legal gender recognition procedures and partnership protection
             for same-sex couples."


         c) The ILGA 2017 Review makes similar points in  relation  to  2016
            and also observes ([B/618]):


             "Albania is a prime example of the difference between laws  on
             paper and realities experienced by LGBTI people in their daily
             lives.  Further legislative progress was made  in  2016,  with
             adoption of an action plan to promote and  protect  the  human
             rights of LGBTI people, adding  to  an  already  comprehensive
             legal package protecting the  human rights  of  LGBTI  people.
             However, no efforts were made to address pervasive  homophobic
             attitudes in society..."


         d) The ERA Article [B/399] (reporting  on  awareness  education  in
            schools) records:


             "While Albania is to be commended  for  making  some  positive
             steps with  regards  to  LGBTI  rights,  such  as  the  above-
             mentioned legislation, the training of officials -  especially
             law enforcement agencies and social services - and the  recent
             approval of the National Action Plan, a lot more needs  to  be
             done to address pervasive  negative  attitudes,  and  lack  of
             proactive measures by institutions in charge of  human  rights
             issues and anti-discrimination policies.  This  situation  has
             left the LGBTI community in a paradoxal state,  where  by  law
             they are protected, but in practice they are as vulnerable and
             as discriminated as pre-2010."


80. The general theme of non-implementation is one repeated by Ms Young, as
    we have observed. In her response to the written questions posed by the
    Respondent about her assessment of progress  made  on  governance,  law
    enforcement and protection of human rights between 2014 and  2018,  she
    explains ([B/87]):


         "I do believe that there is a very gradual improvement in all these
         areas.  In the area of law this is the most impressive, but  it  is
         the implementation of those laws that is so lacking and  hence  the
         protection of human rights is only marginally improving  in  the  4
         years to 2018.  I see this as inevitable: that  laws  alone  cannot
         change centuries of traditional social behaviour, and  particularly
         when there is such a lack of education in the rural areas.  I  have
         been working for 20 years with the UK charity  Balkans  Peace  Park
         Project. Our most successful activities have been in the organizing
         of Summer Programmes, mainly for the children in such  villages  as
         Vermosh, Lepushe, Valbona, Thethi and further afield.  For some  of
         these children, they have no other schooling throughout  the  year.
         I consider that  it  is  inevitable  that  in  such  circumstances,
         traditional law is bound to be retained, as we see in the  terrible
         continuation of bloodfeuds, which force whole families to  live  in
         isolation and their children to be prevented from attending  school
         (I could elaborate at great length and with a very large amount  of
         references)."


81. Those views chime with those of some of the NGO  community.   Ms  Young
    cites an article in which Ms Karaj  is  said  to  have  commented  that
    "there is a big contrast between the legislative developments  and  the
    changes when it comes to the everyday  reality  of  LGBT  people."   Mr
    Kodra's view as expressed to Ms Young in  2017  was  that  "little  had
    improved for the lot of LGBT+ individuals even  in  recent  years."  He
    said that Gay Pride marches were supported by  politicians  who  wanted
    Albania to join the EU.  Ms Young, in her report,  makes  reference  to
    two blogs relating to the 2018 Gay Pride demonstration which said  that
    despite government promises "no action has been taken to  "improve  the
    legal framework of LGBT in particular and minority rights  in  general"
    and that "the Rama government has consistently failed  to  improve  the
    lives of Albanian LGBTI people, blocking several legal reforms  drafted
    with the support of the Council of Europe"".


82. In a joint statement attributed to both Mr Pinderi and Ms Karaj on  the
    occasion of the 2017 Gay (P)ride ([B/770-773], the Albanian  government
    was criticised in an online article for failing over the previous  four
    years to improve the legal framework in  relation  to  LGBT  people  in
    spite of initiatives taken by the NGOs and the international community.
    It is said in the same article that the government had blocked  several
    legal reforms drafted with support of the Council of Europe.  It is not
    said what those were.


83. In his 2018 statement, Mr Pinderi explains  that  Albanian  politicians
    "believe that their duty ends when they  approve  a  good  law  in  the
    Parliament".  He commends the existence of the  CPD  and  records  that
    NGOs have been willing and able to make complaints to that organisation
    but  says  that  enforcement  has  "constantly  been  weak".   This  is
    illustrated by the delay in the appointment of a new  Commissioner  and
    the appointment of a person connected with the majority party in power.




84. As recorded at [5.2.1] of the May 2017 CPIN,  the  office  of  CPD  was
    established in 2010 and elected by Parliament for a five-year term.  It
    is common ground that there was no CPD in post in the period March 2017
    to April 2018.  The duties of the CPD  include  the  submission  of  an
    annual report and initiation of judicial  processes  (see  [5.2.1]  and
    [5.2.2] of the May 2017 CPIN for a  fuller  description  of  the  CPD's
    duties).


85. The EU 2018 Report ([B/246-7])  refers  to  the  work  of  the  CPD  as
    follows:


         "The policy and legal framework on non-discrimination is broadly in
         line with EU standards.  However, the  Law  on  Protection  against
         Discrimination   does   not   address   multiple   discriminations.
         Implementation of the legal  framework  needs  to  be  strengthened
         through the specialised training of  judges  and  prosecutors.   In
         2017,  the  Commissioner  for  Protection  against   Discrimination
         handled 203 cases of alleged discrimination (against  288  in  2015
         and 239 in 2016).  The Commissioner  participated  in  59  judicial
         proceedings (against 37 in 2015 and 45  in  2016)  and  imposed  13
         penalties (against 14 in 2015 and 10 in 2016).  Awareness campaigns
         were organised across the country, but homophobia and anti-gypsyism
         remain widespread.  The number of reported hate-crime cases is very
         low and data collection on hate crimes is still lacking."


86. The PA is elected by Parliament for five years.  The work of the PA  is
    described in detail at [B/584] in the UNDP 2017 Report.  In  short  "PA
    is not a decision-making body  and  does  not  have  executive  powers.
    However, PA investigates  complaints  from  individuals  or  vulnerable
    groups  who  are   most   at   risk   of   discrimination   by   public
    institutions...PA  has  worked  with  the  media  to  increase   public
    awareness of LGBTI issues...PA  delegates  any  complaints  related  to
    discrimination to the CPD. PA makes recommendations  to  administrative
    bodies about the measures they should take for restoration of rights or
    recommends filing a lawsuit.  Where a criminal offence is suspected, PA
    can recommend a criminal investigation and prosecution.  PA  can  bring
    cases  to  the  Constitutional  Court.   PA  can  follow  up  on  these
    recommendations and escalate  cases  to  more  senior  levels  where  a
    response is deemed insufficient.  The main remedy of  the  Advocate  is
    the issuance of recommendations to stop the infringement."


87. The Respondent accepts that the PA has no power of  sanction  and  also
    recognises that the PA office has been criticised  as  underfunded  and
    understaffed.  Nonetheless, the Respondent points to the PA's key  role
    of  reporting  to  the  Albanian  Assembly  annually   and   the   PA's
    responsibility for promoting and enforcing human rights (see  reference
    to the US State Department report in 2016 at [5.3.3] of  the  May  2017
    CPIN ([B/642]).

Corruption in Albania


88. Ms Young records in her report in detail the history of  corruption  in
    Albania.  In her response to the Respondent's questions, at  [B/82]  Ms
    Young accepts that there are "individuals in  the  Albanian  government
    with the political will to act decisively in the prevention  and  fight
    against  corruption  and  structural  reforms  testifying  to  an  all-
    encompassing  approach  including  a  wide  range   of   institutions."
    However, she states that there are "sufficient numbers  of  members  of
    that government to have acted in ways that do not support those  aims".
    By way of illustration, she draws attention to examples at page [15] of
    her report which refers to  one  instance  in  2016  (before  the  last
    elections) when the opposition party accused  the  prime  minister  and
    interior minister of involvement in corruption and a July 2018  article
    referring to "two former high officials facing corruption  charges  and
    most of the high court found unfit to hold office".  The article itself
    does not appear to be in the  documents  before  us  and  there  is  no
    footnote to help us find it.


89. Ms Young also cites from the USSD 2017 Report which records that "[t]he
    most significant human rights issues...are pervasive corruptions in all
    branches of government...Officials, politicians, judges and those  with
    powerful business interests often  were  able  to  avoid  prosecution."
    This is a limited extract from the Executive  Summary  of  that  report
    which provides information about improvements in the body of the report
    to which Ms Young does not refer.  Other  material  in  the  background
    evidence provides more detail about the current position.


90. In its EU Conclusions Document,  the  EU  Council  "welcomes  Albania's
    steady progress in pursuing reforms related to the five key priorities:
    public administration reform, reform of the  judiciary,  fight  against
    corruption, fight against  organised  crime  and  protection  of  human
    rights,  including  rights  of  persons  belonging  to  minorities  and
    property rights" ([B/128]).  It states that the vetting process of  the
    Judges "has started  to  deliver  its  first  tangible  results".   The
    document recognises that more still needs to be  done  in  relation  to
    corruption and organised crime, particularly in relation to  countering
    cannabis cultivation and drug trafficking and that more also  needs  to
    be done to establish "a solid track record of proactive investigations,
    prosecutions and convictions in the fight against organised  crime  and
    corruption."  Overall though, as noted at [B/130], the Council responds
    positively to the progress  which  Albania  has  made  towards  opening
    accession negotiations in June 2019.


91. The EU 2018 Report  also  provides  concrete  figures  in  relation  to
    investigations,  prosecution  and  convictions  in  the  fight  against
    corruption  ([B/240]).   These  figures  include  convictions   against
    prosecutors and judges.  When Ms Young was asked to  comment  on  these
    figures during her oral evidence, she said that she could see what they
    purported to show but did not accept that this reflected the reality of
    the situation.  We have already referred to this as an example of where
    we had concerns about Ms Young's objectivity.


92. Ms Young also refers in her report to other  reports  which  she  says,
    "give a very clear picture of  an  abysmal  judicial  system  riven  by
    corruption, that still exists in  Albania  today."  Ms  Young  accepts,
    however, that the vetting system has begun in relation  to  Judges.  By
    reference to the opinion of  "a  lawyer  colleague"  (unnamed  with  no
    particulars), she says that the  vetting  law  is  vague,  "drafted  by
    foreigners", "badly translated", "not sufficiently thought through" and
    that those conducting the vetting  "are  not  the  best".   Ms  Young's
    lawyer colleague says that the process has been slow, that only one  in
    ten Judges have passed and "not a lot" have gone through the process.


93. The EU 2018 Report ([B/218-324] records that "the judiciary of  Albania
    is currently undergoing a comprehensive and thorough  transitional  re-
    evaluation process (vetting)" which "is delivering the  first  tangible
    results".  Ms Young agreed  in  her  oral  evidence  that  the  vetting
    process was helpful but said that the evidence she had seen showed only
    that the process was going to happen and not that it had begun, and she
    queried "the tangible results".  She also said that only one judge  had
    so far been vetted but she accepted in re-examination that this was not
    correct.  Her final position was  that  "[t]here  are  not  yet  enough
    judges and prosecutors to have been successfully vetted" ([B/84]).  She
    does though add a reference to a more positive article published in the
    Financial Times in June 2018 which notes that "[w]e believe the Albania
    model, as it is becoming known, is  working  and  will  be  successful.
    Step  by  step,  by  combining  far-reaching  structural  changes  with
    operational collaboration on fighting organised crime and cleansing  of
    the judiciary, confidence in the rule of law  is  being  built.   Where
    once citizens might have paid any price to avoid going to  court,  soon
    they will be able to expect impartial adjudication and justice."


94. Ms Young also refers to the US State  Department  report  of  2015  and
    records the view there expressed ([B/32]):


         "Corruption was  a  problem  among  police,  and  authorities  took
         measures to combat it.  Although the government's internal  Control
         Service investigated and referred for prosecution  a  significantly
         higher number of police officers during the  years  than  in  2013,
         courts convicted few of them...
         The  Albanian  State   Police   Corruption   Section   investigated
         corruption  cases.   The  section  had  a  limited   capacity   for
         undercover   investigations   and   surveillance   hampering    its
         investigation."


    She points in her report to the acceptance in the May  2017  CPIN  that
    "while the government had mechanisms to investigate  and  punish  abuse
    and corruption, police corruption remained a problem."  ([B/32]).   She
    also draws attention to the July 2017 CPIN ([B/33]) which states:


         "[9.2.2] Police did not always enforce the law  equally.   Personal
         associations,   political    or    criminal    connections,    poor
         infrastructure, lack of equipment or inadequate  supervision  often
         influenced enforcement of laws.  Low salaries, poor motivation  and
         leadership, and a lack of diversity in the workforce contributed to
         continued  corruption  and  unprofessional   behaviour.    Impunity
         remained a serious problem, although the  government  made  greater
         efforts to address it.  Police corruption was a problem."


    We deal further with corruption within  the  police  when  we  consider
    sufficiency of protection below.

Societal Attitudes


95. Ms Young explains in her report at [B/24] that, despite the legislative
    reforms,  Albania  "is  still  a  very  homophobic  society.   In   the
    patriarchal, even macho society of Albania, the police  are  the  least
    likely to condone homosexuality and support  LGBT+  individuals".   She
    refers to a written exchange which she had with Mr  Kodra  of  OMSA  in
    2016 in which he said that "legislation is often not strictly enforced.
     Same-sex civil unions are still illegal, as well as joint adoptions by
    same-sex couples and the right to change one's legal gender."  He  went
    on to say that:


         "There exists  a  large  gap  in  LGBT  representation  within  the
         political structure and government officials  have  been  at  times
         openly hostile towards LGBT people.  Generally speaking, mainstream
         society knows little about the LGBT community and  hold  homophobic
         and transphobic views about LGBT people.  A number  of  politicians
         in Albania feel pressure from  the  European  Union  to  pass  more
         inclusive legislations as a building block towards the path to join
         the European Union.  However, many of these  politicians  will  not
         come out to criticize extremists  and  discrimination  against  the
         LGBT community."


96. At [B/27], Ms Young quotes from the May 2017 CPIN which records what is
    said in ERA's April 2016 report which she accepts  reflects  "a  slight
    shift" in the public's perception of homosexuality:


         "According to ERA's April 2016 report: 'Albanian LGBTI  individuals
         continue to experience discrimination from individuals as  well  as
         institutions.  Public visibility of LGBTI individuals continues  to
         remain very low, even though several individuals and activists have
         spoken up openly about their sexual orientation and gender identity
         in media and public forums. 'Since 2010 with the  adoption  of  the
         non-discrimination law and the organized work  of  LGBT  CSO's  the
         situation has changed drastically.  Public debate over  this  topic
         has been very present and Albanian government has made  significant
         efforts in the inclusion and protection of  LGBT  people.  'Despite
         these changes, homophobic and transphobic  sentiments  remain  very
         high and a culture of heteronormativity  and  patriarchy  is  still
         pervasive.  High ranking politicians  have  often  made  scandalous
         remarks   against   LGBT   people.    Following    reactions    and
         recommendations  from  civil  society,  government  officials   and
         equality bodies however, cases of hate  speech  from  high  ranking
         officials in the country have been much rarer."


    She said in her oral evidence that there was greater societal awareness
    of homosexuality, but she said that this "doesn't make it positive.  It
    is just awareness."


97. As Ms Young points out in the passage immediately following,  a  survey
    carried out in the Western Balkans in 2015 on attitudes  towards  LGBTI
    people, as reported by ILGA-Europe in its 2016 annual report  concluded
    that:


         "42% of the general public said that they would try to  help  their
         son or daughter find a cure if they found out that their child  was
         not heterosexual. '58% said they would not  vote  for  a  political
         party that championed the rights of LGBTI people. '76% of the LGBTI
         people surveyed in Albania had been  verbally  harassed  or  abused
         because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. '32% of the
         LGBTI people surveyed in Albania  had  suffered  physical  violence
         because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. '76% of the
         LGBTI people surveyed  in  Albania  felt  that  Pride  parades  had
         improved the position of the LGBTI community in society."


98. When Ms Young was asked in the written questions what she understood to
    be meant by "the improvements in both  legal  and  attitudinal  issues"
    referred to by Ms Hysa of Aleanca during  their  meeting,  she  replied
    that "[m]y understanding of this is that there is a very  slow  impetus
    towards change in understanding the  issues  and  needs  of  the  LGBTI
    community, and that the Aleanca organization is promoting this  impetus
    for change.  But it is against  a  backdrop  of  tremendous  aggressive
    denial by the general, especially the tradition population in the rural
    areas" ([B/90]).


99. Mr Hazizaj, Director of the  PINK  Embassy  in  his  October  interview
    expresses the view that:


         "the awareness for and hence  the  acceptance  of  LGBT  issues  is
         increasing because we provide people with information. They see our
         events, learn about them in school or watch them on  TV.  They  are
         constantly exposed to our work so to speak.  All the  same,  events
         such as Berlin Pride would be too extreme.  This has nothing to  do
         with the LGBT community but with the fact that Albania  is  a  more
         traditional country. When it comes to sexuality, people are  a  bit
         more reserved.  We must respect that and find  a  common  framework
         that does not curtail our rights either."


100. Mr Hazizaj also compares the Albanian Gay Pride  events  and  those  of
    countries such as Germany; he accepts that it would not  be  acceptable
    for those attending to wear "loud, gaudy clothes" and that there  might
    be trouble if they did.  However, he points to the development  of  the
    Gay Pride events.  He says  that  the  first  was  "quite  modest"  and
    confined to the city centre in Tirana.  The second, by contrast, spread
    across the entire city.  He said amongst all those in the  offices  and
    shops in that area, "there was not a  single  person  who  insulted  or
    mocked us.  This means that, at least in Tirana,  there  is  a  certain
    level of acceptance."


101. A document published by the PINK Embassy in June  2018  at  [B/140-142]
    however paints a less rosy picture.  It reports on  the  results  of  a
    survey of teachers carried out in 2016-17 and describes "some  alarming
    attitudes".  47% of teachers said  that  they  had  enough  information
    about LGBTI rights.  However, 66% of them said  that  they  would  stay
    silent if faced with bullying against LGBTI adolescents.  34% said that
    they had witnessed discrimination in their  schools.  70%  of  teachers
    surveyed said that they would not support their  own  child  if  he/she
    were LGBTI  and  70%  said  they  would  not  even  accept  the  sexual
    orientation or gender identity of their own child  in  that  situation.
    9.3% of teachers said that they would not accept LGBTI persons in their
    classroom, 12% said that being LGBTI is a sickness  and  4%  said  that
    being LGBTI should be prohibited by law.  11.3% blamed the internet for
    influencing  sexuality  and  gender   identity.    The   PINK   Embassy
    recommended to the Ministry  of  Education  a  special  curriculum  for
    information and training of teachers and the preparation of a  code  of
    conduct for all teachers to  protect  "children  and  adolescents  from
    violence, abuse, harassment, bullying and discrimination."  It  is  not
    clear whether that survey pre-dates the awareness training carried  out
    by the NGOs to which we refer above.


102. Mr  Pinderi  also  gives  examples  of  Members  of  Parliament  making
    homophobic or other derogatory remarks about LGBT  individuals  in  his
    2018 statement (See also [B/398]).  The ILGA 2017 Review refers to  one
    such case in which the PINK Embassy filed a complaint with the CPD  and
    formal proceedings were opened.  It was noted however that no  decision
    or recommendation had been issued by the end of 2016 ([B/367]). Ms Hysa
    of Aleanca was also of the view that there  had  been  improvements  in
    both the law and attitudes towards LGBT+ individuals between  2009  and
    2012 but "little has changed for the better" since then.


103. Mr Chelvan submitted that, due  to  the  macho  societal  attitudes  in
    Albania, gay men are required to "prove  straight"  to  demonstrate  to
    others that they are not gay.  This submission receives some support in
    the UNDP 2017 Report at [B/591] as follows:


         "In Albania, rigid gender  stereotypes  and  cultural  expectations
         mean  that  men  and  women  are  expected  to  conform  to  rather
         inflexible ideas of masculinity and femininity in  their  behaviour
         and appearance.  Deviations from these  binary  gender  stereotypes
         are strongly discouraged and  considered  by  some  to  be  morally
         wrong.  As a patriarchal society, there are high levels  of  social
         disapproval  for  any  form  of  sexuality   falling   outside   of
         heterosexual norms."


104. Altin Hazizaj of the PINK Embassy is also reported by Ms Young to  have
    told her that "basically those he  has  worked  with  belong  to  three
    categories: (1) Older LGBT individuals (45 years and over), live double
    lives, some married with children, their homosexuality is  kept  hidden
    (2) Some are well educated, they never  come  out,  but  meet  in  bars
    sympathetic to gays (mostly aged 30-45) (3) Teenagers  and  into  their
    twenties who come out first at sex workers at gay bars."


105. That some gay men may marry to  seek  to  conceal  their  sexuality  is
    supported by what is said by Ms Cela, Director of STREHA.  Ms Hysa,  of
    Aleanca, also told Ms Young that many of those who participate  in  Gay
    Pride events feel the need to wear masks to hide their identity.   That
    is supported to some  extent  by  the  picture  which  accompanies  the
    publication of Mr Hazizaj's interview in October  2018  where  some  of
    those attending are wearing masks.

Role of LGBTI NGOs


106. There are five NGOs about who we received some information: OMSA,  Pro-
    LGBT, Alliance LGBT (also known as Aleanca), STREHA, and PINK  Embassy.
    We  have  provided  above  a  list  of  those   individuals   and   the
    organisations to which they belong which includes also a  reference  to
    the nature and degree of interaction which Ms Young has had with  those
    individuals.


107. The evidence shows that the LGBTI NGOs are all active in the  promotion
    of their own cause.


108. The 2017 ILGA Enlargement Review ([B/151-159]) draws attention  to  the
    part which the LGBT NGOs  played  in  the  period  leading  up  to  the
    Albanian elections in 2017.  They gained significant media coverage  to
    raise awareness among the public and politicians  and  to  inform  LGBT
    individuals of those candidates who held homophobic views.


109. A regional conference was held in  May  2018  between  the  Council  of
    Europe, other  international  organisations,  local  organisations  and
    Albanian institutions to  consider  the  preventing  and  combating  of
    discrimination based on  sexual  orientation  and  gender  identity  in
    Albania ([B/147-148]).  The conference recognised the need to implement
    laws and to fight hate crime.  It also recognised  the  part  that  the
    LGBTI community plays in  gaining  respect  for  the  rights  of  LGBTI
    individuals.  The online report of this conference also draws attention
    to the training of the police, a topic with which  we  deal  separately
    below.


110. The importance of the LGBT NGOs is also recognised  by  the  UNDP  2017
    Report (B/587]):


         "LGBTI civil society organizations are a crucial component  of  the
         equality and human rights architecture in Albania.  There are  four
         active LGBTI people's organizations: Alliance LGBT, Pro LGBT,  PINK
         Embassy and OMSA.  They voice LGBTI's people's  needs  and  address
         individual and group discrimination and  human  rights  violations.
         LGBTI organizations act as advocates for LGBTI people.  They  speak
         on their behalf and represent them in  public  institutions.   They
         play a valuable role as watchdogs on the implementation  of  policy
         and legislation.  They have a strong  partnership  with  the  human
         rights and equality statutory bodies of the PA  and  CPD.   Through
         advocacy and lobbying they have influenced the  amendment  of  laws
         and  policy  design  in  the  area  of  human  rights   and   anti-
         discrimination for LGBTI people.  They have  been  very  active  in
         raising awareness and promoting LGBTI human  rights.   Other  human
         rights organizations have been supporting the cause of LGBTI people
         as well."


111. An online report published in May 2018 reports on  the  launch  of  the
    "PRIDE project" by Aleanca and Pro LGBT ([B/149-150]).  "PRIDE"  stands
    for "Promoting Rights, Inclusiveness, Dignity and Equality for LGBT  in
    Albania".  The  aim  of  the  project  is  said  to  be  on  "promoting
    acceptance, inclusion and protection of the LGBTI minority in rural and
    urban Albania.  Particular focus will  be  on  protecting  risked  LGBT
    youth, promoting respect for the fundamental rights of LGBT people, and
    strengthening the voice of  LGBT  people  in  the  media".   The  three
    specific objectives are set out as:


         "1.  Strengthen the capacity of  LGBT  organizations  and  increase
         their ability to improve the acceptance of the LGBTI  community  by
         the general population.
         2.   To increase access to protection and counselling  support,  as
         well as access to employment opportunities for the LGBT  community,
         with a special focus on ensuring access to basic services  for  at-
         risk young LGBT.
         3.   To promote a more positive image of  the  LGBT  community  and
         improve their acceptance by the general  population,  both  through
         media campaigns and offline activities."


112. The organisation of the Gay Pride events  is  further  illustration  of
    the raising of awareness of LGBT rights by the NGOs.  According to  the
    2017 ILGA Enlargement Review, the 6th Tirana Gay (P)Ride  was  attended
    by 200 LGBTI community members, civil society  activists  from  Albania
    and the region and other supporters of  the  cause.   Mr  Chelvan  drew
    attention however to the reduced numbers attending the 2018  Gay  Pride
    bike ride in May reported at [B/184].  Unfortunately, it is  not  clear
    whether the reference to "60 members of LGBT and supporters from Kosovo
    and Macedonia" is to all those attending or only to  sixty  members  of
    LGBT as well as supporters from those  countries.   Neither  party  was
    able to point us to any document confirming  the  precise  numbers.  We
    accept that the number in view in the picture accompanying Mr Hazizaj's
    October interview is quite small.  However, we are still  not  entirely
    clear whether the Gay Pride Bike Ride is the only Gay Pride event.   Mr
    Hazizaj refers to two events annually in his October interview.


113. Asked in his October interview  whether  the  NGOs'  work  has  made  a
    difference, Mr Hazizaj says:


         "Absolutely! In general, you can say that  the  LBGT  community  is
         more accepted and viewed in a more positive light.  When we started
         off in 2010, you could hardly get more than five people in  a  room
         to discuss our rights.  Today, there are government  officials  who
         understand that it is their  duty  to  come  here,  listen  and  be
         active.  If you told someone in 2010 that you were gay or  lesbian,
         people  would  have  treated  you  very  badly  because  they  were
         misinformed.   For  example,   many   believed   that   gays   were
         paedophiles.  The information we put out is making an  impact  now.
         Our relations with the police have also  improved.   In  the  past,
         gays were often randomly accused of all kinds of misdemeanours  and
         arrested.  Today we collaborate with the police academy.  We  train
         officers to respect our rights and  protect  our  people.   Because
         hate that is related to sexual orientation is  a  criminal  offence
         and must be punished."


114. Mr Pinderi records that he has "10 years of experience as  the  leading
    LGBT+ human rights activist" ([B/325]). Despite  that  accolade  coming
    from Mr Pinderi himself in his 2018 statement, Ms Young sought  in  her
    evidence to downplay his public profile by suggesting that he, his  NGO
    and other LGBT NGOs were secretive about their work to avoid  the  risk
    of violence.  We can find no support for that  view  in  the  evidence;
    indeed, there are a number of articles which  show  very  clearly  that
    those involved with the LGBTI NGOs are seeking to  raise  awareness  of
    their cause by media appearances, organising the Gay Pride  events  and
    training of key groups of officials.


115. We have made mention of Ms Young's expansion on her oral evidence  when
    asked questions after the conclusion of the  hearing.   She  sought  to
    suggest there that, except in the case of the PINK Embassy, she met the
    representatives of the NGOs outside  their  offices  at  their  request
    because they were concerned about protection of those benefitting  from
    their help and advice.  We accept that is so in relation to the  STREHA
    shelter.  An article relating to the shelter records the  concern  that
    it would be a target for "arson and havoc".  That a  shelter  might  be
    concerned about targeting because it protects  those  fleeing  domestic
    violence is unsurprising.  However, we do not accept the gloss which Ms
    Young now seeks to put on the fact of  the  meetings  outside  the  NGO
    offices in relation to the other organisations although we do  consider
    the views of their representatives in relation to  risk  when  we  deal
    with that issue below.   Ms  Young  accepts,  following  production  of
    documents by the Respondent after the end  of  the  hearing,  that  the
    address of PINK Embassy is shown on its website.


116. In her post-hearing answers, Ms Young also makes  adverse  observations
    about the work done by PINK Embassy.  She  seeks  to  modify  her  oral
    evidence by suggesting that there are  no  statistics  to  support  the
    evidence about that work and that she "regrets" not  having  asked  for
    those.  She also criticises the survey conducted  by  PINK  Embassy  of
    teachers in Albania on the basis that  the  numbers  surveyed  are  low
    (200).  None of this was mentioned in either Ms Young's report  or  her
    oral evidence.  These comments further underline Ms Young's own failure
    to ask exploratory questions of her interlocutors when  she  met  them.
    Ms Young now seeks to  distance  her  views  from  those  of  the  PINK
    Embassy, we infer possibly because of the positive tone adopted  by  Mr
    Hazizaj in his October interview.  Although her  post-hearing  evidence
    is not inconsistent with her oral evidence that she  was  not  made  to
    feel welcome by Mr Hazizaj when she visited the NGO  offices,  she  now
    adds that this may be because she believes there to be tensions between
    PINK Embassy and the other NGOs.   This is yet another  example  of  Ms
    Young expressing unsourced views.  We are unable to find any indication
    of such a rift in the evidence we have seen.

Findings on the Legislative Framework, Implementation, Corruption, Societal
Attitudes and the Role of the LGBTI NGOs

117. Drawing together the evidence in  relation  to  the  general  societal,
    cultural and legislative background in Albania, we  have  come  to  the
    following findings and conclusions.


 118. There is a long history of corruption in Albania, within all the State
      institutions.  The evidence, particularly that emanating from  the  EU
      indicates that steady progress is being made in the fight against  it.
      In particular, the vetting of  judges  is  underway  (contrary  to  Ms
      Young's initial evidence) and tangible results are being seen already.
       We deal specifically with corruption within the police service  under
      the separate heading of "Sufficiency of Protection" below. Taking  all
      the evidence into account, it would however be  premature  to  suggest
      that  the  problem  of  corruption  in  state  institutions  has  been
      altogether eradicated.




 119.  Albania  has  taken  significant  steps  in  developing   legislative
      protection for LGBTI individuals.   There  remains  concern  over  its
      implementation as recognised in a number of reports.   As  a  positive
      step,  training  has  been  undertaken  in   partnership   with   NGOs
      representing LGBTI individuals within schools nationwide  and  of  the
      police force, in Tirana  in  particular.   This  is  relevant  to  our
      concerns  under  the   heading   of   "Sufficiency   of   Protection".
      Legislation includes the setting up of an Ombudsman organisation  (the
      PA) and a Commissioner with particular responsibility  for  protecting
      against  discrimination   (CPD).    Whilst   the   powers   of   those
      organisations may be limited, they are able to investigate complaints,
      issue sanctions (in the case of CPD), take steps  to  raise  awareness
      and  make  recommendations  to  central  government.    The   Albanian
      government has also set in place two NAPs designed  to  put  in  place
      policies to protect the rights of LGBTI individuals.




 120. The NGOs advocating for LGBTI rights have a  major  influence  on  the
      implementation of reforms.  The evidence shows they "play  a  valuable
      role as watchdogs on the implementation  of  policy  and  legislation"
      (UNDP 2017 Report).  Working with government and particularly CPD  and
      PA, the organisations raise awareness of issues affecting LGBTI,  take
      forward  complaints  including  on  behalf  of  affected  individuals,
      deliver training of key State workers and  raise  awareness  of  LGBTI
      issues within Albanian society through for example, media articles and
      the organising of Gay Pride events.




 121. We recognise however that Albania still has not reached  the  position
      of true equality for LGBTI individuals.  It is presently scored at 33%
      on ILGA's Rainbow Map "ahead of most of its  neighbours...but  also  a
      number of EU member states."  Homophobia remains a feature of  society
      in Albania.  Surveys carried out among the  general  populace  and  of
      teachers in 2015-2017 produced concerning results.  It is  clear  that
      Albanian society still has some way to go in its acceptance  of  LGBTI
      individuals and particularly openly gay men.  We do not however accept
      Ms Young's assertions that  it  will  take  generations  for  that  to
      change; the evidence about training in schools has  produced  negative
      but also positive reaction. Tirana has a more  liberal  outlook.   The
      Director of PINK Embassy acknowledges that awareness and acceptance is
      increasing.




 122. We accept also that there is evidence of some politicians and  persons
      in authority making homophobic or other derogatory remarks.   Some  of
      those individuals are now described as  former  ministers.   In  other
      cases, complaints have been made to CPD although it is not clear  what
      has happened to those  complaints.   The  problem  is  not  though  of
      sufficient frequency or intensity to give  rise  to  a  suggestion  of
      State sponsored antagonism towards the LGBTI community.



 123. Against that background, we turn now to the further aspects  which  we
      are required to consider.

B:   Situation Faced by an Openly Gay Man in Tirana

Risk of Harm to Openly Gay Men in Tirana

124. The Respondent's position is that there is not in  general  a  risk  to
    the life of or risk of sufficiently  serious  harm  to  an  openly  gay
    returnee on return to Albania.  The Appellant's case is that  the  risk
    still exists, both outside the family and within the family.


125. The acceptance that the Appellant  suffered  extreme  ill-treatment  in
    his home area in 2016 is sufficiently recent in time to be relevant  to
    risk on return.  That occurred in Has to where the  Respondent  accepts
    the Appellant cannot be returned.  The Appellant lived  thereafter  for
    about four months in Tirana but, on his evidence, not as an openly  gay
    man.  As such, his own experience in this regard does  not  assist  our
    consideration of the risk based on the expert and background  evidence,
    save that we  take  into  account  that  his  own  perceptions  of  the
    circumstances for openly gay men in Tirana were such that he chose  not
    to live openly.


126. In Ms Young's opinion "[a]ll practising LGBT+  individuals  in  Albania
    are at considerable risk for their personal safety as well as for their
    jobs and their homes" [B/19].  She says that harassment by  the  police
    is "frequent".  However, those views are said to be founded on  a  2007
    and 2008 source and can therefore be given only limited weight.


127. She has referred in her report to an interview published in  2013  with
    Mr Pinderi which deals with violence against gay men ([B/21]).  He says
    this:


         "..Then, regarding the violence.  I have a mixed feeling.   Because
         on the one hand yes we had of course some problems - it  was  minor
         problem last year actually the violence."
         [those comments being related to an attack on the  Gay  Pride  Bike
         Ride in 2012]
         "What we can say about the violence is that I believe it's a hidden
         violence...what we have is non-reported violence especially  within
         families.
         I'm not saying that there is no violence.  I  am  saying  that  the
         violence is so sophisticated, that it's a  financial  violence  for
         instance.  When the parents find  out  about  their  children,  the
         first thing they do is like, okay, we won't  give  you  any  money,
         we're not paying anymore for your university and  if  you  want  to
         leave the house we will not pay you rent for another house, and  we
         will not let you get a job in this city.
         We have had cases of  violence  especially  from  brothers  against
         their younger brothers, extreme violence sometimes and the  problem
         is that the community is quite  unresponsive  and  not  willing  to
         report that violence.  And I can understand  it  because  we  don't
         have enough infrastructure; how to address that kind  of  violence.
         So yeah, this is now the general situation."


128. In  her  answers  to  the  Respondent's  written  questions  (prior  to
    finalisation of her report), Ms Young mentions a warning issued by  the
    Dutch Embassy to avoid the Gay Pride event  in  2017  due  to  security
    concerns ([B/90]).  Those concerns appear to  arise  from  an  intended
    demonstration  on  the  same  day  by  those  opposed  to  LGBT  rights
    ([B/182]).   She  also  refers  to  the  experience  of  the   American
    Ambassador to Albania who attended the Gay Pride event in 2015 (and not
    as Ms Young suggests 2018: his quote begins with reference to the event
    being "three years ago").  He says that he was:


         "...shocked by the lack  of  empathy  and  the  ignorance  of  some
         citizens.  Although there was a  big  protection  from  the  Police
         someone hit with an egg that almost fell on the head of  a  4  year
         boy who was with his father at the pride.  One of my colleagues  at
         the embassy was hit with a tomato.  They told me it was far  better
         than the threats of previous years".


    Ms Young accepted in her evidence that there have been  no  attacks  on
    recent Gay Pride events with those limited exceptions.


129. In his October 2018 interview, Mr Hazizaj  refers  to  attacks  on  the
    Pride Parade.  He says this:


         "The Pride Parade has never been attacked and  there  haven't  been
         any negative incidents - that is the most important  thing.   There
         was just one minor incident during P(ride) 2013,  one  of  Tirana's
         two rainbow parades, to which many people came  by  bike.   Someone
         threw smoke bombs at participants who were sitting in a caf  after
         the parade.  There was, however, never a thorough investigation  as
         to whether there had been a connection.  But there is a lot of hate
         in the social networks.  Many politicians  oppose  these  types  of
         events and try to turn people against us.  They also know that  the
         media jump on this topic, and so they specifically  take  advantage
         of this fact to draw attention away from other topics.   They  want
         to  hold  us  responsible  for  things  that  go  wrong  and  start
         discussions we haven't even asked for..."

130. We take note of the reference in this article to  two  rainbow  parades
    in Tirana and that the  Gay  Pride  Parade  has  never  been  attacked,
    casting some doubt on what we were told that the Gay Pride Bike Ride is
    the same thing as the Gay Pride Parade.


131. Ms Young opines that Tirana is the "only  town  in  Albania  where  any
    LGBT+ person could live free from persecution and possible attack,  and
    that even there it would only be possible  to  live  openly  LGBT+,  in
    certain more tolerant areas".  When asked about this, she said that the
    only area which she considered "safe" in this sense is the  area  where
    the "gay-friendly bars" and, so far as she knew their  location,  where
    the LGBT NGOs are situated.  That is an area which she referred  to  as
    the "Blloku".   It is the area formerly occupied by Enver Hoxha and his
    communist party members, a small district within  Tirana.   A  map  was
    provided at the hearing on which she indicated  its  location.  In  her
    further responses after the hearing, she explained that she  is  "still
    not entirely clear of its exact perimeter, but it certainly covers  the
    areas that I indicated on the map of Tirana".  The area  to  which  she
    pointed during her  oral  evidence  is  one  surrounded  by  some  four
    streets. Mr Thomann accepted that, if Ms Young's  evidence  about  this
    were adopted, so that an openly gay man could only live without risk in
    that confined area, it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to
    relocate to Tirana.  Ms Young did not provide a source for  either  the
    comment in her report or what she said  in  oral  evidence  or  in  her
    further responses.


132. Mr Pinderi's experiences of violence  against  gay  men  are  relevant,
    particularly as he was openly gay for some considerable time whilst  in
    Albania, is and was whilst in Albania in a  relationship  with  another
    man and was (and still is) a leader of a LGBT NGO in Albania.


133. Ms Young herself relies on what she was  told  by  Mr  Pinderi  and  Mr
    Kodra about incidents of violence. In spite of that, we are  unable  to
    find specific  examples  to  illustrate  Ms  Young's  view  that  there
    continues to be a real risk to gay men, even  in  Tirana.   When  asked
    about this in re-examination, she said that "anecdotally" she was aware
    of incidents.  A British woman running "Balkanista"  had  told  her  of
    some but she had not taken note of them because she was  not  in  touch
    with the people concerned.  She also said in her evidence in chief when
    asked about the source of her view that gay men in  Tirana  would  risk
    violence on the streets from  gangs,  that  she  was  "not  sure  [she]
    supplied them".  She said that she was given examples by Mr Pinderi and
    Mr Kodra, but we were not taken to any examples save those referred  to
    by Mr Pinderi.


134. In his 2018 statement  ([B/333]),  Mr  Pinderi  refers  to  "increasing
    violence" to LGBT+ individuals within the home and at school.  He  says
    that this shows a risk to their lives in those places "as much as  they
    risk in streets".  He says that he provides two concrete  examples  but
    only one is given.  It is of a  friend  of  Mr  Pinderi  who  committed
    suicide in February 2018 because of his "problematic relationship  with
    his family members".  Mr Pinderi goes on however to say that  "[i]n  my
    daily work and also in several documented cases I have seen that LGBTQ+
    community is constantly  facing  physical  violence  because  of  their
    gender identity  and/or  sexual  orientation.   Those  members  of  our
    community who cannot hide their non-binary gender  identity  or  sexual
    orientation,  are  disproportionately  affected  not  only  by   street
    violence, but also by domestic violence, unemployment  and  refusal  to
    offer equal rights and opportunities."


135. Mr Pinderi provides further detail of domestic violence.  He says  that
    this remains "the biggest challenge" both outside  and  within  Tirana.
    He points to the 67 young people helped by the LGBT shelter  in  Tirana
    since its inception in 2014.  He goes on to say that:


         "Usually the violence came  from  family  members  such  as  older
         brothers and even from fathers and  mothers.   At  the  residential
         shelter we had to deal in 2015 even with the case of a 16 years old
         boy that was disowned by his parents who signed  a  declaration  in
         front  of  the  public  notary  to   give   up   their   parenthood
         responsibilities towards their child."


136. In terms of the violence which Mr Pinderi and his partner faced  whilst
    in Albania, the following examples are provided in his statement:


         "I could no longer take public transportation and was  hesitant  to
         go out shopping or to restaurants as people would recognise me  and
         confront me, often calling me "immoral" and warning "that God would
         punish me".
         I received  numerous  messages  on  my  personal  Facebook  account
         threatening to hang me, or saying, "Hitler should wake up and  take
         care of people like me." Others threatened to burn me with acid.
         Five times, people shattered the  mirrors  on  my  car  during  the
         night.  Each time, it was only my car that was vandalized - all the
         other cars in the neighbourhood were left alone.
         I was once with Xheni Karaj, my soulmate, comrade in our cause  and
         colleague and waiting our turn at a gas  station  in  Pogradec,  my
         hometown in Albania, when a man confronted  me.   He  called  me  a
         faggot and told me to stop saying on television that I  was  raised
         in Pogradec, as it brought shame to the town.  He grabbed me by the
         throat, spit on me and told us to leave.
         A few weeks later,  I  heard  from  others  in  town  that  he  had
         accidentally killed himself with an assault rifle.
         ...
         Being openly gay activists and a couple as well, our lives were  in
         danger.  By the time we left, we were  receiving  dozens  of  death
         threats on social media every day -  threats  we  couldn't  ignore.
         The false sense of security we had built around us suddenly started
         to crumble.
         After years as an LGBT activist in Albania, I realized I  had  done
         all I could to change myself and my country, and there was  nothing
         more I could do without putting myself and  my  family  at  serious
         risk.  It was time for a change."


137.  When  questioned  specifically  about  Mr  Pinderi's  experiences   in
    Albania, Ms Young accepted that, even in his 2018 statement, he had not
    described day to day incidents of street  violence.   She  pointed  out
    though that he had to leave Albania because he was  "in  fear  of  much
    worse".  She did not accept that the fact that Mr Pinderi had lived  in
    Albania as an openly gay man for many years without incident  indicated
    that there was no real risk for such a person and  suggested  that  the
    NGO movement in 2013 (when he made his comments about violence which we
    have noted above) was "underground" or "secretive".  We note that  this
    assertion is not supported by Mr Pinderi's own evidence which refers to
    the Gay Pride events before 2013.


138. Ms Hysa (the representative  from  Aleanca  with  whom  Ms  Young  met)
    informed her that the organisation "faced a great deal of  antagonism".
    Ms Young confirmed however that  Ms  Hysa  did  not  particularise  any
    incidents of violence.


139. In the HRW Article in November 2017 ([B/606-7]), the psychologist  from
    STREHA is cited as saying that the exact location of the shelter is not
    published or available information because they "want  to  avoid  arson
    and havoc".  We have already commented on the different position for  a
    shelter provided for those who have fallen victim to domestic violence.
     The article reports comments from two young men then  staying  at  the
    shelter.  One had suffered physical attack from his father and was then
    evicted from the home.  He ended up as a sex worker to  survive  before
    being referred to the shelter by an  acquaintance.   The  other  had  a
    similar experience but had been assisted by STREHA to find an apartment
    and a job as a  journalist.   He  returned  to  STREHA  to  help  as  a
    volunteer.


140. We were told by Ms Young based on what she was told by the Director  of
    STREHA, that they "constantly" had  to  turn  away  young  people.   Mr
    Hazizaj, in his October 2018 interview, when asked about the  need  for
    LGBT individuals to have recourse to the  STREHA  shelter,  casts  some
    doubt on the level of violence within families:


         "Fortunately, very few young people need to resort to this  option.
         When adolescents or young adults come out  to  their  families,  in
         most cases the issue is off the table  after  two  or  four  weeks.
         That does not necessarily mean it  is  solved.   Most  families  go
         through several crises particularly during the  first  week....It's
         not  that  they  [the  parents]  are  overly  worried  about  their
         children's sexuality but rather about what society will do to their
         children.  The biggest fear is that their son or daughter  will  be
         bullied by other children and harassed by their teachers.  So  it's
         more a concern for happiness,  human  rights  and  protection  from
         violence.  That's a legitimate concern that  probably  all  parents
         have."


141. At [B/561-563], there is an article dated  January  2018  concerning  a
    young, bisexual man named (for the purposes of the  article)  "Alesio".
    He has not disclosed his sexuality to his family and  lives  in  Tirana
    where he "leads a relatively restricted existence" so that  he  is  not
    conspicuous in order that his sexuality is not suspected or noted upon.
     He says this about the risk:


         "In the past, I  would  encounter  discrimination  in  the  street.
         People have said offensive things and harassed me.  So now  I  just
         keep myself to myself and try not to exaggerate in the way I dress.
          Because whenever I dress differently, or have my eyebrows done,  I
         know I will get it from  people.   There  are  many  young  men  in
         Albania who would like to dress well and  in  style  and  for  this
         reason alone, people immediately assume they are gay,  even  though
         they may not be.  That is why I lead a secret life and cannot  come
         out openly about my real sexual orientation.  Not that I care  much
         about what other people say.  But I still don't want  them  to  pry
         into my life.  I don't want to be one of those  who  is  abused  or
         verbally attacked."


142. In terms of reports of violence, according to  the  ILGA  2017  Review,
    (by reference to Aleanca's 2016 report), Aleanca  received  reports  of
    523 cases of bullying in that year.  Only  five  of  those  cases  were
    reported to the authorities and of those who reported them, four out of
    five said that they faced hostility  from  the  police.   Aleanca  also
    received eight reports of physical attacks on LGBT  people  and  twelve
    incidents of domestic violence against  such  individuals  during  2016
    ([B/620]).  Ms Young did not accept that the  low  levels  of  physical
    violence reported to Aleanca  as  recorded  in  the  ILGA  2017  Review
    ([B/620]) were indicative of a lack of real risk.  She insisted instead
    that the report of eight incidents  of  physical  violence  and  twelve
    incidents of domestic violence was indicative of  an  unwillingness  to
    report. Such reports are to a NGO and not the  police  and  there  were
    over 500 reports of bullying made to the NGO in the same period.


143. The Helsinki Committee Article at [B/622-23] says that:


         "Citizens belonging to this community face a  series  of  problems
         that impede the effective and full exercise of their rights.   Part
         of them [sic] is not accepted as such by their family  or  society,
         faced with denigrating prejudice  and  multi-faced  discrimination.
         In some cases, members of this community are the victims  of  hate,
         verbal or physical violence, in public places or domestic violence.
          Lack of housing for individuals in need who are  not  accepted  by
         their families, difficulties  in  employment  or  lack  of  quality
         psycho-social services are some of  the  other  problems  that  the
         community faces."


    The document goes on to speak of the difficulties faced by those facing
    gender identity discrimination.


144. The UNDP 2017 Report ([B/592]) says this about violence  against  LGBTI
    people:


         "[4.3] Gender  norms  are  very  persistent.   Non-conformity  with
         mainstream gender norms by LGBTI people can provoke  verbal  abuse,
         physical attacks and harassment from family members and  in  public
         places.  There is no safe place where LGBTI people know  that  they
         can be free from fear of violence and abuse,  except  for  in  each
         other's company and when  receiving  support  from  LGBTI  people's
         organizations...High levels of homophobia cause fear of persecution
         and insecurity amongst LGBTI people."

    The report goes on to observe, based on testimony from 2014, that LGBTI
victims do
     not report homophobic crimes because of fear of extortion and  lack  of
trust in the
     reception they will be given by the police.


145. When dealing with the position of gay men  in  particular,  the  report
    records the following ([B/593]):


         "Gendered cultural practices are very persistent and cause harm  to
         gay people because they provoke verbal abuse, physical attacks  and
         harassment in the domestic context and in public places.  In  2011,
         a gay couple reported physical violence and death threats from  one
         of their brothers to the police.   However,  instead  of  receiving
         protection they  were  subject  to  discrimination  by  the  police
         officers who insulted them because  of  their  sexual  orientation.
         The couple was kept in a cell for 10 hours  and  considered  to  be
         guilty for bothering their families and  neighbours.   After  their
         complaint, PINK Embassy reported the  incident  to  the  CPD  which
         opened an investigation.  In 2013, a 19-year old  student  reported
         that he had been evicted from the apartment he was renting  because
         his landlord found out he was gay."


146. We refer also to the May 2017 CPIN. At [2.3.12]  ([B/629]),  a  general
    summary concerning violence towards LGBT individuals provides:


         "There is no reliable data on hate crime and it  is  believed  that
         many cases  go  unreported.   Almost  all  violence  in  public  is
         targeted  towards  men  who   are,   as   one   source   describes,
         stereotypically gay and towards transgender people.  However,  most
         ill-treatment  occurs  within  the   family   -   often   involving
         psychological violence from parents who feel that their child might
         be gay or lesbian."


147. Reference is made in the  report  at  [6.4.1]  ([B/652])  to  the  2015
    report of  the  European  Commission  against  Racism  and  Intolerance
    ("ECRI") as follows:


         "There is no data from the authorities on hate crime  towards  LGBT
         persons.  However, reports from the CPD, the EU and  civil  society
         show that there are regular incidents of homo-transphobic violence.
          For 2011, the NGO Pink Embassy reported  to  the  OSCE  one  arson
         attack against a house inhabited by five transgender people and  an
         assault against a transgender person resulting in  serious  injury.
         For 2012, the OSCE received reports of a group  attack  on  14  May
         with explosives used against participants in the first  ever  Pride
         event in Tirana.  Fortunately it did not result in serious harm and
         the  subsequent  public  debate  led  to  amendments  in  the   CC.
         Concerning the same year the NGO Pink Embassy reported three  cases
         of physical assault, including one by a group.  Civil  society  and
         the CPD also refer to several cases of violence against young  LGBT
         people by members of their family.  In addition, ECRI was  informed
         of an attack on 25 February 2013 on two transgender persons with  a
         glass bottle and other sharp objects.  Moreover, the police refused
         to consider an attack with tear gas on LGBT  activists  on  17  May
         2013 as a hate crime, on the ground that no  participant  had  been
         physically injured."


148. The May 2017 CPIN  also  refers  at  [B/652]  to  an  Albania  Helsinki
    Committee 2015 report which stated that:


         "During this year there  were  no  cases  of  violence  or  serious
         violations of life and health of  persons  belonging  to  the  LGBT
         community, however the awareness of the  general  public  regarding
         the specifics of the citizens of this community remains low, due to
         the taboos that exist and the minimal treatment of the problem at a
         social level.
         During 2015 the AHC has received only one complaint and request for
         legal assistance from the  community.   The  complaint  related  to
         alleged discrimination of a person from Fier, who was living  in  a
         shelter in Tirana, but at the same time was wanted by  the  police.
         AHC carefully followed the case and the claim resulted [to be]  not
         true."


149. We take account of the view of the PA in  May  2016  cited  at  [6.4.5]
    that:


         "violence  against  the  LGBT  community  is   still   a   present
         phenomenon.  Members of this community in many cases face  violence
         in domestic and public environments.  Albania does not yet  collect
         data on violence related to sexual orientation and this  remains  a
         problem."


    That is backed up by what is said at [6.5.4] in a contribution from ERA
    and the LGBT NGOs in Albania that:


         "Domestic violence remains an issue for the LGBTI community.  Cases
         of domestic violence  are  very  common.   In  2015,  15  cases  of
         domestic  violence  were  reported  to  Aleanca,  mostly  involving
         psychological violence from parents who felt that their child might
         be gay or lesbian.  In six cases, members of the community reported
         that they had experienced physical violence  because  their  family
         had found out they were LGBT.  Aleanca  has  supported  victims  of
         such violence, either through providing psychological support or by
         providing shelter  at  STREHA.   In  several  cases,  Aleanca  also
         collaborated with other NGOs that operate in Albania."


150. Among the recommendations for amendment to the text of an  earlier  COI
    report, Dr Enkeleida Tahiraj, in the ICI Report at [B/695-7], suggested
    that the Home Office should make reference  to  the  lack  of  reliable
    statistics emanating from the Albanian authorities  because  statistics
    were not collected or published "to a meaningful level".  He noted that
    "[t]he most reliable data comes from reported incidents to LGBTI  NGOs"
    and that it was not that there were no hate motivated crimes,  but  the
    level was unknown because they  were  not  being  measured.   The  Home
    Office  accepted  that  recommended  amendment.   Such  amendments  are
    reflected in the text of the May 2017  CPIN  at  [2.3.12]  and  [6.4.1]
    which we have set out above.


151. Our attention was also drawn to the incidents of violence  referred  to
    by Dr Tahiraj at [B/705].  The Home Office  also  accepted  the  recent
    sources and those are set out at [6.4.1]  cited  above.   The  examples
    date back to 2011 and 2012.   In  addition,  Dr  Tahiraj  refers  to  a
    Historia IME link which states that "PINK Embassy  and  'Historia  IME'
    reported  several  individual  cases  of  violence  and  discrimination
    throughout the year 2014, including instances where LGBTI  people  were
    removed from their familial home, left family home because of  fear  of
    being killed by family members, had their resources cut by unsupportive
    family members or were sexually abused.  Some victims sought  to  leave
    Albania".  That passage does not appear in the May 2017 CPIN  nor  does
    that passage include the numbers of incidents, their  details  and  the
    split  between  violence  and  discrimination  or  between  public  and
    domestic violence.


152. The Appellant relies on the Home Office Statistics in  relation  to  UK
    asylum claims based on sexual orientation ([B608-617]).  We take  these
    into account including the limitations of the data expressed at  [B609-
    610], in particular that the identifier of sexual orientation may  have
    been wrongly or inconsistently applied by caseworkers,  that  the  data
    does not reflect a  confirmed  or  definite  status,  that  the  sexual
    orientation claim may not be the sole basis of the claim and  that  the
    basis of the appeal or its outcome is not necessarily the  individual's
    sexual orientation.  We remind ourselves that protection claims turn on
    their own facts and even if reliance can  usefully  be  placed  on  the
    cases of other individuals, little weight can be placed on  statistical
    data without knowing the underlying  facts  or  seeing  the  underlying
    decisions.  With those caveats, though we  note  that  the  data  shows
    that, between 1 July 2015 to 31 March 2017, there  were  95  protection
    claims based on sexual orientation, forming  3%  of  the  2,727  claims
    lodged from Albania.  Of those,  leave  was  granted  in  12  cases  at
    initial decision stage.  All of those were grants of limited leave  and
    not asylum.  66 cases were refused.  At the appeal  stage,  of  the  27
    appeals dealt with, 11 appeals  were  allowed,  15  dismissed  and  one
    withdrawn.


153. Mr Chelvan made much of the lack of hate crime data  from  Albania  and
    invited us to draw an inference from that.  We deal with that under the
    next heading of  sufficiency  of  protection.   We  take  into  account
    however Mr Chelvan's submissions  about  the  numbers  of  gay  men  in
    Albania and the lack of visibility of such numbers which he says points
    to the fact that few gay men are openly gay which is  relevant  to  the
    level of risk.  We have already referred to his  submission  about  the
    low numbers of gay men attending the Gay Pride event in 2018.


154. Mr Chelvan suggested to Ms Young that there  are  likely  to  be  about
    175,000 LGBTI individuals in Albania.  She did not disagree but did not
    provide any evidence to  show  that  she  had  researched  this  aspect
    herself.   When we asked Mr Chelvan about this figure, he said that the
    Office of National Statistics for  the  UK  put  the  figure  of  LGBTI
    individuals within the UK at 2% whereas Stonewall considers  it  to  be
    closer to  5%.    We  were  not  shown  any  documents  supporting  his
    submission nor given any explanation why  he  preferred  the  Stonewall
    figures.  In any event, we were not provided with any evidence to  show
    that the recorded percentage of LGBTI individuals in the UK,  whichever
    figure is accepted, is a reliable measure for the  community  of  LGBTI
    individuals in other countries nor what proportion of the LGBTI numbers
    relates to gay men.  The figures put forward are  at  best  speculative
    and do not assist us.

Risk from Family Members in Tirana

155. We turn now to the evidence about the  risk  to  a  gay  man  of  being
    traced in Tirana by their family members and harmed by them.  Ms  Young
    reports ([B/52]) that  it  would  be  problematic  to  relocate  within
    Albania because of the nature of society there. She explains:


         "Albania is a very small country (the size of  Wales).   Relocation
         would be extremely difficult for ...BF...In Albania, both the rural
         and the  urban  populations  are  based  on  networks  of  kin  and
         neighbours, in which literally 'everyone knows everyone'.   Because
         of a high reliance on personal  family  networks  of  support,  any
         Albanian person, would be generally highly  visible  if  dislocated
         from their local home place.  Not only is it difficult to integrate
         and settle somewhere  in  Albania  without  previous  existing  and
         positive personal contacts and ties, but the whereabouts of  anyone
         is  always  easily  identified.   People  are  socially  positioned
         through inquiries and identities are hard to hide.  The  only  area
         in Albania where LGBT+ individuals are able to  have  any  kind  of
         safe social interaction is Tirana.  But for BF..., this  is  not  a
         safe city since his family could soon locate him; he would  not  be
         able to lead a life as an openly  LGBT+  person,  even  in  Tirana,
         without persecution."

    She continues:


         "BF...would also have difficulty in finding employment or any means
         to support [himself].  [He] would  be  likely  to  face  rejection,
         inevitably putting [himself] at  risk  of  violence.   BF  ...[has]
         already lost the respect of those who knew [him].   The  fact  that
         [he was a] victim of homophobic aggression will count  for  nothing
         in [his] favour, rather the reverse - those who were aware of [his]
         attacks would consider them well deserved.  [He will be] judged  by
         the fact that [he] cannot account for  good  standing  in  society.
         There is little if any follow up on police action (as  was  already
         seen in BF's case).  Abuse of the judicial  system  is  widespread.
         It is highly likely that the appellant would be [a] target of [his]
         father and possibly others, especially paternal  uncles  once  they
         heard [he was] back in the country.  Even  [his  family],  who  all
         feel impelled by a deep sense of maintaining family  honour,  might
         (as [his father has] threatened) use further violence in  order  to
         clear what they perceive as  the  shame,  as  a  suspect  in  their
         sexuality.  [He has] brought shame to  [his]  family  name.   [His]
         fear of being persecuted  or  even  murdered,  is  very  plausible,
         founded on the public knowledge of the repercussions of  events  of
         the past years, which will have been framed as being all the  fault
         of BF..in failing to comply to patriarchal law on family mores."


156. As to the risk  of  tracing  to  Tirana,  Ms  Young,  at  [B/41]  draws
    attention to what is said in the July 2017 CPIN as follows:


         "In order to receive government services, individuals moving within
         the country must transfer their civil  registration  to  their  new
         community of residence and prove the legality of their new domicile
         through property ownership, a property rental agreement, or utility
         bills.  Many persons could not provide this proof and  thus  lacked
         access to public services."


157. Ms Young adds that, in the longer term, the requirement to  re-register
    would  bring  an  individual  to  the  attention  of  persons  in   the
    individual's home area.  She said in her oral evidence that  she  would
    expect the family to come to know of the returnee's whereabouts  within
    about six months and more quickly if the person were openly gay.


158. Attention was drawn by Ms Young to what was said by the Tribunal in  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC)  but  omits  a  key
    passage highlighted below:


         "...the requirement to transfer civil registration to a  new  area,
         as set out at 2.4.4 above, would appear to obviate the  possibility
         of 'disappearing' in another part of  the  country,  and  would  be
         likely to drive  the  male  members  of  a  victim  clan  to  self-
         confinement in the home area as an alternative".
         "A crucial factor in establishing whether internal relocation is  a
         real possibility is the geographical and  political  reach  of  the
         aggressor  clan:   where  that  clan  has  government  connections,
         locally or more widely..."


159. Ms Young also says at [B/46] that "usually" returnees are  checked  for
    criminal records at the airport and that this is likely to involve word
    reaching the returnee's local community and family.  Her  evidence  was
    that she had been to the airport and found out about it last year;  she
    met four airport policemen who interviewed the men returning to Albania
    in the previous year.  She said it was known that  those  returning  to
    Albania had to be "received".  They were separated from the  others  on
    flights and had to go through intensive interrogation.  Ms  Young  said
    that she had known about it a long time ago.  She had spoken to  people
    coming back to Albania.  When her answer was probed, it  appeared  that
    she was referring to those on Home Office  charter  flights  who  could
    therefore be identified as  Albanians  being  returned  to  their  home
    country.


160. Ms Young did not know whether the process for  criminal  record  checks
    or re-registration was computerised or manual.  Her attention was drawn
    at the hearing to the December 2017 CPIN.  Paragraph [10.1.2]  confirms
    (by reference to a 2013 WHO report) that  the  registration  system  is
    electronic.  In addition, she was referred to a letter from the British
    Embassy dated 6 October 2017, in response to a question "Is it possible
    for someone to access personal data for illicit  purposes  through  the
    civil registration system?" said as follows:


         "With regard to the use,  or  misuse,  of  the  civil  registration
         system, the Deputy General Director was aware of one case in  which
         the  perpetrator  had  approached  a  policeman,  whom  they   knew
         personally, and the policeman had then taken the perpetrator to the
         shelter at which the victim was being housed.   It  was  not  clear
         from the Deputy General Director's account  whether  the  policemen
         had located the victim at the shelter via  the  civil  registration
         system, or through some other means.  In any case, legal action was
         then taken against the perpetrator and police officer.
         We were advised that some, but not all, police officers have access
         to the civil registration system.  Access to  the  system  requires
         use of a personal login code, and  all  of  their  lookups  on  the
         system are electronically recorded.  The  Deputy  General  Director
         made clear that whilst some police officers could access the system
         for illicit purposes, they could not do so with  impunity  -  their
         access would leave an electronic audit trail  and  there  would  be
         repercussions for the officer.
         With regard to whether the victim  would  be  checked  against  the
         municipality record of her last place of residence, Social Services
         commented that her previous municipality would come  to  know  that
         she had moved to Tirana if she asked for  her  registration  to  be
         moved there."


161. Ms Young agreed that the system could not be abused because that  would
    be a breach of data obligations but added  that  "they  wouldn't  think
    they were [in breach]".  She was however unable to provide examples  of
    where police or other officials had improperly provided  details.   She
    had not had to register or check the register and was  unfamiliar  with
    the process.  Her source for information about the process was the Home
    Office's own CPINs.  She also considered that  such  information  would
    come to the ears of the family not simply via the  registration  system
    but by "gossip". She acknowledged in her oral evidence that she has not
    provided specific examples of individuals being traced  on  return  and
    harmed, save for one example to which we refer below under the  heading
    of sufficiency of protection which concerns a blood feud  victim.   She
    said though that she "had heard of  cases"  although  did  not  provide
    sources or details.


Discrimination in Tirana


162. Ms Young was taken in evidence to the API  at  [B/744]  which  provides
    the following definitions:


         "...A  discriminatory  measure,  in  itself  or  cumulatively  with
         others,  may  however  amount  to  persecution   if   it   led   to
         consequences, which were of a substantially prejudicial nature  for
         the person concerned.  For example, it may, depending on the  facts
         of the case,  amount  to  persecution  if  the  discrimination  has
         resulted  in  sufficiently  serious  consequences  for  the  person
         concerned such as:
            . Serious legal, cultural or social restrictions on rights  to,
              or ability to earn, a livelihood
            . Serious legal, cultural or social restrictions on rights  to,
              or ability to enjoy, private and family life
            . Serious legal, cultural or social restrictions on rights  to,
              or  ability  to  enjoy,  freedom  of   opinion,   expression,
              association or assembly
            . Restrictions on political enfranchisement
            . Restrictions on the choice to  practise  or  not  practise  a
              religion
            . Restrictions on access to public places
            . Restrictions on access  to  normally  available  educational,
              legal  (including  law  enforcement),  welfare   and   health
              provision."


163. Ms Young's opinion was that a gay man in Tirana would  face  all  those
    restrictions. However, on being questioned, she did accept that certain
    of the restrictions would apply to a lesser extent (such as  access  to
    public places and in relation to political enfranchisement).


164. Mr Thomann drew our attention to information contained within the  UNDP
    2017 report which states that, although "the reality shows  that  LGBTI
    people face high levels of discrimination by employers",  "[i]n  Tirana
    they can access employment more easily, and can  receive  support  from
    LGBTI people's organizations" ([B/574]).    That report  provides  some
    statistical analysis of the problem.  In 2016, Alliance  LGBT  reported
    43 cases of discrimination in the workplace and/or in  recruitment  and
    selection.  However, a 2015 poll is said to  have  shown  that  39%  of
    LGBTI workers who came out did so in front of  work  colleagues  and  a
    2016 study  of  perceptions  of  local  officials  found  that  73%  of
    employees are positive towards  the  employment  of  LGBTI  persons  in
    public administration.  Even so, a recruitment group survey showed that
    of the 71 companies reviewed, only 22%  had  policies  which  contained
    language related to LGBTI although 38% said that they were  willing  to
    work more on LGBTI inclusion (see reference also at [B/366]).


165. The article at [B/561-3] provides a specific example  of  the  sort  of
    problems which a gay man in Tirana may face:


         "After finishing his university studies, he tried  his  hand  at  a
         number of jobs: from  car  wash  assistant,  to  supermarket  shelf
         stacker and call centre operator.  Presently he lives  alone  in  a
         rented accommodation and is out of work.  He says that when  people
         know you are gay it is very difficult to be offered a position.  If
         you can keep your sexuality a secret the chances of getting  a  job
         are higher.
         There is no freedom at all in life; it is us who  try  to  make  it
         free.  Still, it  is  hard  to  escape  discrimination.   Employers
         simply  won't  hire  you.   You  may  think,  I  am  trying  to  be
         respectable and keep myself in check, in both my  dress  style  and
         demeanour, but there are still things that may give  you  away  and
         the other person may understand who and what you  are.   There  are
         certain traits that set us apart and some people are able to  tell.
         On the other hand, there are others who cannot tell or who couldn't
         care less.  What they care about is a job  well  done.   Things  in
         Albania are still rather difficult, but  we  are  trying  to  adapt
         ourselves to this way of life as best we can."


166. Mr Thomann accepted that the evidence does show some discrimination  in
    the area of healthcare (see for example  the  comments  of  the  STREHA
    director at [B/30] and reference in the ILGA  2017  Review  at  [B/621]
    noting that thirteen cases of discrimination  in  healthcare  had  been
    reported to Aleanca according to its 2016 report).   However,  he  also
    drew attention to the article  entitled  "How  sexuality  education  is
    improving young people's lives in Albania" dated July 2018  at  [B/104-
    107].   The article begins  by  drawing  attention  to  the  fact  that
    "[y]oung people from marginalised groups in Eastern Europe and  Central
    Asia are being harmed by high levels of  violence,  discrimination  and
    stigma, and it is enormously difficult for  them  to  access  sexuality
    education or the sexual and reproductive health (SRH) care they  need".
    The article draws attention to the work of ACPD which has put in  place
    network and training programmes to help stigmatised young people and it
    is noted that "ACPD has succeeded where  many  have  failed  before  in
    reaching marginalised young people and  having  a  positive  impact  on
    their lives". Figures are given showing that ACPD has provided care  to
    500 young people and has counselled stigmatised young people on dealing
    with  harm  caused  by  discrimination  and  violence  from  people  in
    positions of authority.


167. An online article  at  [B/143-144]  dated  May  2018  describes  recent
    efforts by the PINK Embassy for changes to be made to the law governing
    the status of same-sex relationships.  It is stated that  Albanian  law
    does not provide for the same rights of cohabitation  or  marriage  for
    same-sex couples  as  for  heterosexual  couples.    The  PINK  Embassy
    records that it has been trying for eight years to achieve a change  to
    the Family Code.  The evidence of Mr Pinderi was that he was in a same-
    sex relationship for a number of years whilst  still  in  Albania.   We
    note that he does not record any  specific  difficulties  in  terms  of
    adverse legal consequences arising from the lack of  such  recognition.




168. Concerning discrimination generally, we take account of  the  following
    evidence in particular:


          a) The UNDP 2017 Report refers to  the  2015  CPD  report  which,
             while  drawing  attention  to   legislative   amendments   and
             protection policies for LGBT people, records that "the on-the-
             ground  situation  for   LGBTI   people   had   not   improved
             significantly" ([B/584]).  It is said that:


                  "LGBTI people face sexual harassment  and  discrimination
                  in  recruitment  and   employment.    Challenges   include
                  difficulties in finding work for people who are open about
                  their sexual  orientation,  or  stress  caused  by  others
                  finding out about their sexual orientation" ([B/568]).


             The report highlights complaints about the denial of access to
             transgender people to public services  and  private  bars  and
             shops.


          b) The May 2017 CPIN at [B/655: 6.6.1] observes:


                  "In recent years there has been a rise in  the  number  of
                  LGBT youth who have problems  with  housing.   This  is  a
                  result of a few factors, coming out to the family  and  in
                  some cases this resulting  in  being  kicked  out  of  the
                  family house, harsh living conditions  and  discriminatory
                  and aggressive communities (especially  in  small  cities)
                  inability to find a job, or inability to rent a house as a
                  result of discrimination because of sexual orientation  or
                  gender identity."


          c) The CPD undertook several  "ex  officio"  investigations  into
             discrimination against LGBTI people in relation to employment,
             education, housing and hate speech.  The CPD  draws  attention
             to  health  and  psychosocial  services  being   "insensitive"
             towards LGBTI people.  The PA is also reported in the May 2017
             CPIN to have drawn attention to discrimination in employment.


          d) At [6.7.4] of the May  2017  CPIN,  reference  is  made  to  a
             contribution to the European Commission by Aleanca,  Pro-LGBT,
             ILGA-Europe and ERA for Albania's report for 2016 as follows:


                  "Forty-three cases of discrimination in workplaces  and/or
                  discrimination  in  job  recruitment  and  selection  were
                  reported to Aleanca LGBT.  These are cases of LGBTI people
                  having difficulty in finding work because  of  stigma  and
                  prejudice, experiencing sexual harassment based on  sexual
                  orientation and gender identity during job interviews,  or
                  being fired because the employer has found out  about  the
                  employee's sexual orientation or gender identity. Only one
                  case was reported to the authorities.
                  For the first time in this period, the Head-hunter  group,
                  a  human  resources  company  in  Albania,  launched   and
                  implemented the  LGBTIQ  Employment  Equality  Index,  the
                  first non-EU country to have such a system in the Balkans.
                   The index is a ranking system that  determines  how  well
                  companies respect the rights and dignity of LGBTIQ persons
                  in  their  hiring,  training,  development   and   general
                  employment  practices.    The   Albanian   Government   is
                  encouraged to support this index by promoting  it  and  to
                  have state owned companies be part of the Equality Index".




          e) Mr Hazizaj is reported to have said in an article published on
             21 May 2018 (to mark the presentation of the Monitoring Report
             of the National Action Plan for LGBTI persons in Albania) that
             "[t]he Report shows that despite the  fact  that  Albania  has
             taken serious steps forward,  there  are  still  some  several
             areas where  the  government  and  its  institutions  need  to
             strengthen a lot their work! Access  to  health,  violence  in
             schools  and  access  to  services  remain  among   the   most
             problematic areas, requiring urgent actions."


Findings on the Situation Faced by an Openly Gay Man in Tirana


 169. Having regard to the evidence set  out  above,  we  have  reached  the
      following conclusions about the situation facing  an  openly  gay  man
      living in Tirana.



 170. We begin with our consideration of the  assertion  by  Ms  Young  that
      there is a general risk of violence from homophobic gangs  in  Tirana.
      Her opinion is unsupported by any specific examples except those which
      were provided to her by Mr Kodra and Mr Pinderi which are  limited  in
      scope and time.



 171. We give some weight to the evidence of Mr Pinderi despite his evidence
      not being tested.  His 2018 statement refers to only one  incident  of
      personal violence.  It is not clear when  it  occurred.   We  know  it
      occurred in Mr Pinderi's home area of Pogradec (near the  border  with
      Macedonia) and not in Tirana.  There is no evidence  that  Mr  Pinderi
      reported the incident to the police.  Although Mr  Pinderi  refers  to
      threats, there is no indication that in the  ten  years  in  which  he
      advocated LGBTI views as an  openly  gay  man  in  Albania,  any  such
      threats materialised into violence against him and his  partner  other
      than the single incident mentioned and vandalism to his car.




 172. We note the contrast between Mr Pinderi's  views  in  2018  and  those
      expressed in 2013 (as contained in Ms Young's report).   In  the  2013
      interview, he says that the violence is particularly  within  families
      and  is  "sophisticated...financial  violence".   There  is   also   a
      divergence between the views expressed by Mr Pinderi and those  of  Mr
      Hazizaj in his October 2018 interview. Even in the  case  of  violence
      within families, Mr Hazizaj  says  that  the  main  concern  of  those
      families is what will happen to their children if they "come  out"  in
      terms of societal reactions.




 173. It is significant that none of the LGBTI NGOs reports violence towards
      their organisations or representatives (except  for  the  one  example
      which Mr Pinderi  gives).   They  are  obvious  targets  for  societal
      attack.  There has not been any incident of  violence  at  recent  Gay
      Pride events.  Even in the recent past, the incidents are limited  and
      are minor in nature.  We note also what  Mr  Hazizaj  says  about  the
      growing acceptance of those events in Tirana.  We accept that there is
      reference to the STREHA shelter fearing "arson and havoc" but we  note
      the rather different position of that organisation (for the reasons we
      give at [140]); there is no report of any such fears materialising.




 174. We accept that there are some incidents of violence in the recent past
      reported  in  the  documents  before  us.   Specific   incidents   are
      referenced in 2011, 2012 and 2013 (ECRI 2015 report  as  contained  in
      the May 2017 CPIN), eight incidents of physical violence and twelve of
      domestic violence made to Aleanca in 2016 (as well as 523  reports  of
      bullying) and "several" cases reported to PINK Embassy  (ICI  report).
      However, those incidents are not of sufficient frequency to amount  to
      "a consistent pattern of such mistreatment" (AA (Zimbabwe))  and  fall
      short of violence of the kind that Ms Young claims exists.




 175. We also take account of the evidence of "Alesio"  in  the  article  at
      [B/561-563] that he is not openly gay because he does not wish  to  be
      "one of those who is abused or verbally  attacked".   That  too  is  a
      consistent theme of the documents before us; that the  nature  of  the
      attacks is often verbal abuse  or  harassment  (see  for  example  the
      citations from May 2017  CPIN  and  report  of  the  Albania  Helsinki
      Committee in 2015).  As such, the incidents reported do not show  that
      there is a "real risk of coming to harm".




 176. Mr Chelvan submitted that there is under-reporting  of  incidents,  in
      part because gay men do not openly disclose their sexuality  for  fear
      of what  will  happen  to  them  and  in  part  because  the  Albanian
      authorities do not gather data  as  to  hate  crimes.   There  remains
      however a lack of evidence of documented incidents of violence against
      those who are known to be gay whether reported or otherwise.  Nor  are
      we assisted by the evidence showing how many hate crimes are  recorded
      as perpetrated  against  gay  men  in  the  UK  which  is  of  limited
      relevance.  This is not evidence of the numbers of gay men in  Albania
      or the likelihood that they will face a real risk of serious  harm  on
      return.  We are not assisted  either  by  statistics  in  relation  to
      appeals of LGBTI individuals who have claimed asylum in the UK.  Those
      statistics show only that eleven individuals have  had  their  appeals
      allowed in the period 2015 and 2017  and  we  are  not  provided  with
      details of those allowed appeals.   We consider that if more incidents
      of violence had occurred they would have been reported or recorded.




 177. Drawing together all the above, we are not persuaded on  the  evidence
      before us that an openly gay man, by virtue of  that  fact  alone,  in
      general, faces a real risk of violence in Tirana.




 178. In relation to a risk of harm of an individual's family tracing a  son
      or relative in Tirana and causing harm, there  is  only  very  limited
      evidence before us of any discovery of an individual by family in  the
      capital arising from the operation of either the  registration  system
      or criminal checks at the airport.  Ms Young was  unable  to  tell  us
      whether the criminal checks at the airport were done electronically or
      manually.  Her knowledge of the registration process  is  confined  to
      the Respondent's own reports which confirm that it  is  an  electronic
      process.   The way in which that process operates would enable  anyone
      abusing the checking system to  be  identified.   There  is  only  one
      example of tracing (of a victim of domestic violence) which  may  have
      arisen by abuse of the registration system.  Action was taken  against
      the police officer who wrongfully provided details of the  whereabouts
      of the victim.  Ms Young was unable to provide us  with  any  specific
      examples of individuals who have been traced and harmed in this way.




 179. There is evidence of only one blood feud victim having  been  targeted
      and killed on return from Sweden to Albania.   There  is  no  evidence
      that the registration  system  was  abused  in  the  tracing  of  that
      individual.




 180. We accept Ms Young's evidence that a person's whereabouts  may  become
      known in Tirana by word of  mouth.   Albania  is  a  relatively  small
      country and we accept as entirely plausible that  a  person  might  be
      traced via family or  other  connections  being  made  on  enquiry  in
      Tirana.  Whether that would occur would depend  on  the  family  being
      motivated to make such  enquiries  (which  motivation  would  probably
      depend on an awareness that the person may be living  there)  and  the
      extent of its hostility.  That is a question for determination on  the
      evidence in each case.




 181. Finally, in relation to discrimination, we are  unable  to  accept  Ms
      Young's evidence that all of the factors set  out  in  the  API  would
      apply.  She herself admitted that some might apply less  than  others.
      We have seen no  evidence  supporting  any  restriction  on  political
      enfranchisement as a result of sexual orientation, that  gay  men  are
      prevented from practising their religion  or  that  they  are  not  in
      general able to access public places.  The fact that Gay Pride  events
      are organised in Tirana is evidence of the ability  to  associate  and
      assemble as is the existence of LGBT NGOs and gay-friendly bars in the
      capital.




 182. There is some limited evidence (in the 2015 CPD report) of  denial  of
      access to transgender individuals to public services and private  bars
      and  shops.   We  also  accept  that  discrimination  may  limit   the
      availability of  employment  opportunities  and  could  mean  that  an
      individual may not always be able to obtain and retain a  job  of  his
      choice.  The CPD carried out "ex officio" investigations  in  relation
      to access to employment, education and housing.  The fact that the CPD
      investigates  discriminatory  access  is  itself  recognition  of  the
      availability of avenues of complaint (as we come on  to  in  the  next
      section). There is reference in the May 2017 CPIN to the launch of  an
      LGBTIQ  Employment  Equality  Index  in  2016  and  some  evidence  of
      improving attitudes of employers  in  the  various  surveys  to  which
      reference is made in the background evidence.




 183. Marriage between two men or its civil partnership  equivalent  is  not
      provided for in Albanian law. There is no evidence that this  prevents
      cohabitation or couples making their own arrangements to  ensure,  for
      example, transfer of property between them. We take note of  the  fact
      that Mr Pinderi was able to live in a relationship  with  another  man
      whilst in Tirana.  It is not said that they were unable to  do  so  or
      met with any particular difficulties in that regard caused by the lack
      of legal recognition.



 184. Whether considered in isolation or cumulatively, we  do  not  consider
      that the level of discrimination which the  evidence  suggests  exists
      reaches the level of having "sufficiently  serious"  consequences  for
      the individual and does not therefore constitute persecution.



 185. By way of conclusion, and having regard to all the evidence, there  is
      no real risk that an openly gay man would face persecution  if  living
      in Tirana.  Even if an openly gay man were able to demonstrate that he
      faced a risk of serious harm or of  discrimination  that  cumulatively
      reached the threshold to amount to persecution, we are satisfied  that
      there is a sufficiency of protection in  Tirana  from  the  state  and
      sufficient  redress  against  the  discrimination  feared  to  protect
      against that risk.  Our reasons are set out in Section C below.



C:   Sufficiency of Protection in Tirana

The Police


186. It is accepted that the Appellant spoke to  a  police  officer  in  his
    home area.  However, he explained that this was done in a  hypothetical
    sense; in other words, he asked the police officer what he would do  if
    a gay man reported such  ill-treatment  and  whether  action  would  be
    taken.  The Appellant's evidence accepted by the Respondent is that the
    police officer said he would not help.  It is also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant made a similar  approach  to  a  police  officer  in  Tirana.
    However, then again, he did not  make  a  direct  report  of  the  ill-
    treatment; it is not  his  case  that  he  suffered  any  further  ill-
    treatment in Tirana. Again, it is accepted that the police officer  did
    not respond positively.  The Appellant said,  however,  that  he  would
    take the matter further if the police would not assist  ("Of  course  I
    would appeal because he is not treating the people the same").


187. Ms Young refers in her report to the US  State  Department  report  for
    Albania in 2015 which summarises the position  in  relation  to  police
    corruption ([B/32]):


         "Corruption was  a  problem  among  police,  and  authorities  took
         measures to combat it. Although the government's  internal  Control
         Service investigated and referred for prosecution  a  significantly
         higher number of police officers during the  years  than  in  2013,
         courts convicted few of them...
         The  Albanian  State   Police   Corruption   Section   investigated
         corruption  cases.   The  section  had  a  limited   capacity   for
         undercover   investigations   and   surveillance,   hampering   its
         investigations."


188. Mr Thomann accepts that the police in Albania are not always  perceived
    as enforcing the law equally (see for example reference to the US State
    Department Report for 2016 at [5.5.1] of the May 2017  CPIN:  [B/643]).
    However,  he  says  that  the  situation  is  improving  and  that,  in
    particular, the training offered to the police on the handling of  LGBT
    cases (involving  collaboration  with  NGOs)  has  been  beneficial  to
    ensuring a sufficiency of protection, in particular in Tirana.   As  we
    have already noted, it is  accepted  that  there  is  doubt  about  the
    sufficiency of protection offered in the Appellant's home area in rural
    North-east Albania.


189. At [5.6.1] of the May 2017 CPIN ([B/644]), reference  is  made  to  the
    statement by LGBT NGOs which includes detail of the training  given  to
    police officers:


         "From 2014 on, ProLGBT (in 2015 together  with  Aleanca)  has  been
         training police officers in Tirana; all chiefs of  all  six  police
         stations in Tirana and 20  to  30  policemen  and  policewomen  per
         police station, plus 30 police from the elite  forces  The  Eagles.
         The organisations believe that the police  in  Tirana  have  become
         more professional, but there is no data available on the  situation
         outside Tirana.  The signs  are  mixed:  there  is  great  sporadic
         collaboration in some southern municipalities, but also a report of
         a transphobic incident with the police in Shkodra, a northern  city
         in early 2016.  Police officers there harassed  a  group  of  LGBTI
         activists and one transgender woman in particular."


    The same report goes on to make the comment that:


         "In general the impression of police  collaboration  is  positive,
         but it is important that newly trained police officers also receive
         LGBT awareness training  in  their  education.   Also,  it  remains
         doubtful that the police have proper  internal  protocols  to  deal
         with hate crimes, even though hate crimes are now addressed by  the
         penal code."


190. The above reference to an incident of police harassment is most  likely
    to have been to the encounter involving Ms Karaj which occurred  on  20
    January 2016 when she was in the company of a  transgender  friend  and
    which Ms Karaj describes as "terror from the state police" ([5.7.4]  of
    the May 2017 CPIN).  Her friend was stopped whilst travelling in a  car
    with Ms Karaj and she was asked for ID which she  did  not  have.   The
    police tried to take her to the police station.  Ms Karaj threatened to
    file a complaint.  Another police car arrived and following the further
    threat of complaint, the original policemen left "like cowards  from  a
    battlefield".  Ms Karaj was advised to file  the  complaint  in  Tirana
    rather than in the local area.  Notwithstanding this incident, Ms Karaj
    has commended the  "good  cooperation"  between  NGOs  and  the  police
    ([B/645]) although we note that this is a comment  apparently  made  in
    2014.


191. The Albania Helsinki Committee 2015 report features  in  the  May  2017
    CPIN as pointing to the "good cooperation" between the  NGOs  with  the
    State police authorities ([7.1.2]; [B/658]).


192. In relation to the training of the police, an online article at [B/147-
    148] dated May 2018 provides more detail as follows:


         "Following the preparation  of  a  new  guideline  on  "Hate  crime
         policing against LGBTI persons: Training for a Professional  Police
         Response", over 150 police officers from all over Albania have been
         trained in a 2-month period to identify  and  address  hate  crimes
         against LGBTI people.  The  Sogi  Manual  is  designed  for  police
         trainers, investigators, hate crime  officers  and  field  officers
         working in  Council  of  Europe  countries.  It  is  based  on  the
         standards of the Council of Europe and its purpose  is  to  provide
         the assistance, information  and  the  appropriate  tools  for  the
         development of hate crimes  training  on  LGBTI  persons,  to  help
         improve the knowledge of law enforcement  officers  on  hate  crime
         against LGBTI persons and strengthen  the  capacity  and  practical
         skills to investigate such crimes."


    The  article,  which  reports  predominantly  on  a  two-day   regional
    conference between Albanian civil and government institutions  and  the
    EU and other international organisations, concludes that:


         "Anti-LGBT  violence  should  be  recognized   as   an   expanding
         phenomenon and addressed through various methods,  not  just  as  a
         hate crime, not just as a change in justice and politics, not  just
         in reporting, documenting  and  dealing  with  cases.   LGBT  civil
         society organizations and LGBT communities,  together  with  police
         and justice institutions are cherished for starting and pushing for
         change.  If they do not participate in the reform, the changes  (if
         they will happen) will not  have  consistency,  responsibility  and
         depth.  Thus, when institutions  understand  the  LGBT  community's
         appreciation,  reforms  are  easier  to  achieve   and   are   more
         productive."


193. The FFM Report  at  [B/431]  (which  is  predominantly  concerned  with
    violence against women) notes the comments of the  CPD  that  they  had
    trained 500 officers at national level "with a focus on some particular
    groups including women, that have more contact with the police.  It was
    not regular training though; it was a particular project they did  with
    the Albania police in 2015".


194. Ms Young explains at [B/31] that "[w]hile it is true  that  there  have
    been attempts to improve the situation for  returnees,  and  there  has
    been an increase in the number and quality of police trained,  Albania,
    as  the  poorest  country  in  Europe,  suffers  more  than  most  from
    emigration".  The turnover of police officers was likely to  impact  on
    the effectiveness of training given to the police unless that  training
    were continual because those who were trained would leave.  She did not
    point us to any current source supporting  her  assertion  that  police
    officers in particular  migrate  from  Albania  other  than  a  general
    statement  about  migration  and  reference  to  a  2016  report   from
    Transparency International which notes "high staff turnover".  She also
    said in her answers to the Respondent's written questions ([B/86]) that
    the training of police and prosecutors had been  "inadequate"  and  she
    attributed that inadequacy, in part, to the fact that "all  the  career
    positions named are political positions and change when  the  party  in
    power changes thus preventing proper continuity."


195. Ms Young  identifies  four  examples  of  those  who  did  not  receive
    "proper" police protection on return.  One dates from 2013 and  another
    from 2014. Unfortunately, the sources quoted are articles  in  Albanian
    which are not translated.  The third is to a returnee from Sweden about
    whom more information is provided in the report of Mr Pinderi (see also
    the article at [B/369]).  Ms Young (and Mr  Pinderi)  accept  that  the
    victim was the target  of  a  blood  feud  (contrary  to  Mr  Chelvan's
    submission  to  us).   We  are  not  assisted  by  the  fourth  example
    concerning the case of a high-profile Judge shot dead by her ex-husband
    in a domestic violence incident.   As Ms Young says in her report, this
    was the ex-husband's third incident and  the  fact  that  he  had  been
    imprisoned for two years following an earlier  attempt  does  not  show
    that the law enforcement system was not prepared to act.


196. Mr Pinderi's views on the police protection available  taken  from  his
    2018 statement are as follows:


         "Question: Is there any  availability  for  Police  protection  for
         LGBTQ individuals who are threatened?
         Answer:  I  have  personally  witnessed  how  Albanian  Police  has
         improved during the last 6-7 years.  But it remains an organization
         incapable of improving itself from inside without a political will.
          Furthermore sadly enough during the last two  years  the  Albanian
         Police has been accused of directly supporting illegal  trafficking
         of drugs and being one of the most corrupted organization
         Can a corrupted organization being led by someone who allegedly has
         been a drug dealer protect citizens?
         Former Minister of Internal Affairs  Mr  Saimir  Tahiri,  including
         dozens  of  high  ranking  police  officers  is   currently   under
         investigation for international  drug  trafficking  and  corruption
         based on a large Italian investigation.  The  Albanian  prosecutors
         believe Tahiri  regularly  made  large  sums  of  money  from  drug
         payments.  While after some arrest orders were made public for high
         ranking former police  officers,  the  most  important  among  them
         became fugitives and they are still under international search.
         ...
         From 2013 when the actual Prime Minister won the elections, Albania
         has doubled the  amount  of  illegal  cultivation  of  cannabis  as
         reported by Italian and EU major observations.
         It is important to mention such sad facts about Albanian Police  if
         we want to understand the context of its work.  I strongly  believe
         that it is difficult  for  an  organization  that  is  blurred  and
         covered for a long time by such scandals to focus on issues such as
         hate motivated crimes, which are  crimes  affecting  the  lives  of
         LGBT+ people.
         But still, on paper, everything might  look  promising.   Recently,
         Tirana's Police had edited its own protocols  to  include  concrete
         and detailed steps of investigations of hate motivated crimes.   Be
         advised though, that this was done only in papers as there  is  not
         even a single case of the investigation of a hate  motivated  crime
         in Tirana."


197. We have already referred above to the comments made by  Mr  Hazizaj  of
    the PINK Embassy in his October 2018 interview about the police.


198. Although mainly in the context of domestic violence against women,  the
    FFM Report 2017 at [B/428] remarked on the changing  attitudes  to  the
    police:


         "[1.17.1]     Several sources noted that  the  number  of  reported
         cases of DV showed an increased awareness and  increased  trust  in
         the police to investigate cases.  The police are usually the  first
         institution a VDV approaches.   They  are  now  more  receptive  to
         complaints and more likely to follow up on them..."


199. Although this report focusses in the main on the position of women  who
    are victims of domestic violence rather than LGBT individuals  (and  Mr
    Chelvan draws attention to the difference in the  relative  numbers  of
    police officers who have been trained in respect of the two areas), the
    CPD comments at [B/554] that the focus of training for the police as  a
    whole has been on groups including LGBTI individuals.


200. The comments of the Albanian Ombudsman's representatives  as  cited  in
    the FFM Report at [B/546] are that:


         "It was to be the case that the person couldn't report  it  to  the
         police, but that isn't true anymore.  If a  case  is  reported,  it
         will be investigated.  No claim is left unfollowed.  In  the  past,
         there have been cases where the  police  have  been  prosecuted  or
         charged administratively for not doing anything, so they don't want
         that anymore."


201. We note however [6.4.3] of the May 2017 CPIN, by reference to  the  ERA
    April  2016  report  ([B/653]),  that  Albania  has  no  official  data
    collection on hate crimes, violent attacks are underreported  "in  part
    due to police abuse or ridicule".  The report also refers  to  training
    and presentations with the police by  LGBT  organisations  since  2010.
    The report concludes that "a lot remains to be done and more  awareness
    needs to be increased with prosecutors and courts".


202. We have referred above to the 2015 ECRI and Albania Helsinki  Committee
    reports concerning the level of incidents of violence  as  reported  in
    the May 2017 CPIN.  By way  of  comment  on  the  significance  of  the
    reported incidents in 2011-2013 in the ECRI report and none in 2015  in
    the Albania Helsinki Committee report, Ms Young said that  this  showed
    that people were scared to report incidents.  She  agreed  though  that
    the ECRI report showed that  PINK  Embassy  were  effective  in  making
    complaints. She added that this was because the Director is  a  lawyer.
    When asked later about people's willingness to report,  Ms  Young  said
    that she had "found in all cases they were fearful  of  reporting"  and
    "fearful of going to the police" except the PINK Embassy. She  accepted
    that she did not ask Mr Hazizaj how many complaints he had made; he had
    not offered any information about this.  As to the  article  about  the
    incident involving Ms Karaj which  suggested  that  she  at  least  was
    willing to complain about police harassment, Ms Young was unwilling  to
    accept that the police response to the threat of  a  complaint  was  an
    indicator of any  concern  by  the  police  about  the  prospect  of  a
    complaint being made.


203. The EU 2016 Report makes the following observation on  the  failure  to
    gather data on hate crimes ([E/65]):


         "On hate crimes, the  state  police  appointed  a  dedicated  focal
         point.   However,   the   number   of   reported   cases   remained
         insignificant and no judicial prosecution has yet  been  initiated.
         Data collection on hate crime continued to  be  lacking.   The  CPD
         dealt with hate speech cases targeting the LGBTI community  and  in
         two cases decided to fine the perpetrators.  The CPD  continued  to
         organise  awareness  campaigns  and  training  activities.    Anti-
         discrimination case-law needs  to  be  further  developed  and  its
         implementation improved."


204. Mr Chelvan sought to compare the position with that of  the  UK  where,
    in 2017/18 11,638 hate crimes were recorded  on  the  basis  of  sexual
    orientation (12% of crimes) and  1,651  on  the  basis  of  transgender
    identity (2% of crimes).  Whilst we have no doubt that  it  is  helpful
    for countries to gather statistics of this nature, we  cannot  see  the
    value of the reliance on this data.  We are  not  comparing  like  with
    like; if a state does not have statistics relating to  hate  crime,  it
    does not follow in our view that  the  state  is  either  unwilling  or
    unable to protect against such crime. For the  same  reason,  the  fact
    that the Albanian State now gathers and publishes data on  gender-based
    crime does not of itself provide an indicator that the state is more or
    less willing to protect LGBT victims when compared with female  victims
    of domestic violence.

The Prosecutors and the Judiciary


205. As Mr Chelvan points out,  sufficiency  of  protection  is  not  simply
    about a willingness by the police to take action but also a willingness
    of other authorities to pursue action.  It is  therefore  necessary  to
    look also at the position in relation to prosecutors and the judiciary.
    We have dealt with corruption  of  those  institutions  in  a  separate
    section above.  We have also  dealt  separately  with  the  failure  to
    implement the laws on the statute book fully.  We have  also  mentioned
    that some politicians have made statements  against  LGBTI  individuals
    and/or rejecting efforts to change societal attitudes.


206.  Mr  Thomann  accepts  that,  although  hate  crime  based  on   sexual
    orientation and gender identity is a criminal  offence,  there  are  no
    reported instances of prosecutions for  such  offences.  On  the  other
    hand, it follows that  if  there  is  underreporting  of  incidents  of
    violence and hate crimes by the LGBTI community as  Ms  Young  insisted
    was the position in her  evidence,  then  there  would  be  nothing  to
    investigate or prosecute.


207. We turn to the role of the CPD and the PA.

The Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination

208. Against the background of Mr Chelvan's  submission  that  the  risk  of
    discrimination, individually or collectively, may give rise to  a  real
    risk of persecution, we have already mentioned the existence of the CPD
    and his role above. The CPD's report for 2018 at [E/102] records:


         "During the year 2017, "race" continues to be the  main  ground  of
         alleged discrimination, although has been ascertained that cases of
         alleged  discrimination  on  grounds  of  "economic   status"   and
         "political convictions" are increased.   Discrimination  complaints
         on grounds of "sexual orientation", "gender identity", "and gender"
         and "health status" keep staying at the same level...."


209. In relation to LGBTI discrimination, the CPD comments ([B/106]) that:


         "Public awareness and acceptance  of  LGBTI  persons  remain  low,
         particularly  in  rural  areas.   Hate  speech  and  discriminatory
         language continue to be a problem in the  media  especially  online
         media".


210. The statistics relied on in the  report  show  that  there  were  seven
    reports of discrimination based on sexual orientation in 2013, three in
    2014, four in each of 2015 and 2016 and three in 2017.  The  USSD  2017
    Report at [B/206] records that as at  August  2017,  the  CPD  received
    three complaints alleging discrimination based  on  sexual  orientation
    and gender identity and ruled in favour of one.  The UNDP  2017  Report
    records ([B/582]) that in 2015 four complaints of discrimination  based
    on sexual orientation were made and one in relation to gender identity.
     The report records that the CPD had  investigated  those  and  "issued
    recommendations and sanctions against the alleged perpetrators."


211. Another document from the CPD at  [B/725]  records  statistics  between
    2010-2018.  It shows that the overall number of inquiries range from  4
    in 2010 to 166 in 2017.  The number of cases handled ranged from  1  in
    2010 to 209 in 2017.  The number of media  appearances  (not  including
    social media) ranged from 10 in 2010 to 42 in 2015.  We do not draw any
    adverse inferences from the existence of "no  data"  for  2018;  it  is
    likely that this data was simply not  harvested  when  the  report  was
    produced.  Nor do we consider that the lack of data relating  to  media
    appearances by the Commissioner in 2016-2018 discloses any lack of will
    by this organisation, particularly given that the post of  Commissioner
    was vacant for at least part of the time and that it is likely that  it
    would be the Commissioner himself who would appear in media  interviews
    and the such like.   We accept though that the statistics  are  overall
    numbers and do not specifically relate to  LGBT  discrimination  cases.
    We therefore refer to specific instances where the  CPD  has  acted  in
    LGBT cases.


212. The CPD refers to a complaint in 2010 by  two  LGBT  NGOs  about  being
    denied  participation  at  an   HIV/AIDS   hearing   session   by   the
    Parliamentary  Commission  on  Health.   The   CPD   recommended   that
    Parliament provide space to  LGBTI  organizations  in  public  hearings
    which was taken into consideration in 2013 hearings.


213. In 2011, following complaints by  LGBTI  organisations  about  physical
    violence in schools, the CPD conducted a survey to assess the knowledge
    and application  of  the  anti-discrimination  laws.   That  led  to  a
    recommendation to the Ministry of Education to take measures to  reduce
    bullying in schools and introduce human rights education in schools.


214. The UNDP 2017 Report records that, in 2012, following  complaints  made
    by two LGBT NGOs, the CPD initiated two investigations into  homophobic
    speech by politicians. Criminal prosecutions were refused because of  a
    legal vacuum in relation to hate speech.  The involvement  of  the  CPD
    led to an amendment to the penal code  ([B/583]).  In  2013,  following
    findings against two public officials that  they  had  misinformed  the
    public  through  the  media  by  associating  sexual  orientation  with
    paedophilia  and  recommending  an  apology,  the  CPD  sanctioned  the
    officials with a fine when an apology was not forthcoming ([B/584]).


215. The ILGA 2017 Review ([B/364]) refers to  the  CPD  dealing  with  four
    claims relating to sexual orientation  and  gender  identity  in  2016.
    Discrimination was found in one case involving the  police  in  Shkodra
    and the police authority was fined.  Although no  connection  was  made
    between the report of this incident  and  the  article  concerning  the
    incident involving Ms Karaj during the hearing, it seems to us  likely,
    given the date and  location  of  the  incident,  that  this  complaint
    relates to the incident to which we have referred above. The  CPD  also
    found evidence of hate speech in online media.  The third case involved
    comments made by a MP and the fourth was found not proved (in  relation
    to education).


216. In response to the Respondent's written questions prior to  Ms  Young's
    report, when asked about her understanding of the role of the  CPD  and
    the impact of its actions, Ms Young replied "I have to admit that  this
    is news to me, which is surprising as I have worked on probably as many
    as 20 LGBT cases since 2010.  I tried to reach the website  given,  and
    got this response...SITE NOT SECURE, so I didn't  dare  look  further."
    ([B/88]).  She went on to say that she believes that "most people don't
    have faith that by reporting discrimination, there  will  be  effective
    action." We note that Ms Young has not referred to either CPD or PA  in
    the first draft of her report.

The People's Advocate


217. When asked about the role of the PA and her view  of  the  significance
    of the PA's advocacy of LGBT rights ([B/88]), Ms Young responded to the
    Respondent's written question as follows:


         "In attempting to find LBGT [sic] People's Advocate, I only brought
         up an Advocate for Women's Rights.  However, Regarding  the  Action
         Plan it is a total failure.  There  is  not  even  a  single  event
         organized by the Government who now just collects what the NGOs are
         doing and they report it as part of the  action  plan.   After  the
         last election the government removed from its structure the  entire
         Ministry of Social Welfare that was responsible  to  implement  the
         action plan and melted its directories with the Ministry of  Health
         such making the social welfare a secondary issue under  the  health
         issue.  Find below an  article  explaining  the  failure  with  the
         action plan (google translate it)..."


218. It is not clear why Ms Young associated her answer about  the  PA  with
    an unconnected response about the NAP which also  appears  somewhat  at
    odds with what she says in an earlier  answer  specifically  concerning
    the NAP where she describes it  alongside  the  other  "laudable  laws"
    which are yet to be "properly understood and universally  acted  upon".
    ([B/86]).


219. Ms Young said in evidence that she doubted that most people in  Albania
    would be aware of the CPD or PA or know how to contact them.  She  said
    that  she  accepted  that  individuals  had   the   right   to   report
    discrimination but not that they would be  "able  to  follow  through".
    When asked why that would be so,  she  said  that  they  would  not  be
    supported by teachers  or  the  police  and  would  be  intimidated  or
    prevented. She was also not prepared  to  accept  that  the  threat  of
    action by the CPD would have any impact on the  police  attitude.   She
    said that she "didn't think they  would  be  too  concerned"  and  even
    suggested that the CPD might be open to bribery (as to which there  was
    no evidence).   As Mr  Thomann  pointed  out,  in  the  report  of  the
    incident involving Ms Karaj, the police threatened with a complaint are
    said to have left "like cowards from a battlefield". No  doubt  because
    she was not aware of the existence of  CPD  or  PA  Ms  Young  did  not
    approach either organisation during her May visit.

Findings on Sufficiency of Protection


220. Based on the above evidence, we draw the  following  conclusions  about
    the sufficiency of protection available to an openly gay man in  Tirana
    should he face a risk of harm or serious discrimination.


 221. There remains some corruption  within  the  police  force  in  Albania
      against which there are effective avenues of redress if an  individual
      police officer abuses his power or  fails  to  enforce  the  law  (see
      reference to US State Department report for 2015 cited by Ms Young and
      the section dealing with corruption more generally above).




 222. It is accepted by the LGBTI NGOs in particular and in other background
      evidence that there has been improvement in the conduct of the police.
      Ms Young also accepts that there  have  been  some  improvements.   We
      nevertheless accept that there are  still  some  incidents  of  police
      officers behaving in an inappropriate manner illustrated by the report
      of the incident involving Ms Karaj in 2016.  The police in Tirana have
      been trained how to deal with hate crimes against  LGBTI  individuals.
      In addition, the evidence shows good cooperation between them and  the
      LGBTI NGO community.  The evidence demonstrates that this is likely to
      endure.




 223. Although there is no evidence that  the  training  of  the  police  is
      continuous or repeated, there is only limited evidence in  support  of
      Ms Young's assertion of the high staff turnover in  the  police  force
      attributable to emigration.  We are unable to reach a firm  conclusion
      on either aspect. However, we repeat the point made  above  concerning
      avenues of redress in the event of abusive behaviour.  The examples of
      an inability by the police to protect  are  few  and  taken  at  their
      highest do not point to an unwillingness or inability by the police to
      protect LGBTI individuals in Tirana.




 224. The evidence of the Albanian Ombudsman  to  the  Fact-Finding  Mission
      (albeit in relation to victims of domestic violence) and the  evidence
      of advocacy by LGBTI NGOs in Tirana undermines Ms Young's opinion that
      individuals are unwilling  to  report  incidents  through  fear.   The
      evidence of the Appellant  himself  indicates  a  resolve  to  make  a
      complaint in the event of inaction by the police.  We  are  unable  to
      give any real weight to the negative  responses  to  the  hypothetical
      enquiries made by the  Appellant  any  more  than  we  would  had  the
      responses been positive.




 225. We accept that there is no evidence of any prosecution  or  conviction
      of hate crimes against LGBTI individuals.  There is  also  a  lack  of
      data in relation to the occurrence of hate  crimes  and,  as  we  have
      observed, few reported incidents of violence.  Authorities  cannot  be
      expected to investigate or prosecute incidents not raised  with  them.






 226. Whilst we accept that the evidence regarding the work of the  CPD  and
      PA provides only limited specific examples of  the  investigation  and
      sanction, this aspect needs to be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
      limited number of complaints made in the years to  which  the  reports
      refer.  We are satisfied that  both  bodies  have  a  willingness  and
      ability to act although we accept that the CPD's powers of enforcement
      are limited and the PA does not have enforcement powers.




 227. Ms Young has not been able to provide  any  meaningful  assistance  in
      relation to these bodies for the reasons we have  given.   We  do  not
      consider it reasonably likely that a gay man would be unaware  of  the
      avenues of redress to these bodies  which  are  available  or  of  the
      support and advocacy which the NGOs can provide (as any search of  the
      internet would reveal; as  happened  in  this  appeal).    The  online
      presence of the NGOs is evident.




 228. We are satisfied that there exists in Tirana an  effective  system  of
      protection should  an  openly  gay  man  face  a  risk  of  harm.  The
      authorities in Tirana are willing and able to provide such  protection
      to  the  standard  required  under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
      Qualification Directive.   Redress is also available  in  response  to
      discrimination which an openly gay man might face by way of  complaint
      to the CPD and/or PA.  Such discrimination is unlawful in Albania.

D:   Internal Relocation

Relocation to Tirana


229. Mr Thomann accepts that  the  position  outside  Tirana  may  be  "more
    challenging  and  isolating"  but  submits  that  the   Appellant   can
    internally relocate to Tirana to  avoid  any  such  risk.   Mr  Chelvan
    accepts that Tirana is a more liberal environment  but  contends  that,
    even there, the Appellant would face risk either generally as an openly
    gay man or from his family and friends who could find  him  there.   Mr
    Chelvan asserts that the only area of Tirana  in  which  the  Appellant
    might avoid risk is the "Blloku" which is a  small  area.   Mr  Thomann
    accepts that, if the Appellant were limited to living in that  area  to
    avoid risk, it would be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  relocate  but
    submits that this is not supported by evidence.


230. We have already reached our finding that the  level  of  discrimination
    which an openly gay man may experience in  Tirana  is  insufficient  to
    reach the high  threshold  to  amount  to  persecution.   It  was  also
    asserted on behalf of the Appellant that, even if this does not  amount
    to persecution, the obstacles and discrimination he would face in terms
    of difficulties in finding and retaining employment  and  accommodation
    are such that it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Tirana.


231. We have considered the risk of tracing within  Tirana  by  family  from
    other parts of Albania under the heading of "Risk from  Family  Members
    in Tirana" above.  We therefore turn to deal with  the  other  problems
    which it is argued the Appellant or someone in his position would face.



Employment and Accommodation


232. Ms Young pointed to difficulties which she  said  the  Appellant  would
    face finding a job without family connections in Tirana.  She also said
    it was unusual for individuals to live alone in Albania and  that  this
    would raise suspicion.


233. The FFM Report at [B/410], albeit dealing with  the  position  of  lone
    women states that although "[s]ocietal stigma does exist to some extent
    for both victims of domestic abuse and trafficking, but this is less of
    a problem for women in Tirana where it is not  uncommon  for  women  to
    live alone."  Ms Young's response to this reference is that it does not
    mean that women live alone but rather that they live on their own  with
    other women (see [B/91]).  She states that "[a]ccommodation in  Albania
    is not set up for single occupancy".  Mr Thomann drew our attention  to
    the evidence of the account of a young  man  who  had  previously  been
    housed in the STREHA shelter in Tirana having found a  small  apartment
    and a job as a  journalist  (albeit  with  the  assistance  of  STREHA)
    ([B/606]). Ms Young's position is also at odds with the observations of
    the Albanian Ombudsman cited in the FFM Report at ([B/546]) that  "[w]e
    are rapidly advancing to Western living of life.  There is big cultural
    change in Tirana.  It's not  just  single  mothers,  but  single  women
    living alone; working; paying  rent".  Ms  Young  acknowledges  in  her
    responses to the Respondent's written questions that it would be harder
    for a single female to locate alone in Tirana than a single male.


234. Mr Thomann accepts that the STREHA shelter has  only  eight  beds.   In
    the account of her meeting with the Director of STREHA, Ms Marsida Cela
    is reported by Ms Young to  have  "stressed  the  extreme  shortage  of
    funding (donor dependent) to allow them to try to  fulfil  their  aims,
    especially in their desire to accommodate more than the 8 that they can
    now take, as well as their hope to keep track of them once  they  leave
    the shelter, ideally for a couple of years."  Ms Cela also stated  that
    STREHA tries to support all 18-25-year olds who apply with  six  months
    accommodation  and  support  in  gaining   assistance   and   obtaining
    employment and accommodation but "they are overstretched and unable  to
    give the services they would like to." ([B/29]). Ms Young said  in  her
    oral evidence that she had been  told  by  Ms  Cela  that  the  shelter
    "constantly" had  to  turn  people  away  whereas  in  her  report  she
    describes this as "sometimes  they  just  have  to  turn  people  away"
    ([B/89]).  We consider Ms Young's  initial  position  to  be  the  more
    reliable.


235. Mr Thomann drew our attention to the ERA 2016 report cited in  the  May
    2017 CPIN which adds that the Albanian government assists  the  shelter
    by providing food and that in 2015, the  shelter  was  able  to  assist
    eighteen beneficiaries ([B/659]). The HRW  Article  at  [B/606-7]  also
    refers to some support being provided by the  Dutch  embassy  (although
    notes that  the  shelter  is  running  out  of  funds).   The  article,
    published in November 2017, also refers however to efforts made by  the
    writer of the article who raised the issue with  Tirana's  mayor  at  a
    meeting.  He reports as follows:


         "That afternoon, I met with Tirana's mayor, Erion Veliaj.   I  told
         him I was impressed by the shelter and  asked  if  the  city  could
         support it.  "Yes" he said "Let them send me a proposal, we must be
         able to find some money for  this  service."   In  the  evening,  I
         reconnected with Rajan,  Valmir,  and  the  shelter  staff  at  the
         opening of the Pride Photo Award exhibition.........I told them the
         possible good news. "Let's hope the Mayor will keep  his  promise,"
         Valmir said cautiously."


    There is no evidence to show that the Tirana authorities have  provided
    funding since then.


236. We observe that Mr Pinderi gives his views on relocation to  Tirana  in
    his October 2018 statement:


         "Question: Is it possible  to  relocate  in  Albania  without  your
         family being able to locate you?
         Answer: Tirana, the Albanian capital is the  largest  city  in  the
         country.  For members of the LGBT+ community it represents the hope
         of starting a new life.  But, in my opinion after the initial  time
         people start to realize that the liberal atmosphere  that  one  can
         notice while visiting it for the first time a false atmosphere that
         hides in reality the same widely homophobic Albanian society.  Also
         family connections are important: important and crucial in  renting
         a house, in finding a job and in establishing your position in  the
         society.  For this reason you questions about where  you  are  from
         and who your family is are routinely asked.  And because Albania is
         a very small country people cannot stay hidden from their  extended
         families.
         Furthermore, the strong family connections  that  are  typical  for
         Albanian society makes it impossible to live a free life and be  in
         an unnoticed existence.
         The lack of services, including the lack of  a  minimum  of  mental
         health care in Tirana is a factor that worsen the situation for the
         LGBT+ community.  Being alone in a city with high  rates  of  rent,
         that doesn't offer security and sustainable employment and  on  the
         other side it is still not inclusive and accepting towards same sex
         relationships can turn out to be quite a difficult challenge."


    Whilst we take note of what  is  there  said,  we  repeat  our  earlier
    observation that, notwithstanding the difficulties to which he  refers,
    he was able to live as an openly gay man and LGBT activist  in  Albania
    for at least ten years.


Socio-Economic Factors

237. In her written responses to the Respondent's  pre-report  questions  on
    the position in relation to employment ([B/92]), Ms Young refers  to  a
    report dated 2015 which describes  unemployment  amongst  young  people
    reaching up to 35%.  She also refers  to  a  report  entitled  "Trading
    Economics" dealing with Albania's employment rate for 2012-18 which  is
    said to show that the employment rate in Albania decreased to 57.30% in
    the second quarter of 2018 compared with 59.20% in the  first  quarter.
    Employment is said to have averaged 54.09% from 2012 to  2018  reaching
    an all-time high for the first quarter of 2018.


238. Our attention was drawn to the employment statistics contained  in  the
    EU 2018 Report.  The figures show, for 2016, an  unemployment  rate  of
    15.2% (15.9% for males and 14.4%  for  females).   However,  the  youth
    unemployment  rate  (15-24-year  olds)  is  said  to  be   36.5%.   The
    unemployment rate for those aged 25-64 years having completed  at  most
    secondary education is 11.8%  ([B/321]).  Those  compare  with  figures
    given for 2015 as follows: 17.1%  unemployment  (17.1%  for  males  and
    females), youth unemployment of 39.8% and unemployment  for  the  25-64
    years age group of 12%.


239. Ms Young was asked whether the statistics reflect the situation on  the
    ground.  Mr Thomann asked, for instance, about the existence of a "grey
    market".  Her evidence in this regard was that  this  certainly  exists
    but that family connections would be even more crucial to  the  finding
    of a job in that market than  more  generally.   We  note  however  the
    evidence in  the  HRW  Article  relating  to  a  young  man  previously
    accommodated in the STREHA  shelter  who  had  been  assisted  by  that
    organisation to find an apartment and  a  job  as  a  journalist  which
    suggests that the LGBT NGOs might also be of assistance in this regard.




240. Ms Young also refers ([B/41-42]) to a Trading  Economics  Report  which
    records wages as increasing to an all-time  high  of  "60500  ALL"  per
    month in the second quarter of 2017 (equivalent to  approximately  430
    at current rates)  and  minimum  rates  of  accommodation  as  800-2000
    leks[1] (about 80-149 per month).  That is consistent  with  the  FFM
    Report which  gives  a  figure  for  a  one-bedroom  apartment  of  the
    equivalent of 100 per month.

Findings in Relation to Internal Relocation

241. Drawing together the strands of evidence on  the  factors  relevant  to
    the reasonableness of relocation  to  Tirana,  we  make  the  following
    findings.  In so doing we take  account  of  our  earlier  findings  in
    relation to the situation faced by an openly gay  man  in  Tirana,  the
    risk that he may be traced by family members or others wishing him harm
    and the protection available to him.

 242. We do not accept the assertion that a single gay man  could  not  live
      alone and we find that it is an option that is reasonably open to him.
       The evidence of the Albanian  Ombudsman  to  the  Home  Office  Fact-
      Finding Mission  is  that  Tirana  in  particular  is  experiencing  a
      cultural change and "rapidly advancing" to a Western way of life where
      single people (in that context single women) do live alone.  Ms  Young
      accepted that the position of a single woman  living  alone  would  be
      more challenging than that of a single male.




 243. We accept that STREHA has limited accommodation  available  to  access
      their services.  The accommodation is reserved for those in the  18-25
      age group and there are only eight beds.  Ms Young's evidence has been
      inconsistent. We consider her first position to be more likely correct
      (that "sometimes" STREHA had to turn people away - and consistent with
      the evidence of Mr Hazizaj) than her later evidence  that  people  are
      "constantly" turned away.



 244. If a gay man is able to access employment there is no evidence of  any
      real barrier to him finding paid accommodation.  We have  referred  to
      the example of a young man who was accommodated by STREHA who was able
      to find a job as a journalist and accommodation in an  apartment  when
      he left the shelter.  Ms Young relied on evidence indicating that  the
      cost of accommodation in Tirana is not disproportionate to the average
      wage.




 245. The unemployment level for young people (under 25) is reported on  the
      most recent figures to  have  been  36.5%  in  2016,  representing  an
      improvement on the previous year.  Unemployment is reported to  be  in
      general lower for those over 24 years (11.8%).  We have  already  made
      reference to the fact that not all gay men will wish to behave  in  an
      identical manner.  Not  all  gay  men  will  wish  to  disclose  their
      sexuality when applying for a job or to  their  work  colleagues  once
      they have found a job.  We accept that  discrimination  in  employment
      for gay men who do wish to disclose their sexuality at work  may  make
      it more difficult for those men to readily find and retain  work.   We
      accept that this may be disheartening and at times a challenge, but  a
      remedy is readily available.



 246. There is the availability of redress in the form of complaint  to  the
      CPD and/or PA in the  event  of  discrimination,  such  discrimination
      being unlawful in Albania.  Complaints can also be made to  LGBT  NGOs
      which the evidence suggests are  prepared  to  take  those  complaints
      forward with the Albanian authorities.  We have already accepted  that
      the evidence shows that the CPD and/or PA are willing to act.   Whilst
      they may have limited powers of enforcement, there  is  evidence  that
      they do take forward investigations and  there  is  no  evidence  that
      those investigations or actions are protracted so that  an  individual
      making complaint is likely to  obtain  a  form  of  redress  within  a
      reasonable period.




 247. It is undisputed that the Appellant in this appeal was  able  to  find
      work within a very short period of arriving in Tirana, albeit with the
      assistance of a friend to whom he did not disclose his sexuality.   We
      have referred to evidence which suggests that the  LGBT  NGOs  may  be
      able to provide some assistance.  We are not  provided  with  evidence
      that the difficulties of finding employment in Tirana are such that it
      would be unduly harsh for that reason to relocate to Tirana.



 248. We have already noted that there is currently no legal recognition  of
      same-sex relationships in Albania although there is evidence that  the
      PINK Embassy is  still  actively  campaigning  for  such  recognition.
      However, we have already referred to the example of Mr Pinderi who was
      in a same-sex relationship whilst living in Albania and  there  is  no
      evidence that the lack of legal recognition caused him and his partner
      any serious difficulties such as might give rise to undue harshness on
      that account.




 249. In general, although we accept that the situation  in  Tirana  is  far
      from perfect and that discrimination against gay men  does  arise,  in
      particular, as regards  employment  and  healthcare,  even  considered
      cumulatively such discrimination is not at a level that  it  would  be
      unduly  harsh  for  an  openly  gay  man  to   relocate   to   Tirana.
      Nevertheless, each case will require to be assessed on its  own  facts
      taking into account an individual's particular circumstances including
      education, health and the reasons why relocation is being addressed.



COUNTRY GUIDANCE



250. We give the following guidance on the general issues as follows:


      i) Particular care must  be  exercised  when  assessing  the  risk  of
         violence and the lack of sufficiency of protection for  openly  gay
         men whose home area is outside Tirana, given the evidence of openly
         gay men from outside Tirana encountering violence as  a  result  of
         their sexuality. Such cases will turn on  the  particular  evidence
         presented.
     ii) Turning to the position in Tirana, in general, an openly  gay  man,
         by virtue of that fact alone, would not have an  objectively  well-
         founded fear of serious harm or persecution on return to Tirana.
    iii) There is only very limited evidence that  an  individual  would  be
         traced to Tirana by operation of either the registration system  or
         criminal checks at the airport. However, it  is  plausible  that  a
         person might be traced via family or other connections  being  made
         on enquiry in Tirana.  Whether an openly gay man might be traced to
         Tirana by family members or others who would wish  him  harm  is  a
         question for determination on the evidence in each  case  depending
         on the motivation of the family and the extent of its hostility.
     iv) There exists in Tirana a generally effective system  of  protection
         should an openly gay man face a risk of harm in that city  or  from
         elsewhere in Albania.
      v) An openly gay man may face discrimination in  Tirana,  particularly
         in  the  areas  of  employment  and  healthcare.  However,  whether
         considered individually or cumulatively, in general  the  level  of
         such discrimination  is  not  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to
         persecution. Discrimination on grounds  of  sexual  orientation  is
         unlawful in Albania and there are avenues to seek  redress.   Same-
         sex relationships are not legally recognised in  Albania.  However,
         there is no evidence that this causes  serious  legal  difficulties
         for relationships between openly gay men.
     vi) In general, it will not be unduly harsh for an openly  gay  man  to
         relocate to Tirana, but each case  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
         facts,   taking   into   account   an    individual's    particular
         circumstances, including  education,  health  and  the  reason  why
         relocation is being addressed.


THE APPELLANT'S APPEAL


251. There is little dispute over the facts of the Appellant's case.  It  is
    accepted that he is a gay man.  It is accepted that he suffered serious
    harm in the past from family and friends  in  his  home  area.   It  is
    accepted that he cannot  return  to  that  home  area  because  of  the
    presence there of those who may wish to do him harm if he were to  live
    there openly as a gay man.


252. It is also not disputed that  the  Appellant  asked  a  police  officer
    (both in his home area and in Tirana) in hypothetical terms whether the
    officer(s) would be prepared to help a gay man if faced  with  violence
    and that he was told they would not.  The Respondent accepts  that  the
    level  of  protection  available  in  the  Appellant's  home  area   is
    "questionable".


253. We accept that the Appellant wishes to live openly as a  gay  man.   In
    his case, and based on his oral evidence, this means that he wishes  to
    tell friends that he is gay but would not do so until he gets  to  know
    them.  If invited to enter into a relationship with a woman,  he  would
    refuse and would tell those who tried to set up the  relationship  that
    he  is  not  interested  in  women.   He  has  not  had  any   same-sex
    relationships with men in the UK other  than  of  brief  duration.   We
    accept though that this is not because he does not want to  enter  into
    such relationships in the future.  The Appellant has a reticence  about
    expressing his orientation.   He  only  discusses  his  sexuality  with
    friends when he gets to know them. That is not  a  relevant  factor  in
    this case.


254. We have concluded that in general an openly gay man in the  Appellant's
    situation would not face a real risk of violence on return to Tirana.


255. We take into account the Appellant's case that he  has  family  members
    (and family members of his ex-fiance) living in  Tirana  and  that  he
    fears that they would discover his presence there and would report back
    to family members in his  home  area  who  would  wish  him  harm.   We
    consider as speculative that either he would meet those family  members
    randomly in Tirana or that, if he did, they would do him harm.  He  did
    not encounter them during the four  months  he  was  there  previously.
    Although he said he was in hiding, he admits that he was working (in  a
    public place: a car wash).  He has also now given evidence that he  was
    living for about a week in a hotel and also said that he slept rough on
    the streets for a short period.  We do not accept that he was hiding as
    he claims. We note Ms Young's  evidence  that  the  whereabouts  of  an
    individual would probably become known within six  months  by  word  of
    mouth or via registration checks and sooner if that person were  openly
    gay as the individual would excite more interest.  She did not  provide
    any specific examples of openly gay men being traced to Tirana or being
    harmed in that way.


256. We also consider as speculative that the Appellant's family members  in
    Tirana or in his home area would wish him harm if they  discovered  his
    presence in  Tirana.   The  Appellant  himself  said  that  he  had  no
    information that his family (either in Tirana or his  home  area)  were
    looking for him.  The Appellant said that his uncle with whom he  lives
    in the UK visits family in Albania regularly and has not mentioned  his
    presence in the UK because he fears  that  if  he  disclosed  that  the
    Appellant was staying with him, "he would lose them like I did".   That
    assertion suggests that the Appellant has been ostracised by his family
    and not that they are actively seeking him out to do him  harm.   There
    is no indication that the  Appellant's  family  have  asked  his  uncle
    whether he has had contact with him.  The Appellant's evidence is  that
    his family consider him to have brought shame on the family.  In  those
    circumstances, we think it reasonably likely that they  would  wish  to
    ignore any connection with him if his whereabouts were discovered.   We
    find that provided the Appellant did not relocate to his home area, his
    family members would not seek him out to harm him.


257. In any event, as we have found generally, there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection by the police  in  Tirana  in  the  event  of  any  risk  of
    violence.  The Appellant could therefore seek that protection from  the
    police.  We recognise that he said  he  would  not  go  to  the  police
    because they would not help him, but his unwillingness is not due to  a
    fear of persecution by the police and we have  found  on  the  evidence
    that there is a willingness and ability to protect.


258. If the police were to decline to help  the  Appellant  because  of  his
    sexual orientation (which we consider unlikely on  the  evidence),  the
    Appellant can seek redress from the institutions which exist.   Indeed,
    the Appellant said when asked what he would do if refused help  because
    he  was  gay  that  he  would  appeal  because  he  was  being  treated
    differently.


259. That brings us to consideration of any risk that  the  Appellant  would
    face discrimination in Tirana.  We accept that the evidence  does  show
    that there is some discrimination in finding accommodation and  finding
    and keeping employment which may well adversely affect the  Appellant's
    ability to find work and accommodation in the short term.   We  do  not
    suggest that the Appellant would be able to access the STREHA  shelter.
    He is on the cusp of falling outside the  age  group  assisted  by  the
    shelter and there are limited resources.  STREHA  and  the  other  LGBT
    NGOs in Tirana are however able to offer  other  assistance.   We  have
    regard to the evidence that STREHA helped one young man who  previously
    resided in  the  shelter  to  find  work  and  accommodation.   If  the
    Appellant faces discrimination when seeking work and accommodation,  he
    can seek help from the LGBT NGOs who will be able to make  a  complaint
    on his behalf.  Such discrimination is unlawful under Albanian law.


260. We also take into account that the Appellant  was  able  to  find  work
    during the short period when he lived in Tirana previously.  We  accept
    that this was with the assistance of  a  friend  to  whom  he  had  not
    disclosed his sexuality.  However, given the way in which the Appellant
    behaves even in the UK, we do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  would
    disclose  his  sexuality  when  applying  initially  for   a   job   or
    accommodation.  We do not accept that the level  of  discrimination  is
    such as to amount to persecution.  The Appellant does not make a  claim
    under Article 8 ECHR.  In any event, there are institutions in  Albania
    (particularly the CPD) whose role  it  is  to  protect  those  minority
    groups affected by discrimination.


261. We have made  some  general  observations  about  the  failure  of  the
    Albanian  State  to  recognise   the   legal   status   of   homosexual
    relationships.  There is insufficient evidence that this interferes  to
    any sufficient extent with the  ability  of  openly  gay  men  to  form
    relationships in order to amount to persecution.   In  any  event,  the
    Appellant is not currently  in  a  relationship  nor  has  he  had  any
    relationships other than of very short duration.


262. The Appellant is a young man in good health.  He has a basic  level  of
    education in Albania.


263. Taking together all the factors relevant  to  the  internal  relocation
    issue, we do not consider it unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate
    to Tirana.

Summary of Conclusions on the Appellant's Appeal

264. The Appellant  does  not  have  an  objectively  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return to Tirana.  He is unlikely to face  any  risk  of
    violence generally or from his family members there. In the event  that
    he faces any risk of  random  violence  or  violence  from  his  family
    members, he can look to the police to offer him protection.   They  are
    willing and able to protect him.   It  is  not  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to relocate to Tirana.  For those  reasons,  the  Appellant's
    appeal fails.

DECISION
The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed            [pic]    Dated: 22 March 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                       ANNEX A: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Promulgated                   |
|                                              |                              |
|On 16 April 2018                              |......1 May                   |
|                                              |2018........................  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     BF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born in July  1994.  He  arrived
    illegally in the UK in March 2015. On 5 November 2015 he  was  arrested
    for a sexual assault and on 18 November 2015 sentenced to a  period  of
    28 days' imprisonment. The full particulars of the offence, the precise
    identification of the offence and the court details, are not clear from
    the documents before me, but nothing turns on those details, except  as
    further explained below as to the appellant's  reasons  for  committing
    the offence.

 2. He was removed from the UK on 17 December 2015 but  returned  in  April
    2017 when he was encountered at  the  docks  at  Dover.  After  removal
    directions were set he claimed asylum.  His  claim  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 22 June 2017.

 3. His appeal against what was a decision to refuse his protection  claim,
    came before the First-tier Tribunal on 31 July 2017, whereby the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ") dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The respondent now accepts that the FtJ erred in law in her decision in
    various respects, such as to require her decision to be set aside.

    The basis of claim and the FtJ's decision

 5. The appellant's claim is based on a fear of persecution on  account  of
    his sexuality as a  gay  man.  The  sexual  assault  of  which  he  was
    convicted in the UK arose as a result of the appellant's wish to  prove
    to his friends that he was not gay, so  he  accosted  a  woman  in  the
    street and kissed her.

 6. The FtJ accepted the appellant's claim to  be  gay,  in  particular  on
    account of the evidence given by a witness, SS, called on  his  behalf,
    whom she found to be credible.  She  accepted  her  evidence  that  the
    appellant  told  her  in  2015  that  he  was  gay.  She  accepted  the
    appellant's reasons for not disclosing his sexuality when arrested  for
    the sexual assault in 2015 or in the screening interview.

 7. She also accepted that in the  light  of  the  background  evidence  in
    relation to the attitude of Albanian society towards LGBT  people,  the
    appellant had given credible reasons for keeping his  sexuality  secret
    from the Albanian community in the UK. She found that  the  appellant's
    credibility was not undermined by the fact that he could  not  remember
    the names and addresses of the gay  clubs  that  he  visited  in  2015.
    Likewise, she concluded that his credibility was not undermined by  the
    delay in not claiming asylum earlier than he did.

 8. The FtJ also accepted that after he returned to  Albania  in  2015  his
    family and the community where his family lived  found  out  about  his
    sexuality from a photograph of him kissing P, a man with whom he had  a
    one night stand in June 2015 whilst he was in the  UK.  The  photograph
    was put on Facebook and circulated.

 9. The appellant's account was that after the photograph was  revealed  in
    Albania he was beaten up by his former friends because  the  photograph
    confirmed to them that he was gay. Two months later  his  father  found
    out about the photograph and also beat him up and  threatened  to  kill
    him.

10. He agreed to his father's demand that he marry a  female  in  order  to
    stop the abuse. His fiance's family came to take him  out  for  coffee
    but instead took him to a park, accused him  of  dishonouring  them  by
    being gay and then beat him up. The appellant went home but his  father
    and uncle also beat him. He was about to kill himself but  woke  up  in
    hospital, taken there by his uncle's wife. On his release from hospital
    he fled to Tirana.

11. The FtJ accepted the reliability of  a  letter  said  to  be  from  the
    hospital in Albania which referred to the appellant's  admission  there
    on 16 November 2016. His account of how  he  obtained  the  letter  was
    found to be credible.

12. She referred to HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 31 and background evidence.  She  concluded  at  [62]  that
    there was  a  "striving"  (presumably  'thriving')  LGBT  community  in
    Tirana. She found that "because of this the appellant would be able  to
    live in Tirana as a homosexual without being persecuted".

13. At [63] she said that in the UK the appellant had  the  opportunity  to
    express himself openly as a gay man but did not do so, not telling  any
    of his friends about his sexuality. She said that the  only  person  he
    disclosed his sexuality to was the mother of one of his friends,  which
    she surmised was because he saw her as a mother figure.

14. She thus concluded that:

         "the appellant has a preference to live discreetly as a gay man and
         this was not because he feared persecution but because he  wish[ed]
         to do so...if the appellant returned to Albania  he  would  conduct
         his life in the same way."

15.  She then went on to find that the appellant does not have to return to
    his home area and that he  could  seek  help  from  STREHA,  which  she
    described as a shelter for LGBT youth who are homeless, or living in  a
    hostile environment.  She also concluded that the  appellant  would  be
    able to access one of the support groups  which  provides  support  for
    LGBT persons, and noted that the police in Tirana are  now  trained  to
    deal with hate crimes, including those relating to LGBT people and  are
    willing and able to prosecute such crimes.

16. She found then, that the appellant "need not fear being harmed  by  his
    friends and family members which is one of his concerns"  and  that  he
    could safely return to Albania "based on what  the  objective  evidence
    says". She further concluded that he was fit and well which meant  that
    he should be able to find employment and would suffer no hardship if he
    relocates to Tirana.

17. She dismissed the Article 8 ground of appeal in  terms  of  family  and
    private life, concluding that whilst adaptation and  integration  would
    not be immediate or initially comfortable, there was no  evidence  that
    those things would not be achievable.

    The grounds of appeal

18. It is only necessary to summarise the grounds. Ground 1  contends  that
    the FtJ erred in not finding that the appellant was a  victim  of  past
    persecution on the grounds  of  his  sexual  identity  as  recently  as
    November 2016. Ground 2 asserts that the FtJ erred in  her  application
    of HJ (Iran) in terms of the extent to which gay men would be  able  to
    achieve effective protection in Albania, and ground 3 suggests an error
    of law in the assessment of how the appellant would behave on return to
    Albania.

19. The error advanced in relation to ground 1 is in terms of the lack of a
    conclusion by  the  FtJ  that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of  past
    persecution on account of her acceptance  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim as to past events. That past persecution was relevant
    to future risk. Further, his evidence was that he modified his  conduct
    in Tirana due to a fear of harm.

20. In relation to ground 2, relying amongst other things on the unreported
    decision of KL v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
    UKAITUR AA/02967/2014  and  the  country  background  material,  it  is
    asserted that it is evident that there is a real  risk  of  persecution
    for openly  gay  men  and  that  the  second  limb  of  HJ  (Iran)  was
    established before the FtJ. The FtJ therefore erred in  her  conclusion
    that there  was  a  viable  internal  relocation  alternative  for  the
    appellant,  including  in   the   alternative   taking   into   account
    discrimination  and  plausible  unwillingness  to  avail   himself   of
    protection.

21. As to ground 3, it is argued amongst other things that  the  fact  that
    the appellant had been attending gay bars since 2015 and  was  publicly
    affectionate with another man which was disclosed  in  the  photograph,
    makes it clear that the appellant had not been acting discreetly in the
    UK. Further, in Albania the  appellant's  sexual  identity  is  already
    known by his family and his conduct in Tirana would be motivated  by  a
    fear of harm from his friends and family. In  addition,  the  appellant
    would have to prove that he is straight in order to avoid  persecution,
    as he did in relation to the sexual assault in the UK and his agreement
    to marry a woman in Albania.

    The respondent's position

22. As already indicated, it was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    before me that the FtJ had materially erred in law in various respects.
    The respondent's position is as set out  in  Mr  Jarvis'  very  helpful
    written submissions dated 13 April 2018. I summarise as follows.

23. It was conceded that the FtJ had not  made  thorough  findings  on  the
    appellant's claimed past persecution, including in terms  of  the  risk
    from his father who the appellant asserts would be able and willing  to
    find him in another part of Albania away from the home area.

24. It was also  conceded  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant would live discreetly on return because he had done so in the
    UK, in the light of the appellant's evidence, the accepted findings and
    the positive credibility findings generally.

25. The FtJ had also erred  in  not  apparently  taking  into  account  the
    unreported decision of KL, notwithstanding that  that  decision  itself
    makes it clear at [26] that it does not purport to decide  any  matters
    of principle. However,  the  FtJ  had  not  obviously  dealt  with  the
    submission that the STREHA shelter was, to summarise, limited in  terms
    of what it could practically offer the appellant.

26. Likewise, it is accepted that the FtJ had not apparently  engaged  with
    the appellant's own background evidence in  respect  of  the  issue  of
    implementation of legal reforms and the general  nature  of  conditions
    for gay men in Albania as a whole or in Tirana in particular.  Further,
    the FtJ's findings are inconsistent with her own observations about the
    underlying heteronormativity in Albanian culture.

27. Although recognising that the Upper Tribunal is not bound to accept any
    of the respondent's concessions or  observations,  it  is  acknowledged
    that if those are accepted, the appeal would have to be  re-decided  in
    respect of the question of the appellant's behaviour on return and  the
    issues of risk and internal relocation.

    Conclusions

28. As I indicated at the hearing,  taking  into  account  the  grounds  of
    appeal and the respondent's concessions, I am satisfied  that  the  FtJ
    erred in law such as to require  her  decision  to  be  set  aside.  In
    particular, I am satisfied that on the  basis  of  the  FtJ's  positive
    credibility findings, the FtJ erred in not making the  further  finding
    that the appellant had been subjected to persecution in Albania as  set
    out in his account.

29. I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in deciding that the appellant  would
    act discreetly in terms of his sexuality on return for the reasons that
    she gave at [63]. Both parties submitted that it was not appropriate at
    this stage to make a finding about how the appellant  would  behave  on
    return because that is a matter  that  would  be  informed  by  further
    argument at the next hearing. I therefore make no  further  finding  in
    that respect.

30. Mr Chelvan confirmed that it was not argued that the appellant's family
    would find him wherever he was in Albania, and that the point  referred
    to at [22] of KL is not relied on (modification of behaviour where  the
    fear of persecution is not objectively well founded).

31. In response to the Secretary of State's written submissions, Mr Chelvan
    provided a supplementary skeleton argument dated 15 April  2018  which,
    amongst other things, sets out the appellant's position in relation  to
    the scope of any re-making of the decision.

32. Because, apart from anything else,  the  parties  agreed  that  it  was
    appropriate for this appeal to be linked to two  other  appeals  before
    the Upper Tribunal raising similar  issues,  it  was  not  possible  to
    proceed to a re-making of this  decision.  Mr  Chelvan's  supplementary
    skeleton argument is helpful in setting out the position on  behalf  of
    the appellant in relation to the re-making but the approach to the  re-
    making and its scope is a matter that will be decided by the  judge  or
    judges seized of the appeal at that stage.

33. The only thing further in this respect that I think it is necessary for
    me to say is that the findings  of  fact  made  by  the  FtJ,  save  as
    infected by the error(s) of law, are to stand.

34. The other cases to which it is proposed to  link  this  appeal  are  MB
    (Albania) (PA/04051/2017) and AG (Albania) (PA/05987/2017),  which  are
    cases in which  I  understand  the  same  solicitors  are  acting.   Mr
    Chelvan's supplementary skeleton argument suggests that in relation  to
    the latter case it  is  hoped  that  case  management  directions  will
    facilitate the linking of the cases and provide for  directions  as  to
    their future progress.

35. This appeal will therefore be listed for further  hearing  as  soon  as
    practicable. It does appear to me at this stage to be  appropriate  for
    this appeal to be listed with MB and AG in respect of which  directions
    may be given in due course.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 24/04/18



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given the nature of the claim and the background to it, unless and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

             ANNEX B: INDICES TO BUNDLES OF BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM
CHAMBER


BETWEEN

                                BF (ALBANIA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                    INDEX TO COUNTRY BACKGROUND EVIDENCE
                                  BUNDLE B1

|Index   |Document                                          |Page      |

|1.      |Letter of Instructions to AY                      |1-3       |
|2.      |Expert Report of AY dated 29th August 2018        |4-72      |
|3.      |Questions by the Respondent to the Expert with her|73---93   |
|        |Responses dated 18th September 2018.              |          |
|4.      |Addendum to Expert Report to Address Previously   |94-96     |
|        |Inaccessible Document dated 26th September 2018   |          |
|5.      |Asylum Research Centre, 'A Note on the Reference  |97-103    |
|        |to NGOs in the Guidance Section 'Protection in the|          |
|        |UK Home Office Sexual Orientation and Gender      |          |
|        |Identity Country Policy and Information Notes',   |          |
|        |dated October 2018                                |          |
|6       |IPPF-EN, 'How Sexuality Education is Improving    |104-111   |
|        |Young People's Lives in Albania', dated 30th July |          |
|        |2018                                              |          |
|7.      |Council of the European Union, 'Conclusions on    |112-139   |
|        |Enlargement and Stabilisation', adopted on 26th   |          |
|        |June 2018                                         |          |
|8.      |PINK Embassy, '66% of Albanian teachers stay      |140-142   |
|        |silent when pupils are bullied because of         |          |
|        |homophobia and transphobia'. dated 01st June 2018 |          |
|9.      |PINK Embassy, 'PINK' Embassy launches national    |143-144   |
|        |campaign "Equality in Marriage", dated 22nd May   |          |
|        |2018                                              |          |
|10.     |PINK Embassy, 'TIRANA RAISES THE LGBTI FLAG!;     |145-146   |
|        |dated 21st May 2018                               |          |
|11.     |Historia IME, 'Regional conference "Greasing the  |147-148   |
|        |wheels of the criminal justice system"', dated    |          |
|        |18th May 2018                                     |          |
|12.     |Historia IME, 'Alcanca LGBT and Pro LGBT launch   |149-150   |
|        |"PRIDE in Albania", project', dated 18th May 2018 |          |
|13.     |ILGA Europe, 'LGBTI Enlargement Review 2017',     |151-181   |
|        |dated 17th May 2018                               |          |
|14.     |ILGA Europe, 'Annual Review of the Human Rights   |182-183   |
|        |Situation of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and    |          |
|        |Intersex People in Europe 2018 - Albania', dated  |          |
|        |14th May 2018                                     |          |
|15.     |Historia IME, 'Tirana Gay Pride, love won again', |184-185   |
|        |dated 14th May 2018                               |          |
|16.     |United States Department of State, '2017 Country  |186-211   |
|        |Report on Human Rights Practice: Albania', dated  |          |
|        |20th April 2018                                   |          |
|17.     |ILGA-Europe, 'Albania and FYR Macedonia accession |212-213   |
|        |talks recommended', dated 19th April 2018         |          |
|18.     |Prishtina Insight, 'Albania's Layered Homophobia',|214-217   |
|        |dated 18th April 2018                             |          |
|19.     |European Commission, Commission Staff Working     |218-324   |
|        |Document, Albania 2018 report, dated 17th April   |          |
|        |2018                                              |          |
|20.     |Pinderi, Kristi, 'Expert Opinion regarding the    |325-396   |
|        |situation of Albanian LGBT people and a Review of |          |
|        |Legislation vs its Enforcement' dated 15th April  |          |
|        |2018 (attached to sources referred to within the  |          |
|        |document).                                        |          |
|21.     |LGBTI Equal Rights Association for Western Balkans|397-400   |
|        |and Turkey (LGBTI ERA), 'Open Lectures on LGBTI   |          |
|        |Rights in Albania's High Schools Face Homophobic  |          |
|        |Backlash', dated 30th March 2018                  |          |

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM
CHAMBER


BETWEEN

                                BF (ALBANIA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                    INDEX TO COUNTRY BACKGROUND EVIDENCE
                                  BUNDLE B2

|Index   |Document                                          |Page      |

|1.      |Home Office, 'Report of a Fact-Finding Mission,   |          |
|        |Albania.                                          |401-560   |
|        |Conducted on 31st October to 7th November 2017',  |          |
|        |dated February 2018                               |          |
|2.      |United Nations Albania, 'Being LGBTI in Albania - |561-564   |
|        |Alesio's Story', dated 09th January 2018          |          |
|3.      |United Nations Development Programme, 'Being LGBTI|          |
|        |in Eastern Europe Progress, Drawbacks,            |565-566   |
|        |Recommendations [Albania Excerpt]', dated 03rd    |          |
|        |December 2017                                     |          |
|4.      |United Nations Development Programme, 'Being LGBTI|          |
|        |in Eastern Europe: Albania Country Report         |567-605   |
|        |[Executive Summary and Key Findings]', dated 23rd |          |
|        |November 2017                                     |          |
|5.      |Human Rights Watch, 'Sheltering Albania's Gay     |606-607   |
|        |Youth from Virulent Homophobia,' dated 07th       |          |
|        |November 2017                                     |          |
|6       |Home Office, 'Asylum Claims on the Basis of Sexual|          |
|        |Orientation, Experimental Statistics', dated      |608-617   |
|        |November 2017                                     |          |
|7.      |ILGA-Europe, 'Annual Review of the Human Rights   |          |
|        |Situation of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and    |618-621   |
|        |Intersex People in Europe 2017 - Albania dated',  |          |
|        |17th May 2017                                     |          |
|8.      |Albanian Helsinki Commission, 'Public appeal for  |          |
|        |the rights and freedom of the LGBTI in Albania',  |622       |
|        |dated 17th May 2017                               |          |
|9.      |Home Office, 'Country Policy and Information      |          |
|        |Notice Albania: Sexual Orientation and Gender     |623-662   |
|        |Identity', version 4.0, dated May 2017            |          |
|10.     |Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and        |          |
|        |Immigration, 'Inspection of Country of Origin     |663-718   |
|        |Information, March 2017 report'                   |          |
|11.     |Astraea Foundation, 'Location: Albania', undated  |719-721   |
|12.     |Council of Europe, 'Preventing and Combating      |          |
|        |Discrimination on Grounds of Sexual Orientation   |722-723   |
|        |and Gender Identity in Albania', undated          |          |
|13.     |Equinet (European Network of Equality Bodies),    |724-728   |
|        |'ALBANIA: Commissioner for the Protection from    |          |
|        |Discrimination', undated                          |          |
|14.     |Home Office Asylum Policy instruction, Sexual     |          |
|        |orientation in Asylum Claims, Version 6.0         |729-769   |
|        |published for Home Office staff on 3rd August 2016|          |
|        |                                                  |          |
|15.     |6th Tirana Gay (P) Ride without Incidents, dated  |770-771   |
|        |13th May 2017                                     |          |
|16.     |Tirana Gay (P) Ride Continues on May 13 dated 10th|772-773   |
|        |May 2017                                          |          |

               ANNEX B: INDICES TO BACKGROUND EVIDENCE BUNDLES


IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM
CHAMBER

BETWEEN

                                BF (ALBANIA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        INDEX TO SUPPLEMENTARY BUNDLE
                                  BUNDLE E



|Index   |Document                                          |Page      |

|1.      |2016 Communication on EU enlargement policy -     |          |
|        |Commission Staff Working Document - Albania 2016  |1-95      |
|        |Report                                            |          |
|2.      |Annual report on the activities of the Albanian   |          |
|        |Commissioner for Protection Against Discrimination|96-120    |
|        |Summary of the Year 2017 dated July 2018          |          |
|3.      |May 2018 article on health care for vulnerable    |          |
|        |groups                                            |121-123   |
|        |http://historia-ime.com/2018/05/22/issues-to-acces|          |
|        |s-the-health-system-for-vulnerable-groups-in-alban|          |
|        |ia/                                               |          |
|4.      |April 2018 Albania article (untranslated +        |          |
|        |translated version) regarding  civil society's    |124-125a  |
|        |position on the new CPD                           |          |
|        |https://www.svri.net/politike/150345/skandali-komi|          |
|        |sioneri-i-anti-diskriminimit-emerohet-nieriu-i-bal|          |
|        |les/                                              |          |
|5.      |Article regarding same sex marriage, 30th July    |126-127   |
|        |2009 BBC on-line -                                |          |
|        |http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8177544.stm            |          |
|6       |2017 Human Rights Watch article about same sex    |          |
|        |marriage -                                        |128-130   |
|        |https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/02/08/albanian-court|          |
|        |s-asked-recognize-same-sex-partnerships           |          |
|7.      |2018 Tirana Gay pride article -                   |131-132   |
|        |http://historia-ime-com/2018/05/14/tirana-gay-prid|          |
|        |e-lov-won-again/                                  |          |
|8.      |Supplementary letter of Instruction to Mrs Antonia|133       |
|        |Young by SMA Solicitors dated 29th August 2018    |          |

                            ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS

1.   Map of Albania
2.   Map of Tirana
3.   ERA Mission statement
4.   Stonewall report entitled "LGBT in Britain: Hate Crime and
    Discrimination" published 2017

5.   Home Office Country, Policy and Information Note entitled "Albania:
    Women fearing domestic abuse" published December 2017 ("the December
    2017 CPIN")

6.   Article entitled "PINK Embassy presents the Monitoring Report of the
    National Action Plan for LGBTI persons in Albania" published 21 May
    2018

7.   Article reporting interview on 4 October 2018 with Altin Hazizaj of
    PINK Embassy entitled "LGBTs in Albania: We don't bite"

8.   Home Office Statistical Bulletin 20/18 entitled "Hate Crime, England
    and Wales 2017/18" published 16 October 2018
-----------------------
[1] We believe Ms Young intended to refer to 8000 to 20,000 Albanian lek
which would equate to the sterling equivalent she gives

