
                                    [pic]
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)

R (on the application of C6) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(asylum seekers' permission to work) [2021] UKUT 00094 (IAC)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings

                                                             13 January 2021

                                   Before:

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                         (on the application of C6)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                   Ms S. Harrison, QC, and Mr A. Bandegani
             (instructed by Birnberg Peirce), for the applicant

                                 Mr W. Hays
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent

                        Hearing date: 6 November 2020
            Further submissions received: 4, 5 and 7 January 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                                  JUDGMENT

Insofar  as  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  Permission  to  work   and
volunteering for asylum  seekers,  version  8.0,  29  May  2019,  admits  no
exceptions, it has not been justified and so is unlawful.

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith:

Introduction


 1. This is an application for judicial review challenging  a  decision  of
    the respondent dated 4 February 2020 to refuse to grant the  applicant,
    a citizen of Afghanistan with protection proceedings pending before the
    Special  Immigration  Appeals  Commission  ("SIAC"),   permission,   in
    principle, to work in  any  capacity  other  than  in  a  role  on  the
    Secretary of State's "shortage occupation list" ("the  SOL"),  pursuant
    to her Permission to work and volunteering for asylum  seekers  policy,
    version 8.0, 22 May 2019 ("the Work  Policy").   In  this  decision,  I
    refer to the Secretary of State's decision of 4 February 2020  as  "the
    February 2020 decision".


 2. The applicant has obtained an offer of work as a delivery driver for  a
    pizza and chicken fast food outlet.  In the February 2020 decision, the
    Secretary of State refused to grant permission to take up that position
    on the basis that the role of delivery driver does not feature  on  the
    SOL, and, as such, the role would be incompatible with the Work Policy.
     The Secretary of State did not consider whether, if she  were  willing
    in principle to grant the applicant permission to work  as  a  delivery
    driver, it would engage any national security considerations.  National
    security matters are outside the scope of these proceedings.


 3. On 19 May 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker ordered that  the  applicant
    be granted anonymity in these proceedings  in  terms  that  mirror  the
    anonymity he enjoys in the ongoing SIAC proceedings.  Judge Coker  also
    refused an application for this application for judicial review  to  be
    case managed by Mrs Justice Laing, the then President of SIAC,  on  the
    basis that the application did not raise matters that were outside  the
    jurisdiction or competence of the Upper Tribunal.  Before me, there has
    been no attempt to revisit Judge Coker's decision that this application
    is within the institutional competence of the Upper  Tribunal,  and  no
    issues arose which gave me cause to do so of my own motion.


 4. Permission to make this application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Owens on all grounds on 30 July 2020.


IJ (Kosovo): written submissions


 5. On 18 December 2020, the Mr Justice Bourne handed down  judgment  in  R
    (oao IJ (Kosovo)) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
    EWHC 3487 (Admin).  Those proceedings considered the application of the
    Work Policy and paragraphs  360ff  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
    context of a victim of trafficking, declaring that the Work Policy  was
    unlawful in certain respects.


 6. I directed that, should they wish to do  so,  the  parties  could  make
    written submissions on the judgment by 4 January 2021.  I  am  grateful
    to both parties for having done so in  a  timely  manner.   Thereafter,
    both  parties  sought  to  respond  to  the  other's  submissions;  the
    applicant on 5 January 2021, and the respondent, by way  of  a  factual
    observation, on 7 January  2021.   I  had  not  directed  or  permitted
    additional submissions.  The parties are  reminded  that  the  Tribunal
    would have issued further directions, or reconvened the hearing, in the
    event such steps were necessary.


 7. I consider IJ (Kosovo), and the submissions made  in  response  to  it,
    where relevant below.


Factual background


 8. The applicant, C6, is a citizen of Afghanistan.   He  arrived  in  this
    country as an unaccompanied minor in December 2003 and claimed  asylum.
    The claim was refused,  but  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain, and, in September 2011, he acquired British citizenship.


 9. On 20 May 2014, the applicant was notified by the  Secretary  of  State
    that she had decided to deprive him of his British citizenship  on  the
    grounds that to do so was conducive to the public good.  That  decision
    was upheld by SIAC on appeal on 22 December 2015,  and  an  application
    for permission to appeal against  the  SIAC  deprivation  decision  was
    finally refused on  10  November  2016.   The  applicant  thus  enjoyed
    British citizenship for a period exceeding 11 years.


10. The relevant findings of SIAC in the course of upholding the  Secretary
    of State's decision to deprive C6 of his British citizenship related to
    a return visit he made to Afghanistan in 2014, and  the  links  he  was
    assessed by the Security Service to  have  with  an  associate  of  the
    leader of a "small group of  highly  experienced  Al  Qaeda  militants"
    operating in Afghanistan.  SIAC found that it was highly probable  that
    items of electronic equipment taken by the applicant to Afghanistan via
    Saudi Arabia were taken with the intention of providing  assistance  to
    the associate of the Al Qaeda operative with  whom  the  applicant  was
    found to be linked.  Further,  SIAC  found  that  it  was  very  highly
    probable that C6 was an Islamist extremist.


11. On 15 November 2016, the applicant made further submissions in  support
    of a fresh claim for international protection under  paragraph  353  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The application was refused on 31 January 2018,
    and the respondent initially declined to treat the further  submissions
    as a "fresh claim", with the effect that the refusal decision  did  not
    attract a right of appeal.  The decision was remade on 22  March  2018,
    in circumstances which again did not attract a right of appeal.  On  29
    October 2018, Mrs Justice Jefford granted permission to bring  judicial
    review proceedings against the 22 March 2018  refusal  decision,  which
    led to the Secretary of State withdrawing the decision.  The  Secretary
    of State took a further decision to refuse the further  submissions  on
    19 February 2020, this time treating them as  a  fresh  claim,  thereby
    attracting a right of appeal.   The  applicant's  appeal  against  that
    decision lies to SIAC.   The  parties  have  informed  me  that  it  is
    unlikely that that appeal will be heard by SIAC before October 2021.


12. Following his release from  a  period  in  immigration  detention,  the
    applicant has been subject to bail conditions imposed  by  SIAC  on  15
    December 2014 by Mr Justice Irwin, as he then  was.   Pursuant  to  the
    bail conditions, the liberty of the applicant is restricted on  several
    fronts, to a significant  extent.   The  conditions  imposed  a  curfew
    requirement on the applicant, requiring him to be in his  residence  at
    all times save for 5 am to 8am, 12 noon to 5.30pm, and 7pm to 9pm.   He
    is  subject  to  monitoring  conditions,  restrictions  as  to  who  is
    permitted  to  visit  him  at  his  home  during  the  curfew  periods,
    restrictions on contact with persons  during  the  non-curfew  periods,
    electronic communication conditions which prevent  him  from  accessing
    the internet, conditions restricting his access to  bank  accounts  and
    financial services, conditions relating  to  his  identity  and  travel
    documents, conditions restricting his ability to lead  prayers  at  the
    mosque, and conditions requiring him only to use a single vehicle of  a
    type approved by the Secretary of State.  The applicant is also subject
    to employment conditions, addressed below.


13. Another feature  of  the  applicant's  case,  both  when  applying  for
    variations  to  his  bail  conditions  before  SIAC,   and   in   these
    proceedings, are  his  medical  conditions.   The  applicant  has  been
    assessed by Dr Katona who, in a report dated 11 January 2018, diagnosed
    him with a "major  depressive  episode".   Dr  Katona  noted  that  the
    applicant had an episode of poor mental health in  2010,  but  that  he
    remained mentally well until his detention under immigration powers  in
    2014.  Dr Katona prepared a joint expert report with Professor  Grubin,
    instructed by the respondent, dated 19 January 2018.  The experts agree
    that the applicant experiences depression, although Dr Katona considers
    it to be moderate, while Professor  Grubin  considers  it  to  be  mild
    [6.b].  The applicant also claims to experience a range of debilitating
    physical symptoms, including muscle pain, joint pain, chest  pain,  and
    abdominal  pain.   Dr  Katona  and  Professor  Grubin  agree  that  the
    applicant is telling the truth about the pain he claims to  experience,
    and that there is a "strong and malign interaction" between his  mental
    and physical conditions.  The experts also agree that  the  applicant's
    restrictive bail conditions have had an  impact  upon  the  applicant's
    health, and that amending his conditions would improve, but  not  cure,
    his depression.  Some of the bail conditions, such as those restricting
    the applicant's attendance at  the  mosque,  and  restrictions  on  him
    leading prayers, "are particularly  important  factors  in  maintaining
    mental distress."  See [7.b.i.].


14. Significantly for present purposes, on  11  February  2020,  Mr  C.M.G.
    Ockelton, Vice-President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  sitting  in  SIAC,
    amended the applicant's  bail  conditions.   The  bail  conditions  had
    always prohibited employment without the permission of the Secretary of
    State, but the revised bail order made more detailed provision for  the
    process to be invoked by the applicant when seeking permission from the
    Secretary of State to engage in employment, and for SIAC to review  any
    security concerns raised by the Secretary of State.  In addition,  SIAC
    partially relaxed the terms of the  curfew  requirement  to  which  the
    applicant is subject, such that, it is contended by  Ms  Harrison,  QC,
    undertaking some roles is now a real  possibility  for  the  applicant,
    subject, of course, to the permission of the Secretary of  State  under
    the bail conditions.  The curfew requirement of  the  applicant's  bail
    now permits the applicant to leave his residence between 0500 to  1030,
    1130 to 1700, and 1730 to 2300.   The  new  curfew  hours  are  largely
    consistent with the applicant's proposed role as a delivery driver, and
    would require only a minor variation, submits Ms Harrison.


15. In the judgment that  provided  for  the  partial  relaxation  of  bail
    conditions handed down on 9 January 2020 by the Vice President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal ("the SIAC bail judgment"), SIAC observed, at [58]:


"If [C6] can spend time at the mosque and generally at large it is not easy
to see why he should not be allowed to spend time in approved employment.
It is very likely that being able to occupy his time usefully with paid
work, or anything else, might well enable him to develop some self-esteem."



The November 2019 decision


16. On 4 November 2019, Duncan Lewis, the applicant's then representatives,
    applied to the Secretary of State for permission for the  applicant  to
    work at a pizza and chicken outlet  as  a  delivery  driver.   At  that
    stage, they would have had sight of  the  draft,  embargoed  SIAC  bail
    judgment, and so were, presumably, able to make the permission to  work
    application with  the  approach  of  SIAC  in  mind  without  expressly
    referring to it: see paragraphs 13 and 14 of  the  statement  of  David
    Williams, a Grade 6 lawyer with the Government Legal Department,  dated
    17 September 2020.


17. The Secretary of State refused the permission to work application in  a
    letter dated 14 November  2019  ("the  November  2019  decision").  The
    decision contained in that letter is  not  within  the  scope  of  this
    challenge, however Mr Hays,  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    contends that the February 2020 decision should be read  alongside  the
    November 2019  decision,  such  that  the  latter's  reasoning  may  be
    incorporated into that of  the  former,  or  at  least  illuminate  the
    February 2020 decision to some extent.  Accordingly, it is necessary to
    examine the November 2019  decision,  and  the  basis  upon  which  the
    Secretary  of  State  was  invited  to  consider  the  application  for
    permission to work on that occasion.


18. While I have not been provided with a copy of the application that  led
    to the November 2019 decision, I have had the benefit of sight  of  the
    applicant's  skeleton  argument  dated  18  July  2019  from  the  SIAC
    proceedings, to which the Secretary of State referred in the course  of
    that decision.  The skeleton argument was drafted by Ms Harrison and Mr
    Bandegani, who represent the applicant in both the SIAC proceedings and
    this application.  Paragraphs 43 to 47 focus on the applicant's  mental
    health and highlight the salient features of the reports of  Dr  Katona
    and Professor Grubin.  At [44],  Ms  Harrison  highlights  Dr  Katona's
    conclusions that the applicant's bail conditions,  "in  particular  his
    inability to work  and  support  himself,  his  restricted  ability  to
    socialise and to move freely", were having a significant adverse impact
    on his continuing  mental  health.   At  [47],  the  skeleton  argument
    highlighted the claimed positive mental health benefits  the  applicant
    would enjoy  if  the  restrictions  on  him  meeting  and  socialising,
    remaining in his residence under curfew conditions, and  working,  were
    lifted.


19. In the November 2019 decision, the Secretary of State  highlighted  the
    Work Policy, and referred to paragraph 360 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The letter stated:


"In accordance with the Home Office policy I can confirm that your client
has permission to work, but that permission is restricted to roles on the
Shortage Occupation List that is published by the Home Office.


On that basis, your client's request to take up employment at [the pizza
and chicken outlet] is refused because this is not a role on the current
published Shortage Occupation List. For the avoidance of doubt, if the role
had been one included on that list, the Secretary of State would have gone
on to consider whether the role was appropriate, having regard to the terms
of your client's bail conditions and the risk he poses to national
security. As is common ground, the bail conditions were imposed by the
Special Immigration Appeals Commission as being necessary on grounds that
your client poses a risk to national security.


The Secretary of State has given consideration as to whether to depart from
her published policy and to permit, in principle, your client to work in
roles that do not feature on the Shortage Occupation List (such as the role
at the [pizza and chicken outlet]).  In considering this question, the
Secretary of State has not considered any risk to national security posed
by your client. The Secretary of State does, however, take into account
your client's claim that being able to work will positively impact on his
mental health (for example, paragraphs 43 - 47 of the skeleton argument
dated 18 July 2019 filed with the Commission on behalf of your client).


Even assuming your client's mental health would improve if he takes paid
employment, the Secretary of State does not consider it appropriate in this
specific case to depart from her published policy. One of the purposes of
the policy is to maintain a distinction between economic migration and
asylum, which would be undermined if the request to undertake paid
employment were acceded to. As for your client's personal circumstances,
even if your client is currently unable to obtain employment on the
Shortage Occupation List, your client is free to undertake unpaid
employment, and/or a suitable study course to enable him to obtain
employment on the shortage occupation list (subject to the terms of his
bail and subject to the Secretary of State being satisfied that the
particular employment or study is compatible with national security)."


     There was no challenge to that decision.


The February 2020 decision


20. On 4 February 2020,  the  applicant  renewed  his  application  to  the
    respondent for permission to work at the pizza and chicken outlet.   It
    is the ensuing refusal of that application that lies at  the  heart  of
    these proceedings: the February 2020 decision.


21. In support of the application,  the  applicant  provided  a  number  of
    supporting  materials;  two  witness  statements  from  C6,  a  witness
    statement from the manager of the  pizza  and  chicken  outlet,  and  a
    letter from him confirming the job offer as  a  delivery  driver.   The
    application noted that the Secretary of State had, in the course of the
    November 2019 decision, considered whether to  exercise  discretion  to
    depart from the Work Policy, but had declined to do so.


22. The application highlighted the fact that  the  proposed  employer  was
    aware of the complications arising from C6's ongoing legal  proceedings
    and that C6 had been deprived of his British  citizenship  on  national
    security grounds.  The employer was aware of the curfew conditions, and
    was able to offer shift work which corresponded, in broad terms, to the
    curfew hours.  A minor amendment to the curfew would be required.   The
    application highlighted the contents of C6's  witness  statements,  and
    the positive benefits he considered would attach to him being  able  to
    work.  It underlined the financial constraints experienced by  C6,  and
    his indebtedness to friends and family, caused, it  was  said,  by  his
    inability to work.  The application stressed how the curfew  and  other
    conditions prevented the applicant from being able to  obtain  training
    or experience of the sort necessary to obtain a  skilled  role  on  the
    SOL.  He would not have the time or money  to  train  as  an  engineer,
    doctor or nurse, the application said.  The applicant had attempted  to
    obtain other, non-SOL roles.  Those attempts had been fruitless  as  it
    had proved practically  impossible  to  find  a  role  with  sufficient
    flexibility which did not require access or exposure to  the  internet,
    and which would be compatible C6's curfew conditions.   C6's  inability
    to use the internet also hampered his ability to construct a CV, and to
    apply for roles  using  online  processes,  thereby  placing  the  vast
    majority of even non-SOL roles out of his reach.  Being able to take up
    the offered position "would be the only way to practically improve  his
    situation".


23. The application contended that the Secretary of State's reliance on the
    need to maintain the distinction between economic migrants  and  asylum
    applications amounted to an unlawful fetter of her discretion,  relying
    on established authorities including British Oxygen Co. Ltd v  Minister
    of Technology [1971] A.C. 610 at 625:


"The general rule is that anyone who has to exercise a statutory discretion
must not 'shut his ears to an application...'"


24. Against that background, the application highlighted what it considered
    to be  the  uniquely  disadvantageous  situation  of  C6,  whereby  his
    restrictive bail conditions had placed immense constraints on his life.
     His situation was readily distinguishable from  that  of  an  economic
    migrant.  In addition, C6 had previously enjoyed leave  to  remain  and
    British citizenship, and his further submissions were predicated on the
    events  surrounding  the  deprivation  of  his  citizenship.   As   the
    Secretary of State had, in response to Jefford J's grant of  permission
    in  the  judicial  review  proceedings,  agreed   to   compromise   the
    applicant's  challenge  to  her  decision  to  refuse  to   treat   the
    applicant's further submissions as a fresh claim under  paragraph  353,
    "he cannot also be considered an economic migrant and he is  a  genuine
    asylum seeker".  The proceedings had lasted for more  than  five  years
    which was considerably longer than a "normal asylum  claim".   Although
    the Secretary of State had agreed to  compromise  the  judicial  review
    proceedings for which Jefford J had granted permission, she had not yet
    issued a revised decision in relation to  the  applicant.   The  global
    conclusions of the application may be stated simply: the applicant  was
    in "particularly unique circumstances" that had not been considered  by
    the Secretary of State in the November 2019 decision; it was irrational
    for the Secretary of  State  to  rely  on  the  need  to  maintain  the
    distinction between economic migration and genuine  asylum  seekers  in
    C6's circumstances; and by not exercising her discretion to  permit  C6
    to work, the Secretary of State was effectively  prohibiting  him  from
    taking employment.


25. The application concluded in these terms:


"37. We submit that this is at odds with the judgement of Mr Justice
Ockleton [sic].  The judge did not consider the prospect of [C6] obtaining
work to be fanciful and discussion has taken place during both hearings
about potential jobs for [C6]."


26. By a letter dated 19 February 2020, the Secretary of State referred  to
    the fact that a separate decision had been taken  and  served,  on  the
    same day, concerning C6's asylum claim. The operative reasoning in  the
    February  2020  decision  addressing  the   applicant's   request   for
    permission to work commenced in these terms:


"Your client does not now have an asylum claim outstanding for more than 12
months and his fresh asylum representations and evidence have been fully
considered and determined. Therefore, your client does not qualify for
permission to work in the UK. This decision has been made with reference to
the Home Office policy on "permission to work and volunteering for asylum
seekers" and paragraph 360, part 11B of the Immigration Rules." (emphasis
original)


27. The February 2020 decision proceeded to address  the  need  for  asylum
    applicants who are eligible for work to ensure that the roles they seek
    to obtain feature on the SOL in any event:


"You were informed in our previous letter dated 14 November 2019 that your
client should ensure that he does not apply for vacancies that are not on
the [SOL] list...


The policy states that it is the responsibility of the applicant and a
potential employer to ensure that the job is one which is included on the
list of shortage occupations and that the applicant is qualified for the
position being offered before taking up the post.


In summary, in light of your client's current circumstances and status in
the United Kingdom, he may not take up employment in the United Kingdom,
nor may he be self-employed or engaged in business or professional
activity. On that basis your client's request to take up employment at [the
pizza and chicken outlet] is refused."


RELEVANT LAW AND POLICY


Asylum seekers' access to the labour market


28. Section 1(2) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides  that  those  without
    the right of abode in the United Kingdom may only work "by permission":


"Those not having [the right of abode] may live, work and settle in the
United Kingdom by permission and subject to such regulation and control of
their entry into, stay in and departure from the United Kingdom as is
imposed by this Act."


29. Council  Directive  2003/9/EC  prescribes  minimum  standards  for  the
    reception of asylum  seekers.    Article  11(1)  provides  that  Member
    States "shall" determine a period of time, starting from  the  date  on
    which an application for asylum was lodged, during which  the  claimant
    shall not have access to the labour  market.   Article  11(2)  provides
    that, if a decision has not been taken  within  a  year,  provided  the
    delay cannot be attributed to the claimant, Member States shall "decide
    the conditions for granting  access  to  the  labour  market"  for  the
    claimant.  Paragraph (4) of the article provides that,  "[f]or  reasons
    of labour market policies,  Member  States  may  give  priority  to  EU
    citizens and nationals of States parties to  the  [EEA  Agreement]  and
    also to legally resident third-country nationals."


30. The  Immigration  Rules  reflect  the  requirement  for  provision  for
    permission to  work  to  be  granted  to  asylum  seekers,  subject  to
    conditions, in the following terms:


"360 An asylum applicant may apply to the Secretary of State for permission
to take up employment if a decision at first instance has not been taken on
the applicant's asylum application within one year of the date on which it
was recorded. The Secretary of State shall only consider such an
application if, in the Secretary of State's opinion, any delay in reaching
a decision at first instance cannot be attributed to the applicant.


360A If permission to take up employment is granted under paragraph 360,
that permission will be subject to the following restrictions:


(i) employment may only be taken up in a post which is, at the time an
offer of employment is accepted, included on the list of shortage
occupations published by the United Kingdom Border Agency (as that list is
amended from time to time);


(ii) no work in a self-employed capacity; and


(iii) no engagement in setting up a business.


360B If an asylum applicant is granted permission to take up employment
under paragraph 360 this shall only be until such time as his asylum
application has been finally determined.


360C Where an individual makes further submissions which raise asylum
grounds and which fall to be considered under paragraph 353 of these Rules,
that individual may apply to the Secretary of State for permission to take
up employment if a decision pursuant to paragraph 353 of these Rules has
not been taken on the further submissions within one year of the date on
which they were recorded. The Secretary of State shall only consider such
an application if, in the Secretary of State's opinion, any delay in
reaching a decision pursuant to paragraph 353 of these Rules cannot be
attributed to the individual.


360D If permission to take up employment is granted under paragraph 360C,
that permission will be subject to the following restrictions:


(i) employment may only be taken up in a post which is, at the time an
offer of employment is accepted, included on the list of shortage
occupations published by the United Kingdom Border Agency (as that list is
amended from time to time);


(ii) no work in a self-employed capacity; and


(iii) no engagement in setting up a business.


360E Where permission to take up employment is granted pursuant to
paragraph 360C, this shall only be until such time as:


(i) a decision has been taken pursuant to paragraph 353 that the further
submissions do not amount to a fresh claim; or


(ii) where the further submissions are considered to amount to a fresh
claim for asylum pursuant to paragraph 353, all rights of appeal from the
immigration decision made in consequence of the rejection of the further
submissions have been exhausted."


31. Put simply, asylum seekers (a term I  shall  use  in  this  context  to
    include  those  awaiting  a  decision  on  further  submissions   under
    paragraph 353) may only access the labour market when their  claim  has
    been under consideration for at least 12 months, provided the delay was
    not their fault, and once granted, permission to work is restricted  to
    roles on the SOL.  The SOL is maintained by the  Home  Office,  on  the
    advice of  the  Migration  Advisory  Committee,  an  independent,  non-
    departmental public  body  that  advises  the  Secretary  of  State  on
    migration issues.


32. I turn now to the Work Policy.  Much  of  the  content  of  the  policy
    concerns operational instructions to caseworkers. However, it sets  out
    the "policy intention" behind the permission  to  work  regime  in  the
    following terms:


"The policy objectives in restricting permission to work for asylum seekers
and failed asylum seekers whilst their claim is considered are to:


            . ensure a clear distinction between economic migration and
              asylum that discourages those who do not need protection from
              claiming asylum to benefit from economic opportunities they
              would not otherwise be eligible for


            . prevent illegal migration for economic reasons and protect
              the integrity of the asylum system so that we can more
              quickly offer protection to those who really need it


            . be clear that asylum seekers can undertake volunteering as
              this provides a valuable contribution to the wider community
              and may help those who qualify for leave to remain here to
              integrate into society[.]"


33. In R (oao Rostami) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
    EWHC 1494 (Admin); [2014] Imm AR 56, Mr  Justice  Hickinbottom,  as  he
    then was, rejected a  multi-faceted  challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of
    paragraph 360 and following of the rules.  The court held that  Article
    15(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union  did
    not confer a general right to work upon anyone in  the  territories  of
    the EU at a  particular  time  [55].   The  court  held  at  [81]  that
    paragraphs 360A(i) and 360D(i) of the rules, restricting asylum seekers
    to roles on the SOL, had as their main public policy objective the  aim
    of ensuring that asylum seekers are granted access  to  the  UK  labour
    market without  adversely  impacting  on  UK  nationals  and  other  EU
    citizens, as access is only granted to jobs identified as  those  which
    the resident labour market would be unable  to  fill.  That,  held  the
    court, was a well-established legitimate  labour  market  policy  [83].
    The court  gave  fourteen  reasons  for  finding  that  the  policy  as
    contained in the Immigration Rules was  proportionate:  see  [92],  and
    found that it did not engage Article 8 of the ECHR.   Rostami  features
    significantly in the parties' submissions, and I  will  return  to  its
    reasoning later.


Grounds for judicial review


34. In the course of her unrestricted grant of permission,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Owens gave the applicant permission to rely  on  all  grounds  of
    judicial review:


        a. Ground 1: the Work Policy admits no exceptions, or  provides  no
           in-built discretion,  and  is  so  rigid  as  to  amount  to  an
           impermissible and unlawful fetter on the  Secretary  of  State's
           discretion.


        b. Ground 2: the Work Policy is unlawful,  and/or  operates  as  an
           unlawful fetter on the  Secretary  of  State's  discretion.  The
           policy makes no reference to the residual discretion outside the
           relevant paragraphs of the immigration rules, and refers  to  no
           criteria by which discretion  may  be  exercised  exceptionally,
           within the policy, or outside the rules. It  fails  to  identify
           any factors relevant to the possible exercise of discretion.  It
           is  a  blanket  policy  amounting  to  an  unlawful  fetter   of
           discretion.


        c. Ground 3: the respondent failed to review her policy in light of
           Covid-19.  This ground is  based  upon  the  Government's  post-
           decision designation of delivery drivers as "key workers" during
           the Covid-19 pandemic ("the pandemic").


        d. Ground 4: the respondent failed to exercise  discretion  in  the
           applicant's case by reference to all relevant facts,  and/or  to
           provide reasons.


        e. Ground 5: the decision of the Secretary of State constitutes  an
           arbitrary  and/or   disproportionate   interference   with   the
           applicant's article 8 ECHR rights to family life.


        f. Ground 6: the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  entailed
           unjustified discrimination against  the  applicant  contrary  to
           Article 14 of the ECHR, when read with Article 8 ECHR.


Submissions and discussion


35. I will commence my analysis by considering  ground  4,  which  contends
    that the respondent failed to exercise discretion by reference  to  all
    relevant facts and circumstances, as the  facts  and  submissions  that
    were before the Secretary of State set the context for my consideration
    of the remaining grounds for judicial review.


36. Well established public law principles require decision makers to  take
    into account all relevant considerations and  to  disregard  irrelevant
    considerations.


37. In the course of  his  application  for  permission  to  work  dated  4
    February 2020, the applicant set out  a  number  of  factors  which  he
    contended militated in favour of a departure from the policy, in  light
    of what that application submitted were the unique circumstances of his
    situation.  While the Secretary of State  had,  in  the  November  2019
    decision, considered issues relating to the  applicant's  physical  and
    mental health in light of the conclusions of Dr  Katona's  report,  and
    the  joint  report  with  Professor  Grubin,  there  were  a  range  of
    additional matters  which  the  4  February  application  drew  to  the
    attention of the Secretary of  State  which  had  not  previously  been
    relied upon.  Those factors included:


        a. C6 had accrued serious  debts  to  his  friends,  which  he  had
           incurred as a result of his inability to work [13], [29].


        b. C6 had no qualifications or experience that would enable him  to
           apply for a role on the SOL.  He had neither the  time  nor  the
           money to train in order to apply for such roles [16].


        c. The unique circumstances of C6's bail conditions meant that many
           roles, even those not on the SOL, were out of reach [17].   Most
           roles were the subject of an  online  application  procedure,  a
           process which the applicant's  bail  conditions  prohibited  him
           from undertaking [18].  As for the role itself, it would need to
           be extremely flexible, and not require access to  the  internet.
           The proposed delivery driver role "would  be  the  only  way  to
           practically improve his situation" [19].


        d. C6 was in a unique situation; as a former  British  citizen  who
           had resided lawfully for over 11 years, with the right  to  work
           at those times, his situation could be distinguished  from  that
           of  an  economic  migrant.   Moreover,  his  asylum  claim   was
           predicated  on  events  surrounding  the  deprivation   of   his
           citizenship. See [29] and [30].


        e. Given the Secretary of State had accepted that his asylum  claim
           amounted to a fresh claim within the meaning of  paragraph  353,
           she had accepted that his claim was arguable,  with  the  effect
           that "he cannot also be considered an economic migrant and he is
           a genuine asylum seeker" [32].


        f.  C6's  asylum  claim  had  lasted  for  11  years,   which   was
           significantly longer than a normal asylum claim.  The  Secretary
           of  State  had  repeatedly  delayed  the   further   submissions
           decision, having initially undertaken to take it by 15  November
           2019, later delaying until 31 January 2020 and  subsequently  17
           February 2020.  At the time of the application's submission,  it
           was not clear when the decision would be taken.  See [33].  Were
           the  Secretary  of  State   to   rely   on   national   security
           considerations, the refusal would have to be dealt with in SIAC,
           taking further time [34].


        g. The overall circumstances of C6 had not been considered  in  the
           course of the November 2019 decision [35].


        h. The application concluded by stating that,  by  her  refusal  to
           exercise discretion in favour of C6, the Secretary of State  was
           "in effect prohibiting him from employment" [36].  The SIAC bail
           judgment did not consider the prospect of C6 obtaining  work  to
           be fanciful, and a  discussion  had  taken  place  at  two  SIAC
           hearings about potential roles for C6.


        i. C6's highly restrictive bail conditions meant that his choice of
           roles  would  be  "severely   hampered",   in   particular   the
           restrictions on his time and use of the internet.


        j. The Secretary of State's reliance on the terms  of  the  policy,
           and her refusal to depart  from  it,  amounted  to  an  unlawful
           fetter on  her  discretion,  and  reliance  upon  arbitrary  and
           irrational reasoning.


38. I find that the February 2020 decision  did  not  purport  to  consider
    whether it was appropriate to exercise discretion.  Still less  did  it
    consider or otherwise engage with any of the above factors advanced  on
    behalf of the applicant.  Indeed, all the decision did was to  restate,
    and apply, the Work Policy, absent any consideration of the applicant's
    submissions for discretion to be exercised in his favour.  The  factors
    set out above were plainly relevant considerations which  the  February
    2020 decision failed to take into account, at all.


39. Strikingly, the February 2020 decision contended that the applicant did
    not even have permission to engage in a role on the SOL  in  accordance
    with the Work Policy.  The applicant's further submissions had not been
    outstanding for more than 12 months,  the  decision  stated,  with  the
    effect that the emboldened text stating that the  applicant  "does  not
    qualify for permission to work in the UK" was simply incorrect.  As was
    common ground before me, that was an error.


40. I accept that the Secretary of  State  had  taken  a  decision  on  the
    applicant's protection claim in parallel to taking  the  February  2020
    decision, and so to that extent, the decision did engage  with  one  of
    the factors raised by the applicant (see paragraph  37.f  above).   But
    the context in which the decision referred to the  protection  decision
    having being taken  was  to  underline,  erroneously,  the  applicant's
    ineligibility for permission to work under the Work Policy.  The letter
    did not deal with the substantive underlying concern of that aspect  of
    the application, namely the length of time for which the applicant  had
    been waiting for his protection  claim  to  be  resolved,  and  in  all
    likelihood would have to continue waiting.


41. When the letter proceeded to analyse the applicant's request to work as
    a delivery driver in any event, it simply appealed to the terms of  the
    Work Policy, and concluded that, because the role of a delivery  driver
    does not feature on the SOL, he would not be entitled to assume such  a
    role.


42. Rather than setting out a considered response to the  reasons  advanced
    by the applicant in favour of a departure from  the  Work  Policy,  the
    February 2020 decision singularly failed to engage with  any  of  those
    factors.  The decision  was  based  on  the  flawed  premise  that  the
    applicant was not even eligible for permission to work in a role on the
    SOL, which highlights and underlines the deficiencies in the  decision.
    The  decision  misunderstands  the  nature  of  the   application   for
    permission to  work  and  the  applicant's  circumstances,  incorrectly
    treating the application as though it were made in the initial 12 month
    period during which asylum seekers do  not  enjoy  the  possibility  of
    accessing the labour market  at  all.   Against  that  background,  the
    February 2020 decision's consideration of  the  proposed  role  at  the
    pizza and chicken outlet has the appearance of being added simply as  a
    makeweight.


43. Mr Hays sought to cure these  evident  defects  in  the  February  2020
    decision on the basis that it should be  read  alongside  the  November
    2019  decision.  I  accept  that,  to  an   extent,   the   course   of
    correspondence with the Secretary of State can be read as a  whole,  to
    in order to ascertain the Secretary of State's overall approach.


44. In this respect, the Secretary of State's discussion  in  the  November
    2019 decision of whether it would be appropriate to exercise discretion
    in the applicant's favour does  demonstrate  that,  in  principle,  the
    Secretary of State is aware of her ability to consider  departing  from
    the terms of the policy, and did undertake such consideration  on  that
    occasion.  That letter states:


"...the Secretary of State has given consideration as to whether to depart
from her published policy and to permit, in principle, your client to work
in roles that do not feature on the [SOL] (such as the role at [the chicken
and pizza outlet]). In considering this question, the Secretary of State
has not considered any risk to national security posed by your client...."


45. While the Secretary of State's decision on that application illuminates
    the fact that she accepts  she  is  able,  in  principle,  to  consider
    whether to depart from the terms of the Work  Policy,  nothing  in  the
    November 2019 decision is capable of curing the significant defects  in
    the February 2020 decision.  First, the February 2020 decision did  not
    seek to incorporate, or otherwise rely upon, the reasoning  adopted  by
    the November 2019 decision.  Merely referring to the  earlier  decision
    is not capable of  incorporating  its  reasoning.   Secondly,  had  the
    February 2020 decision incorporated the earlier decision's reasoning in
    the wholesale terms for which Mr Hays contends it  should  be  read  as
    having  been  incorporated,  that  would  have  led  to  an  irrational
    conclusion.   The  applicant's  February  2020   permission   to   work
    application post-dated the application he made for permission  to  work
    in November 2019, and featured a  range  of  considerations  which  the
    Secretary of State, on the materials before me, had not been invited to
    consider as part of the earlier application.  By definition,  even  had
    the Secretary of State sought expressly to rely on  her  November  2019
    reasoning, those reasons would have been incapable  of  addressing  the
    quite separate matters she was invited to consider by the applicant  in
    the February 2020 application.


46. It follows, therefore, that the import of the November  2019  decision,
    taken at its highest, is that it  provides  a  single  example  of  the
    Secretary of State demonstrating that she  has  considered  whether  to
    depart from the Work  Policy.   It  cannot  cure  the  defects  in  the
    February 2020 decision.


47. The  approach  of  the  February  2020  decision  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion was in stark contrast to the approach of  the  Secretary  of
    State to the application for permission to work in IJ (Kosovo).   While
    the applicant in those proceedings invited the Secretary  of  State  to
    exercise  discretion  on  different  grounds,  it  is  clear  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  nevertheless  considered  whether   to   exercise
    discretion: see [52] and  [57].    It  is  nothing  to  the  point,  as
    submitted by Mr Hays, that IJ (Kosovo) concerned the unique position of
    a victim of trafficking;  the  judgment  provides  an  example  of  the
    Secretary of State having  conducted  the  discretionary  exercise  she
    wholly failed to conduct in these proceedings, and to  that  extent  it
    underlines the findings outlined above.


48. Given the discretionary nature of  the  judicial  review  jurisdiction,
    ordinarily a court or tribunal would  consider  whether,  but  for  the
    defect identified, the outcome for the applicant would  not  have  been
    substantially different if the conduct complained of had not  occurred.
    Section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981 codifies  this  well-known
    principle of judicial review.


49. I cannot say that it would be "highly likely" that the outcome for  the
    applicant would not have been substantially different  if  the  conduct
    complained of had not occurred, pursuant to section 31(2A).  There  are
    two reasons for this.


50. First, the applicant has highlighted a series of  considerations  which
    set his application for permission to work apart from the  many  asylum
    seekers who are subject to the Work Policy.  The policy  objectives  of
    the Work Policy are readily distinguishable from an individual  in  the
    position of this claimant, given  his  position  as  a  former  British
    citizen now seeking to renew his protection claim as  a  third  country
    national.  That is  not  to  say  that  that  is  capable  of  being  a
    determinative factor, given the High Court has underlined and  endorsed
    the "bright line" approach and  consequences  of  the  Work  Policy  in
    Rostami.  But it is to say that this is, on any  view,  an  application
    for permission to work which features few parallels with the  situation
    of the vast majority of asylum seekers.  Very few asylum  seekers,  for
    example, will have had the benefit of the Vice President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal indicating the positive benefits of  potential  employment  in
    their circumstances, as he did in the SIAC bail  judgment.   While  the
    Secretary of State may well have  sound  reasons  for  maintaining  her
    position in the course of a properly reasoned future decision (I do not
    speculate), I cannot say that it is "highly likely"  that  the  outcome
    would not be different  for  the  applicant,  which  is  the  threshold
    codified by Parliament under section 31(2A) of the  Senior  Courts  Act
    1981.


51. Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  openly  considered  the
    potential national security considerations of the applicant's  proposed
    role.  She  indicated  her  likely  phased  approach  to  the  national
    security issue in the November 2019 decision, in which she stated that,
    had the applicant proposed a role on the SOL, she would have gone on to
    consider whether any  national  security  considerations  would  arise.
    Again, I cannot pre-empt that process,  still  less  conclude  that  it
    would be "highly likely" that permission to work would be  refused,  in
    the absence of any reasoning from the Secretary of State on this issue.


52. For these reasons, I grant this  application  for  judicial  review  in
    relation to the February 2020 decision insofar as it relies  on  Ground
    4.


Grounds 1, 2 and 3


53. This application for judicial review is not confined  to  the  February
    2020 decision.  The applicant seeks to challenge the terms of the  Work
    Policy itself.


54. I shall take Grounds 1 and 2 together.  In essence, they  contend  that
    the Work Policy features no possibility of the exercise of  discretion,
    fails to acknowledge the existence of the Secretary  of  State's  broad
    discretion in the exercise of her  powers  under  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, and  fails  to  articulate  the  criteria  pursuant  to  which  a
    departure from the otherwise rigid policy  should  be  considered.   As
    such, contends Ms Harrison, the policy amounts to an unlawful fetter of
    the Secretary of State's discretion.


55. Mr Hays submits that  Rostami  provides  a  complete  answer  to  these
    submissions, and that Ms Harrison's submissions  seek  to  deprive  the
    authority of any effect.  In Rostami,  Hickinbottom  J  held  that  the
    imposition of the conditions on asylum seekers' access  to  the  labour
    market by paragraphs 360 and following of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    lawful and proportionate, for detailed reasons which I need not  repeat
    here: see, for example, [92].  To  the  extent  that  the  Work  Policy
    provides no scope for discretion, there can be no complaint, submits Mr
    Hays.  So much is clear from [94] of  Rostami,  where  the  High  Court
    addressed the submission that paragraph 360 of the rules  was  unlawful
    because  it  made  no  provision  for  a  decision  maker  to  exercise
    discretion to allow an asylum seeker greater access to  the  rules,  on
    the basis of his or her own individual circumstances.  It was a  bright
    line rule from which no departure was envisaged or permitted.  At [95],
    Hickinbottom  J  recalled  that  there  is  no  "near  miss"  principle
    concerning the Immigration Rules: "in short, a rule is a rule", he held
    at [96].  Accordingly, Mr Hays  submits  that  the  Work  Policy  is  a
    lawful, bright-line policy, from which a departure may be  made  in  an
    exceptional case.  In addition, the issue of asylum seekers' access  to
    the labour market is a matter of "high policy".  The Secretary of State
    is best placed to decide who is able to access the labour market, not a
    court or tribunal.  The issue of the  weight  to  be  ascribed  to  the
    competing factors is necessarily a matter for the Secretary of State.


56. In any event, Mr Hays accepted that the Secretary of State does enjoy a
    residual discretion in the  exercise  of  her  statutory  powers  under
    section 1of the 1971 Act, and that she was prepared to depart from  the
    position  enunciated  in  her  policy  in  exceptional   circumstances.
    Further, there was no need for  the  policy  to  articulate  what  such
    exceptional circumstances were likely to be; it was sufficient that the
    possibility existed for discretion to be exercised  in  an  appropriate
    case.  Mr Hays relied on R (Gurung) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] 1 WLR 2546; [2013] Imm AR 651; [2013] EWCA Civ 8  at,
    for example, [16].


57. Ms Harrison seeks to distinguish Rostami on the basis that it concerned
    paragraph 360 and following of the Immigration Rules, rather  than  the
    exercise of discretion outside the rules pursuant to policy.   Wherever
    the Immigration Rules provide for a strict approach, it is nevertheless
    necessary to entertain the possibility of  an  exercise  of  discretion
    outside the rules, she submits.  It is trite law that a  policy  cannot
    be a blanket policy admitting of no exceptions, and to the extent  that
    the Work Policy may be so  described,  it  is  unlawful.   Ms  Harrison
    relies on the opinion of Lord Dyson JSC in R (oao) Lumba v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department and others [2012] 1 AC 245;  [2011]  UKSC
    12 at [20], where His Lordship was addressing  whether  an  unpublished
    blanket detention policy concerning foreign criminals was unlawful:


"Mr Beloff QC [for the Secretary of State] rightly accepts as correct three
propositions relating to a policy.  First, it must not be a blanket policy
admitting of no possibility of exceptions.  Secondly, if unpublished, it
must not be inconsistent with any published policy.  Thirdly, it should be
published if it will inform discretionary decisions in respect of which the
potential object of those decisions has a right to make representations..."



58.  Lord Dyson continued at [21]:


"As regards the first of these propositions, it is a well-established
principle of public law that a policy should not be so rigid as to amount
to a fetter on the discretion of decision-makers..."


59. Ms Harrison submits that the Secretary of State's reliance  on  Rostami
    is misplaced.  This is not a near-miss  case  within  the  rules.   The
    presenting issue is whether the  policy  concerning  what  takes  place
    outside the rules unlawfully fails to countenance  the  possibility  of
    the exercise of discretion, and in so failing to do  so  amounts  to  a
    policy that is so rigid as to amount to a fetter of discretion.


60. On one view, there is little difference between the applicant  and  the
    Secretary of State.  The applicant contends that the Work Policy should
    admit of exceptions; the Secretary of State accepts that there may be a
    departure from the policy in  exceptional  cases.   To  the  extent  Ms
    Harrison  relies  on  established  public  law  principles   going   to
    preserving the residual possibility of the exercise of  discretion,  Mr
    Hays submits that such residual discretion exists.  He  points  to  the
    November 2019 decision  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  in  terms
    considered whether to depart from the Work Policy.  There is  agreement
    on the principles.  The  dispute  lies  in  the  application  of  those
    principles to the facts.  I return therefore to the terms of the policy
    itself.


61. The Work Policy states on each page that it  was  "Published  for  Home
    Office staff on 22 May 2019".  The  policy  is  primarily  intended  as
    operational guidance or instructions to the respondent's  officials  as
    to how to implement paragraphs 360 and  following  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, rather than, for example, a guide to asylum seekers on accessing
    the labour market.  That the Work Policy's  target  audience  comprises
    the officials responsible for applying the relevant provisions  of  the
    rules is significant.  If the policy admits  of  a  discretion  in  the
    manner for which Mr Hays contends, one would expect to  see  references
    to the existence of such a discretion in the policy itself, or at least
    cross-references to the existence of such discretion elsewhere.


62. At page 4, the Work Policy provides:


"Those who claim asylum in the UK are not normally allowed to work whilst
their claim is being considered. They are instead provided with
accommodation and support to meet their essential living needs if they
would otherwise be destitute. The Home Office may grant permission to work
in accordance with this policy to asylum seekers whose claim has been
outstanding for more than 12 months through no fault of their own. Those
who are allowed to work are restricted to jobs on the shortage occupation
list published by the Home Office. Any permission to work granted will come
to an end if their claim is refused and any appeals rights are exhausted
because at that point they are expected to leave the UK. Those who are
granted leave have unrestricted access to the labour market." (Emphasis
added)


63. At page  6,  under  the  heading  Relevant  legislation,  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules are summarised.  The  summary  reflects  the  "bright
    line"  approach  approved  in  Rostami.   There  is  no  mention  of  a
    discretion to depart from those rules.


64.  On  page  9,  under  the  heading  Considering  permission   to   work
    applications, the policy states:


"The following criteria are relevant and must be considered by caseworkers
when deciding whether to grant permission to work..." (emphasis added)


65. There are a number of conditions precedent which an asylum seeker  must
    fulfil in order to be granted permission to work, which are covered  in
    the policy in the following terms.


        a. First, there must  be  an  outstanding  decision  on  protection
           grounds which has been outstanding for more than 12 months.  See
           Outstanding UKVI decision on protection grounds, on page 9.


        b. Secondly, the delay must not be the fault of the asylum  seeker.
           See the paragraph titled Delay, on page 9: "Permission  to  work
           must be refused where the delay was their fault."  On  page  12,
           there  is  the  sole  express  reference  to  the  exercise   of
           discretion in the policy, cited as an indicative  example  of  a
           reason to refuse an application  for  permission  to  work.   It
           provides:


                  "Reasons for refusing permission to work might include the
                  following... the delay is partly  due  to  the  claimant's
                  actions or inaction and it is  not  possible  to  exercise
                  discretion in their favour..."


        c. There is provision requiring applications to  be  refused  where
           there is an outstanding prosecution: see Criminality, page 10.


        d. Under the heading Dependants on page 10, the policy states  that
           there is "no  provision"  in  the  Immigration  Rules  to  grant
           permission to work to the dependents  of  asylum  seekers,  even
           where the claim has been outstanding for more than 12 months.


        e. Provision is made for asylum seekers with existing  leave  which
           confers permission to work in its own right.  Such  persons  are
           not subject to labour market  access  restrictions  while  their
           existing leave remains extant.


66. Page 11, headed Granting  or  refusing  applications,  deals  with  the
    substantive decision to grant or refuse permission to  work.   Page  11
    first deals with  granting  applications.   A  series  of  prescriptive
    instructions  are  set  out.   Caseworkers  "must"  use  the  specified
    template letter,  and  the  following  wording  "must"  be  used  "when
    updating Home Office records":

            . permission to work request received  in  [name  of  team]  on
              [date]
            . request granted on [date]
            . permission to work restricted to the Shortage Occupation List
              (SOL)
            . granted on basis of:  [further  submissions  outstanding  for
              more than 12 months / asylum claim outstanding for more  than
              12 months / other - give detail (delete as applicable)]
            .  ASL.4264  sent/handed  to  the  applicant/representative  at
              [address] on [date]
            . name of caseworker
            . name of team
            . telephone number (including external code)"

    I have added emphasis to the words "other..."


67. On  page  12,  while  still  dealing  with  granting  applications  for
    permission to work, under the heading Shortage Occupation  List  (SOL),
    the policy states:


"If an asylum seeker or failed asylum seeker is granted permission to work
(subject to the exceptions listed in the section on Applications from
asylum seekers with existing leave), this must be restricted to jobs on the
Shortage Occupation List (SOL), published by the Home Office." (emphasis
added)


68. Page 12 continues by dealing with Refusing  permission  to  work.   The
    potential reasons for refusal highlighted by the guidance  all  concern
    an asylum seeker's  eligibility  under  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    allowed to perform a role on the SOL.  This part of the  guidance  does
    not deal with the SOL, for example indicating that permission  to  work
    should be refused on the grounds that the role sought was  not  on  the
    SOL.


69. Against that background, I find that the terms of the policy itself  do
    not countenance the possibility that there may be a departure from  its
    requirement to restrict asylum seekers' permission to work to the  SOL,
    in any circumstances, for the following reasons:


        a. First, there  is  no  reference  in  the  policy,  anywhere,  to
           departing  from  the  provisions  of  the  rules,  or  otherwise
           granting permission outside the rules,  whether  in  exceptional
           cases or otherwise.  Specifically, there is no provision at  all
           in the policy for consideration of an application for permission
           to work outside the rules.


        b. Secondly, the only point at which the Work Policy refers to  the
           "normal" approach, that is in the context of asylum seekers "not
           normally" being allowed to work.  That is  a  reference  to  the
           default position in the first twelve months of an  asylum  claim
           being considered; the exception to the "normal" position is  the
           limited access to the labour market  that  asylum  seekers  once
           their claim has been outstanding for more  than  twelve  months,
           and even then, only to SOL roles.  There is no provision in  the
           policy which provides that the SOL restrictions are the "normal"
           approach,  such  that  in   exceptional   or   other   specified
           circumstances permission may be given on different bases.


        c. The only express reference to an exercise of discretion  by  the
           Secretary of State's officials is in the context of delay  which
           is the partial fault of an  asylum  seeker,  where  it  is  "not
           appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  in   their   favour"   to
           categorise the delay as not being the fault  of  the  applicant.
           This reference to discretion concerns whether an applicant is to
           be regarded as being at fault for their asylum claim  not  being
           considered; it goes only to  the  binary  issue  of  whether  an
           asylum seeker will be granted permission to work  in  accordance
           with the terms of the Work Policy, thereby entailing restriction
           to the SOL.  There is no reference  to  the  possibility  of  an
           exercise  of  discretion  to   permit   consideration,   in   an
           appropriate case, of whether to grant permission to  work  in  a
           non-SOL role.


        d. When giving  instructions  on  granting  access  to  the  labour
           market, the guidance does admit of the possibility  that  access
           may be granted for reasons other than an asylum claim or further
           submissions being outstanding for more than 12 months or  "other
           - give detail" reasons (see  page  11,  Granting  permission  to
           work).  This envisages the possibility that another  reason  may
           be  given  for  restricted  access   to   the   labour   market.
           Significantly, however, the mandatory wording of such  a  letter
           must  still  include  the  caveat  that  "permission   to   work
           restricted to the [SOL]".  This underlines the  absence  of  any
           provision in the policy to consider, in an appropriate  case,  a
           possible departure from the SOL restriction condition.


70. It is  clear  that  pursuant  to  the  express  terms  of  the  policy,
    permission to work, if granted, will only ever be for SOL roles.  There
    is simply no provision anywhere in the  policy  for  the  Secretary  of
    State's officials to consider exercising discretion to depart from that
    requirement in exceptional, or any, circumstances.


71. I accept that the substance of the policy is, as  Mr  Hays  submits,  a
    matter of "high policy", and that it is not for this tribunal  to  seek
    to determine that policy for the Secretary of State.  However, my  role
    is not to determine what the contents of the policy should be,  but  to
    scrutinise  it   against   well-established   public   law   principles
    prohibiting the fettering of discretion through an inflexible and rigid
    policy.  In any event, the Secretary of State's  submissions  in  these
    proceedings contend that there is a residual discretion inherent to the
    Work Policy, such that, in exceptional circumstances, there  may  be  a
    departure from,  for  example,  the  SOL-restrictions  in  the  policy.
    Accordingly, this tribunal is not straying into the forbidden territory
    of the "high policy" of asylum seekers' access to the labour market  by
    finding that the Secretary of State's policy  does  not  encompass  the
    discretion which she contends is inherent to it.  My findings  in  this
    regard merely contrast the reality of the contents of the  Work  Policy
    with the submissions made by Mr  Hays  in  relation  to  it.   See  the
    following paragraphs of  Mr  Hays'  skeleton  argument,  with  emphasis
    added:


"...the Work Policy... gives effect to the Rules, unless it is appropriate
to make an exemption." (para 25)


     "...this is a case where, subject to exceptions, the relevant policy
gives effect to an extant decision-making framework (the Rules) which is
comprehensive and lawfully admits of no exception." (para 36(ii)(a))


"...the present situation is a case of a lawful bright-line rule from which
exceptions may be made.  That is an unobjectionable state of affairs."
(para 36(ii)(c))


"...in this case the 'rule' is defined by the Rules, which may be departed
from in an exceptional case.  This is unobjectionable." (para 36(ii)(d))


"A policy from which the decision-maker may exceptionally depart need not
spell out what those exceptional circumstances would be... That is simply a
product of the decision maker having the power to depart from a policy in
an exceptional case." (para 36(iii))


72. Accordingly, it is appropriate for this tribunal to examine  the  terms
    of the policy for wording of the sort that would  be  expected  in  the
    event that such discretion was to be found  within  it,  and  highlight
    omissions or deficiencies when the policy  is  scrutinised  against  Mr
    Hays' realistic acceptance that there must be some form of  ability  to
    depart from it in exceptional circumstances.  For the reasons  set  out
    above, no such discretion is clear from the terms of the policy.


73. Mr Hays submitted that if such wording was not present in  the  policy,
    the policy should nevertheless be read and scrutinised as  though  some
    discretion were inherent to it.  To that end, Mr Hays relied on  R (oao
    Chaudhry)  v  DPP  [2016]  EWHC  2447  (Admin)  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that the ability of a decision maker  to  depart  from  the
    terms of a policy need not be express.  Chaudhry concerned the  process
    established by the Crown Prosecution  Service  ("the  CPS")  to  review
    decisions not to prosecute certain suspects, pursuant to  its  Victims'
    Right to Review ("VRR") guidance.  The CPS had declined to prosecute an
    individual said by the claimant to have been involved in the  abduction
    of her children, on the grounds that there was no realistic prospect of
    conviction.  The suspect was the sister of the father of  the  abducted
    children,  who  had  been  convicted  of  child   abduction   in   this
    jurisdiction and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.  The  CPS  had
    initially declined to reconsider the  decision  not  to  prosecute  the
    sister, citing a provision in the VRR which excluded from the scope  of
    the policy cases where charges were brought against some, but  not  all
    possible, suspects.   The  CPS  later  reviewed  the  decision  not  to
    prosecute the sister, notwithstanding the terms of the VRR.  The review
    upheld the decision not to prosecute.  One of the grounds for  judicial
    review  was  that  the  guidance  unlawfully  prevented  the  CPS  from
    reviewing a decision not to prosecute a  suspect  of  its  own  motion,
    thereby unlawfully fettering its own discretion, presenting an absolute
    bar to reconsidering decisions to prosecute such as those  at  play  in
    those proceedings.   The Divisional Court  dismissed  the  application,
    finding  that  the  CPS  enjoyed  the  ability  to   review   its   own
    prosecutorial decisions.  Little turns on this authority, which sits in
    the  very  specific  context   of   prosecutorial   independence,   the
    operational  ability  of  prosecutors  to  review  their  own  previous
    decisions, and the margin of discretion  enjoyed  by  prosecutors  when
    taking such decisions.  See, for example, [16], [28], [36],  [38],  and
    [43].  The case turned on its context and facts, and is  not  authority
    for the general proposition for which Mr Hays places reliance upon it.


74.  Mr  Hays  also  sought  to  resist  Ms  Harrison's  submissions   that
    exceptionality must be articulated by the terms of the  policy  through
    relying on Gurung.  The policy with  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
    concerned in Gurung expressly admitted of the  possibility  that  there
    may be exceptional cases meriting a departure  from  the  policy.   The
    discretion inherent to the policy under consideration in Gurung  throws
    the approach adopted by the Work Policy into sharp relief.  In  Gurung,
    an issue was whether the Secretary of State was obliged to set out,  on
    the face of the policy or in similar guidance, the criteria to be taken
    into  account  when  considering   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances, meriting a departure from  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions concerning Gurkha family reunion cases, in  light  of  the
    well-documented "historical injustice"  experienced  by  Gurkhas.   The
    policy stated:


"Children over the age of 18 and other dependant relatives will not
normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in line with the main
applicant and would be expected to qualify for leave to enter or remain in
the UK under the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules, for example
under paragraph 317, or under the provisions of Article 8 of the Human
Rights Act. Exceptional circumstances may be considered on a case by case
basis. For more information on the exceptional circumstances in which
discretion may be exercised see [para] 13.2." (emphasis added)


    As may readily be seen, the Gurkha policy  said  that  adult  relatives
    would "not  normally"  qualify  for  an  exercise  of  discretion,  but
    exceptional circumstances could be considered on a case by case  basis.
    As the analysis of the Work Policy set out above demonstrates, there is
    no such criteria in the present matter.


75. Of course, it is clear that in the November 2019 decision the Secretary
    of State did expressly address her mind to  the  issue  of  whether  to
    exercise  discretion  outside  the  requirements  of   paragraph   360.
    However, I do not consider that that decision,  which  is  outside  the
    scope of this judicial review application, is capable  of  imputing  to
    the Work Policy a discretion which does not feature on the face of that
    policy.  There is no evidence from the  Secretary  of  State  that,  in
    practice, she applies the Work Policy with the inherent possibility  of
    the exercise  of  discretion  in  mind.   While  Mr  Williams'  witness
    statement accepts at paragraph 4 "a power to depart from the policy  in
    exceptional circumstances", there is no evidence from the Secretary  of
    State that she ever considers whether to do so,  save  for  the  single
    example in the November 2019 decision, and the decision in IJ (Kosovo).
     The fact that there is no reference to an exercise of  discretion  may
    give rise to a real risk that, as here, the  policy  is  applied  in  a
    rigid and inflexible manner, fettering the discretion of  the  decision
    maker.


76. The point is underlined with all the  more  force  when  one  considers
    that, in the February 2020 application, the applicant expressly invited
    the Secretary of State to consider exercising discretion on a number of
    bases.  The substance of the response from the Secretary  of  State  in
    the February 2020 decision was little more  than  a  standard  refusal,
    which not only failed to engage with the specific factors the Secretary
    of State was invited to consider, but did nothing to support  Mr  Hays'
    contentions that the Secretary of State is  prepared  to  consider  the
    exercise of discretion in an appropriate case.  To the extent that  the
    November  2019  decision  mitigates  against  a  conclusion  of   rigid
    inflexibility in the Work Policy, the February  2020  decision  negates
    and cancels  out  any  such  mitigating  factors.   The  February  2020
    decision was taken entirely in accordance with the Work Policy and is a
    true reflection of its rigidity.


77. Mr Hays sought to rely on Budd v Office of the Independent  Adjudicator
    for Higher Education [2010] EWHC 1056  (Admin)  as  authority  for  the
    proposition that an absence of evidence of discretion  being  exercised
    is not evidence of a fettering of discretion.  However, that is nothing
    to the point.  In  Budd,  the  review  policy  of  the  Office  of  the
    Independent Adjudicator encompassed the possibility of an oral hearing:
    see paragraph 6.2 of the policy, quoted at [23] of  the  judgment,  but
    there had not been an oral hearing in the course of the complaint under
    consideration.  The mere  fact  that  an  oral  hearing  had  not  been
    conducted was not evidence of discretion being fettered; the High Court
    noted at [90] that it was difficult to see  why  there  should  be  any
    general need for an oral hearing, in the context  of  higher  education
    disputes, and that dispute specifically.  In contrast to paragraph  6.2
    of the policy under consideration in Budd, the Work Policy contains  no
    provision for the exercise of discretion at all.  The  Work  Policy  is
    rigid and inflexible, as currently drafted.   Budd is not authority for
    a general proposition that  a  policy  may  legitimately  preclude  the
    exercise of discretion; the extract  relied  upon  by  Mr  Hays  simply
    demonstrates that in the case-specific  procedural  context  of  higher
    education grading disputes, it was not irrational or otherwise unlawful
    for the Office of the  Independent  Adjudicator  to  have  declined  to
    invoke the oral hearing procedure in the course of that dispute.


78. I am fortified in this approach  by  that  of  the  High  Court  in  IJ
    (Kosovo), which found that the Work Policy makes no  reference  to  the
    claimed inherent discretion, with the effect that it  is  "misleading".
    While  the  context  of  the  court's  analysis  was  the  exercise  of
    discretion for the purposes of ensuring compatibility with  the  United
    Kingdom's  international  obligations  under  the  Council  of   Europe
    Convention on Action against Human  Trafficking,  the  absence  of  any
    references to discretion is equally likely to  lead  to  a  failure  to
    consider the exercise of discretion in other cases, as with the present
    matter.  See [75], per Bourne J:


"the lack of any reference to the discretion obviously makes the guidance
misleading."


79. I find that the Work Policy  is  a  blanket  policy,  admitting  of  no
    possibility of exceptions, and is unlawful to that extent, and  make  a
    declaration to that effect.


80. Ground 1 therefore succeeds.


Ground 2


81. To the extent  that  Ground  2  seeks  to  attack  the  policy  on  the
    additional basis that it fails  to  articulate  the  criteria  for  the
    exercise of discretion,  that  submission  is  misconceived.   In  this
    respect, Gurung at [22] is apposite:


"It is inherent in any policy which permits a departure from a general rule
in exceptional circumstances that there may legitimately be scope for
different views as to whether there are exceptional circumstances on the
facts of a particular case. There is implicit in the exercise of any
discretion the risk that different decision-makers can legitimately make
different decisions on what appear to be indistinguishable facts. The range
of reasonable (and therefore legitimate) responses may be wide. This is the
inevitable consequence of giving a decision-maker a discretion. But that
does not mean that a discretionary rule or policy is unlawful on grounds of
uncertainty."


82. In the present context, not only are the criteria  for  departing  from
    the Work  Policy  matters  of  "high  policy",  but  articulating  such
    criteria in the abstract is likely to be almost impossible.  Indeed, as
    the February 2020 application pointed out, this  applicant's  situation
    as a former British citizen who  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
    unaccompanied child now facing  removal  to  Afghanistan,  pending  the
    resolution of protection proceedings in SIAC is unique.  Any attempt to
    articulate,  in  the  abstract,  possible   grounds   for   exceptional
    circumstances in the Work Policy would have  been  highly  unlikely  to
    have foreseen such an unusual situation, and would have, therefore, not
    benefitted the applicant in the manner he seeks.


83. Ground 2 therefore fails.


84. Ground 3 is a post decision matter and was not pursued with any  vigour
    before me.  The Covid Pandemic had not taken hold at the  time  of  the
    impugned decision.  To the extent the applicant contends  there  was  a
    general obligation on the Secretary of State to review her Work  Policy
    in light of  the  Pandemic,  that  submission  is  misconceived.   That
    delivery drivers performed a valuable role  during  the  lockdown,  and
    have done since, does  not  place  the  Secretary  of  State  under  an
    obligation proactively to review the Work Policy, disapplying  the  SOL
    requirement  to  the  extent  that  it  relates  to  delivery  drivers.
    Delivery drivers are not on the SOL.  The contents of the SOL  are,  as
    Mr Hays submits, a matter of "high policy", and are chosen in light  of
    independent advice provided to the Secretary of State by the  Migration
    Advisory Committee.  To the extent, in an individual case, an applicant
    invites the Secretary of State to exercise discretion in their  favour,
    including on pandemic grounds, it is  incumbent  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider that application.  But it cannot be said, and nor did
    Ms  Harrison  realistically  seek  to   pursue,   that   the   Pandemic
    necessitated an exception to this aspect of the SOL requirement in  the
    Work Policy.


85. I dismiss this application in relation to Ground 3.


Grounds 5 and 6 - Articles 8 and 14 ECHR


86. In respect of Ground 5, the statement of  facts  and  grounds  contends
    that the Secretary of State's decision  in  this  case  constitutes  an
    arbitrary and/or disproportionate  interference  with  the  applicant's
    right to private life under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    human rights.


87. In light of my decision concerning ground 4 in which I have  found  the
    February 2020 decision to be unlawful, it is not necessary to  consider
    this ground in depth, other than to  highlight  the  binding  authority
    dispositively determining this ground against the applicant.  In R (oao
    Negassi and Lutalo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    EWCA Civ 151, the Court of Appeal  considered  whether  Article  8  was
    engaged by the restrictions imposed upon two asylum seekers' access  to
    the labour market.   The  court  rejected  the  submission.   At  [38],
    Maurice Kay LJ held:


"In the present cases, where it is common ground that Article 8 does not
embrace a general right to work, I do not consider that the protected right
to respect for private life embraces the right of a foreign national, who
has no Treaty, statutory or permitted right of access to the domestic
labour market, to an entitlement to work."


88. I do not consider there to be any features of the present matter  which
    distinguish the applicant from the  positions  of  Mr  Negassi  and  Mr
    Lutalo concerning their access  to  the  labour  market.   Like  Messrs
    Negassi and Lutalo,  the  applicant  is  a  foreign  national  with  no
    automatic right of access to the labour market.


89. Consideration of the authorities analysed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Negassi underlines this conclusion.  At  [34]  of  Negassi,  the  court
    considered Sidabras v Lithuania (55480/2000) (2006) 42  EHRR  6,  which
    concerned employment restrictions imposed by Lithuania on those of  its
    citizens who, prior to independence,  had  worked  for  the  Lithuanian
    branch of the KGB.  One reading of [43] of the judgment of the European
    Court of Human Rights could imply the existence of a broad, Article  8-
    based ability to "freely pursue the development and fulfilment  of  his
    or her personality." Two observations follow, based on the analysis  of
    the Court of Appeal.  First, Sidabras concerned the ability of  certain
    citizens of Lithuania to access the labour market  in  the  country  of
    their own nationality.  The applicant, as  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,
    cannot possibly be said to be in an analogous position.  No  breach  of
    Article 8 was found in Sidabras in any event.  Secondly, to the  extent
    that the approach of the ECHR appeared to mandate a broad,  Article  8-
    based right to access the labour  market,  it  was  described  by  Lord
    Bingham at [15] of R (oao Countryside Alliance and others and others) v
    Her Majesty's Attorney General and another [2006] EWCA Civ  817  as  "a
    very extreme case on its facts".


90. I reject Ms Harrison's submission that the High Court in  Rostami,  and
    the Court of Appeal in Negassi, are restricted to  their  facts.   This
    applicant is subject to a range of SIAC bail  conditions  which  impose
    significant restrictions on his liberty; to  the  extent  there  is  an
    interference with his private  life  Article  8  rights  due  to  those
    restrictions, that interference is caused by the SIAC  bail  conditions
    imposed in consequence  to  the  applicant's  national  security  risk,
    rather than the  terms  of  the  Work  Policy,  or  the  February  2020
    decision.  So much is clear from paragraph  29  of  the  applicant's  4
    February 2020 application for permission to work:


"[C6] is in a unique situation.  He has been under restrictive bail
conditions for the last five years that have seriously restricted his
movements and his ability to occupy his time..."


91. The only example of Article 8 being found to be engaged by  a  decision
    concerning an asylum seekers' access to the labour market is R  (Tekle)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWHC 3064  (Admin).
    It is well established that Tekle turns on its facts.  See  Negassi  at
    [35]:


"Tekle may have been correctly decided on its facts but they went way
beyond those in the present cases. The context was one in which the
Secretary of State had deliberately adopted a policy whereby decisions on
claims such as the one under review were deferred for five years or more."


     And again at [38]:


"Tekle is readily distinguishable."


92. Mr Hays highlights the Court of Appeal's lukewarm endorsement of  Tekle
    in the extract quoted above; even when confined to its facts, the  high
    watermark of the Court of Appeal's views of the case were that it  "may
    have been correctly decided".   There  is  force  to  that  submission.
    Tekle is of no assistance to the applicant on Article 8 grounds.


93. Negassi is binding on this tribunal.  As Hickinbottom J said  at  [111]
    of Rostami of similar Article 8 submissions made in  those  proceedings
    when following and applying Negassi:


"[W]e are simply not in Article 8 country here."


94. I find that Article 8 was not engaged by the February 2020 decision.  I
    dismiss Ground 5 of this application.


Ground 6


95. As pleaded in the Statement of Facts and Grounds, Ground 6 is  anchored
    to case-specific considerations which contend that  the  applicant  has
    suffered unjustified  discrimination  on  account  of  his  disability,
    thereby contravening Article 14 of the ECHR, on the basis the  decision
    is within the "ambit" of Article 8.


96. At [80], Ms Harrison's skeleton argument seeks impermissibly to  expand
    the scope of the pleaded ground to attack the  Work  Policy  itself  on
    this basis, as well as paragraph 360A(ii) of the Immigration Rules.   I
    decline to permit the applicant  to  advance  a  significantly  broader
    ground for judicial review than the ground upon which  he  was  granted
    permission, which related to the decision  and  not  the  policy.   See
    paragraph (4) of Judge  Owens'  grant  of  permission.   Further,  this
    tribunal does not have the jurisdiction to entertain a challenge to  an
    immigration rule, and it was incumbent upon the applicant  to  seek  to
    transfer the proceedings to the High Court in order to seek  permission
    to advance submissions on that basis.


97. In the light of my decision concerning Ground 4, it is not necessary to
    consider whether the impugned decision breached Article 14 of the  ECHR
    on the basis it was within the ambit of Article 8.  I accept that in IJ
    (Kosovo), the High Court held that the decision  in  those  proceedings
    was within the "ambit" of Article 8, although Bourne J  held  that,  in
    the case of the  decision  refusing  to  exercise  discretion  in  IJ's
    favour, all relevant  factors  were  taken  into  account:  see  [109].
    However, in light of my  decision  concerning  Ground  4,  it  will  be
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State to consider all factors  advanced
    by the applicant  upon  reconsideration  of  the  application,  and  no
    further analysis of the Article 14 point is necessary  in  relation  to
    the February 2020 decision in these proceedings.


98. For these reasons, I dismiss this application on Ground 6.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


99. This application for judicial review is granted in relation to  Grounds
    1 and 4, and dismissed in relation to Grounds 2, 3, 5 and 6.













