
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL

  HM (Policy concessions not Convention recognition) Iraq [2006] UKAIT 00092

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Bradford
Date of Hearing: 21 April 2006
                                            Promulgated on: 12 December 2006
                                   Before:


 Mr C M G Ockelton, Deputy President of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                      Senior Immigration Judge Roberts
                          Immigration Judge Dickson

                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:           Mr D Seddon, instructed by Refugee Legal
Centre
For the Respondent:          Ms R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


A claim that the appellant is (or  was)  entitled  to  be  recognised  as  a
refugee under the Convention has to be distinguished from a claim  that  the
appellant is (or was) entitled under  some  policy  to  be  treated  in  the
United Kingdom as a refugee.   An  appellant  cannot  select  elements  from
those two distinct arguments and combine them into a hybrid claim.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This was the reconsideration, in pursuance of an order made by  Ouseley
    J, of the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  on
    4 August 2005 to give removal directions against him as an  overstayer.



 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He was born on 20 May 1986.  He is
    a Kurd.  He lived  in  a  town  close  to  Kirkuk,  in  the  government
    controlled area, just outside the Kurdish Autonomous Zone (KAZ).   When
    he was aged about 16 he began a relationship with a girl whom he met in
    secret.  The relationship continued for about a year until  25  January
    2003, when a neighbour saw them leaving a house together and  contacted
    the appellant's girlfriends' mother.  Her husband, the  girl's  father,
    was a member of Saddam Hussein's intelligence and security  forces  and
    had considerable power in the area.  Because it was clear that he would
    not approve of the relationship, the appellant feared for his life.  He
    therefore left his home, travelling across the KAZ and through  Turkey,
    and eventually came to the United  Kingdom,  arriving  on  17  February
    2003.  He applied for asylum the same day.  After consideration of  his
    case, the Secretary of State decided on 12 March  2003  to  refuse  him
    asylum.  Two reasons are given for that decision in the letter of  that
    date.  The first is that  "your  claim  is  not  based  on  a  fear  of
    persecution in Iraq because of race, religion, nationality,  membership
    of a particular social group or political opinion", the second is  that
    "the Secretary of State finds it not unreasonable to expect you  to  go
    to a part of Iraq that you would be safe".  The second  reason  is  the
    subject  of  some  elaboration  in  the  letter  refusing  asylum;   in
    particular, the  Secretary  of  State  notes  that  the  appellant  had
    travelled through KAZ on his way  to  Turkey,  apparently  without  any
    problems.  On 13 March  2003  the  Secretary  of  State  issued  formal
    notices refusing to grant asylum  but  granting  exceptional  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom until 19 May  2004,  the  day  before  the
    appellant's eighteenth birthday.  The reason for the  grant  is  stated
    simply that "it has been decided that it would be right because of  the
    particular circumstances of your case".

 3. The appellant appealed under s69(3) of the 1999 Act.  In his Notice  of
    Appeal he advanced human rights grounds,  which  were  the  subject  of
    separate consideration  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  recorded  in  a
    supplementary refusal letter dated  30  September.   The  Secretary  of
    State rejected the claim based on  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and pointed out that Saddam Hussein's regime no longer  posed  a
    threat to anybody as it had been removed from power by armed action  in
    March and April 2003.

 4. The appellant's appeal was heard by an Adjudicator on 7  January  2004.
    The appellant was professionally represented.  Before  the  Adjudicator
    it was conceded on the appellant's behalf that he  had  no  entitlement
    under the Refugee Convention because the ill-treatment he feared  would
    not be for reasons of any of the  five  motives  mentioned  in  Article
    1A(2) of that Convention.  The appeal proceeded therefore to deal  with
    human rights matters  only.   The  Adjudicator  dismissed  the  appeal.
    There was no further challenge to that determination.

 5. There was also no further grant of leave to the appellant, whose  leave
    accordingly expired on 19 May 2004.   On  15  October  2004,  with  the
    assistance of solicitors (according  to  his  subsequent  statement  at
    interview) the appellant applied for further leave to remain, solely on
    human rights grounds.  He was interviewed on 7 March 2005.   He  stated
    that he still feared his former girlfriend's father.   We  say  "former
    girlfriend" because he now based his claim  partly  on  a  relationship
    with a new girlfriend, who he had met at a nightclub, and who  he  knew
    only as "Christine".  On 4 August 2005 the Secretary of  State  refused
    his application and decided to remove the appellant.  The Secretary  of
    State took the view that the matters now mentioned by the claimant were
    not significantly different from those raised in  his  original  asylum
    claim.  Further, it was said that if there were  any  difficulties  for
    the appellant, he could live in an appropriate part of the KAZ.  So far
    as the new relationship was concerned, it had been begun at a time when
    the appellant had no leave and his situation in the United Kingdom  was
    unstable.  There would therefore, in the Secretary of State's view,  no
    disruption to the relationship if  the  appellant  now  had  to  leave.
    Given that the appellant was an overstayer who was  not  being  granted
    leave, he was liable to removal under s10 of the 1999 Act.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal was heard  by
    an  Immigration  Judge  on  9  September  2005.   The   appellant   was
    unrepresented.  It is, however,  clear  from  the  Immigration  Judge's
    determination that he gave the appellant every possible opportunity  to
    say anything he wanted to say in support of his case.  The  Immigration
    Judge took the view that the appellant had failed to establish that, if
    he were returned to Iraq, he would be at risk of ill-treatment that  he
    could not reasonably be expected to avoid by moving to a safe  part  of
    the country.  So far as his life in the United Kingdom  was  concerned,
    the appellant now had  another  girlfriend,  called  Alison.   She  was
    certainly aware of his immigration status, and  the  Immigration  Judge
    found no truly exceptional reason for departing  from  the  Immigration
    Rules in the appellant's case.  He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 7. There was then an application for reconsideration.  The application was
    made on a ground which had not previously been raised.  It was that  in
    2003 the Secretary of State had not treated the appellant in accordance
    with his policy relating to claimants from Iraq.   The  terms  of  that
    policy had only become apparent in the course of litigation in the case
    of Rashid v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 744.  The Grounds of Challenge are set
    out in the application for reconsideration as follows:

      "Jurisdiction

      8.    The IJ's jurisdiction on appeal extended to a  consideration  of
           whether the decision appealed against was not in accordance with
           the  law  (s84(1)(e)).    Such   a   jurisdiction   extends   to
           consideration  of  whether  or  not  the  Secretary  of  State's
           decision was vitiated by errors of public law: DS  Abdi  v  SSHD
           [1996] Imm AR 148 Court of Appeal.  A failure to  follow  policy
           (all other things being equal) is plainly a public law error.

      Rashid

      9.    At the time of the initial decision on the claimant's case,  the
           policy articulated in Rashid was in  play.   At  such  time,  no
           removals of Kurds were being effected to  government  controlled
           Iraq.  In recognition of the well-founded  fear  of  persecution
           for relevant reasons  faced  by  Kurdish  returnees.   In  those
           premises, the Secretary of State erred in failing to  grant  the
           Claimant refugee status at a time when he took a policy decision
           to grant the Claimant  exceptional  leave  to  remain  until  he
           reached majority.

      10.   In these premises the IJ erred in failing to  allow  the  appeal
           pursuant to his not in accordance with the law jurisdiction."

 8. The Tribunal made no order for reconsideration, but on renewal an order
    was made by Ouseley J for reasons he gave as follows:

        "There is nothing wrong with the conclusion that  the  claimant  is
        not entitled to asylum or that there would be no breach of  Article
        3 in returning him.  He did not raise the point which he now raises
        under the Robinson principle.  He arrived in the UK 17.2.03 and was
        refused asylum on 12.3.03 on the grounds  that  he  could  relocate
        safely to KAZ.  He did not appeal against that decision.  The  Govt
        policy not to take that point was changed on 21.3.03.  He  received
        ELR as a minor and an extension was refused on 4.8.05.  It was that
        decision which was the  subject  of  the  appeal.   The  Abdi  line
        permits a failure to consider a  policy  to  be  an  error  of  law
        although it is not for the AIT to  enforce  the  policy.   The  AIT
        cannot deal with abuse or misuse of power as if it were a JR Court.
         The Rashid decision was not simply a failure to apply a policy but
        involved an abuse of power because of the  extended  duration  over
        which the policy had been applicable to Rashid  but  had  not  been
        applied.  The  facts  are  entirely  different  here  in  terms  of
        timescale and applying Rashid, an abuse case would be very hard  to
        mount.  Yet absent that the only aspect which could be said  no  to
        be in accordance with law  would  be  the  failure  on  12.3.03  to
        address the policy; this was  some  two  years  before  the  appeal
        decision.  A JR Court might regard there as having  been  delay  in
        raising the point which could  be  circumvented  were  the  AIT  to
        broaden its  jurisdiction  to  cover  JR  matters.   However  I  am
        satisfied that there is sufficient in the point to make it arguable
        that it could have an effect upon the  outcome.   It  is  a  matter
        which  could  usefully  be  dealt  with  at  a  senior  level  upon
        reconsideration."

 9. The extent of the policies  operated  by  the  Secretary  of  State  at
    relevant times is now reasonably  clear,  as  a  result  of  a  witness
    statement by a Home Office official, Mr A P Saunders, prepared for  use
    in Judicial Review proceedings before Collins J, R, H  and  AH  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWHC 526 Admin.  The policies in question appear to have been as
    follows.

     1. Before the military action against Iraq in March 2003, Iraqi asylum
        seekers from South and Central Iraq were normally (perhaps  always)
        granted exceptional leave to remain if they  did  not  establish  a
        claim under the Refugee Convention, because of a number of  factors
        including the severe penalties imposed by Saddam Hussein  on  those
        who left Iraq illegally.  Iraqi asylum seekers from the KAZ who did
        not establish that they were entitled under the Refugee  Convention
        were normally (perhaps always) granted exceptional leave to  remain
        because of poor humanitarian conditions in the KAZ, or the lack  of
        a practical route for return, or both.  (Paragraphs 24 and 26 of Mr
        Saunders' witness statement).
     2. Following the establishment of the KAZ there  was  some  suggestion
        that the KAZ might provide an internal relocation  alternative  for
        asylum seekers from Southern and Central  Iraq.   But  IND  Policy,
        possibly from the very beginning,  and  certainly  for  some  years
        before removals to Iraq temporarily ceased on 20  March  2003,  was
        that the possibility of internal relocation to Northern Iraq  would
        not be advanced in the case of a person from South or Central Iraq,
        and therefore that asylum would not be refused on the basis of that
        possibility.  (Paragraphs 28 to 34, 48, 61 to 62, 65 and 68  of  Mr
        Saunders' statement).  Difficulties have arisen because that policy
        was, apparently erroneously, not applied consistently.
     3. The period of exceptional leave to remain granted to those who were
        found not to be refugees was, at first, four years.  On 20 February
        2003 the period was reduced to six months "in view of the uncertain
        situation surrounding Iraq, in particular the prospect of  imminent
        military action".  (Paragraph 64 of Mr Saunders' statement).
     4. Independently of any policy  specific  to  Iraq,  an  unaccompanied
        minor who claimed asylum but failed to establish entitlement  under
        the Refugee Convention was granted exceptional leave to remain  for
        a period expiring on the day before his eighteenth birthday.

10. At the hearing before us,  Mr  Seddon  made  extensive  submissions  on
    jurisdiction, at our request.  He based the rest of his submissions  on
    his exceptionally helpful skeleton argument, which we may summarise  as
    follows.

     1. By advancing an argument  based  on  the  possibility  of  internal
        relocation in 2003, the Secretary of State had failed to follow his
        own policy.
     2. The Secretary of  State  was  wrong  in  his  conclusion  that  the
        appellant was  not  entitled  to  refugee  status  for  lack  of  a
        Convention reason for the feared persecution.
     3. Therefore, the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  recognised  the
        appellant as a refugee, by reaching the right answer on  Convention
        reason and by ignoring any question of  internal  relocation.   His
        failure to recognise the appellant as a refugee in 2003 amounted to
        "conspicuous unfairness".  The decision to remove him in  2005  was
        therefore not in accordance with the law, because it could be  made
        only in the context of an unfair refusal of refugee status in 2003.


     4. Strictly in the alternative to 3, if the  Secretary  of  State  was
        entitled to refuse to recognise the appellant as a refugee in 2003,
        he ought to at least to  have  granted  him  exceptional  leave  to
        remain on the same basis as he would have granted it to  any  other
        Iraqi asylum claimant.  The grant, being after  20  February  2003,
        would have been of six months leave, which would,  in  Mr  Seddon's
        submission, be "on a 'risk' basis i.e. not simply on the grounds of
        age".  The failure to grant such leave means that the appellant has
        been treated unfairly and he is entitled  to  be  replaced  in  the
        position he should probably have  been  in.   That  means  that  he
        should be treated as  having  been  granted  exceptional  leave  to
        remain on a "risk" basis, and should now be permitted  to  make  an
        application to extend that leave, as  though  the  leave  had  been
        granted and the application had been in time.  In this case too the
        2005 decision to remove was a decision which was not in  accordance
        with the law because the appellant's lack of  leave  again  results
        from a faulty decision in 2003.

11. In her submissions  Ms  Petterson  reminded  us  that  our  task  in  a
    reconsideration is primarily to determine whether the Immigration Judge
    materially erred in law in his conclusions.  He  was  dealing  with  an
    appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.  He dealt with the arguments
    put to him and it had not been shown that he  made  any  error  in  his
    conclusions on those arguments.  So far as the points made by Mr Seddon
    were concerned, the references in the 2002 refusal to  the  possibility
    of internal relocation were erroneous,  but  refugee  status  was  also
    refused upon the basis of a lack of a Convention reason, and  it  could
    not accordingly be said that the claimant should have been regarded  as
    a refugee.  His case had been dealt  with  promptly  and  he  had  been
    granted more than six months  exceptional  leave  to  remain.   It  was
    difficult to see any unfairness.  In reply,  Mr   Seddon  repeated  his
    submission that the Secretary of State's 2003 conclusion on  Convention
    reason was simply wrong.  He said that he accepted  that  had  he  been
    granted exceptional leave to remain as an Iraqi asylum  seeker  (rather
    than an Iraqi minor asylum seeker) it would have been  leave  for  only
    six months, but submitted that if the  leave  had  been  granted  on  a
    "protection" basis rather than on a  "minority"  basis,  the  appellant
    might have been treated more favourably when he sought to renew it.  He
    now ought to be treated as though he had been granted exceptional leave
    to remain on a "protection" basis.

12. There is no doubt that the Secretary of  State  erred  in  raising  the
    possibility of internal relocation against in the appellant in his 2003
    decision.  It is, however, important to appreciate precisely why it  is
    said that he erred.  It is not because internal relocation had  somehow
    ceased to be part of refugee law.  It is merely because  the  Secretary
    of State had a policy of not raising the issue.  As is apparent from Mr
    Saunders' witness statement, even the UNHCR appears to have wavered  as
    to whether the KAZ constituted a possible  relocation  alternative  for
    asylum seekers from Central and Southern Iraq.   The  decision  not  to
    raise the issue was taken on a purely pragmatic basis.  The consequence
    of that must be that individuals who in fact had a reasonable and  safe
    relocation  alternative  within  Northern  Iraq  were,  in  the  United
    Kingdom, treated  as  though  they  were  refugees  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.  And that treatment was not on  the  basis  of  entitlement
    under the Refugee Convention, but as  a  result  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's pragmatic decision.  In the same way that  a  policy  sometimes
    operates to grant benefits outside the Immigration Rules,  this  was  a
    policy that operated (in some, unidentified cases, but as a  matter  of
    principle) outside the Refugee Convention.

13. It is in that context that Mr Seddon's submission about the  Convention
    reason for the harm threatened to the appellant needs to be  evaluated.
    In his skeleton argument, and before us, Mr Seddon treated  this  issue
    as though it were a  matter  of  refugee  law.   That  is  to  say,  he
    attempted to show that in the  circumstances  in  which  the  appellant
    found  himself,  and  on  the  basis  of  authority,   the   threatened
    persecution would be for one of the reasons specified  in  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The problem is that  that  process  does  not  enable  the
    appellant to demonstrate that in 2003 he should have been recognised as
    a refugee.  In order to determine whether someone is a refugee, one has
    to ask the simple composite question posed by the  Refugee  Convention.
    One cannot do it by ignoring questions  of  internal  relocation.   The
    ignoring of questions of  internal  relocation  is  a  feature  of  the
    Secretary of State's policy, not of the Refugee Convention itself.   If
    we  are  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  was   in   truth,   in
    international law, a  refugee,  we  have  to  take  both  factors  into
    account.  The appellant has never shown that the arguments on  internal
    relocation raised in the 2003 Refusal Letter were without  merit  as  a
    matter of international law, and we think it is unlikely in the extreme
    that he could succeed in doing so.   What  he  does  say  is  that  the
    arguments should not have been made, not because they were not relevant
    to his refugee status, but because the Secretary of State had a  policy
    of not raising those arguments.  The appellant fails to  show  that  in
    2003 he was a refugee, because he seeks to do so by reference  to  only
    one of the reasons raised against him.  The appellant cannot show  that
    he  was  a  refugee  by  excluding  considerations  going  to  internal
    relocation.  What he might be able to show is that if the Secretary  of
    State had applied his policy correctly he might (or would) have treated
    the appellant as a refugee, whether he was one or not.  That is to say,
    he might have applied his policy outside the Refugee Convention in such
    a way as to call the appellant a refugee.  But when we are  considering
    the exercise of the Secretary of State's policy, we are concerned  with
    his decision-making process, not primarily with  whether  the  decision
    was correct.  Whether or not reasons could now be found  for  asserting
    that the Secretary of State was incorrect in holding that there was  no
    Convention reason, nothing that has been advanced at any stage in  this
    appeal demonstrates that the Secretary of State erred in his  procedure
    for making the decision.  That the issue is  very  far  from  clear  is
    demonstrated by the  fact  that  the  lack  of  Convention  reason  was
    conceded by the appellant in the  2003  appeal,  when  he  was  legally
    represented.  Whether there was a Convention reason in the present case
    is, in truth, a matter of some difficulty.  In  the  operation  of  his
    policy the Secretary of State decided that the appellant's claim to  be
    a refugee failed for that reason.   Whether  he  was  as  a  matter  of
    international law right or wrong on  that  basis,  his  decision-making
    process and his conclusion are not  shown  to  have  been  in  any  way
    unfair, and the conclusion was accepted by the appellant  in  the  2003
    appeal.

14. The appellant cannot make  his  case  by  selecting  one  element  from
    arguments based on the policy and another element from arguments  based
    on the Convention.  So far as the Convention is concerned, he  has  not
    established that he was a refugee in 2003, because for  those  purposes
    he cannot exclude considerations of internal relocation.  So far as the
    policy is concerned, he has not established unfairness in  refusing  to
    recognise him as a refugee, because he cannot do that  without  showing
    that it was unfair (rather than arguably wrong) for  the  Secretary  of
    State to decide that there was no Convention reason for the  threatened
    ill-treatment.

15. For those reasons we reject Mr Seddon's submission that  the  appellant
    should have been recognised as a refugee in  2003  and  his  submission
    that it was in some way improper for the  Secretary  of  State  not  to
    recognise the appellant as a refugee in 2003.

16. The question then is whether the appellant was entitled to  exceptional
    leave to remain that was in some way  different  in  nature  from  that
    which he was granted.  So far as the period of leave is  concerned,  he
    cannot complain: he received rather over  a  year's  leave  instead  of
    merely six months.  Mr Seddon's submission is  that  his  leave  should
    have been granted not on the basis of his minority but on the basis  of
    the need to provide  protection  against  difficulties  that  he  would
    suffer if returned to Iraq.  We have the very gravest  of  difficulties
    with that submission.  First, it is very far from clear the  difference
    between various qualities of leave in early 2003 is anything other than
    a construct of Mr  Seddon's.   In  April  2003  a  distinction  between
    humanitarian protection and discretionary leave was introduced; but  no
    such distinction appears  to  have  existed  when  this  appellant  was
    granted exceptional leave to  remain.   Secondly,  the  period  of  six
    months granted to Iraqi asylum seekers after 20 February  2003  was  as
    short as six months specifically because it was clearly  not  envisaged
    at that time that it would be necessary to make grants of  leave  on  a
    general "protection" basis to failed Iraqi asylum seekers for very much
    longer.  Thirdly, we do not understand that the leave  granted  to  the
    appellant was not on  a  "protection"  basis.   It  is  true  that  any
    unaccompanied minor would have received  the  same,  that  the  reasons
    behind the development of a policy of that sort are rather unlikely  to
    exclude any perceived need for protection on return.  Fourthly, because
    there was in March 2003 no distinction  between  exceptional  leave  in
    various categories, the grant to the appellant would have been  exactly
    the same if it had been on the basis that Mr Seddon submits  it  should
    have been.  That is to say, it would have been a period expiring on the
    day before the appellant's eighteenth birthday, consisting of a  period
    of six months because the appellant was a failed Iraqi  asylum  seeker,
    followed by a period at the expiry of which he would still be a  minor.
    We cannot see that there is anything in the material before us  showing
    that that was not exactly what the  appellant  got.   The  position  is
    that, instead of six months leave he received fourteen months.

17. For these reasons we reject Mr Seddon's submission that  the  appellant
    had something less than the Secretary of State's policies and  practice
    entitled him to.

18. In any event, Mr Seddon's submission was that the appellant should  now
    be put into the position that he would have been if he had been treated
    properly, granted the notional leave that he should have  been  granted
    in 2003, and allowed to make what would be an in-time  application  for
    its extension.  Mr Seddon's submission was that that would be to  grant
    the appellant a remedy equivalent to that granted to AH in R (A, H  and
    AH) v SSHD.  That, with respect, is not right.  In that case  A  and  H
    should have been recognised as refugees, whether in  international  law
    they were entitled to be so recognised  or  not:  their  claims  failed
    solely because the Secretary of State  had,  contrary  to  his  policy,
    taken an internal relocation point against them.  They were, in Collins
    J's view, now entitled to ILR, not because they are now  refugees,  but
    because  they  should  have  been  recognised  as  refugees  from   the
    beginning.  AH's case was different.  He could not  properly  claim  to
    have been entitled to be recognised as a  refugee.   In  his  case  the
    problem  was  that  the  determination  of  his  case  had   taken   an
    unaccountably long time, despite a declared practice of  the  Secretary
    of State of determining such claims quickly.  Because of the delay, his
    claim was determined just after 20 February 2003.  He therefore was not
    granted the four years exceptional leave to remain which he would  have
    been granted in accordance with the practice or policy,  if  his  claim
    had been determined before 20 February 2003.  Instead, he  was  granted
    six months exceptional leave to remain.  Collins J's conclusion in  his
    case was that he should have been granted four years exceptional  leave
    to remain in July 2001.  That would by now have  expired,  and  so  the
    Judge ordered that he be treated as having applied for an extension  in
    time if he did so within a reasonable time of the judgment  which  had,
    for the first time, established his right to the four years.

19. In the present case, there was no unacceptable  delay.   The  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom only three  days  before  the  change  of
    policy on 20 February 2003.  It cannot properly be suggested  that  his
    claim ought finally to have been determined within  those  three  days.
    Unlike AH, who was entitled to four years but received only six  months
    leave, the appellant was entitled to six months but received  fourteen.
    We have not been  shown  any  policy  which  would  have  entitled  the
    appellant to a period of leave which he has not been given.  We can see
    no basis on which it can be said that the appellant should be granted a
    period of six months leave in addition to the fourteen months which  he
    has had.

20. For these reasons we also reject Mr Seddon's submissions as to the  way
    in which the appellant should now be treated.

21. There is a further point, which in a sense is a preliminary issue,  but
    which it has been convenient to leave until the end of  this  judgment.
    The  arguments  raised  by  Mr  Seddon  were  not  raised  before   the
    Adjudicator in 2003 or before the Immigration Judge in 2005.  The order
    for reconsideration appears to have been sought and made on  the  basis
    that those arguments were obvious in the Robinson v  SSHD  [1996]  EWCA
    Civ 706 sense: that is  to  say,  that  there  are  matters  which  the
    Tribunal ought to take into account, whether or not specifically raised
    by the parties.  We have  been  content  to  consider  them,  given  in
    particular the terms of the order for reconsideration.  We do, however,
    have very considerable doubts whether the arguments before  us  can  be
    said  to  be  within  the  Robinson  doctrine.   In  Robinson   itself,
    considerations  were  said  to  be  confined  to  "obvious  points   of
    Convention law", meaning in that context the Refugee Convention.  There
    can be no objection to extension to points relating to the Human Rights
    Convention.  "Obvious" has the refined meaning that the  point  is  one
    which has a good prospect of success (even if the point itself  is  not
    immediately apparent).  The reason for the doctrine in litigation which
    is essentially inter partes, is the need to ensure that  a  failure  to
    argue the point does not put  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
    international obligations.  Following the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in A (Iraq) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1438, it is  now  also  clear
    that the Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to  rely  on  the  Robinson
    doctrine.  The arguments put in the present case are,  however,  as  we
    have explained, not arguments on Convention law.   They  are  arguments
    based on the Secretary of State's application of a policy  outside  the
    Refugee Convention.  For that reason we have considerable doubt whether
    it was in truth open to the appellant to rely  on  them  at  this  late
    stage.  As we have indicated, however, even if he is entitled  to  rely
    on them, they do not enable him to win his appeal.

22. We reject the arguments put by the appellant  on  reconsideration.   It
    follows that the Secretary of State was entitled to treat the appellant
    as an overstayer in 2005.  The Immigration Judge did not err in law  in
    dealing on the merits with an appeal against a decision to  remove  the
    appellant as an overstayer.  He had in  mind  the  arguments  that  the
    appellant had adduced at various stages,  and  had  also  in  mind  the
    appellant's concession at the previous hearing.  We are  not  persuaded
    that he erred in law in dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds for the reasons he gave.  We accordingly order that  his
    determination stand.








                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT
                                                             Date:
