


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

       SI (expert evidence - Kurd - SM confirmed) Iraq CG [2008] UKAIT 00094

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow (Eagle Building)             |                             |
|On 7 May 2008                                 |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                           IMMIGRATION JUDGE CORKE

                                   Between

                                     SI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Mitchell QC instructed by Livingstone Brown
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Laverty, Home Office Presenting Officer


   1. Failure by the respondent to adduce her  own  expert  evidence  cannot
      imbue expert evidence submitted by an appellant with any greater value
      than it merits when considered alongside the rest of the evidence.


   2. The evidence relating to the official justice system in the KRG  falls
      short of demonstrating that all persons who are tried in that part  of
      Iraq will face a process that would amount to a flagrant denial of the
      notion of a fair trial:  SM and  Others  (Kurds-Protection-Relocation)
      [2005] Iraq CG UKAIT 00111 followed.

   3. The guidance given in SM regarding relocation of a Kurd from  the  KRG
      to central or southern Iraq, which was  that  it  can  in  general  be
      effected without this being unduly harsh and without giving rise to  a
      real risk "in all but the most  exceptional  high  profile  cases"  of
      their relocation being brought to the attention of  [any  of  the  KRG
      authorities], also remains valid.

   4. "Honour killings" and "blood feuds"  are  distinct  phenomena,  albeit
      they may sometimes overlap in practice.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He arrived in the  UK  on  14  July
2000 and claimed asylum. On 5 November 2001 the respondent made  a  decision
to issue removal directions, having refused to grant asylum. On 19  November
2003 an Adjudicator, Mr J G Macdonald, dismissed his appeal.  On  23  August
2005 a panel of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  chaired  by  Senior
Immigration Judge Allen upheld that dismissal.  Its  decision  was  reported
as SM and Others (Kurds-Protection-Relocation) [2005] Iraq CG  UKAIT  00111.
Subsequently on April 2007 the Inner House of the Court of  Session  decided
that the Tribunal had erred in law and ordered that the  appeal  be  reheard
by a different  constitution  of  the  Tribunal:  we  shall  have  cause  to
consider the precise terms of that order later on.

2. The principal facts relating to the appellant's case are not in  dispute.
As stated by the Tribunal in SM at paragraphs 14-16 they are as follows:

         "14.     Mr (        ) had been a member of the PUK until 1995.  In
             1983  a  PUK  organiser,  Omer  Hamakaki  had   murdered   the
             appellant's uncle, Mulla  Omer.  When  the  appellant  stopped
             working for the PUK in 1995 he opened his own  business  as  a
             hairdresser. His cousin Aso, the son of Mulla  Omer,  came  to
             visit him on 3 June  2000  and  on  10  June  he  was  in  his
             hairdressing salon and Aso was with him. Aso saw Omer Hamakaki
             pass by the shop and shot him, and  fled  to  the  appellant's
             sister's house. The appellant felt that he also had to run  as
             he feared that Hamakaki's family would take immediate  revenge
             upon him.


         15.      Both Aso and the  appellant's  brother  were  arrested  in
             connection  with  the  murder.  The  appellant's  brother  was
             released.  Aso was killed by the family of Omer  Hamakaki  and
             his relations and the PUK, according to the appellant's answer
             to question 24 at interview. The Hamakaki family belong to the
             Jaff tribe which the appellant said was present throughout the
             whole of Iraq.  He also claimed that  although  Aso  had  been
             killed by Hamakaki's family, the tradition of revenge  killing
             had not been satisfied, and he was perceived as being involved
             in the murder.


         16.      He produced various documents including a letter issued by
             a PUK commander indicating that he was involved with Aso  Omer
             in the  killing  of  Mr  Hamakaki,  and  also  describing  the
             appellant and containing instructions that he be arrested."

3. There were, to be precise, two documents  evidencing  an  arrest  warrant
from a PUK Commander of Dukan  Sector  (5)  dated  14  June  2000.  One  was
addressed  to  "the  respective  General  Commander  Force  of  H.P.K."  and
referred to Aso as Hamakaki's assassin and to his having  stayed  beforehand
for 3 days at the appellant's house. It added:

     "The assassination took place in front of  his  shop.  This  indicated
    that he was involved with Mr Aso Omar  for  the  assassination  of  our
    comrade Mr Omer Hamakaki. Therefore, we  request  his  arrest  by  your
    force,  police  and  Asayeh  forces  in  order   to   bring   him   for
    investigation".

4. The second document, stamped by the same commander and bearing  the  same
date, was addressed  to  "all  respective  commanders"  and  instructed  the
arrest of the appellant "...because of  his  involvement  with  the  accused
person Aso Omar for the assassination of comrade Omar Hamamaki  on  10  June
2000. "

5. At the hearing Mr Mitchell QC  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  sought  to
adduce more recent evidence in the form of a statement  from  the  appellant
dated 3 October 2007 relating to his  past  experiences  in  Iraq.   In  the
course of giving further details about the  nature  of  the  blood  feud  in
which he had become involved, the appellant  refers  to  Aso  having  killed
Omer Hamakaki with a Kalashnikov. The appellant says he kept a  gun  in  his
house, but did not take it out with him. Aso,  however,  "used  to  carry  a
weapon with him all the time, first of all to protect himself  and  secondly
to try and eventually take revenge for  his  father".  Mr  Laverty  for  the
respondent opposed admission of this further statement on the  grounds  that
it had not been served  in  accordance  with  Tribunal  directions  and  the
respondent was not prepared to deal with  it  at  this  late  stage.  Having
considered the matter, we decided not to admit this  evidence.  This  appeal
has a long  history  and  it  has  been  known  to  the  appellant  and  his
representatives for some considerable time that there was to  be  a  further
hearing on the date fixed. There was nothing said in the application to  the
Inner House of the Court of Session to indicate that  the  appellant  wished
to adduce further evidence about his past  experiences.   Nor  was  anything
mentioned after specific directions concerning the nature  of  this  hearing
had been given by Senior Immigration Judge Mather on 21  August  2007.  None
of the  matters  outlined  in  the  appellant's  statement  falls  into  the
category of fresh evidence which he could not have been reasonably  expected
to adduce earlier.  It has been the clear position for some  time  that  the
historical basis of the appellant's appeal was not in  dispute  and  in  our
view it would subvert the purpose  of  the  Inner  House  of  the  Court  of
Session's order if we were to admit further evidence  that  could  have  the
effect  of  causing  us  to  revisit  the  basics  facts  relating  to   the
appellant's personal history. We would add that,  even  had  we  taken  this
recent statement  into  account,  we  would  not  have  considered  that  it
markedly added anything to the appellant's previous account.  In  particular
we do not think that the extra detail, that  the  appellant  knew  that  Aso
carried a gun all the time (one purpose being in case he  had  a  chance  to
revenge his father's  death),  would  play  any  significant  part  in  what
happened to the appellant on return.

6. We did, however consider  it  appropriate  to  admit  further  background
evidence from both parties relating  to  the  situation  in  Iraq.   It  was
necessary for us to do  so  because  our  task  is  to  assess  whether  the
appellant faces a real risk of serious harm or ill-treatment as at the  date
of hearing before us. Recent background evidence, along  with  the  evidence
of the country experts, is highly relevant to that assessment.

7. So far as the law is concerned, we  confirmed  at  the  outset  with  the
parties that there was no issue of exclusion and that the appellant did  not
seek to argue that he faced a real risk  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
reason: his case stood to be considered solely in terms of  whether  he  was
eligible for humanitarian protection and whether he faced  a  real  risk  of
ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the  ECHR.  We  must  decide  whether
there are substantial grounds for believing that if returned  the  appellant
would be exposed to a real risk of serious harm or  ill  treatment.  Subject
to what we have said above we must consider  the  appellant's  circumstances
in the light of the evidence as a whole, including that we had from  several
experts. One other matter we discussed with the parties  concerned  whether,
given that the respondent had not raised the issue  of  internal  relocation
before the Tribunal in SM it was open to her to do so now: we shall come  to
that after we have dealt with the issue of risk  to  the  appellant  in  his
home area.

The expert evidence
8. The materials before  us  included  the  reports  that  were  before  the
Tribunal in SM (from Dr Rebwah Fatah, Ms Sheri Laizer  and  Mr  Joffe),  the
Tribunal's summary of the oral evidence of Dr Fatah and Ms Laizer  as  given
in SM, together with reports from Dr George and Dr  Fatah  written  post-SM.
In this determination we propose to elaborate only  on  the  further  expert
evidence which has been produced post-SM.

Dr George
9.  Dr  George's  report  of  14  November  2007  describes  the  population
breakdown of Iraq as being 60% Shia, 20% Sunni Arabs and 20%  Kurd.  Family,
extended family and tribe were the fundamental units of Iraqi  society.  The
Jaff, whose numerical strength is estimated as up to three million,  is  the
largest Kurdish tribe.  He  describes  tensions  between  these  three  main
communities as having heightened, plunging Iraq into the early stages  of  a
civil war. On the strength of  UNAMI  figures  for  January-March  2007,  he
states that an estimated 54% of the Iraqi population is living on less  than
US$1 per day, among whom 15% is living in extreme poverty (less than  US$0.5
per day); the unemployment rate had risen  to  about  60%.  He  details  the
figures  of  those  killed  in  the  conflict  and  describes  the   various
protagonists in the conflict, including the main insurgent groups.  He  also
analyses both the situation in the KRG and in central and southern Iraq.

10. According to Dr  George,  revenge  attacks  can  be  directed  not  only
against specific individuals  but  also  against  their  extended  families.
Quoting from his book, Jordan: Living in the  Crossfire,  October  2005,  he
states that in Iraqi, as in Jordanian, society:

     "sharaf, or honour, is  everything,  traditional  mediation  seeks  to
    ensure  that  problems  affecting  individuals  do  not  escalate  into
    conflicts involving entire families and tribes...Tribal custom requires
    murder to be compensated by mutual agreement, failing which honour  can
    be satisfied only by vengeance against the killer's  family.  Such  so-
    called blood feuds can be grisly and  protracted  affairs  involving  a
    cycle of retaliation and counter-retaliation that sometimes passes from
    generation to generation".

11. Dr George states at para 86 that he knows of:

     "no evidence to suggest that the risk to [the appellant] would face as
    a result of the blood feud would have diminished merely because of  the
    passage of time. I would note again that while family/clan/tribal blood
    feuds can be resolved through mediation... I am not aware that  efforts
    at mediation have been made in the feud involving [the appellant]".

12. He was unsurprised that the appellant's wife and child and  two  sisters
had been able to remain in Iraqi Kurdistan without being targeted, since  it
was the custom for women and children  to  be  exempted  from  blood  feuds.
However, the fact that the appellant's  two  brothers  had  been  living  in
Kurdistan apparently without problems did surprise  him  as  he  would  have
expected Hamakaki's family to have targeted them in the appellant's  lengthy
absence.

13. In his opinion the appellant  would  be  at  risk  from  the  family  of
Hamakaki as a result of the blood feud.  From this family/clan he  would  be
at grave and immediate risk, as they were the most motivated to target  him.
The fact that the appellant had in reality played no part in the  murder  of
Hamakiki would not necessarily be relevant since  the  Hamakiki  family/clan
would very likely have perceived him as been a party  to  the  killing.  The
murder had taken place  directly  outside  the  appellant's  salon  and  the
appellant had fled from the scene of the murder. The  appellant  would  also
have good reason to fear the PUK   not only per  se  because  of  its  close
connections  with  the  Hamakiki  family/clan  but  also  because   of   its
involvement with the KRG and the Baghdad government, albeit  his  risk  from
the Baghdad  authorities  would  not  be  as  great  given  that  they  were
embroiled with a major insurgency and would not regard the matter  involving
the appellant as having a high priority. That  said,  the  Kurdish  elements
within the Baghdad government, and notably the PUK and KDP  elements,  might
be motivated to target the appellant.

14. Dr George was also  of  the  opinion  that  were  the  appellant  to  be
detained by the Kurdish authorities (whether the PUK or another  entity)  he
would run a real risk of being maltreated or worse. He cited what  was  said
in the US State Department Report of March 2006 and UNAMI reports  regarding
KRG treatment of detainees.

15. Dr George was adamant that the appellant could not relocate  within  the
KRG, given that the Hamakaki family would be able through their  connections
with the PUK, KDP and KRG authorities, to locate and harm the  appellant  in
all parts of the  KRG-controlled  areas.  The  appellant  could  not  expect
protection from the KRG authorities.

16. Addressing risk to the appellant as a Kurd if he sought to  relocate  to
central or southern Iraq, Dr George noted that Kurds living  in  Sunni  Arab
areas have been attacked  by  insurgents  as  "Collaborators"  with  the  US
occupiers and driven from their homes. He  detailed  the  large  numbers  of
Kurds who in recent years had been forced to flee Mosul and the  Sunni  Arab
cities of Fallujah, Ramadi, Samarrah and Baquba. The  dangers  facing  Kurds
south of the KRG zone were highlighted, he wrote at para 96,  on  14  August
2007 when two Kurdish villages,  Adnaniya  and  Qataniya  were  attacked  by
extremist Sunni Arab  groups.   He  cited  UNHCR's  August  2007  Guidelines
recording that in mixed areas such as Baghdad,  Mosul,  Kirkuk  and  Kiyala,
Kurds had come under fierce attacks from Sunni Arab insurgent  groups,  both
because of their imputed political  opinion  as  well  as  their  ethnicity.
These Guidelines  also  recorded  that  Kurds  in  minority  areas  such  as
Baghdad, Fallujah and Ramadi have been displaced by force. Many  Kurds  from
Mosul City, the western side of which once had  a  majority  of  Kurds  (and
Christians) have been displaced, mostly to the three Northern  Governorates.


17. The fact, added Dr George, that the appellant, albeit  non-Arab,  was  a
Sunni would mean he was exposed  to  sectarian  violence  at  the  hands  of
various Shia groups.  The fact that he would be a returnee  from  a  Western
country would, according to a June 2004 UNHCR report, also expose him  to  a
danger of kidnapping. In addition, the appellant would  face  more  general,
but nevertheless real, risk as a result of the widespread violence in  Iraq.


18. Dr George was also firmly of the view that within the  centre  or  south
of Iraq the appellant would face a serious risk of  being  targeted  because
of his  Kurdish  ethnicity.  Citing  in  support  the  UNHCR  December  2006
Advisory, he wrote:

     "In mixed Sunni-Shia towns in central Iraq (including Baghdad) Sunnis,
    such as [the appellant] are being targeted. As a Sunni,  he  could  not
    relocate to the Shia-dominated south of Iraq  and  I  would  note  that
    Kurds are being targeted because of their ethnicity in the  Shia  south
    as well as in the Sunni centre in Iraq.  The fact  that  the  appellant
    had no supportive family  connections  would  cause  him  to  encounter
    difficulties finding work and accommodation.  The fact that wherever he
    went  people  in  the  locality  would  quickly  become  aware  of  his
    background would make it relatively easy for pursuers  to  locate  him.
    The appellant would also need appropriate documentation."

19. We also heard oral evidence from Dr George, which can be  summarised  as
follows.  Since  his  written  report  of  14  November  2007  the  security
situation in Iraq had not fundamentally improved.  As at  May  2008  it  was
"as bad as it ever was". A reduction in levels of violence had occurred  but
this owed much to highly contingent factors, in particular  the  renewal  of
the Mahdi Army's ceasefire and the  Sunni  Awakening  Council's  cooperation
with the Americans in opposing Al Qaeda in Iraq (AQI).  The recent  decision
of the Government of Iraq (GoI) to crack down on Mahdi  Army  militants  was
likely to see the levels  of  violence  go  back  up.  All  the  key  issues
essential to achieving stability in Iraq were still unresolved.

20. Dr George had visited Iraq in  April  2008.  He  had  seen  for  himself
Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) checkpoints and had had  meetings  with  a
range of KRG  officials,  including  the  KRG  Foreign  Minister.  At  Erbil
airport the officials used computerised records and he was  told  they  kept
lists of wanted persons.

21. In the KRG, explained Dr George, there were  parallel  justice  systems:
(i) the regional government  system,  both  civil  and  criminal;  (ii)  the
tribal system, which operated independently; and (iii) a fusion of  (i)  and
(ii) in which government officials and powerful  tribal  figures  interacted
with each other.  Even within (i) he did not  consider  individuals  charged
with offences would get a fair trial.

22. As to what would happen to the appellant on return to his home  area  in
the KRG, it was extremely difficult to make hard and fast statements, as  so
many factors could come into play, including the fact that the man whom  his
cousin murdered was closely connected to the PUK leadership.  The  chief  of
staff he interviewed had confirmed that, whenever they chose, the PUK  could
involve the KRG in taking action against someone and  vice  versa.   If  the
appellant were dealt with by the official justice system, it could  be  some
considerable time before he was brought before a court,  during  which  time
he would be incarcerated and could be ill-treated.  An  official  member  of
the PUK with a particular adverse interest in the appellant could ensure  he
was badly treated.  So far as the general security situation in the KRG  was
concerned, however, he agreed that it was vastly  improved,  although  there
were still terrorist attacks from Ansar Al Islam.

23. As regards the appellant's prospects of internal relocation outside  the
KRG, they would be dim. In central and southern Iraq  Kurds  faced  targeted
attacks. To move south, a person from the KRG would need a certificate  from
the security services.  That in  turn  would  require  a  person  to  obtain
documents such  as  a  birth  certificate  from  their  home  area.  Without
documentation a person would not be safe. UNHCR figures showed there  was  a
net outflow of refugees from Iraq.

24. Asked what significance he would attach to the fact  that  no  harm  had
come to the appellant's siblings, Dr  George  agreed  this  was  a  relevant
factor. It did not as such  indicate  that  there  had  been  mediation.  He
accepted, however, that if he had been in the  appellant's  shoes  he  would
have asked his family to try mediation on his behalf. Mediation  did  happen
if both parties wanted it, but there was not the information to say  it  had
happened in this case. If the appellant's family had become  involved  in  a
full-blooded blood feud, he would have expected the appellant's siblings  to
have been in the firing line.  Although the PUK had  sought  to  tackle  the
problem of blood feuds by changing  the  law  relating  to  honour  killings
(classing them as murder), their main  concern  was  honour  crimes  against
women in respect of which they had changed the penalties.  It  was  not  the
case that blood feuds never ceased, but there were  no  set  regulations  or
practices; some feuds could be quiescent for years only to flare  up  again.
The fact that in this case the murderer  had  himself  been  killed  by  the
victim's family did not essentially mean the latter  regarded  the  feud  as
over; it might do it, it might not. Asked by Mr  Laverty  why  he  had  been
much more definite in his written reports (where he spoke of  the  appellant
being at "grave and immediate risk"), Dr George said one could not  quantify
risk; the best way of putting it was to say "grave, immediate and  serious".
It was for the Tribunal to decide.  Asked to  clarify  why  he  had  written
that on any return to Baghdad, the appellant would be recognised as a  Kurd,
Dr George said officials had good knowledge of people's backgrounds. He  did
not seek to say that all Iraqis returned to Baghdad would be  at  risk,  but
if someone had been in Europe for a significant period of time,  they  would
be perceived as wealthy.

25. Mr Laverty questioned Dr George as to whether the appellant in his  view
    would need to return to his home  area  if  he  had,  as  it  appeared,
    essential documents with him already (birth certificate and  ID  card).
    Dr George agreed that if he had the appropriate documents he  would  be
    able to enter  and  stay  and  find  employment  in  Baghdad,  although
    background reports spoke of the need for a personal visit and the new G
    series passport being only available in Baghdad. He  accepted  that  in
    central and southern Iraq  there  were  some  areas  where  Kurds  were
    numerous, but (even  leaving  aside  that  he  considered  the  current
    security situation made it unsafe for any  relocation  southwards),  it
    could not be taken for granted they would help support someone like the
    appellant: such support was principally through extended family clan or
    tribe connections. Kurds  could  not  safely  relocate  to  central  or
    southern Iraq.

26. Dr George was asked his opinion about the arrest warrants issued by  the
    PUK naming the appellant. He considered they  indicated  the  appellant
    was of adverse interest and would be put on trial.  What  could  happen
    when he returned depended heavily  on  the  reaction  of  the  extended
    family of the murdered man.

27. As regards the issue of whether  the  appellant  could  safely  relocate
    within the KRG, he considered that for the appellant this would be like
    Russian roulette.  He faced risks  from  both  family  members  of  the
    murdered man and/or the PUK.  As regards  risk  from  the  family,  the
    chief-of-staff  he  interviewed  had  said  that  blood  feuds  were  a
    noticeable feature.  Mediation  was  possible  through  a  third  party
    tribal leader.  He agreed it was surprising the appellant had not taken
    steps since being in the UK to find out whether mediation was possible.
     He agreed that if there was a  fully  active  blood  feud,  one  would
    expect all male members to have faced reprisals.  As to risk  from  the
    PUK, the appellant would be perceived by them as a traitor  because  he
    had fled his home area.  According to Human Rights  Watch,  torture  of
    detainees in the KRG was routine. Adverse interest on the part  of  the
    PUK was likely because the murder had involved a senior PUK official.

Dr Fatah
28. We turn to Dr Fatah's updated report of 2 May 2008.

29. When setting out the claim of the appellant as he understood it, Dr
Fatah stated that:

     "He claims that if he were returned to Iraq, he would be persecuted by
    PUK and Hamakaki's clan of the Jaff tribe. He claims that the  Hamakaki
    clan is very powerful in Iraq and his life was in  danger  due  to  the
    threats from the PUK and Jeff tribe. The dispute  has  developed  to  a
    tribal feud, which would be backed  up  by  one  of  the  main  Kurdish
    political parties, the PUK".

30. The Jaff tribe is affiliated to the PUK and the PUK acts  in  favour  of
the Jaff. They are Sunni Kurds. It is one of the most substantial tribes  in
size.   Jaff's  territories  occupy  a  huge  area  of  Iraqi  and   Iranian
Kurdistan. Tribes such  as  the  Jaff  have  become  "neo-tribes"  who  have
attained political influence extending beyond  their  geographical  regions.
One of the characteristics of Kurdish society  was  many  people  are  being
killed as part of tribal reprisals. Honour killings take place  on  a  daily
basis. A Danish source had estimated  that  since  the  Kurdish  authorities
came to power in 1992 at least 30,000 women had been killed in the  name  of
honour, although that figure  is  disputed.  Various  reports  dealing  with
honour killings illustrate that tribes are influential in  many  aspects  of
Kurdish society. Tribal feuds will not fade away with time.

31. It was not his view that  the  entire  Jaff  would  seek  to  visit  ill
treatment of the appellant, only the family and clan  of  Hamakaki;  however
this family and clan can gain the support of others parts of  the  Jaff  and
that of the PUK. In Dr Fatah's opinion the  appellant  would  face  risk  on
return from the Hamakaki clan who would be able to call on  the  backing  of
the PUK. It was also possible that relatives of the family/clan of  Hamakaki
could take reprisal action against the appellant on  their  own  accord.  In
that case, the PUK would turn a blind eye. The appellant was not  affiliated
to any political parties or tribes, therefore, he would be  an  easy  target
and defenceless.

32. If the appellant were dealt with by the PUK and the KRG authorities,  he
would not be treated fairly. The KRG and  PUK  are  committing  grave  human
rights violations. People  are  detained  for  years  without  a  trial  and
detained  people  disappear  without  their  families   having   access   to
information  about  them.  Ordinary  citizens,  like  the   appellant,   are
subjected to ill treatment. Further the KRG is not stable,  with  a  renewed
threat now of invasion from Turkey and insurgents from  the  south  carrying
out attacks.

33. Relocation within the KRG would not be possible  because  the  Jaff  and
PUK can exercise direct  governmental  or  quasi-governmental  control  over
this area. The appellant would come to their attention.   That  would  apply
at his first point of contact, at an entry  port  of  airport  as  well  as,
thereafter, at various checkpoints.  In addition the  appellant  would  face
cultural and linguistic isolation and problems finding a job.  The  security
situation in Kurdistan is  far  better  than  that  of  the  rest  of  Iraq;
however, the KRG is not able to protect  citizens,  especially  from  tribal
reprisals.

34. Relocation would not be possible anywhere in Iraq because the PUK is  an
influential power not only in the KRG but in the whole of Iraq. PUK and  KDP
leaders have influential positions in central government and are  in  power-
sharing  with  other  political  parties.   They  have  signed   cooperation
agreements over security,  political,  economic  and  social  matters.  Such
agreements have empowered the PUK and KDP to chase up anyone who  is  wanted
by the KRG authorities. "Thus, relocating [the appellant] to other parts  of
Iraq would be unlikely due to  the  power-sharing  of  KDP,  PUK  and  their
agreements with other Iraqi political parties".  For example,  the  KRG  has
10,000 soldiers in Baghdad and provides security in Kirkuk.

35. Another aspect to this is the racial friction between  Kurds  and  Iraqi
Arabs, who speak a different language and have distinct  customs.  This  has
been exacerbated by the current conflicts. Kurds are regarded by many  Arabs
as "traitors" and  "infidels"  for  collaborating  with  the  US  forces  in
ousting the former Iraqi government. Kurds in  Iraqi  government  controlled
areas are in particular danger. Attacks against  Kurds  are  mainly  carried
out by Islamic groups who see the Kurds as collaborating with the  occupying
forces. Citing various reported incidents of targeting of  Kurds,  Dr  Fatah
states that these are representative of a daily  killing  on  the  basis  of
identity. This would mean that someone such as the  appellant  would  be  at
risk because he would have no social or political power to support  him  and
the authorities are unable to protect people.

36. There is also the fact that  throughout  central  and  southern  Iraq  -
indeed the whole of Iraq - there is a security vacuum, which has  led  to  4
million Iraqis fleeing the country.  Militias are prevalent and  opportunist
criminal gangs exploit the security vacuum. There is no effective  authority
in  Iraq;  citizens  cannot  obtain  protection.  Iraq  has  fractured  into
regional power bases; political, economic and security powers have  devolved
to local sectarian, ethnic or tribal political groupings:

      "For an ordinary citizen like [the appellant] who  has  no  political
    and tribal affiliations, the chance for him  to  live  safely  is  very
    weak. In today's Iraq no accused can get a fair trial and no victim can
    get justice.  The independence of the  judiciary  has  been  negatively
    affected by consistent attacks on and killings of judges and lawyers."

37. As a result the appellant  would  be  a  "soft  target"  as  he  has  no
protection from any social groups such  as  a  tribe  or  political  groups.
Evidence shows that Kurds are not safe in  Arab  Shia  and  Sunni  areas  of
Iraq.

38.  To  relocate  the  appellant  would  also   need   an   Iraq   Personal
Identification Document (PID) and an Iraqi  Nationality  Certificate  (INC).
Without these documents and a place to live he would  not  be  able  to  get
food rations, and without those he would face extreme poverty.

39. Dr Fatah's oral evidence can  be  summarised  as  follows.  His  written
report of 2 May 2008 continued  to  reflect  up-to-date  evidence.   He  has
visited Iraq between 10-28 April 2008.  The Jaff was one of the main  tribes
in the KRG and many leaders and commanders of the PUK were  from  the  Jaff.
Hamakaki was of the Jaff and had been a PUK tribal  leader,  so  his  family
would have a substantial tribal base. On return to  the  KRG  the  appellant
would most likely be dealt with by  the  security  forces,  because  of  the
murder victim having been a tribal leader. The warrants had been  issued  by
peshmerga forces.  Despite  being  issued  in  2000,  they  would  still  be
considered as effective, albeit computerisation of records, lists  etc  only
happened from 2003 onwards.

40. As to relocation southwards, he did not consider the appellant could  do
so without the necessary documents.  Also, in central and southern Iraq,  he
repeated, Kurds were soft targets for insurgents; thousands had been  killed
or displaced. In answer to questions from Mr Laverty,  Dr  Fatah  said  that
whilst he did not rule out that some Kurds could  relocate  in  safety,  the
average Kurd could not. It was possible some Kurdish communities  could  re-
establish themselves.  If the appellant had good connections  (and  assuming
he had no political profile), it was possible they would help him  with  the
necessary documentation needed to get through Arab and Shia checkpoints.

41. Dr Fatah said that as Hamakaki was a member  of  the  Jaff  tribe  which
covered a wide area and was part of the warlord regime, the appellant  would
have problems with members of  this  tribe,  individually  and  politically.
Security was very much a family affair.  He was surprised  that  neither  of
the appellant's male relatives had come to  harm.  The  appellant  would  be
dealt with by the PUK. The appellant would not get a fair trial  because  of
the blood feud: things would not be done by the book.  Whilst  in  detention
he would face ill-treatment. If he sought to relocate to other areas of  the
KRG outside his home area, he may well be on a  wanted  list  and  he  would
have problems finding a job. Outside the KRG, as a Sorani-speaking Kurd  who
did not have family connections locally, he would face serious risks.

42. Mosul was very dangerous for Kurds, many had fled  from  there.   Kirkuk
was different, but the Article 114 referendum, still  delayed,  was  causing
political instability. If the appellant had problems with  the  PUK,  Kirkuk
would not be safe for him.

43. He could not say whether details on a person held on old  paper  records
kept  by  the  KRG  authorities  would  have  been  transferred  when   they
introduced computer records, but it was possible and he had known people  go
back after many years and still face trouble. The security in  the  KRG  was
sophisticated; they even monitored mobile telephone calls.

Closing Submissions

44. In closing submissions Mr Mitchell contended that  the  appellant  would
clearly face a real risk of serious harm in his home area, arising out   his
family's blood feud with the Hamakaki family  and  the  circumstances  under
which he left. There was a warrant for  his  arrest.   Inevitably  he  would
come to the attention of the PUK on return and of the  Hamakaki  family.  He
would be detained and ill-treated in detention and  would  not  get  a  fair
trial. He could not safely relocate to other parts of the KRG, because  they
all would know he was a fugitive from  justice.  Relocation  in  central  or
southern Iraq was not a viable option either.  In Kirkuk, where  there  were
many Kurds, the PUK there would get to know who he  was  and  would  deliver
him to the PUK in his home area or deal with him themselves.  Even in  other
parts of central and southern Iraq where  there  were  Kurdish  communities,
the appellant would not be safe because insurgents would  target  him  as  a
Kurd; and, in  the  absence  of  any  local  family  connections,  he  would
struggle to survive economically.  In any event  he  would  need  to  return
first to his home area in order to get the necessary documents so as  to  be
able to pass through various checkpoints, government or militia.

45. Mr Mitchell said that all these propositions were strongly supported  by
the expert evidence. The respondent had not called or produced  any  country
evidence. Accordingly the evidence should be accepted in  its  entirety  and
the most favourable inferences drawn from them for the appellant:  he  cited
Ross v Associated Portland Cement Manufacturers [1964] 1 WLR  768  [1964]  1
WLR 768 and  O'Donnell  v.  Murdoch  M'Kenzie  &  Co  1967  SC  HL  63.  The
background evidence contained nothing to call into question any part of  the
appellant's  evidence  and  claim.  The  Tribunal  should   follow   UNHCR's
position, which remained that no one from  the  KRG,  Arab  or  Kurd,  could
safely relocate to central or southern Iraq.

46. When considering risk in the appellant's home area,  Mr  Mitchell  urged
us to keep in mind that the KRG did not have a  proper  system  of  justice.
The Iraqi Penal Code based on the 1936 Soviet Constitution was not  followed
in practice; the judiciary was not independent.  Because  of  the  existence
of a blood feud implicating the appellant, there was a substantial  risk  of
extrajudicial punishment. The appellant has been accused  of  conspiracy  to
murder; the  evidence  against  him  is  real  albeit  circumstantial.   The
appellant would face risk from the Hamakaki family as well as  the  PUK.  He
would be perceived as a traitor. It was unclear whether Aso  was  killed  by
the PUK or handed over by them to the Hamakaki family, but his  killing  was
plainly extrajudicial. The appellant's brother  was  released  on  it  being
established  he  was  not  involved;  the  same  would  not  happen  to  the
appellant.  As the Court of Session noted, to assess  that  the  passage  of
time would mean  the  appellant  was  no  longer  at  risk  would  be  sheer
speculation.  Between Hamakaki's death and Aso's there had been a  seventeen
year gap; the experts too noted that blood feuds could  linger  on.  In  the
eyes of the Hamakaki family and the PUK,  conspiracy  to  murder  would  not
fade with time.  The experts were adamant the appellant could  not  relocate
in a subzone of the KRG or outside the KRG.  In  Kirkuk,  where  there  were
many kinds of Kurds there was ethnic neo-warfare and it was subject  to  the
reach of the PUK, they could deal with him themselves or transfer  him  back
to his home area. In  Arab Iraq he faced substantial risk  as  a  Kurd.   He
would  not  have  the  necessary  documents  to   negotiate   controls   and
checkpoints; he  faced  problems  or  random  violence  as  well  as  ethnic
cleansing.

47. Mr Laverty for the respondent submitted that the appellant would not  be
at risk in his home area.  The appellant played no part in the  murder.  The
authorities had apprehended the actual  murderer.  The  appellant's  brother
had been released (in the appellant's own words in his  statement)  "because
they caught the murderer".  Both experts had agreed it  was  surprising  the
appellant and his family had not sought mediation.  Even if the  authorities
had decided to put him on trial, Dr Fatah had said, at  least  some  of  the
time, that a fair trial in the KRG was feasible.  The claims that  he  would
be tortured in pre-trial custody were purely speculative. The  appellant  is
a former PUK man himself.  He was innocent of the  crime.   The  appellant's
evidence was not that he  feared  the  PUK  and  no  Convention  ground  was
involved.

48. As regards internal relocation, the appellant would be able to  relocate
safely within the KRG: he had managed  to  live  with  relations  for  seven
nights (in nearby Rania) without any search being made for him.

49. As regards central and southern Iraq, added Mr Laverty,  the  background
evidence showed that there are Kurdish communities able to exist  safely  in
certain parts of Iraq. The evidence fell well short of showing that in  such
areas of Iraq Kurds per se were being targeted. The appellant  could  obtain
the necessary documents  he  would  need:  his  family  had  sent  him  some
already, including a national ID card. The guidance given in SM  and  Others
still held good. Further, Dr Fatah said the appellant was not visible  as  a
Kurd, albeit it was accepted he  may  not  speak  Arabic.  He  lacked  party
political affiliation, although  he  was  a  former  PUK  peshmerga.  In  KH
(Article 15(c) Qualification Directive) Iraq CG [2008]  UKAIT  the  Tribunal
rightly attached weight to  the  evidence  that  UNHCR  had  not  said  that
persons who had returned to Iraq were again at risk.

50.  Further  written  submissions,  made  with  the  Tribunal's  permission
largely reiterated earlier points.

The background evidence

51. Since Dr George's and Dr Fatah's reports and oral evidence drew  heavily
on the principal  background  materials  we  do  not,  with  one  exception,
propose to summarise their effect. A full list  of  the  materials  we  have
before us is contained in an Appendix. The exception is  the  evidence  from
UNHCR sources. A UNHCR report of 29 January 2005 and a further letter of  24
March 2005 were considered in SM (see paras 169-174), but UNHCR has  updated
its position several times since.

UNHCR's position
52.  The  18  December  2006  UNHCR  Return   Advisory   and   Position   on
International Protection Needs of  Iraqis  outside  of  Iraq  states,  inter
alia, that  in Iraq the authorities cannot provide effective  protection  to
the population and that, whether the individual is a refugee under the  1951
Convention or flees  generalised  violence,  there  is  no  internal  flight
alternative within the southern or central regions, given the reach of  both
state and non-state agents of persecution, the lack of  national  protection
and grave insecurity and human rights violations prevailing in those  parts.
An individual,  who  relocates  to  an  area  from  where  she/he  does  not
originate, would likely face serious ongoing difficulties given the lack  of
protection provided by local  authorities,  communities  or  tribes,  ethno-
religious hostilities and the lack of access to basic services.

53. The main passages in the UNHCR's Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing
the International Protection Needs  of  Iraqi  Asylum-Seekers,  August  2007
that are relevant to internal relocation for a Kurd from the KRG to  central
and southern Iraq are as follows:

    "151. In the context of Iraq, UNHCR's  analysis  distinguishes  between
    the situation in South and Central Iraq and the situation in the  three
    Northern Governorates. The availability of an  IFA/IRA  in  the  latter
    area would also depend on whether  the  individual  concerned  is  from
    Central and  Southern  Iraq  or  from  within  the  three  Governorates
    themselves.
    1. IFA/IRA in Areas of Central and Southern Iraq
    UNHCR considers that an internal flight or  relocation  alternative  in
    Central and Southern Iraq is on the whole not available, because of the
    overall ability of agents of persecution to perpetrate acts of violence
    with impunity, the  widespread  violence  and  prevalent  human  rights
    violations giving rise to new risks of  persecution,  risks  associated
    with travel, and the hardship faced in ensuring even basic survival  in
    areas of relocation. When, however, the  availability  of  an  internal
    flight or  relocation  alternative  must  be  assessed  in  a  national
    procedure, it should be examined cautiously and in the context  of  the
    individual claim.  UNHCR's  Guidelines  on  Internal  Flight/Relocation
    Alternative should be taken into account.


    a) The Relevance Analysis
    i. Risk of Persecution or Other Serious Harm Upon Relocation
    As indicated in these Guidelines, persecution could emanate from  state
    as well as non-state agents. Within Central  and  Southern  Iraq,  both
    state and non-state agents of persecution could  pursue  their  targets
    throughout and state agents are  known  to  be  able  to  operate  with
    impunity. In regard to non-state agents of persecution,  protection  by
    national authorities would on the whole not be available given the fact
    that the national authorities have limited capacities  to  enforce  law
    and order, and the security agencies, namely the  ISF,  are  themselves
    infiltrated by radical elements. The void created by the absence  of  a
    strong central government is gradually being filled by militant  groups
    operating from bases in different areas of Central and  Southern  Iraq.
    These groups, whether religious or ethnic, cannot be considered  to  be
    operating as effective authorities in the areas under their control, as
    they themselves are the targets of frequent  attacks  from  individuals
    and groups in those areas. Absolute allegiance to the ideology  of  the
    group is a fundamental requirement, and in the general absence  of  the
    rule of law, arbitrariness and human rights violations  are  rife.  The
    highly volatile and fluid political and security situation existing  in
    Central and Southern Iraq renders the area subject to a great  deal  of
    significant  unpredictability,  with  possibilities  of  new  risks  of
    persecution arising from a wide range of actors  anywhere  at  anytime.
    Furthermore, in the smaller towns and cities, ongoing  communalism  and
    lack of state protection has enforced the need for individuals to  stay
    close to their kinsmen. Any newcomer, particularly when he/she does not
    belong to the existing sect,  tribes  or  families,  is  liable  to  be
    severely discriminated against or subjected to ill-treatment so  as  to
    amount to persecution. Even those who originated from the area  may  be
    perceived as newcomers, if they left a long time ago and have lost  all
    links with their tribal-based community.
    ii. Particular Considerations Relating to Formerly Arabized Areas
    The increasing  ethnic-religious  violence  in  the  formerly  arabized
    areas, the highly sensitive political, ethnic and  economic  nature  of
    these areas and the risk of further destabilizing the situation through
    significant population movements need to be considered  when  assessing
    the availability of an IFA/IRA in these Governorates. It must be  noted
    that the distribution of land and housing is disputed between the  main
    ethnic factions. Any access to land granted to newcomers on an  ad  hoc
    basis (generally done in order to increase an ethnic  population  in  a
    particular area) by authorities in certain areas is  heavily  contested
    by the other ethnic factions, and may have serious consequences for the
    ability of individuals to secure protection and/or durably reside there
    without undue hardship....


    157. b) The Reasonableness Analysis
    Overall, for the reasons set out  below  and  as  demonstrated  by  the
    difficulties  faced  by  IDPs  in  Central  and  Southern  Iraq,  UNHCR
    considers it unreasonable to expect an individual  fleeing  persecution
    in Iraq to relocate to an area in Central and Southern  Iraq.  Such  an
    individual would not be able to lead a relatively normal  life  without
    undue  hardship.  Lack  of  basic  facilities  and  difficulties   with
    livelihoods and survival render it extremely harsh for persons to  live
    normal lives at  even  basic  subsistence  levels  within  Central  and
    Southern Iraq.


    160.
    ...
    c) Conclusion
    In light of the overall situation in Central and Southern  Iraq,  UNHCR
    considers  that  on  the  whole  an  internal  flight   or   relocation
    alternative would not be relevant or reasonable, given, in  particular,
    the  existence  of  widespread  violence  and  prevalent  human  rights
    violations, the  physical  risks  and  legal  barriers  encountered  in
    reaching other areas, as well as  the  serious  difficulties  faced  in
    accessing basic services and ensuring economic survival in a  situation
    of displacement."


54. The December 2007 Addendum concludes as follows:

    "UNHCR is thus maintaining the position, set  out  in  the  Eligibility
    Guidelines originally,  with  regard  to  assessing  the  international
    protection needs of Iraqi asylum-seekers. In brief, that position is as
    follows:


    With regard to Iraqi asylum-seekers from Central and Southern Iraq:


      1. - UNHCR considers Iraqi asylum-seekers from  Central  and  Southern
         Iraq to be in need of international protection.


      1. - Iraqi asylum-seekers from Central and  Southern  Iraq  should  be
         considered as refugees based on the 1951 Convention criteria.


      1. - Where such asylum-seekers  are  not  recognized  under  the  1951
         Convention refugee criteria,  international  protection  should  be
         afforded through the application of an extended refugee definition,
         or otherwise through a complementary form of protection.


      1. - UNHCR considers that an internal flight or relocation alternative
         (IFA/IRA) in Central and Southern Iraq is on the whole not
         available. When, however, the availability of an internal flight or
         relocation alternative must be assessed in a national procedure, it
         should be examined cautiously, taking into account the particular
         circumstances of the applicant. The question of the availability of
         an IFA/IRA in the three Northern Governorates for individuals from
         Central and Southern Iraq must be carefully assessed on a case-by-
         case basis, taking into consideration, in particular, the relevance
         and reasonableness analysis in the Eligibility Guidelines.


    As concerns Iraqi asylum-seekers from the three Northern Governorates:


      1. - The international protection needs  of  asylum-seekers  from  the
         three Northern Governorates should be individually  assessed  based
         on the 1951 Convention refugee definition. In cases where an asylum-
         seeker is not recognized as a refugee under the 1951 Convention but
         nevertheless demonstrates protection needs for which  complementary
         forms of protection may be appropriate, the case should be assessed
         accordingly.


      1. - UNHCR considers that there is no IFA/IRA  available  for  asylum-
         seekers  from  the  three  Northern  Governorates  in  Central  and
         Southern Iraq. Whether an IFA/IRA may be available for them  within
         the  three  Northern  Governorates  themselves  must  be   examined
         carefully on a case-by-case basis. Special attention should be paid
         to the categories of individuals  highlighted  in  the  Eligibility
         Guidelines who clearly would not be able to find an IFA/IRA in  the
         three Northern Governorates.


    In all cases, due attention should be  paid  to  possible  grounds  for
    exclusion, in accordance with Article 1(F) of the 1951 Convention."

Our Assessment

The expert evidence

55. Before turning to set out our reasons, it is necessary that  we  address
a specific matter relating to the expert evidence.

56. Mr Mitchell has contended throughout that the expert  evidence  in  this
case should be accepted in  its  entirety  because  of  the  fact  that  the
respondent has not sought to produce any expert evidence  to  the  contrary.
In his view that  entails  that  only  the  most  favourable  inferences  in
support of the appellant's case should be drawn. As we have seen  he  relied
on two higher court authorities, Ross and O'Donnell,  neither  dealing  with
the context of asylum.  We cannot accept his contention. The  weight  to  be
accorded to expert evidence in asylum-related appeals has been  the  subject
of a number of judgments by the senior courts in recent times (see  e.g.  CM
(Kenya) [2007] EWCA Civ 312; AS & DD (Libya) [2008] EWCA  Civ  289)  and  it
would be odd indeed to ignore their guidance in favour  of  decisions  which
are concerned with different subject-matters and where  different  rules  of
evidence prevailed. The Tribunal have expressed the view on  many  occasions
that it would be desirable for the  respondent  to  adduce  its  own  expert
evidence. However, its  failure  to  do  so  cannot  imbue  expert  evidence
submitted by an appellant  with  any  greater  value  than  it  merits  when
considered alongside the rest of the evidence.   In  general,  the  Tribunal
take the view that a country expert's opinion is  to  be  given  significant
weight and if the Tribunal decides to come  to  a  different  view  from  an
expert on key matters, proper reasons must be given.

57. And so it is in  this  case.   In  SM  the  Tribunal  found  Dr  Fatah's
evidence reliable on the whole, albeit lacking in objectivity in places  (it
was more critical of Ms Laizer). In HA (WCPI-IMIK-KRG) Iraq CG [2007]  UKIAT
00087 the Tribunal reached  a  very  similar  view:  see  para  70  of  that
decision. For the most part we also take a similar view and consider  indeed
that we should attach significant weight to both of his reports, as well  as
that prepared by Dr George for this case. Their evidence  was  not  entirely
consistent on all matters, for example over  whether  the  general  security
situation in the KRG was relatively stable and over  whether  a  fair  trial
was ever possible in the KRG. Both were somewhat  ambivalent  about  whether
the appellant would be at risk from the PUK even disregarding  the  Hamakaki
family's adverse interest. We are bound to say we found their view that  the
appellant would face adverse interest from the authorities in  Baghdad  far-
fetched. The fact that the KRG have 10,000 soldiers in Baghdad and that  the
KRG authorities and  those  in  control  in  Baghdad  co-operate  over  many
governmental matters does not on its  own  establish  that  the  two  bodies
would share information about someone in the position of the  appellant.  We
find it surprising that Dr George could feel able to say that  in  May  2008
things were "as bad  as  ever"  when  several  indicators  that  he  himself
elsewhere saw as very important when assessing the nature and level  of  the
conflict, in particular  those  relating  to  the  number  of  incidents  of
violence and the number of casualties, were markedly down by that date.  (We
shall return below to points (relatively limited in number) on which we  did
not agree with the experts, and why.)  However, we have been struck  by  the
fact that both in their oral evidence, when taxed  with  specific  questions
put to them, showed a readiness to qualify several points they had  made  in
their written reports that appeared overstated. If  that  somewhat  lessened
the reliability of their written reports, it  did  increase  our  confidence
that they were anxious to assist the Tribunal as far as they were able.  The
value of their evidence to us  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  both  have
recently visited parts of Iraq and had an opportunity to interview a  number
of key figures. Nevertheless, as we have noted in many cases, it is  for  us
to decide whether the evidence as a whole, including  the  expert  evidence,
demonstrates that the  risk  categories  in  Iraq  are  precisely  as  those
experts identify them or that the appellant is at risk under either  of  the
provisions relating to humanitarian protection (subsidiary protection  under
the Qualification Directive) or Article 3 ECHR.

Our assessment: general risk categories

58. We broadly agree with the analysis provided by Dr George  and  Dr  Fatah
of the general  political  situation  in  the  KRG.  In  this  regard  their
analysis closely reflects other background sources:  e.g.  the  COIS  report
refers to the fact that  in  northern  Iraq,  the  ruling  parties  actively
support the tribes in return for political loyalty  (13.18).  Similarly  the
COIS report highlights the concerns of UNHCR and others  that  in  the  KRG-
administered areas there have been arbitrary arrests and  detention  without
trial and that "in particular  persons  held  by  the  security/intelligence
agencies are at risk of detention  without  judicial  review  in  accordance
with the Law on Criminal  Proceedings  and  are  often  held  for  prolonged
periods of time" (14.20). At para 15.20 the same COIS report quotes from  an
October 2005 UNHCR report noting that in the KRG some  of  the  prisons  are
under the control of the political parties and are used  to  hold  political
and security cases (e.g suspected members of Islamist  groups,  PKK  members
and critics of the ruling parties.). "It is reported that the rules  of  due
process are systematically violated in these unofficial  detention  centres"
(15.20). It does not seem to us, however, that the evidence  demonstrates  a
real risk of serious harm or ill treatment either  for  detainees  generally
or even for  the  narrower  category  consisting  of  those  who  have  been
imprisoned for committing  honour  crimes  or  blood-feud-related  offences.
That is because the  evidence  of  human  rights  abuses  committed  by  KRG
officials against detainees is largely concerned with  specific  categories,
those "primarily held for  political,  sectarian,  or  ethnic  reasons"  (US
State Department Report of March 2007).

 59. So far as the evidence relating to the official justice system  in  the
KRG is concerned, we think it falls short of demonstrating that all  persons
who are tried in the KRG  will  face  a  process  that  would  amount  to  a
flagrant denial of the notion of a fair trial. It  is  significant,  in  our
view, that Dr Fatah in  his  evidence  was  not  wholly  consistent  in  his
assessment of  this  issue  and  that  the  background  evidence  indicating
serious  abuses  tends  (as  with  that  concerned  with   mistreatment   of
detainees) to focus largely on specific types of persons brought  to  trial.
Albeit Dr George was adamant that trials in the KRG are unfair,  he  himself
notes that the Human Rights Report of UNAMI for the  period  1  Jan  2007-31
March  2007  records  that  the  main  concern  was  with  the  practice  of
administrative detention of persons held  in  the  custody  of  the  Asayish
(internal security) forces in the  Kurdistan  region,  the  majority  having
been arrested on suspicion of involvement in acts  of  terrorism  and  other
serious crimes. Many, he notes, are said to be officials  or  supporters  of
proscribed Islamist groups. His report goes on  to  note  that  the  Asayish
"have jurisdiction over economic crimes, such as  smuggling,  and  political
crimes, including espionage and acts of sabotage and terrorism." In  general
we are not persuaded that the principal conclusions on  the  justice  system
or about the independence of the judiciary in  the  KRG  reached  in  SM  at
paras 260-264 need revision. So far as concerns the approach  taken  by  the
Tribunal in SM that the authorities in  the  KRG  are  entities  capable  of
affording protection, it is also worth noting that such an approach  is  now
enjoined by reg 4  of  the  Persons  in  Need  of  International  Protection
Regulations  SI  2525/2006  (implementing   Article   7   of   the   Refugee
Qualification Directive). So far as  concerns  that  Tribunal's  assessment,
that  in  the  KRG  the  authorities  are  in  general  able  to  provide  a
sufficiency of protection, we think  that  assessment  continues  to  accord
with the broad thrust of the background evidence.

60. Whilst  our conclusions on these two general issues relating to the  KRG
government is relevant to country guidance, it turns out, as  we  shall  see
when we come  to  assess  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances,  that
neither has any particular bearing on his case.

61. As regards the situation of Kurds in central and southern Iraq, we  know
from the case of SM that the number of Kurds in central  and  southern  Iraq
is around 1.2 million (compared with  3.8  million  in  the  KRG).  We  also
remind ourselves that at para 279 the Tribunal in SM concluded as follows:

              "We also consider that relocation to the south for a Kurd  can
      in general be effected without this being  unduly  harsh  and  without
      giving rise to a real risk  in  all  but  the  most  exceptional  high
      profile cases of their relocation being brought to  the  attention  of
      one of the two political  parties i.e. the KDP or the PUK of whom they
      had a fear.

62. In seeking to persuade us to depart from that guidance,  both  Dr  Fatah
and Dr George (to name the two main sources on  which  Mr  Mitchell  relied)
have contended that in parts of central and southern Iraq Kurds  face  being
targeted by Arab insurgents and so  are  at  real  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm per se. On the basis  of  their  reports  together  with  other
background evidence (including  the  UNHCR  Governorate  Assessment  reports
adduced before us) we are prepared to accept that  Kurds  face  difficulties
pretty well everywhere in  central  and  southern  Iraq.  However,  although
there have been examples of  Kurdish  communities  per  se  facing  targeted
attacks, the evidence does not demonstrate that that is generally the  case.
On the whole a Kurd who can relocate  safely  within  central  and  southern
Iraq to an area where there is a  significant  Kurdish  community  can  find
protection there and will be able to avoid unduly harsh  living  conditions.
What, however, of Kurds who for one  reason  or  another  are  not  able  to
relocate safely to such areas? Here, we are  prepared  to  accept  that  the
evidence indicates a slightly different position.  As  compared  to  a  Kurd
able to relocate safely to an area where  there  is  a  significant  Kurdish
community, a Kurd only able to relocate safely to an area where he (or  she)
would have to live separately from a  Kurdish  community  would  face  added
difficulties, by virtue of being regarded with suspicion as a  stranger  who
stands out in ethnic, tribal and cultural  and  sometimes  religious  terms.
However, we do not consider that the evidence demonstrates  that  for  Kurds
in either category these difficulties are such as to  mean  that  merely  by
virtue of being Kurdish a person faces either a real risk  of  serious  harm
or that those conditions for them would be unreasonable or unduly harsh.

63. We say that for this reason. Whilst the background  evidence  does  show
that there have been a significant number of attacks  on  Kurds  in  central
and southern Iraq by  insurgents  of  one  kind  or  another  (and  both  Dr
George's and Dr Fatah's reports document some of these incidents),  and  the
COIS report at 8.108 does include Kurds in  a  list  of  those  targeted  as
collaborators and "soft targets", the same list also includes Shias  and  it
is far from being the case that evidence as a whole discloses  a  consistent
pattern of such attacks in respect of either group. The COIS report at  para
12.06 refers  to  Sunni  Arab  insurgents  being  committed  to  eliminating
"Shiites,  Kurds  and  those  Sunnis  who  support  the  new  government  or
cooperate with the MNF". Para  22.17  also  indicates  that  whilst  various
armed groups have made no secret of their desire to attack Kurds, whom  they
consider collaborators with the United States and the  allies  of  Jews  and
Christians, most attacks have been attributed to Ansar al-Sunna; not all  of
the significant insurgent groups  have  undertaken  such  attacks.  Further,
although the number of Kurds who have been forced to  flee  their  homes  or
have been targeted have been significant, given  the  numbers  of  Kurds  in
central and southern Iraq (around 1.2  million),  it  cannot  be  said  that
these events are generally happening. Further, it is  only  in  relation  to
some of the Kurdish communities in central and southern Iraq that  there  is
evidence that they have been forced to flee or have suffered displacement.

64. We do not find it necessary in this  case  to  address  the  submissions
made by Mr Mitchell based on the evidence given by the  experts  as  to  the
general security situation in Iraq, although, as already noted, we  find  Dr
George's assessment that "the situation is as bad as  ever"  very  difficult
to square with the preponderance of the evidence we  have  of  events  since
the beginning of 2007. In short we found nothing in the evidence  before  us
in this case which caused us to take a different view  than  that  taken  by
the Tribunal in KH.

Our assessment: the appellant's case

65. We are conscious of the fact  that  the  the  original  Adjudicator,  Mr
Macdonald and the Tribunal in SM accepted the  appellant's  account  of  his
adverse experiences in his home area. Their findings  on  those  experiences
are preserved and it is manifest that the  appeal  has  been  remitted  back
from the Court of Session on that basis.  Since it will feature in  what  we
say below, we think it pertinent  to  remind  ourselves  that  part  of  the
appellant's evidence, as set out in  his  October  2003  statement,  in  the
course of describing what he did in the few days after  Aso's  assassination
of Hamakaki, was as follows:

    "In Rania I stayed with a friend until the 16th June 2000. I found  out
    though in those last few days that  Omer[Hamakaki's]  family  had  been
    looking for me and asked about my  whereabouts  because  they  had,  as
    previously said, wanted to kill me as they believed that Aso and I  had
    planned the murder together".

Risk in the appellant's home area
66. As already noted the appellant's account of the events which led him  to
flee Iraq is not in dispute. On the basis of these facts the  appellant  had
fled the scene of the murder  outside  his  shop,  fearing  that  Hamakaki's
family would try to take immediate revenge against him.  On  returning  home
under cover of darkness he learnt that his brother had been  arrested.  That
same night Aso was arrested by the PUK  and  the  Hamakaki  family  and  was
subsequently executed in Sulaimaniya by the PUK  and  the  Hamakaki  family.
While in Rania the appellant learnt that the Hamakaki  family  were  looking
for him and had expressed an intention of killing him because  of  a  belief
that he was a partner in crime (see above). Nor is it  in  dispute  that  an
arrest warrant (in two manifestations) was issued against him shortly  after
he had fled the scene of the crime. We have seen that these regard the  fact
that the murder took place outside the appellant's shop as "indicating  that
he was involved with Mr Aso Omar for the assassination  of  our  comrade  Mr
Omer Hamakaki". In the light  of  these  facts  we  consider  it  reasonably
likely that if he had not fled his home area he  would  have  met  with  the
same fate as Aso. As regards his likely position on  return,  some  8  years
later, we consider it would be unsafe to  infer  that  the  Hamakiki  family
will have ceased to have  any  adverse  interest  in  the  appellant  purely
because of the passage of time. As we  have  seen,  the  evidence  regarding
blood feuds indicates that they can be protracted and can, sometimes,  flare
up after being quiescent for many years.

67. Mr Laverty has sought to argue that  whatever  the  appellant  may  have
said at certain points, his case is not now put on the basis that  he  would
face risk from the PUK or even the Jaff per se. He also reminded us of  what
was said at para 3 of the  order  by  Lord  Wheatley  when  summarising  the
Adjudicator's findings: "The appellant made  it  clear  to  the  Adjudicator
that he did not claim that he would be persecuted by the PUK".  He  adverted
to what the Tribunal had said in SM, namely that  "[i]t  was  in  particular
observed that the appellant did not claim to fear persecution  by  the  PUK,
but rather by the Jaff...". If the appellant would not be persecuted by  the
PUK, argued Mr Laverty, then it was inconsistent of the  appellant  and  the
experts to maintain that he would be at risk on return because  of  how  the
KRG authorities in conjunction with the PUK, would treat him.

68. It is true that the appellant on more than one occasion said he did  not
fear persecution by the PUK. It is also true  that  the  evidence  regarding
his own history suggests that in normal circumstances  the  PUK  would  have
regarded him in a positive light. He is a former  peshmerga  and  there  has
been no suggestion that his record serving as a  peshmerga  was  tainted  or
that he had left under a cloud. And it is  clear  that  the  PUK  must  have
known, given the number of witnesses to the incident, that the appellant  at
least played no physical part in Hamakaki's assassination.  However,  it  is
sufficiently clear that what the appellant has sought to  convey  all  along
is that the PUK of its own accord had no grievance  with  him.  He  was  not
intending to say that would remain the case if the  Hamakaki  family  sought
their support. In this regard we think that  Dr  George  and  Dr  Fatah  put
their finger on the real problem in  this  case.   Dr  George  in  his  2007
report, whilst accepting that   without  the  involvement  of  the  Hamakaki
family/clan, the PUK, KDP, KRG and Baghdad authorities would  very  probably
take no adverse interest in him, went  on  to  consider  that  the  Hamakaki
would get involved. Likewise, Dr Fatah, despite noting that  the  PUK  would
only become involved against the appellant if  the  Hamakaki  family  wanted
them to and that not all the sub-tribes and clans  that  make  up  the  Jaff
would be  motivated  to  assist  the  Hamakiki  family/clan  to  target  the
appellant, nevertheless concluded that the Hamakiki family would enlist  the
support of the PUK and would also  be  able  to  benefit  from  the  tribe's
extensive connections to locate the appellant and take revenge.

69. So far as the outstanding warrant  is  concerned,  we  are  prepared  to
accept that through the elapse of time or other factors  the  PUK  of  their
own accord might not seek to enforce it against the appellant.  However,  it
seems to us reasonably likely that once the Hamakaki family learnt that  the
appellant has returned, they would prevail on the PUK to enforce it  against
the appellant and to visit ill-treatment on him thereafter.  The  fact  that
the Hamakaki family were members of the Jaff  tribe  is  likely  to  further
influence the PUK and the KRG to do what this family wanted them  to.  (That
does not necessarily mean that we accept that the family feud involving  the
appellant had developed, as both experts opined, into a tribal feud; in  our
view it goes too far to suggest that the Jaff collectively would  have  seen
themselves in a feud with the appellant; but it is enough,  so  far  as  the
appellant's case is concerned, that significant numbers of  the  Jaff  would
be likely to lend their support to the Hamakaki in the latter's  efforts  to
him the appellant).  Given the importance  which  Mr  Laverty  urged  us  to
place on Lord Wheatley's recording of the appellant saying that he  did  not
fear the PUK, we think it pertinent to note what his  lordship  went  on  to
say at para 7:

     "The fact that the Jaff are a major influence in the PUK, and that the
    PUK have issued warrants for the appellant's return, would suggest that
    interest in the appellant by the PUK and the Jaff had not  diminished."
    (para 7).

70. A key aspect of the question of whether the Hamakaki family would  still
wish to visit harm on the appellant relates to the evidence regarding  blood
feuds. We are assisted here by the COIS report at  para  23.59  and  by  the
"UNHCR position on claims for  refugee  status  under  the  1951  Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees based on a fear of persecution due to  an
individual's membership of a family or clan engaged in  a  blood  feud",  17
March 2006. From these sources we glean that although  honour  killings  and
blood feuds are phenomena which may sometimes overlap in practice,   "honour
killing" is a term used to describe a murder committed by  a  family  member
to protect the family's honour where it is  considered  that  behaviour  has
brought shame on the family, such as loss of virginity, fidelity,  a  demand
for divorce or refusal of marriage;  whereas a "blood  feud"  is  a  dispute
following upon the killing of a family or tribal or clan member  by  another
family or tribe or clan. In the light of this clarification, we do not  rule
out that the circumstances which led in this case to  the  original  killing
may have been perceived as a matter of honour: Hamakaki having  been  issued
a fatwa preventing him from having sex  with  his  own  wife.   It  has  not
helped us that most of the examples Dr Fatah gave to show the prevalence  of
blood  feuds  were  individuals,  mainly  women,  who  had  been  killed  or
seriously harmed  for  so-called  crimes  of  honour;  but  considering  the
background evidence as a whole we  accept  that  (even  when  not  involving
crimes of honour) blood feuds still persist in the KRG and that they do  not
necessarily die away through the mere elapse of time.   At  the  same  time,
when tackled on the subject, neither expert  has  sought  to  maintain  that
blood feuds never die away or resolve  themselves;  both  acknowledged  that
they saw the issue of whether or not they persevered to depend very much  on
the surrounding circumstances and the individual case. But when we  turn  to
consider the appellant's case we cannot ignore the fact  that  there  was  a
considerable gap between the killing of Mulla  Omer  in  1993  and  his  son
Aso's revenge  killing  in  2000  and  that  so  far  as  the  appellant  is
concerned, the Hamakaki family made known at the time of  Hamakaki's  murder
that they "wanted to kill me [the appellant]". So in addition  to  a  likely
motivation to harm there has been a declared intention to do so.

71. We need to underline our principal reasons  why  we  consider  that  the
preponderance of  the  evidence  indicates  that  the  Hamakaki  family  are
reasonably likely to continue to have an adverse interest in the  appellant.
First, as just highlighted, although the murderer of  Hamakaki  was  caught,
it is clear from the appellant's accepted evidence that the Hamakaki  family
even after this event still wished to visit harm on the appellant.   Second,
since the murder, an arrest warrant was issued in two  forms.  One  of  them
clearly states that the authorities believe that the fact  that  the  murder
took place outside the appellant's shop indicated  that  the  appellant  was
involved in the murder as well as Aso. We do  not  consider  that  the  fact
that there were said to be many witnesses to the murder would mean that  the
authorities  would  see  the  appellant  as  not  involved:  indeed  it   is
reasonably likely that when they issued the  arrest  warrant(s)  they  would
have known about  the  witnesses.  Further,  the  authorities  knew  he  was
related to Aso and that Aso had stayed at his house in the week  leading  up
to the crime. They would also know that the appellant had fled the scene.

72.  Third,  despite   the   accepted   evidence   that   Aso   was   killed
extrajudically, there is no suggestion  that  the  KRG  or  PUK  authorities
sought to take action against those who had killed the murderer; indeed  the
evidence is  that  either  the  PUK  themselves  killed  Aso  or  they  were
complicit in his killing by members of the Hamakaki clan.

73. We accept that once Hamakaki's murderer was captured  and  killed  there
was no known further direct action  of  any  kind  by  the  Hamakaki  family
against the appellant's family, including against  the  other  male  members
who would, in accordance with the customary  patterns  of  tribal  or  blood
feuds, be the most immediate targets.  One of the appellant's  brothers  was
arrested but was released. In the appellant's own  words,  he  was  released
"because" the authorities had captured the murderer. In total the  appellant
has two brothers, yet neither  has  been  harmed.  That  was  not  only  the
evidence of the appellant in relation to the situation up  to  the  time  he
left Iraq; despite having plainly kept in  contact  with  his  family  since
(who have sent him documents), he has never  suggested  that  any  harm  has
befallen his brothers since. However, the background  evidence  about  blood
feuds does not state that more than one male member of a  family  is  always
targeted around the same time. We also know from  the  facts  of  this  case
that since Hamakaki's murder, his family clearly saw the  appellant  as  the
principal target for revenge, not other members of his family  and  the  PUK
has issued arrest warrants for the appellant, no-one else.  In  the  earlier
history of this blood feud it does not appear that at the time  Mullah  Omer
was  killed  that  the  Hamakaki  family  targeted  other  members  of   the
appellant's family as well. And it also appears that Aso  had  seen  fit  to
confine his quest for revenge for many years to Hamakaki  himself.   Bearing
in mind the lower standard of proof, we think it would be  unsafe  to  infer
from the available evidence that the Hamakaki family would  not  target  the
man they identified as an accomplice to  Hamakaki's  murder  purely  because
they had not turned their hostile intentions to other male  members  of  the
appellant's family since 2000.

74. We confess to some difficulty over the evidence as to  mediation.  There
is nothing to indicate  that  either  the  appellant's  own  family  or  the
Hamakaki family have refused  to  mediate  or  to  consider  mediation.  The
appellant has nowhere suggested that his own family  wishes  to  pursue  the
blood feud. On the appellant's  own account of the  history  of  this  feud,
which began  in  1993  when  Hamakaki  killed  his  uncle  Mulla  Omer,  the
appellant's own family has lost two members (Mulla Omer  and  Aso),  whereas
the Hamakaki family has lost only Hamakiki himself. We also  know  from  the
evidence of both experts that if they  were  in  the  appellant's  situation
they would have sought to initiate mediation whilst still in the UK, with  a
view to enhancing their prospects of being  safe  on  return.  But  we  lack
evidence as to what, if anything the appellant and/or his family  sought  to
do by way of mediation and we must  bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant  is
someone whose evidence has been found credible;  we  are  not  entitled,  it
seems to us, to infer that he  has  concealed  evidence  about  attempts  at
mediation and their outcome. The evidence about mediation is a factor  which
we have counted  against  the  appellant,  but  it  is  not  evidence  which
outweighs those factors which we counted in his favour.

75. Having found that the appellant would  again  be  targeted  for  adverse
treatment by the Hamakaki family on return, we must look  more  specifically
at how this would affect his position, both in terms of the  risk  of  being
targeted and in terms of  whether  protection  would  be  available  to  him
against such targeting. Whilst we made clear earlier that we see  no  reason
to take a different view from the Tribunal in SM concerning the  ability  of
the KRG  authorities  generally  to  protect  their  citizenry,  we  do  not
consider that the appellant would have access to  such  protection  for  two
reasons. First of  all,  on  the  accepted  evidence  the  PUK  were  either
directly responsible for, or complicit in, the extrajudicial killing of  Aso
and clearly the PUK and the KRG authorities in  the  appellant's  home  area
are closely intertwined. Whether a suspect is obviously guilty or  not,  the
authorities of a state can be expected to protect him against  extrajudicial
killing.  Secondly, we do not think that the fact that the  PUK  have  since
then issued arrest warrants against the appellant would  mean  that  on  his
return they would deal with the appellant's case without  reference  to  the
Hamakaki family. We recognise that the Tribunal in SM were of the view  that
having issued the arrest warrants the PUK  would  deal  with  the  appellant
without him being placed in the hands  of  the  Hamakaki  and/or  the  Jaff.
However, we respectfully  agree  with  Lord  Wheatley  that  the  Tribunal's
reasoning on this point was unconvincing. Not only had  the  PUK  not  acted
according to the book before (when Aso was killed), but  we  know  from  the
background evidence that they are closely allied  with  the  Jaff  and  that
Hamakaki was a former PUK organiser. It  is  true  that  the  appellant  was
himself a peshmerga, but he was clearly at a  lower  rank  and,  unlike  the
Hamakaki clan, his tribe had no influence with the PUK. We note  again,  and
endorse, Lord Wheatley's observation at para 10 of his order:

    "As is often the  case  in  matters  of  this  sort  the  issues  which
    determine whether or not there is a risk of  persecutory  ill-treatment
    are inextricably bound  up  with  the  question  of  whether  there  is
    adequate provision to protect against that risk. In  the  present  case
    the considerations  which  affect  each  of  these  issues  are  almost
    identical.  The  risk  to  the  appellant  is  not  that  he  would  be
    apprehended by the PUK in execution of the warrants they  have  issued,
    but that the PUK would thereafter  hand  him  over  to  the  Jaff.  The
    question of sufficiency of protection depends therefore on whether  the
    PUK would be able to insist that they retain  control  of  any  process
    that follows on from the appellant's  apprehension,  and  do  not  find
    themselves constrained to hand the appellant over that of the Jaff.  It
    is in this respect that the history of what happened to the appellant's
    cousin [Aso] is again of considerable significance."

76. For the above reasons we consider that the appellant, when he  fled  his
home area, faced a real risk of serious harm and ill treatment and that,  if
he returned there, he would again face the same risk. We  consider  that  he
will do so because on return to his home area he will come to the notice  of
the Hamakaki clan and will face a real risk of adverse  treatment  from  the
Hamakaki aided by the KRG authorities or the PUK or the Jaff tribe,  or  all
three.

The issue of internal relocation

77. Before we can deal with this issue,  we  must  address  whether  we  are
entitled to consider it at all. We bear in  mind  Lord  Wheatley's  emphatic
statement in para 10 of his order that:

    "Finally, we should make it clear that in this appeal the  question  of
    internal relocation, should the risk of  persecutory  ill-treatment  to
    the appellant be established, and the protection available against that
    risk being (sic) found to be inadequate, was  not  dealt  with  in  the
    course of the hearing. Counsel for the respondents  conceded  that  the
    matter had not been put before the Tribunal, and therefore could not be
    raised now".


78. Mr Laverty pointed out that this statement appears to have been
jettisoned a few lines on in this order, when, Lord Wheatley stated that:

     "[f]or the avoidance of  doubt,  we  consider  that  the  question  of
    whether there is a risk of persecutory ill-treatment to  the  appellant
    should he return to Iraq, the sufficiency of  protection  available  to
    him, should that risk  be  established,  and  the  matter  of  internal
    relocation should that protection appear to be inadequate,  should  all
    be considered by the reconstituted Tribunal".

79. We recognise that there is an apparent, if not  stark,  tension  between
these two statements. However, neither party has sought to dispute  that  at
the hearing before Lord Wheatley Counsel had made the concession  described.
Further, the only paragraph where any reasoning  is  given  for  conclusions
about internal relocation is para 10 and those reasons are  indeed  correct:
the issue of whether the appellant had an  internal  relocation  alternative
had not been put before the Tribunal in  SM.  And  Lord  Wheatley's  opinion
that the issue "therefore could not be raised now"  is  supported  by  other
higher court authority: see AM (Serbia) [2007] EWCA Civ 16 and  BB  (Guinea)
[2007] EWCA Civ 129.

80.  We  recognise  that  prior  to  the  hearing  the  Tribunal  (a  senior
immigration judge) gave directions which specified  internal  relocation  as
one of the issues to be considered by the Tribunal,  but  such  a  statement
did not, and could not, bind us as to the proper approach in  law.  For  the
reasons given we consider that it is not  now  open  to  the  respondent  to
raise the issue of internal relocation.  Accordingly  our  finding  that  he
faces a real risk of serious harm and treatment contrary  to  Article  3  in
his  home  area  is  sufficient  for  him  to  succeed  in  his  appeal   on
humanitarian protection and Article 3 grounds.

81.  Given,  however,  that  the  Tribunal  did  seek  and  that  we   heard
submissions relating to the issue of internal relocation, we will go  on  to
say what  would  have  been  our  finding  on  internal  relocation  had  we
considered it a live issue before us.

Within the KRG
82. Let us first of all consider the appellant's situation if he  sought  to
relocate elsewhere within the KRG. Part of our  finding  is  that  the  PUK,
prompted by the Hamakaki family, would still have reason  to  enforce  their
warrant for arrest against the appellant.  However,  we  do  not  think  the
appellant will necessarily be at risk throughout  the  KRG  because  of  any
records held on him. ( And we consider  it  must  be  doubtful  whether  any
records would be held on him: although we are told that since 2003  the  KRG
authorities maintain  computerised records,  there  is  no  indication  that
these contain all the data previously held  manually  going  back  to  2003;
given the great preoccupation of the KRG authorities with insurgents we  are
prepared to accept that they  will  have  transferred  records  relating  to
persons regarded as terrorists or risk to state security,  but  we  are  not
persuaded we can accept more than that.)

 83. Rather we think the appellant would be at  risk  because  his  presence
would become known to the Hamakaki family who would  be  motivated  to  then
enlist the PUK and the KRG  authorities,  and  their  Jaff  connections,  to
detain and ill-treat the appellant. We accept that  also  on  this  scenario
the appellant, even if not exposed to direct revenge from the  Hamakaki  (by
for example being handed over to them), would be likely to  be  detained  by
the PUK authorities and, since the  latter  would  know  that  the  Hamakaki
family wanted him detained, they would be likely to ill treat him. He  would
not be in the position of an ordinary detainee.

Central and southern Iraq
84. We turn to consider the appellant' situation if he  sought  to  relocate
to parts of central and southern Iraq.

85. Whilst we  do  not  accept  the  contention  of  the  experts  that  the
appellant would be at risk in central and southern as  a  Kurd  per  se,  we
have accepted that for a Kurd able to relocate safely only  to  areas  where
he would have to live separately from a Kurdish community there would  be  a
greater degree of difficulties: see para 62. That  acceptance  is  important
in this case because we do not consider that the  appellant  could  relocate
safely to areas where there was a significant Kurdish community.

86. That is not to say that we think the appellant, in areas of central  and
southern Iraq where there are Kurdish  communities,  would  be  at  risk  of
being identified by the PUK directly or immediately. Although Dr  Fatah  was
adamant in several passages  in  his  report  that  the  PUK  had  influence
throughout Iraq, his own report elsewhere makes clear that  it  is  only  in
certain areas that the PUK has any effective power and  control:    Even  if
the appellant's name was on records held by the PUK or  KRG  authorities  in
the KRG (which we doubt), we think that at most it would only  be  in  other
areas of central and southern Iraq where the PUK had  power  and  influence,
such as Kirkuk, that there might be access to those records.

87. Nor do we think it helpful to portray the  appellant  as  likely  to  be
"pursued" in central and southern Iraq by the  Hamakaki,  at  least  in  the
ordinary sense of that word (Dr Fatah stated at para 309  of  his  May  2008
report, "[i]t should be clear that the entire Jaff would not pursue the ill-
treatment of [the appellant], only the family and clan of  Hamakaki".)  Even
though we have accepted that the Hamakaki family would continue to  wish  to
take revenge on the appellant,  it  plainly  does  not  have  the  means  to
conduct a hunt for any suspect outside  its  own  immediate  environs;  and,
outside of the KRG, we seriously doubt that the PUK or the  KRG  authorities
(through records or other means) would see pursuing someone  who  is  wanted
for conspiracy to murder in the context of a blood feud in 2000 as any  kind
of priority in Iraq during the relevant parts of 2008.

88. However, that is not the end of the  matter.  In  deciding  whether  the
appellant would be safe in such communities,  a  central  question  must  be
whether he would be identified as  someone  who  had  crossed  the  Hamakaki
clan. From the background evidence we have about the tribal and  clan  based
nature of Iraqi society, we think it  reasonably  likely  that  fellow-Kurds
would quickly come to hear that the appellant  was  a  Sorani-speaking  Kurd
who hailed from the area around Dukhan/Rania and his family and  his  tribal
affiliations would also be quickly established. His background would  become
known. Once that identification was made, we consider that it would only  be
a matter of time before it was relayed back through family and  Jaff  tribal
networks to the Hamakaki family that the appellant had returned to Iraq  and
they would find out where he was. Once they knew where he was,  we  consider
it reasonably likely that they would then be able to gain the assistance  of
local Kurds connected with the PUK or the  Jaff  in  making  direct  contact
with and apprehending him: at this point  (and  this  point  only)  talk  of
"pursuit" outside the KRG does make sense.

89. We do not need to address  the  issue  of  whether  the  authorities  in
central  and  southern  Iraq  provide   sufficient   protection   to   their
populations generally. Whether they do or they do not, they  would  not,  in
our view, be willing or able to afford effective protection  to  someone  in
the appellant's position, who  appeared  to  be  targeted  by  fellow-Kurds.
Whilst we have not found that Kurds per se face a real risk  of  persecution
in central and southern Iraq,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  perceived  as
outsiders and that the  authorities  at  a  local  level,  whose  protective
functions are extremely  beleaguered  dealing  with  insurgents,  would  not
devote any resources to protecting someone in his  position,  especially  as
they would know he was a fugitive from justice  from  another  part  of  the
same federal state.

90. That  leaves  as  the  only  possible  place  of  relocation  where  the
appellant would be safe as those areas of central and  southern  Iraq  where
there are not significant Kurdish communities.  Here  we  have  to  consider
whether it would be reasonable to expect him  to  relocate  to  such  areas,
given his personal circumstances: see para 339O of HC  395  as  amended.  We
remind ourselves that the appellant is still a relatively young man, in  his
late 30s, that he has no physical or mental problems  and  that  he  has  an
occupational skill (hairdressing).  Although  we  are  prepared  to  accept,
particularly bearing in  mind  the  UNHCR  evidence,  that  in  central  and
southern Iraq Kurds who have to live apart from their own ethnic groups  and
communities are less likely  to  able  to  gain  protection  and   may  face
suspicion, distrust and even a certain degree of hostility  from  state  and
non-state actors locally, we do not consider that the evidence  as  a  whole
demonstrates that in general  they  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  or
serious harm or ill treatment simply because of their Kurdish  and  outsider
identity. As regards possible problems of documentation, we note that  since
being in the UK the appellant has been able to obtain from  his  family  his
national ID card. We see no good reason to think he would not be able,  when
the time came, to obtain any further documentation from Iraq  which  he  may
need  to  enable  him  to  move  around  the  country  in  accordance   with
requirements governing documentation.

91. For the above reasons we conclude that had we considered  the  issue  of
internal relocation to  be  a  live  one  in  this  appeal,  we  would  have
concluded  that  the  appellant  did  have  a  viable  option  of   internal
relocation in those parts of  central or southern Iraq where  there  are  no
significant Kurdish communities. But, of  course,  we  have  not  considered
this issue to be a live one in this appeal: our  primary  decision  is  that
the respondent earlier conceded the issue of internal relocation and  so  in
this appeal the appellant is entitled to  succeed  notwithstanding  what  we
have found in the alternative.

92. For the above reasons we conclude:

the Adjudicator materially erred in law;
the appellant's appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection and  Article  3
grounds.

Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey


                       APPENDIX: BACKGROUND MATERIALS

H.J. Barkey and  G.E.  Fuller,  Carnegie  Commission  on  Preventing  Deadly
Conflict, Turkey's Kurdish Question, Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1998

Dutch General Report on Northern Iraq, April 2000

CIPU Iraq Bulletin, August 2003

Joint British/Danish Fact Finding Mission to Damascus, Amman and  Geneva  on
Conditions in Iraq, July 2003

Various Press Cuttings, circa 2003

US State Department Bulletin, 26 March 2004

Human Rights Watch Report, 3 August 2004

Amnesty International Report Iraq, 2004

UNHCR report on Iraq, 1 August 2004

Joint British/Danish Fact Finding Mission on Conditions in  Iraq,  September
2004

CIPU Country Report, October 2004

General Country Report on Iraq of the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs,  14
December 2004

UNHCR report on the possibility of applying the internal flight or  internal
relocation alternative for Iraqi Kurds within Iraq, 29 January 2005

IWPR Reports, 18 February 2005 and 4 March 2005

UNHCR letter of 24 March 2005

Dr A George, Jordan: Living in the Crossfire, October 2005 [extract]

UNHCR Report, October 2005

UNHCR, "UNHCR's position  on  claims  for  refugee  status  under  the  1951
Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees  based  on  a  fear   of
persecution due to an individual's membership of a family  or  clan  engaged
in a blood feud", 17 March 2006

US State Department Report, March 2006

UNHCR, Return Advisory and Position on  International  Protection  Needs  of
Iraqis outside of Iraq, December 2006

UNAMI Report, 1 Jan 2007-31 March 2007

US State Department, Iraq Country Report, March  2007

UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International  Protection
Needs of Iraq Asylum-Seekers, August 2007

Fact-Finding Mission to Iraq's Three Northern Governorates, 23 October  -  3
November 2007

UNHCR, Governorate Assessment Report Erbil Governorate, September 2007

UNHCR, Governorate Assessment Report Dahuk Governorate, September 2007

UNHCR, Governorate Assessment  Report  Sulaymaniyah  Governorate,  September
2007

UNHCR Addendum to August 2007 Eligibility Guidelines, December 2007

UK Home Office Border and Immigration Agency, Country of Origin  Information
Report - Iraq, 8 January 2008
