
BE (Care Proceedings) Jamaica [2005] UKIAT 00098
                                                                         | |



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                     Date:  15 February 2005
                                                Date Determination notified:
                                                                  28/02/2005
                                   Before:

                The Honourable Mr Justice Ouseley (President)
                        Mr J Freeman (Vice President)
                        Mr P R Lane (Vice President)

Between:


                                                                   APPELLANT


                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  RESPONDENT


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Mallick, instructed by Oliver Abey & Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Sigley, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


  1. This  is an appeal against the determination of an Adjudicator,  Mr  D
     Humphrey, promulgated on 29 January 2004.  There are five  Appellants,
     a mother and her four children.  The mother is a citizen  of  Jamaica,
     born in 1973, who entered the United Kingdom in September 2000 and was
     given two weeks leave to enter and subsequently leave to remain  until
     March 2001.  An application to remain as  a  student  was  refused  in
     November 2001.  Her appeal was dismissed in March 2002.  She married a
     British citizen in August 2002, and applied in January 2003 to  remain
     as the spouse of a British citizen, and  applied  for  leave  for  her
     children to remain.  Her application was refused in  August  2003  and
     this refusal is the decision which  the  Adjudicator  considered.   He
     dismissed her appeal, which was brought on human rights  grounds,  and
     Article 8 ECHR in particular.

  2. The children were not the children of her British husband but of other
     men in Jamaica.  She had left the children behind in Jamaica when  she
     came to the United Kingdom.  The youngest, who was born in  1999,  was
     brought by a friend in 2000;  there is no record of  his  entry.   The
     others entered on various separate dates in the first half of 2002 and
     were given six months leave to enter.  In January 2004, they were aged
     twelve, ten and eight.

  3. The Adjudicator was told that Brent LBC had commenced care proceedings
     under the Children Act 1989 in respect of all four children, but  that
     at the date of his hearing those proceedings had not progressed beyond
     a failed contested Interim Care Order application.

  4. One daughter had been the subject  of  a  serious  sexual  assault  at
     school in Jamaica;  one son had abused his  two  half-sisters.   There
     were allegations of sexual and physical abuse and neglect  in  Jamaica
     and the United Kingdom.  However, the mother and children were  living
     in council accommodation and her husband had been  permitted  to  join
     them.  Both daughters were on the SEN Register and received beneficial
     support with emotional issues which had been a barrier to learning.

  5. The Adjudicator held  that  although  removal  would  terminate  those
     educational benefits, that did  not  justify  overriding  the  "proper
     implementation" of immigration policy.  The Appellant had made  "every
     effort to prolong her illegal stay in the United Kingdom, and while an
     overstayer has successfully brought all her children to this  country.
     While she has undeniably founded a private life with her  husband  and
     children in the United Kingdom, this has  been  achieved  despite  her
     full knowledge that her status in this country was precarious and  she
     was liable at any time to removal".

  6. He referred to then current case law on proportionality and said  that
     if the Secretary of State had "addressed  the  issue  with  all  facts
     before him", his task as an Adjudicator was "to determine whether  the
     decision of the Secretary  of  State  was  reasonable".   Because  "no
     different issue of fact" was involved,  he  was  concerned  only  with
     whether the Secretary of State  had  struck  a  fair  balance  between
     immigration control and Article 8.  He concluded:

           "Having regard to the totality of the evidence before me I  find
           that there  is  no  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  Appellant
           returning to Jamaica with her children, who are young enough and
           adaptable enough to make the change as  long  as  they  are  not
           separated from their mother, and making proper  application  for
           settlement in the United Kingdom on the basis of  her  marriage,
           and I find that the decision of the Secretary of State  was  not
           outside the range of reasonable  responses  in  his  determining
           that this should be the course the Appellant would follow."

  7. The appeal as argued by Ms Mallick was different to some  degree  from
     the original grounds.  She focused first on the  significance  of  the
     then pending care proceedings and then  on  what  she  submitted  were
     inadequacies or  legally  inadequate  reasons  for  the  Adjudicator's
     conclusions on proportionality.

  8. We take the care proceedings first.  Her submission was that once  the
     Adjudicator knew that there were incomplete care proceedings,  he  was
     bound to adjourn the appeal so that his decision could take account of
     their outcome which  could  in  certain  circumstances  determine  the
     outcome of the immigration appeal.  He should adjourn  even  if  there
     were no application to do so.

  9. The existence of care  proceedings  showed  that  it  was  responsibly
     thought that a child was suffering significant  harm  attributable  to
     the care given or absence of parental control.  If a care  order  were
     made under Section 33 of the Children Act, the local  authority  would
     have parental responsibility for the child, and by subsection (7):

      "While a care order is in force with respect to a  child,  no  person
     may-


           (a)   cause the child to be known by a new surname;  or
           (b)   remove him from the United  Kingdom,  without  either  the
                 written  consent  of  every   person   who   has   parental
                 responsibility for the child or the leave of the court."


10. At the date of the Adjudicator's hearing,  it  could  not  be  known  or
  predicted whether a Care Order would be made.  By its terms, if made,  it
  would prevent the Secretary of State removing the children,  which  could
  be determinative or at least very significant for  the  decision  in  the
  immigration appeal.  A Supervision Order under  section  35  contains  no
  equivalent restriction on removal from the jurisdiction.



11.  We  reject  these  submissions.   First,  there  is  nothing   in   the
  Adjudicator's determination or in any other material to suggest that  any
  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made.   There  is  no   statutory
  requirement that the appeal be adjourned.  It would not have  been  right
  for the Adjudicator to adjourn in the absence of an  application  by  the
  parties, save very exceptionally, particularly  in  view  of  the  strict
  provisions of Rules  4  and  40(2)  of  the  2003  Procedure  Rules.   It
  certainly cannot be said to have involved any error of principle  in  the
  exercise of the limited discretion available.



12. Second, even if an application had been made on these  facts,  it  would
  have been wrong in principle for an adjournment  to  have  been  granted,
  again in view of the provisions of the Rules.



13. It is difficult to see that an adjournment could have served any  useful
  purpose.  The Adjudicator could not second-guess their outcome but  would
  act on the material available to him about any  aspect  of  the  family's
  well-being  relevant  to  Article  8.   If  the  care  proceedings   were
  ultimately unsuccessful, nobody would have been any the wiser, yet  there
  would have been potentially very considerable delay  to  the  immigration
  appeal.  If they resulted in a supervision order (as in  fact  happened),
  there would be no bar on the removal of anyone.  If they  resulted  in  a
  Care Order and if the restriction or removal by  a  "person"  covers  the
  Secretary of State exercising his powers of immigration control, then the
  relevant court's leave would be required.  But that Court would be  in  a
  position to know that the immigration decision which was the basis of the
  application for leave had passed  successfully  through  the  immigration
  appellate process.  If  the  Court's  leave  was  not  required  for  the
  Secretary of State's exercise of immigration control powers, the position
  would be the same as if a Supervision Order had been made.  (We  are  not
  in a position to comment on whether the  Secretary  of  State  exercising
  immigration control powers is a "person" for section 33 (7) purposes.)



14. Third, the fact that a local authority  might  have  statutory  parental
  authority, or that the proceedings might reveal  material  which  cast  a
  significantly different light upon factors  relevant  to  the  Article  8
  claim could justify a fresh claim.



15. Fourth, the care and the immigration proceedings should  be  treated  as
  concurrent and independent.  Some of the considerations or  evidence  may
  overlap, but they are viewed  from  different  perspectives.   Each  must
  proceed at its  own  timetable.   If  Care  Orders  override  immigration
  decisions, then they can be invoked to prevent removal;  and if not, not.
   There were no interim orders here which could suspend removal.



16. We turn to the second issue, proportionality.  We reject the  suggestion
  that the Adjudicator ignored DP3/96;  it does not  appear  to  have  been
  advanced before him and had it been, it would inevitably have failed  for
  the reasons given in the Secretary of State's letter of 29 August 2003.



17. Ms Mallick  said  next  that  the  Adjudicator  had  only  assessed  the
  reasonableness of the Secretary of State's decision on the  facts  before
  the Secretary of State and had said that there were no  different  issues
  before the Adjudicator.  She said that there was further  evidence  which
  required the Adjudicator to form his own view.  These  factors  were  the
  evidence of the relationship formed between the husband and the children,
  which was also proving beneficial to  them.   Neither  the  Secretary  of
  State nor the Adjudicator had given separate consideration to the  effect
  of removal on the children.



18. We accept that there was some further, albeit very brief, material  from
  the  mother's  witness  statement  before  the  Adjudicator  about   that
  relationship.  The Secretary of State's decision letter makes no specific
  reference to the relationship between husband and children.   The  impact
  of removal on the children was considered by reference to their formative
  years in Jamaica and their comparatively brief time  here.   The  husband
  would be free to accompany his wife at public expense  or  stay  here  to
  support an entry clearance  application.   The  wife's  past  failure  to
  observe immigration regulations was an important factor.



19. It is clear that some separate consideration was given to  the  children
  by the Secretary of State and the Adjudicator.  But there was also  fresh
  material.  It is not wholly clear whether the Adjudicator took  the  view
  that there was no new material or no new issue.  The  legal  approach  to
  proportionality may have changed subsequently.



20. We do think it possible that the Adjudicator erred in law  by  regarding
  the Secretary of State as having information equivalent to that which the
  Adjudicator had.  But we do not see it as a material error of law because
  the additional material before him could not have caused a different view
  to be taken of the proportionality of  the  return  of  the  mother  and,
  viewed separately of her four children.  The  importance  of  immigration
  control and its procedures plainly is overriding here.



21. Whether the  Adjudicator  should  have  seen  it  as  a  question  of  a
  proportionate decision falling outside the "small minority of exceptional
  cases", R (Razgar) v SSHD  [2004]  UKIAT  27,  [2004]  2AC  368  at  p390
  paragraph 20, or as a decision which, on the facts before  him,  did  not
  fall outside the scope of responses open to  a  reasonable  Secretary  of
  State, the result would still be the same.   The  two  approaches  should
  lead to the same practical outcome in any event.



22. If there were a material error of law and it fell to  the  Tribunal,  on
  either  approach,  to  reach  a  decision  on  Article   8,   but   after
  consideration of the material newly placed  before  us,  we  would  still
  reach that same conclusion.



23. We know that a Supervision, not a Care, Order was made in May  2004  and
  that in January 2004 information was sought for those purposes about  the
  family's immigration status.  There may have been a  little  more  detail
  about family background.  It may well be better for the children to  stay
  here.  But that is not the overriding  consideration.   The  decision  to
  remove is plainly proportionate.



24. This appeal is dismissed.  It is reported for  what  we  say  about  the
  relevance of care proceedings.




                                                          MR JUSTICE OUSELEY
                                                                   PRESIDENT


