


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|AM (Begedi - members generally at risk) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00107|
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2005                 |01st June, 2005                 |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:
For the appellant:   Mr  M  Schwenk,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Howells
Solicitors
For the respondent: Mrs L Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Adjudicator, Mr V.P. McDade, in a determination   notified  on  22
      October 2004, had allowed on asylum   and  human  rights  grounds  the
      appeal of the appellant, a national of  Somalia,  against  a  decision
      refusing to grant further leave or vary the  grounds  of  leave.   The
      respondent appealed to the Tribunal.  The  grounds   were  essentially
      threefold. Firstly it was contended that the Adjudicator  should  have
      accepted in the light of the  expert  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      clan, the Begedi, were linked with the Digil/Rahanweyne who, as  found
      by the Tribunal in the  Country Guideline case SH [2004] UKIAT  00272,
      were not a minority clan. Secondly, the Adjudicator had erred, it  was
      argued, in finding it was unnecessary to consider  the   substance  of
      the appellant's claim,  despite  challenges  to  his  account  in  the
      refusal letter. In particular he made no findings as  to  whether  the
      appellant encountered difficulties in Mogadishu or whether he was ever
      in  Afgoye:

             'In failing to make any findings on this point  the  assertion
             that Begedi in Afgoye can be considered  to be  Benadiri is of
             little value because no findings have been made as to  whether
             the Adjudicator accepts the appellant is  in  fact  from  that
             area.'

2.    Thirdly it was submitted that the Adjudicator  had  erred  in  law  by
      failing to consider in the  alternative the relocation issue:

             'In  light  of  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  SH,  the
             Adjudicator ought to have  considered  whether  the  appellant
             could  relocate  to  the  Bay  and  Bakool  region  where  the
             Rahanweyne  have   consolidated   their   control   to   avoid
             persecution from  other majority clans.'

3.    It was conceded by the respondent that the appellant was a  member  of
      the  Begedi.

4.    We do not consider that the grounds demonstrate a  material  error  or
      law on the part the Adjudicator.

5.    The Adjudicator was fully aware of the findings  of  the  Tribunal  in
      the  SH case: see paragraph  10. He also gave careful consideration to
      the submission made to him that the Begedi  were  to  be  linked  with
      Digil/ Rahanweyne and in consequence seen as an "intermediate"  rather
      than  a minority clan. In the same paragraph he wrote:

             'The respondent has provided me with a list  of  Somali  clans
             and this list describes the  Begedi as "Digil" -  "links  with
             Benadiri in Afgoye". The respondent draws my attention to page
             47 at 11.1 in the Report on Minority  Groups.  This  paragraph
             suggests Digil, also known as the Imirifle and Rahanweyne, are
             halfway between a Somali clan and a  minority.'

6.    However, the Adjudicator decided that this evidence was not  decisive.
      His reasons are best set out by giving the full text of the  remainder
      of his paragraph 10:

         'The  appellant's  representative,  for  his  part,  has  drawn  my
         attention to the expert evidence of  Anita  Adam  and  Dr  Virginia
         Luling, to the Tribunal Country Guideline case of KS  [2004]  UKIAT
         00271 and the Home Office Operational Guidelines (undated).  As far
         as the report by Anita Adam is concerned  she  concluded  that  the
         Begedi are a minority clan and are a clan of the  Digil  Rahanweyn.
         She states that:


            "They are an unarmed  group  and  are  not  affiliated  to  the
            dominant pastoralist Somali clans further north, so  the  civil
            war post-civil war period have  been  extremely  vulnerable  to
            having their lands occupied and properties looted."


         She goes on to say as follows:


            "In the academic literature,  in  strict  genealogical  descent
            terms the Begedi are classified within the Digil,  which  is  a
            large though not politically powerful clan family  of  southern
            Somalia, and not one of the major armed  clans  who  have  been
            part of the  struggle for control  of  national  resources.  In
            practice they are much more closely  allied  with  the  coastal
            Benadiri groups considering themselves as a  Benadiri  minority
            and associating with the Reer Hamar rather than the Digil.  (my
            italics)


         Dr Virginia Luling states as follows:


            "(The  Begedi): In the civil war they have suffered badly.  The
            militia have treated them as inferior and without rights.  They
            are looked down on by such groups as the Habir Gidir  who  come
            from a nomadic  background  and  are  in  control  of  much  of
            southern Somalia. For instance in 1999 many Begedi were  killed
            in  Awdhegle by the militia of the Garre (Digil) clan,  because
            they had refused to support the Garre in their war  against the
            Habir Gedir. This particular episode is over, but it  shows how
            vulnerable groups like the Begedi are. An informant in  Somalia
            tells them that they may still be kidnapped and harassed  on  a
            daily basis ... groups like the Bededi  ... can also be classed
            as Benadiri because they are light skinned  (Gibil Cad) and are
            treated in the same way."


         Dr Luling draws attention to the fact that some expert in the joint
         British Danish Fact Finding Mission to Nairobi consider the   Digil
         and  Rahanweyne  as  being  minority  groups.  Undated  operational
         guidance note from the Home Office gives guidance  as  the  way  in
         which  Benadiri ethnicity is to be established. It seems to suggest
         that in Afgoye the  Begedi cans be considered to be  Benadiri.   In
         the  Country  Guideline case of UKIAT 00271 it  is  suggested  that
         where membership of  a minority  clan generally does give rise to a
         real risk "the claim will normally depend on the  fact the claimant
         is genuinely a member of that minority clan".  In  this  case   the
         Home Office  have conceded that the appellant  is a member of   the
         clan he claims. Having considered the objective evidence before  me
         I hold that Begedi can be classified as a minority clan.   Further,
         in the light of  the  expert  evidence  I  have  considered,  I  am
         satisfied that members of the  clan have been shown  to be at  real
         risk of persecution and that there is no effective  protection  for
         them from any more powerful clan.  This being so,  I  am  bound  to
         conclude that this appellant,  as a member of this  clan, would  be
         at real risk of persecution  if he were returned to Somalia. It  is
         unnecessary for me to consider the  substance  of  the  appellant's
         claim in greater detail in view of my findings in relation  to  the
         Begedi clan.'

7.    At this point we remind ourselves that we can only interfere with  the
      determination of an Adjudicator in respect of a determination notified
      after 9 June 2003 if satisfied that there is a material error of  law:
      see CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.  So long as an Adjudicator's decision  is
      within the range  of reasonable responses,  it  will  not  be  legally
      erroneous.

8.    It seems to us that this Adjudicator's determination  was  simply  one
      which arrived at findings which were ones reasonably open  to  him  on
      the evidence.  Given in particular that he was faced  with  background
      materials  which   presented  a  somewhat  equivocal  picture  of  the
      position of the Begedi, he was fully justified in  placing  particular
      reliance on the two experts reports before him from Dr Anita Adam  and
      Dr Virginia  Luling.   Read  together  these  furnished  a  compelling
      explanation as to why accounts as to the minority status of the Begedi
      differed.  This explanation was, in Dr Adam's words, that although  in
      strict genealogical descent terms the Begedi are classified  with  the
      Digil, in practice their  association  and   alliances  lie  with  the
      Benadiri/ Reer Hamar, not  the  Digil.    Furthermore,  as  Dr  Luling
      emphasised, the Begedi, being light-skinned, received  much  the  same
      treatment as the Benadiri.

9.    The Adjudicator does not  comment  on  the  credential  of  these  two
      country experts who provided reports on the  Begedi.  However,  it  is
      worthy of note that the Tribunal in  a  number  of   Country  Guidance
      cases has considered  Dr Virginal Luling to be an  established  expert
      on  Somalia whose reports are to be taken seriously. In any  event  we
      note that the grounds of appeal in this case do not seek to impugn the
      expertise of either  Dr Luling or Dr Adam.

10.   Given the fact that the Adjudicator  had  before  him  weighty  expert
      reports specifically resolving the apparent conflict  found  in  other
      sources as to the  minority status of the Begedi, we consider  he  was
      fully entitled to conclude that the Begedi was a minority  clan  which
      was subject to persecutory treatment at the hands of   majority  clans
      and  would  have  no  effective  source  of  protection  against  such
      treatment.

11.   The Adjudicator's finding that the Begedi  is  a  minority  clan  also
      resolves the issues raised by the second and third grounds  of appeal.
      As the Adjudicator correctly noted, country guidance as to the  proper
      approach to cases in which it is established that a person is a member
      of a minority clan subject to persecutory treatment at the   hands  of
      majority clans was set out in KS [2004] UKIAT 00271.  Such a case will
      normally depend on whether in fact the claimant is genuinely a  member
      of that minority clan. Furthermore, the Refugee Convention  ground  in
      this case is manifestly obvious, namely clan identity, i.e. race.

12.   Having satisfied  himself  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  of  a
      minority clan at real risk of persecution  who would not  be  able  to
      obtain effective protection   from   any  other  powerful  clan,   the
      Adjudicator was not obliged to go any  further.  He  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the appeal should be allowed on asylum  and human rights
      grounds without going on to consider the substance of the  appellant's
      claim in greater detail. The only  possible  basis  suggested  by  Mrs
      Singh  for considering the appellant would not on return be exposed to
      the same treatment as the Begedi generally received, was that he could
      relocate to the Bay and Bakool area. However, in  the   light  of  the
      findings of the two experts on which the Adjudicator  placed reliance,
      the Rahanweyne would not see the Begedi as a clan to whom  they  would
      extend protection.

13.   So far as the points raised in the grounds  concerning the failure  of
      the Adjudicator to make any  findings  as  to  what  happened  to  the
      appellant in Mogadishu or whether he was ever  in  Afgoye,  the  whole
      point of KS was to identify cases in which  specific  findings  as  to
      location or a particular history are not essential in view of what  is
      known about the position of a minority  clan  in  Somalia,  generally.
      Furthermore, given that  on  the  Adjudicator's  proper  findings  the
      Begedi generally do not  have  any  majority  (or  intermediate)  clan
      patrons to whom they can look for protection, there  would  always  be
      the  further problem in such cases of  showing  that  members  of  the
      Begedi, in the absence  of  exceptional  circumstances,  could  either
      reside  or move about in Somali safely.

14.   For the above reasons we have decided that  the  Adjudicator  did  not
      materially err in  law.   Thus  there  is  no  basis  for  reaching  a
      different decision on reconsideration.

15.   Whilst the parties  did  place  before  us  a  significant  number  of
      background materials on the  Begedi, including two expert reports,  we
      do not consider that these were comprehensive. Furthermore,  in  order
      to reach a decision in this case it has only been necessary to  decide
      in relatively brief terms  whether  the  Adjudicator's  findings  were
      within the range of reasonable responses. For these  reasons  we  have
      decided not to report this case as  country   guidance.   However,  we
      shall report it.   That represents  in  our  view  a  way  of  putting
      parties on notice in future appeals  concerned  with  members  of  the
      Begedi that we consider that the two expert reports from Dr Anita Adam
      and  Dr Virginia Luling  constitute  strong  reasons  for  considering
      that, notwithstanding genealogical links with the Digil,  the  Begedi,
      are a persecuted minority clan, to be  classified  together  with  the
      Benadiri/Reer Hamar.  We would require compelling evidence or argument
      before we would put aside the  common  view  expressed  by  these  two
      experts.

16.   For the above reasons we have concluded that  there  was  no  material
      error of law and accordingly the  decision  of  the  Adjudicator  must
      stand.



                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
