
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT
00108 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London             |       Decision promulgated on    |
|on 26 November 2015 and 19 January 2016  |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                   Between

                                     PD
                                     JR
                                     NR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin (of Counsel), instructed by Nag Law
             Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

In considering the conjoined  Article  8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple  family
members decision-makers should first apply the  Immigration  Rules  to  each
individual applicant and, if appropriate, then consider  Article  8  outside
the Rules.  This  exercise  will  typically  entail  the  consideration  and
determination of all claims jointly, so  as  to  ensure  that  all  material
facts and considerations are taken into account in each case.


                         DECISION AND REASONS (No 2)




INTRODUCTION

   1. This is  the  decision  of  the  panel  to  which  both  members  have
      contributed. By our decision promulgated on 05 October  2015,  we  set
      aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT").   That
      decision is annexed hereto  at  Appendix  1.   We  hereby  remake  the
      decision of the FtT.

FACTUAL MATRIX

   2. Borrowing from, and  augmenting  somewhat,  our  earlier  decision  we
      outline the salient facts in the following way.  The  Appellants,  all
      nationals of Sri Lanka, are a family unit consisting of mother, father
      and son now aged 14 years.  This appeal has its origins in a  decision
      dated 23 August 2014 of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
      (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  refusing  the  applications   of   the
      Appellants for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  By  its
      determination promulgated on 15 January 2015, the First-tier  Tribunal
      (the "FtT")  dismissed  their  ensuing  appeal.   The  Appellants  now
      appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

   3. The basic facts are brief and uncontroversial:

      (a) The first-named Appellant, the father, was  granted  clearance  to
           enter the United Kingdom as a student in respect of  the  period
           January 2005 to October 2006.  The  other  two  Appellants  were
           granted entry clearance as his dependents.   All  three  entered
           the United Kingdom on 19 January 2005.


      (b) In respect of the period October 2006 to January 2010,  all  three
           Appellants were the beneficiaries of subsequent  further  grants
           of leave to remain.


      (c) From February 2010 the  Appellants  had  the  status  of  unlawful
           overstayers.


      (d) On 12 February 2013 an application for leave  to  remain  invoking
           Article 8 ECHR was made.


      (e) This application was refused by the Secretary of State's  decision
           dated  30  April  2013  which,  following  reconsideration,  was
           affirmed by the index decision noted above.

   4. The father of the family was the only one of the three Appellants  who
      testified before us.  Elaborating on his witness statement,  which  he
      adopted in full, he explained that having entered the  United  Kingdom
      in 2005 he studied for a total period  of  seven  years,  achieving  a
      qualification in Business Administration.  Since then, during the past
      three years, his  career  has  been  static,  being  confined  to  the
      provision of occasional informal  business  advice  to  friends.   The
      mother of  the  family  has,  recently,  provided  some  informal  and
      gratuitous beauty advice and services  to  close  friends  and  family
      members.  Neither has had any gainful employment since arrival in  the
      United Kingdom. There is no evidence of any family income, illicit  or
      otherwise. While the family have survived during a sojourn of some  11
      years in the United Kingdom, how they have done so is not clear.


   5. The father confirmed that the main focus of their claim is their son's
      education.  The son has progressed  successfully  through  the  United
      Kingdom education system since the family's arrival  in  2005.  He  is
      scheduled  to  undertake  his  GCSEs   in   September   2016.    Since
      commencement of his second level education he has  attended  the  same
      school.  The family previously resided in Colombo, the capital city of
      Sri Lanka and would probably return to  live  there.   Based  on  some
      evidently limited research into international schools in Colombo,  the
      father has obtained some  information  about  likely  costs  but  none
      relating  to  curriculum.  He  asserted  that  their  son   has   some
      familiarity with, but no fluency in, Sinhalese.  At this stage of  his
      education, the son's ambition is to qualify as a lawyer.

   6. Taking into account the  cross  examination  of  the  father  and  the
      submissions  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative,  we  can
      identify nothing contentious in the factual framework  outlined  above
      and shall proceed accordingly.

LEGAL ISSUES

   7. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  raised
      the question of whether "...... the rights of the third Appellant [the
      son] should  have  been  considered  first".   The  arguments  of  the
      parties' representatives focused mainly on this  issue  together  with
      the test of reasonableness enshrined in paragraph 276 ADE  (1)(iv)  of
      the Immigration Rules (hereinafter "the Rules").

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

   8. This has several components.  We begin with paragraph 276 ADE  of  the
      Rules. This is one of an extensive series of  provisions  arranged  in
      Part 7 in accordance whereof leave to remain in the United Kingdom may
      be granted by the Secretary of State. It was  introduced  with  effect
      from 09 July 2012 and amended by HC532, with effect from 28 July 2014.
       The general subject heading is "Private Life",  while  the  immediate
      cross heading is "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to
      remain on the grounds of private life".   Paragraph  276  ADE  (1)(iv)
      provides:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date  of  the
         application the Applicant: ....


         (iv) Is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK."

      The ancestry of paragraph 276 ADE is worthy of note.   It  is  one  of
      several provisions which introduced new  long  residence  rules.   The
      "seven year rule" relating to children has a certain lineage, to which
      we now turn.


   9.     The  first  version  was  introduced  in  DP5/96,  which  required
      children to have been in the United Kingdom for ten years.   This  was
      reduced to seven years on 24 February 1999.  The Immigration  Minister
      (Hansard, columns 309/310) stated the following:

         "Children who have been in this country for several years will  be
         reasonably settled here and may, therefore, find  it  difficult  to
         adjust to life abroad.


         In future, the enforced removal or deportation will not normally be
         appropriate where there are minor dependent children in the  family
         who have been living in the United Kingdom continuously  for  seven
         or more years.  In most cases, the  ties  established  by  children
         over this period will outweigh other considerations and it is right
         and fair that the family should be allowed to stay here ...."

  10.     DP5/96 was considered by the Court of Appeal in NF (Ghana) v  SSHD
      [2008] EWCA Civ 906.  There the Home Secretary accepted she was  bound
      by DP5/96 as amended.  At [39] the Court set out the correct  approach
      to the Ministerial policy:

         "For the future it seems to us inevitable that tribunals
         considering the impact of the Secretary of State's policy in
         relation to the passing of seven years residence on the part of a
         child of the family should:


              (1) start from the position (the presumption) that it is only
              in exceptional cases that indefinite leave to remain will not
              be given, but


              (2) go on to consider the extent to which any of or a
              balancing of all the factors mentioned in the 1999 policy
              modification statement makes the case an exceptional one.


        It is only in such a way that the various documents can be
        reconciled into a single policy."


  11.     With effect from 09 December 2008, DP5/96 was withdrawn.  This was
      accompanied by the following new Ministerial statement:

         "The United Kingdom Border  Agency  is  withdrawing  DP5/96...  The
         original purpose and need for the concession has been overtaken  by
         the Human Rights Act and changes to  immigration  rules.  The  fact
         that a child has spent a significant period of their  life  in  the
         United Kingdom will continue to be an important factor to be  taken
         into account by case workers when  evaluating  whether  removal  of
         their  parents  is  appropriate..."The  withdrawal  of  DP5/96  and
         replacing it with consideration under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
         article 8 of the ECHR [European Convention on  Human  Rights]  will
         ensure a fairer, more consistent approach to  all  cases  involving
         children,  whether  accompanied  or  unaccompanied,  across   UKBA.
         Withdrawing the policy  will  also  prevent  those  overstaying  or
         unlawfully present in the UK having the  benefit  of  a  concession
         which  does  not  apply  to  those  persons  who  comply  with  the
         Immigration Rules and remain in the UK lawfully."

      In EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  the  Upper
      Tribunal stated:

     "2.  Guidance is also given  on  the  assessment  of  the  private  and
         family life of a Zimbabwean national present in the United  Kingdom
         for over 11 years with children born and/or resident most of  their
         lives in the United Kingdom.

         3.  In the absence of countervailing  factors,  residence  of  over
         seven years with  children  well-integrated  into  the  educational
         system in the United Kingdom, is an indicator that the  welfare  of
         the child favours  regularisation  of  the  status  of  mother  and
         children".

  12.     Paragraph 276 ADE(1) (iv) of the Rules when first introduced, with
      effect from 09 July 2012, enunciated a rule which  provided  that  the
      claims of children for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  would
      succeed under the private life rubric of Article 8 ECHR if they  could
      demonstrate a  minimum  of  seven  years  continuous  residence.   The
      Ministerial "Statement of Intent" included the following, at [11]:

         "The Immigration Rules will reflect all the  factors  which,  under
         current statutes and case law, can weigh in favour of an Article  8
         claim, e.g. a child's best  interests,  or  against  an  Article  8
         claim, e.g. criminality and poor immigration  history.  The  Courts
         will continue to determine individual cases according  to  the  law
         but, in doing so, they will  be  reviewing  decisions  taken  under
         Immigration  Rules  which  expressly  reflect  Article  8.  If   an
         applicant fails to meet the requirements  of  the  new  Immigration
         Rules, it should only be  in  genuinely  exceptional  circumstances
         that refusing them leave and removing them from the UK would breach
         Article 8."


          [Emphasis added]


      The following passage in the statement, at [56], is also striking:

     "The key test for a non-British citizen child remaining on a  permanent
         basis is the length of residence in the UK of the child - which the
         Immigration Rules will set  as  at  least  the  last  seven  years,
         subject to countervailing factors.  The  changes  are  designed  to
         bring consistency and transparency to decision-making."

     This provision was amended, with effect from 13 December 2012,  in  the
      following terms:

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the applicant ...

     (iv)     is under the age of 18 years and  has  lived  continuously  in
             the UK for    at least seven years (discounting any period  of
             imprisonment) and it   would not be reasonable to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK".

              [Emphasis added]

     Accordingly, since 13 December  2012,  in  applications  for  leave  to
      remain based on Article 8 private life, it has not been sufficient for
      a child applicant to have accumulated seven years continuous residence
      in  the  United  Kingdom.  Rather,  the  applicant  has  also  had  to
      demonstrate that he or she could not reasonably be expected  to  leave
      the United Kingdom.  We shall give consideration to the  criterion  of
      reasonableness infra.

  13.     The legal framework also contains certain provisions of Part 5A of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"),  in
      particular section 117B which provides:


         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

      Given that the child member of the family unit  constituted  by  these
      three Appellants has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
      period of seven years or more, he has the status of "qualifying child"
      within the Part 5A regime.


  14.     Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was  considered  recently  by  the
      Upper Tribunal.  In Treebhawon and  others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]
      UKUT 00674 (IAC), section 117B(6) was analysed and construed in [12] -
      [23].  This Tribunal expressed its conclusions in the following terms,
      at [20] - [21]:

         "20.  In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
    conditions, namely:

           (a)    the person concerned is not liable to deportation;


              b)  such  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, namely a  person  who
                 is under the age of 18 and is  a  British  citizen  or  has
                 lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
                 seven years or more; and


              c) it would not be reasonable to expect the  qualifying  child
                 to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute    proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions  are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the  parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

         21. Giving effect to  the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention  is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

  15.     The Upper Tribunal has also given consideration to  the  interplay
      between Part 5A of the 2002 Act and the Rules.  In  Bossade  (Sections
      117A - D: inter-relationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415  (IAC),  this
      issue was examined at [30] - [52]. It was held  that,  ordinarily,  it
      will be appropriate for the Tribunal to first consider an  appellant's
      Article 8 ECHR claim by  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  This
      exercise will entail  determining  whether  the  relevant  substantive
      conditions are satisfied by the person concerned.  Part 5A has no role
      in this discrete process.  Rather,  as  the  provisions  assembled  in
      section 117A make abundantly clear, the Part 5A regime is engaged only
      if the court or tribunal finds that the  impugned  measure  interferes
      with a person's right to respect to private or  family  life,  thereby
      requiring examination and determination of  the  question  of  whether
      such interference is proportionate.

  16.     The applicable framework also has a  policy  dimension.   In  this
      context we draw attention to the Immigration  Directorate  Instruction
      ("IDI") of the Home Office entitled "Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
      parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes", published in  August  2015.
      In doing so, we are mindful of the statutory genesis  of  all  IDIs  -
      paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 -  and  their
      status in the legal system, determined by the decisions in R (Alvi)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 33 and  Ishtiaq
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 386.   In
      view of their relative bulk the relevant provisions  of  the  IDI  are
      assembled in an appendix to this judgment.

  17.   We refer particularly to (iii) of the IDI extracts reproduced in the
      Appendix hereto. In an earlier part of this discrete section reference
      is made to the Immigration Act 2014 and the new provisions of the 2002
      Act. The sentence which we have highlighted is  eyecatching,  for  two
      reasons.   First, it is consonant with  this  Tribunal's  decision  in
      Bossade  (supra).  Second,  the  instruction  which  it  contains   is
      diametrically opposite  to  the  submission  advanced  to  us  by  the
      Secretary of State's representative.

THE CORRECT APPROACH

  18.     As noted above, all three Appellants entered the  United  Kingdom,
      as a composite family unit, in January 2005.  The 11th anniversary  of
      this event has just been reached.  The third  of  the  Appellants  was
      then aged three years  and  has  very  recently  celebrated  his  14th
      birthday.  Given that he has been residing continuously in the  United
      Kingdom for some 11 years, he will secure the grant of leave to remain
      under paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules  if  he  can  satisfy  the
      requirement that "....  It would not be reasonable to expect [him]  to
      leave the UK".  As regards the other two Appellants, his  parents,  it
      is common case that neither can succeed in a claim  under  the  Rules.
      Their claims are, therefore, based  on  Article  8  ECHR  outwith  the
      Rules.

  19.     Focussing on the terms of the grant of permission  to  appeal,  we
      note in particular the following:

        a) All three Appellants were granted entry clearance together.


        b) They then entered the United Kingdom together.


        c) They have resided together as a family ever since.


        d) The further leave to remain application dated 12  February  2013
           was a joint     application. It was  determined  jointly,  by  a
           decision dated 30 April 2013.


        e) This latter decision was the  stimulus  for  the  initiation  of
           judicial review     proceedings, on 31 July 2013, in  which  all
           three Appellants had the status   of claimants.


        f) The consensual outcome of the judicial review challenge resulted
           in yet     another joint decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
           dated 23 August  2014,     wherein  lie  the  origins  of  these
           conjoined appeals.


  20.     There is no statutory requirement, whether embodied in primary  or
      secondary legislation, whereby the Secretary of State was  obliged  to
      determine the claim of the child first. Nor is  there  any  such  rule
      requiring the tribunal to do so in the context of the determination of
      these conjoined appeals.  Furthermore, there is no stipulation in  the
      Immigration Rules to this effect.

  21.     We consider that the answer to the principal question of law  upon
      which permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted  lies  in  the
      public law framework within which the Appellants' applications to  the
      Secretary of State were made and determined. One  of  the  overarching
      principles of public law thereby engaged was the duty imposed  on  the
      Secretary of State  to  take  into  account  all  material  facts  and
      considerations.  We consider that if  the  application  of  the  third
      Appellant had been severed  from  the  other  two  and  determined  in
      isolation from them, in some kind of vacuum,  this  would  have  given
      rise to a breach of this duty. It is the very  essence  of  Article  8
      ECHR claims based on the family  life  dimension  of  this  Convention
      provision  that  there  are  relationships,  bonds  and  ties  joining
      together the members of the family unit in question.  In circumstances
      where the claims of several  family  members  coincide,  it  would  be
      artificial and unrealistic  to  determine  them  on  their  individual
      merits, in  a  rigid  sequence  and  in  insulated  packages,  without
      reference to the other claims.

  22.     We further consider that if the third Appellant's claim  had  been
      severed from the other two and determined in isolation in  the  manner
      suggested, this would have contravened both public law principles  and
      Article 8 itself. It would also  have  been  in  breach  of  the  duty
      imposed by section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
      2009 (the "2009 Act") which has been construed as requiring a properly
      informed evaluation  of  all  material  facts  and  considerations  in
      assessing a child's best interests: see  JO  and  Others  (section  55
      duty) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC), at [11] especially:

         "....  properly analysed, there are two  guiding  principles,  each
         rooted in duty. The first  is  that  the  decision  maker  must  be
         properly informed. The second is that, thus equipped, the  decision
         maker  must  conduct  a  careful  examination   of   all   relevant
         information and factors. These principles  have  a  simple  logical
         attraction, since it is difficult to conceive how a decision  maker
         could properly have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
         welfare of the child or children concerned otherwise.  Furthermore,
         they  reflect  long  recognised  standards  of  public  law.  Being
         adequately  informed  and  conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are
         elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of  identifying
         the child's best interests  and  then  balancing  them  with  other
         material considerations. This balancing  exercise  is  the  central
         feature of cases of the present type. It  cannot  realistically  or
         sensibly be undertaken unless and until  the  scales  are  properly
         prepared."

  23.     In our judgment, the duty imposed upon the Secretary of  State  in
      the circumstances presented by the simultaneous advent of these  three
      family members' claims jointly was, rather than engaging in a  fiction
      of the kind mooted above, to process and consider the claims  together
      and then determine them.  This would avoid the manifest  artificiality
      of applying the reasonableness test enshrined  in  paragraph  276  ADE
      (1)(iv) and s117B (6) of the 2002 Act in the  purely  imaginary  world
      that the child's parents did not have claims, also based on Article 8,
      pending.  Further, it would have been equally surreal to determine the
      parents' claims without reference to either or both of the other  two.
      This is so not least because decisions of the  kind  required  in  the
      present cases involved, unavoidably, predictive  evaluative  judgments
      concerning the short and medium term futures of all three  Appellants.
      The processing, consideration and determination of these three  claims
      together would equip the decision maker with the information necessary
      to acquit the public law duty of making  the  decisions  on  as  fully
      informed a basis as possible, in tandem with the section 55  duty,  as
      decided in JO and Others (section 55  duty)  [2014]  UKUT  517  (IAC).
      Crystal  ball  gazing,  which  not  infrequently  opens  the  door  to
      Wednesbury irrationality and the kindred public  law  misdemeanour  of
      failing  to  take  into   account   all   material   information   and
      considerations, would  thereby be avoided.

  24.     We would add that the approach advocated above  does  not  detract
      from the general  principle  that  in  Article  8  ECHR  cases  it  is
      appropriate for the decision maker and, on  appeal,  the  tribunal  to
      consider first whether  the  person's  claim  satisfies  the  relevant
      requirements of the Rules: the Bossade principle refers and  see  also
      paragraph 1.1 of the IDI (supra).  We are further satisfied  that  the
      approach  which  we  favour  finds  support  in  the  decision  in  EV
      (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
      Civ 874. We refer particularly to the connection between children  and
      parents which Christopher Clarke LJ made in [33].  The Court of Appeal
      found that the overall conclusion of the tribunal judge which was,  in
      substance, that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  three  children
      concerned to continue to live with their parents and that  all  should
      return together to their country of origin, with the  public  interest
      in  the  maintenance  of  firm  immigration  control  prevailing,  was
      sustainable in law.  In the language of Lewison  LJ,  to  remain  with
      their parents was "obviously" in their best interest: [60].

  25.     The application of the approach which we have espoused above would
      have led the decision maker to recognise  that  the  only  person  who
      could conceivably succeed under the  Rules  was  the  son,  the  third
      Appellant,  who  satisfies  the  seven  years  resident   requirement.
      However, at this point of the exercise, we consider that the  decision
      maker could not then proceed to determine  the  son's  application  in
      isolation from the others, since the application of the  criterion  of
      reasonableness behoved the official to evaluate all  three  claims  in
      the round and determine them together.  The answer to the question  of
      whether the son could reasonably  be  expected  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom could not realistically or sensibly be answered without  first
      examining what the future was likely to  hold  for  all  three  family
      members.

The FtT's Decisions Re-made

  26.     In re-making the decisions of the FtT we begin by identifying  the
      possible future scenarios for the three Appellants:

      (i) All three appeals are dismissed, in  which  event  the  Appellants
           will depart the United Kingdom together, the family unit intact,
           relocating to their country of origin, Sri Lanka.


      (ii)    The appeals of the first two Appellants are  dismissed,  while
           that of the third Appellant succeeds.  This could have the  same
           result as scenario (i), being a matter of  choice  and  decision
           for the three family members concerned.


      (iii)   However, another possible scenario is that the appeals of  the
           first two  Appellants  are  dismissed  and  that  of  the  third
           Appellant allowed, with the parents returning to Sri  Lanka  and
           the third Appellant continuing to live and study in  the  United
           Kingdom.


      (iv)    The fourth scenario  entails  all  three  appeals  succeeding,
           which will result in the perpetuation of the status quo  in  all
           respects.


  27.     We conceive it our duty to  identify  the  most  likely  of  these
      future scenarios before proceeding to apply the relevant  legal  rules
      and principles.  Since the evidence bearing  on  the  possible  future
      scenarios was rather unsatisfactory and inconclusive,  we  convened  a
      further hearing and received additional evidence.  This  exercise  was
      revealing.  It stimulated further evidence from the  first  Appellant,
      the father and a detailed letter from the third  Appellant,  the  son.
      The latter contains the following eloquent passage:


         "My parents are the people who have supported me throughout my life
         ever since the day that I was born.  They are there to  support  me
         through childhood to adulthood.  My parents are  irreplaceable  and
         have a key role in my emotional strength and wellbeing also  as  we
         are a close knit family.  My parents provide  for  me  as  well  as
         giving me a roof over my head."


  28.     We refer to the second of the three scenarios  canvassed  in  [26]
      above.  Based mainly on the further evidence received, we find without
      hesitation that to separate the third Appellant from  his  parents  is
      not a viable proposal.  He would not be left in the United Kingdom  to
      reside with relatives or friends.   Nor  would  he,  for  example,  be
      attending a boarding school.  Rather, he would be entirely reliant  on
      publicly funded services, as  the  father's  witness  statement  makes
      clear:

         "... We have [not] had time to  get  any  information  from  Social
         Services as to what their position would be but  our  lawyers  have
         told us that they would have a duty to house [the third  Appellant]
         if we left him alone in the UK."

    Thus we consider that there are only two  realistic  scenarios,  namely
    all  three  appeals  are  either  allowed  or   dismissed.   No   other
    configuration is appropriate in the circumstances.

  29.      Given  that,  of  the  three  Appellants,  only  the  third   can
      conceivably  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  we   turn   our
      attentions to his claim at this stage.  In doing so,  we  commence  by
      evaluating the primary consideration of his best interests.  The  best
      interests of any child necessarily encompass a potentially broad range
      of factors bearing on multiple aspects of their life.  In addition  to
      the uncontentious factual framework rehearsed in [2] - [5]  above,  we
      have given consideration to  a  substantial  quantity  of  documentary
      evidence, none of it contentious. To summarise,  the  third  Appellant
      has, beginning at the age of three years, spent three quarters of  his
      life in the United Kingdom.  Throughout this period his life has  been
      shaped by United Kingdom culture, values, pastimes, living  standards,
      language and the prevailing education system.  The third Appellant has
      participated in the  latter  during  the  past  ten  years.   Critical
      milestones in both his personal and educational development have  been
      passed and are now looming.  We find, based on the evidence,  that  he
      is an intellectually gifted young man who has made excellent  academic
      progress; he has a wide circle of friends; he is a member of the  Army
      Cadets;  and  he  engages   in   extra-curricular   activities.    His
      integration in United Kingdom society and culture is complete. We find
      further that his connections with his country of origin  are  minimal,
      extending barely beyond the facts that he is a person  of  Sri  Lankan
      nationality who was born in that country and spent the first couple of
      years of his life there.

  30.   We conclude firmly that  as  regards  those  aspects  of  the  third
      Appellant's life highlighted above, his best interests, viewed through
      the lens of Article 8 private life, would be served  by  remaining  in
      the United Kingdom. The four dominant  factors,  summarised,  are  his
      length of residence in the United Kingdom,  his  full  integration  in
      United Kingdom society, his age and his minimal ties with his  country
      of origin.  We observe that this conclusion is expressly  foreshadowed
      in the Secretary of State's  IDI,  an  instrument  which,  having  the
      status of a material consideration, serves to  inform  the  Article  8
      private life analysis.

  31.     However, the assessment of the third  Appellant's  best  interests
      from  the  perspective  of  his  private  life  only  is   necessarily
      incomplete. We must also consider his best interests through the prism
      of his family life.  He is an only child and we find that he has, vis-
      �-vis  his  parents,  the  bonds  of  love,  affection,  respect   and
      dependency which one would expect of any child  of  14  in  a  stable,
      settled family.  This is not diluted  by  the  truism  that  teenagers
      become progressively independent, resilient and self  sufficient.   In
      this context we refer to our assessment in [28]  above.   Viewed  from
      the twin perspectives of the  third  Appellant's  private  and  family
      life, the conclusion that his best interests would be best  served  by
      continuing to live in the United Kingdom, with  his  parents,  follows
      inexorably.

  32.   At this juncture, we remind ourselves that the best interests of the
      third  Appellant  have,  by  statute,  the   status   of   a   primary
      consideration.  We are also mindful that our assessment  of  the  best
      interests of the third Appellant is not determinative of the  question
      posed by both paragraph 276 ADE  (1)(iv)  of  the  Rules  and  Section
      117B(6) of the 2002 Act, namely whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
      expect him to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  This  question  cannot  be
      answered without considering the parents' appeals,  to  which  we  now
      turn.  At this juncture,  we  turn  to  consider  the  claims  of  the
      Appellant's parents, the first two Appellants. Their Article 8  claims
      cannot succeed under the Rules.  They do not come  remotely  close  to
      doing so.  They can succeed only outwith  the  Rules,  which  involves
      them  satisfying  the  test  of  compelling/exceptional  circumstances
      prescribed in MF Nigeria (infra).

  33.     The main ingredients in the cases of the parents  are  that  their
      presence in the United Kingdom was lawful during the first half of the
      11 year period under scrutiny; they  have  been  unlawful  overstayers
      since early 2010; they are the parents of  a  teenage  child  who  has
      lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for   11  years;  they  have
      established private lives in the United Kingdom; they are law  abiding
      and self-sufficient citizens; and they have spent most of their  lives
      in their country of origin, Sri Lanka.

  34.     At this point of  the  analysis,  we  ask  ourselves  whether  the
      dismissal of the parents' appeals would interfere with their rights to
      respect for their private lives.  The answer is, clearly, affirmative.
       Since the impugned decisions are in accordance with the law  and  are
      in  furtherance  of  a  legitimate  aim,  namely  the  maintenance  of
      immigration control, the next question to be addressed is whether they
      are proportionate.  Proportionality is the "public interest  question"
      within the meaning of Part 5A of the 2002  Act.   By  section  117A(2)
      thereof we are obliged to have regard to the considerations listed  in
      section 117B.  We consider that section 117B applies to these  appeals
      in the following way:

      (a) The public interest in the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
           controls is engaged.


        b) There is  no  infringement  of  the  "English  speaking"  public
           interest,  given  the  uncontested  finding   that   all   three
           Appellants are fluent English speakers.


        c) While the economic self-sufficiency of both parents  is  not  in
           dispute and we have no evidential basis for  finding  otherwise,
           we consider that this public interest must be engaged since  the
           third Appellant has been, and will continue to be,  educated  at
           public expense and if all three Appellants remain in the  United
           Kingdom they will have the capacity  to  access  other  publicly
           funded services and benefits.


        d)    That part of the private lives  established  by  the  parents
           during the second half of their 11 year sojourn  in  the  United
           Kingdom qualifies for the attribution of little weight only.

  35. This brings us to section 117B(6), which provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


        "  (a)      the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with a qualifying child; and


        (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom."

      The third Appellant is a "qualifying child" by virtue of his length of
      residence in the United Kingdom.

  36.     We consider that where a court or tribunal reaches  the  stage  of
      conducting  the  balancing  exercise  required  by  a  proportionality
      assessment, as here, the two tests enshrined in section 117B(6) are to
      be considered and applied together.   The  application  of  the  first
      test, namely whether the first and second Appellants have genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationships with the third Appellant,  yields  a
      swift affirmative answer which is  not  contested  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State.  The second test poses the question of whether  it
      would be reasonable to expect the third Appellant to leave the  United
      Kingdom. This is a mirror image of the test contained in paragraph 276
      ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules. We observe that neither this provision of the
      Rules  nor  Section  117(B)(6)  of  the  2002  Act  featured   in   EV
      (Philippines),  where the  child  concerned  fell  far  short  of  the
      qualifying period of seven years and the claims therefore lay entirely
      outwith the Rules.


  37.     We further consider that the general passages in the Secretary  of
      State's IDI (reproduced in [16]-[17] above), are in their  essence,  a
      faithful reflection of the extensive  Article  8  ECHR  jurisprudence.
      Thus there is a long standing recognition that, with  the  passage  of
      time, children progressively establish roots and integrate in the host
      country.  This is the rationale of  the  "seven  year  rule".  As  the
      Secretary of State's guidance states:


         "The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more  the  balance
         will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK and strong reasons will be required in  order
         to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of  more  than  seven
         years."

      In our consideration of the third  Appellant's  private  life  in  the
      United Kingdom, we  have  highlighted  above  the  salient  facts  and
      factors.  We balance these with the outcome of the forecast which must
      necessarily be undertaken, based on the premise of the  entire  family
      returning to Sri Lanka.   On  the  one  hand,  this  would  be  hugely
      disruptive for the third Appellant in particular  and  would  decimate
      the friendships, relationships and activities that form  the  core  of
      his private life.  It would also obstruct his  education,  though  not
      irredeemably so.  It would involve his transfer  to  a  society  whose
      culture, values, norms and language are alien to him. Emotionally,  it
      would undoubtedly be highly stressful. Furthermore,  this  fundamental
      transformation of his life and lifestyle would occur at an  age  which
      is recognised universally as of critical importance in every  person's
      development.


  38.     On the other hand, taking into account his Appellant's age from  a
      different perspective,  coupled  with  his  educational  achievements,
      intellectual ability and the support of a  stable  family  unit,  this
      young man would, foreseeably, adapt over time. There is no  suggestion
      that his health would be detrimentally affected or that there would be
      any irreparable rupture in his academic progress. Nor  is  it  claimed
      that his career aims could not be achieved in his country  of  origin.
      This is a stable, educated and healthy family unit.

  39.     We remind ourselves that  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
      reasonableness.  Other legal tests which have gained much currency  in
      this  sphere  during  recent   years   -   insurmountable   obstacles,
      exceptional  circumstances,  very  compelling  factors   -   have   no
      application in the exercise we are  performing.   Self-evidently,  the
      test of reasonableness poses a less exacting and  demanding  threshold
      than that posed by the other tests mentioned.

  40.     Judicial decision making in the sphere of immigration  and  asylum
      law is rarely straightforward.  The present appeals are  no  exception
      in  this  respect.  We  consider   that   the   application   of   the
      reasonableness test involves a  balance  of  all  material  facts  and
      considerations.  The application  of  this  test  will  invariably  be
      intensely fact sensitive, see EB (Kosovo)  v Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41, at [7] - [12], per  Lord  Bingham.
      Ultimately, the factors to which we give determinative weight are  the
      length of the third Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom  (some
      11 years), which has spanned three quarters  of  his  life;  his  deep
      immersion in all aspects of life in this country; the  critical  stage
      of his personal and educational development which  has  been  reached;
      his minimal connections with his country of origin; and the likelihood
      that he will make a useful contribution to United Kingdom society.

  41.     Furthermore, we must weigh the third Appellant's  best  interests,
      as we  have  assessed  them,  which  have  the  status  of  a  primary
      consideration.  The main countervailing factor is that the  first  and
      second Appellants have no legal right to remain in the United Kingdom.
      Their immigration status is that of unlawful over-stayers.  This is  a
      factor of undeniable weight.  However, it has been  frequently  stated
      that a child's best interests should not be compromised on account  of
      the misdemeanours of its parents.  See, for example, per Baroness Hale
      in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]
      UKSC 4, at [20]-[21] and [35] and EM (Lebanon) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 64, at [49].  Having regard to our
      predictive finding of the most likely future scenario for this family,
      we consider that there is a preponderance of factors impelling to  the
      conclusion that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
      Appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Accordingly,  his  appeal
      succeeds under the Rules.

  42.     Having thus concluded, the effect of section 117B(6) of  the  2002
      Act is that the public interest does not require the removal of either
      parent viz the first and second Appellants.  If  and  insofar  as  the
      application of section 117B(6),  where  it  arises,  requires  a  more
      elaborate and comprehensive exercise in certain cases than that  which
      was considered sufficient in the particular context of Treebhawon,  we
      refer to our analysis of the Part 5A regime in [35] above and,  having
      done so, conclude that section 117B(6) should prevail, on the  grounds
      and for the reasons elaborated extensively above.

  43.     Finally, given that the parents' appeals can only succeed  outwith
      the Rules, we remind ourselves that the test to be applied is that  of
      exceptional,  or  compelling,  circumstances:  see  MF   (Nigeria)   v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,  at
      [42]. In our application of this test, we refer to, but do not repeat,
      our various analyses and findings above.  The first of the  two  final
      considerations which we have identified is the  unequivocal  statement
      in section 117B(6) that the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
      removal of these parents given that they have a genuine and subsisting
      parental relationship with the third Appellant and our finding that it
      would not be reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
      The second is that, given our findings above, the effect of dismissing
      the two parents' appeals would be to stultify our  decision  that  the
      third Appellant qualifies for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
      under the Rules.   Insofar as section  117B(6)  requires  a  balancing
      exercise to be performed, we highlight our  previous  assessments  and
      findings and,  balancing everything, our overall  conclusion  is  that
      the test of exceptional circumstances is satisfied. Thus the first and
      second Appellants' appeals succeed outwith the Rules.

DECISION

  44.     Accordingly, we re-make the decision of the FtT by:

      (a) allowing the first and  second  Appellants'  appeals  outwith  the
           framework of the Rules; and


      (b) allowing the third Appellant's appeal under paragraph 276  ADE(iv)
           of the Rules.






                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                    Dated:   21 January 2016



                                 APPENDIX 1



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             |Decision given orally on 29       |
|on 29 September 2015                     |September 2015 and promulgated on |
|                                         |..................................|
|                                         |.....                             |

                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                   Between

                                     PD
                                     JR
                                     NR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin (of Counsel), instructed by Nag Law
             Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The  Appellants,  all  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka,  are  a  family  unit
    consisting of mother, father and son aged 13 years.   This  appeal  has
    its origins in a decision dated 23 August  2014  of  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State"), refusing  the
    applications of the Appellants for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  By its determination promulgated on 15  January  2015,
    the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT")  dismissed  their  ensuing  appeal.
    The Appellants now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The factual framework is uncontroversial and we summarise it thus:

    (a)  The first-named Appellant, the father, was  granted  clearance  to
         enter the United Kingdom as a student  in  respect  of  the  period
         January 2005 to  October  2006.   The  other  two  Appellants  were
         granted entry clearance as his dependants.  All three  entered  the
         United Kingdom on 19 January 2005.

    (b)  In respect of the period October 2006 to January 2010,  all  three
         Appellants were the beneficiaries of subsequent further  grants  of
         leave to remain.

         (c)  From February 2010 the Appellants had the status  of  unlawful
overstayers.

    (d)  On 12 February 2013  a  joint  application  for  leave  to  remain
         invoking Article 8 ECHR was made.

    (e)  This application was refused by the Secretary of State's  decision
         dated 30 April 2013 which, following reconsideration, was  affirmed
         by the index decision noted above.

 3. The FtT Judge noted in particular that the son has been living  in  the
    United Kingdom for some 10 years.  He considered that  the  son's  best
    interests would be safeguarded by the maintenance of the  family  unit.
    Next, per the following passage:

         "In view of the above I am  satisfied  that  it  is  reasonable  to
         expect the claimant's family as a whole to relocate to Sri Lanka."

    The  Judge  elaborated  on  this  evaluative  assessment,  finding  "no
    exceptional reasons, such as any unusual  medical  condition  or  other
    particular need, why any of  the  family  must  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom".  Based on the prediction that the three Appellants  would  be
    removed from the United Kingdom together, the Judge pronounced  himself
    satisfied that there would be  no  interference  with  their  right  to
    respect for family life.  Next, under the rubric of private  life,  the
    Judge seems to have accepted that there would be an  interference.   He
    concluded that  any  such  interference  would  be  proportionate.   He
    identified the public interests in play as the maintenance of effective
    immigration controls and, in particular, the economic well being of the
    country.  He made specific findings that the father had not paid income
    tax or national insurance on taxable income (earned  as  a  consultant)
    and that the son "has been educated at public expense when not entitled
    ....."  The formal disposal was a dismissal of the appeals  under  both
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


 4. The grounds of appeal  concentrate  substantially  on  the  third-named
    Appellant.  The Judge is criticised  for  inadequate  consideration  of
    this Appellant's life and circumstances, while focusing excessively  on
    the parents.  It is further contended that by virtue of section 117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act, the Judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to  assess  the
    position  of  the  child  first.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted
    accordingly.

 5.  We  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  an  obvious  and
    indisputably significant error of law contained in the critical section
    of the judgment, namely that beginning at [37] and ending at [47].  The
    error  of  law  is  exposed  by  the  formulation  of  a  criterion  of
    exceptional  reasons  in  [42].   Mr  Wilding   realistically,   though
    unavoidably, accepted that if the judge has formulated that  criterion,
    or test, in the context of applying paragraph 276ADE(iv) to the  appeal
    then a clear misdirection in law has been committed.

 6. The question of construing the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    is itself a question of law and a matter of law for this Tribunal.   We
    are in no doubt that, considering these passages as a whole, the  judge
    was still in paragraph  276ADE(iv)  "territory"  when  formulating  and
    purporting to apply this misconceived criterion set forth in [42].   We
    construe the determination as  continuing  to  apply  paragraph  276ADE
    through to the middle of [43], at which point the judge  asks  himself,
    for the first time, whether he should consider  the  case  outwith  the
    framework of the Immigration Rules.  That is  the  point  at  which  he
    proceeds to examine the appeal through that different lens.  We are  in
    no doubt that this is the correct construction  of  [43]  and  [44]  in
    tandem.  The decision is unsustainable in law for that reason.

 7. There is a further clear freestanding error of law contained in [46] of
    the determination.  We entertain  no  doubt  that  in  [46]  the  judge
    purports to make a discrete finding that the first  Appellant  has  not
    paid income tax or national insurance on his  consultancy  fees.   That
    is, self-evidently, a finding adverse  to  all  three  Appellants.   It
    raises the question of evidential foundation.  The only place to search
    for that is in the determination itself and there is none to  be  found
    to underpin the finding, which springs as a  veritable  bolt  from  the
    blue as the decision draws to its end.

 8. This abrupt finding also raises the question  of  procedural  fairness.
    Was  this  factor,  which  was  plainly  considered  adverse   to   the
    Appellants, canvassed  at  the  hearing  so  as  to  enable  the  first
    Appellant the opportunity to deal  with  it?   We  find  no  indication
    whatsoever that it was. This is a  further  vitiating  element  in  the
    decision.

 9. It follows from this analysis that the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal suffers from two material errors of law and we set it aside in
    consequence.  We shall re-make the decision within  the  forum  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.  There are two broad choices to be considered.  One  is
    that we proceed  to  consider  the  parties'  written  submissions  and
    reserve our judgment.  The second is that we re-list the case for  some
    further argument and/or the reception  of  evidence,  if  that  be  the
    Appellants' intention, on another date in the near future.

             [Having considered the parties submissions].

10. The appeal will be listed for further hearing, before the same panel of
    judges if possible, on a date to be notified in November 2015.












                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




                                                   Dated:    05 October 2015


                                 APPENDIX 2



   i) The IDI contains, in paragraph 8.2.3.2, a short  section  relating  to
      paragraph 276 ADE (1)(iv):


         "In order to meet these requirements, a child under  18  must  have
         lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years, discounting  any
         period of imprisonment. Further information on continuous residence
         can be found in Section 8.2.3.5 below.


         The criteria set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) reflect the duty in
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  to
         have regard to the need to safeguard and  promote  the  welfare  of
         children who are in the UK, by which we mean their best interests.


         The decision maker must have regard to the best  interests  of  the
         child as a primary consideration (but not the only or the paramount
         consideration).  They  must  fully  consider   the   child's   best
         interests.


         The decision maker must assess whether it is reasonable to expect a
         child to leave the  UK  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),  and  must
         carefully  consider  all  of  the  information  provided   in   the
         application. Decisions must not be taken simply  on  the  basis  of
         assertions about the best interests of the child. All the  relevant
         factors need to be assessed in the round.


         When considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), the decision  maker  must
         refer to Section 11 of this guidance for further information on how
         to consider the best interests of a child and assessing whether  it
         is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK"

      In a separate section, paragraph 11.2.4 of the IDI poses the following
      question:

         "Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British citizen child  to
      leave the    UK?"

(ii) The following moderately prolix answer, which invites consideration  in
      all its fullness, is supplied:

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7 years.


         The  decision  maker  must  consider  whether,  in   the   specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to live in another country.


         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to  each  child
         in the UK in the family individually, and  also  consider  all  the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker  should
         also engage with any  specific  issues  explicitly  raised  by  the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.


         Relevant considerations are likely to include:


         a.   Whether there would be  a  significant  risk  to  the  child's
         health
              For example, if there is evidence that the child is undergoing
             a course of  treatment  for  a  life  threatening  or  serious
             illness and treatment will not be available in the country  of
             return;


         b.   Whether the child would be leaving the UK with their parent(s)


              It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to  remain  with  their  parent(s).  Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK;


         c.   The extent of wider family ties in the UK
              The decision maker must consider the extent to which the child
             is dependent on or requires support from wider family  members
             in the UK in important areas of his or her life;


         d.   Whether the child  is  likely  to  be  able  to  (re)integrate
             readily  into  life  in  another  country.  Relevant   factors
             include:


               . whether the parent(s) and/or child are  a  citizen  of  the
                 country and so able to enjoy the full  rights  of  being  a
                 citizen in that country;


               . whether the parent(s) and/or child have lived in or visited
                 the country before for periods of more than  a  few  weeks.
                 The question here is whether, having visited  or  lived  in
                 the country before, the  child  would  be  better  able  to
                 adapt, and/or the parent(s) would be able  to  support  the
                 child in adapting, to life in the country;


               . whether the parent(s) and/or child have existing family  or
                 social ties with the country. A  person  who  has  extended
                 family or a network of friends in  the  country  should  be
                 able to rely on them  for  support  to  help  (re)integrate
                 there;


               . whether the parent(s) and/or child have  relevant  cultural
                 ties with the country. The  caseworker  must  consider  any
                 evidence of exposure to, and the level of understanding of,
                 the cultural norms of the country. For example, a period of
                 time spent  living  mainly  amongst  a  diaspora  from  the
                 country may give a child an awareness of the culture of the
                 country;


               . whether the parents and/or child can speak, read and  write
                 in a language of that country, or  are  likely  to  achieve
                 this within  a  reasonable  time  period.  Fluency  is  not
                 required -  an  ability  to  communicate  competently  with
                 sympathetic interlocutors would normally suffice;


               . whether the child has attended school in that country."


      The last discrete segment of this section, under the  rubric  of  "(f)
      Other specific factors raised by or on behalf of the child", states:


         "Parents or children may highlight the differences in  the  quality
         of education, health and wider public services or  in  economic  or
         social opportunities between the UK and the country of  return  and
         argue that these would work against the best interests of the child
         if they had to leave the UK and live in that country. Other than in
         exceptional circumstances, this will not  normally  be  a  relevant
         consideration, particularly if the parent(s) or wider  family  have
         the means or resources to  support  the  child  on  return  or  the
         skills, education or  training  to  provide  for  their  family  on
         return, or if Assisted Voluntary Return support is available."

  ii)     Within the "Introduction" section of the IDI, we  have  identified
      an interesting passage.  It is stated at pages 5 - 6 [paragraph 1.1]:

         "This  guidance  must  be  used  by  decision  makers   considering
         applications under the family and private life Rules in Appendix FM
         and paragraphs 276 ADE(1) - DH.  First,  the  decision  maker  must
         consider whether the applicant meets the requirements of the  Rules
         and if they do so leave under the Rules should be granted.  If  the
         applicant does not meet the requirements of the Rules, the decision
         maker must move on to consider whether, considering all the factors
         raised by the  application,  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
         which mean refusal of the application would result in unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the applicant  or  their  family  such  that
         refusal would not be proportionate under Article 8.  If  there  are
         exceptional  circumstances,  leave  outside  the  Rules  should  be
         granted.  If not, the application should be refused."

         [Emphasis supplied]
