
[pic]

           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application  of  Kasicky)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Reg 29AA: interpretation) IJR [2016] UKUT 00107 (IAC)


Heard at Field House
on 14 October 2015

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of
                                ROMAN KASICKY
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

   Mr D O'Callaghan, instructed by South West Law, appeared on behalf of the
   Applicant.


   Mr Sternberg, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared  on
   behalf of the Respondent.

   1. In reg 29AA(3) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2006, the word "appearance" refers to P's formal presence at his
      appeal.


   2. In ascertaining whether the exception in reg 29AA applies, the
      possibility of managing risk by detention or conditions is a factor to
      be taken into account.





                                  JUDGMENT

   1. The applicant is a  national  of  Slovakia.   He  entered  the  United
      Kingdom as an Accession State Worker on 23 March 2006  and  has  since
      been working in the United Kingdom in the exercise of  Treaty  rights.
      Following a number of convictions, the Secretary  of  State  issued  a
      deportation order against him on 26 January 2015 and  certified  under
      reg 24AA of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
      that his removal would not be unlawful under s 6 of the  Human  Rights
      Act 1998, on the ground  that  there  was  no  real  risk  of  serious
      irreversible harm if he were to be removed pending full  determination
      of any appeal he might bring.


   2.  The  applicant  challenged  the  certification  by  judicial   review
      (JR/2505/2015).  Patterson J refused permission.  On 15 May  2015  the
      applicant was removed to Slovakia.


   3. He has appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  decision  to
      deport him.  The appeal was listed to be heard at the Newport  hearing
      centre on 30 July 2015.  On 3 July 2015 he applied under reg  29AA  of
      the 2006 Regulations for permission to re-enter the United Kingdom  to
      attend his hearing.  The respondent refused the application on 17 July
      2015.  When the appeal hearing  began  there  was  (it  appears)  some
      surprise that the appellant was  not  present.   When  the  judge  was
      informed of the reason he adjourned the hearing in order to afford  an
      opportunity for the applicant to attend.  A further request under  reg
      29AA was made on 31 July 2015 and refused  on  2  September  2015.   A
      third request was  made  on  26  September  2015  and  refused  on  30
      September 2015.  By then the appeal had been relisted to be  heard  on
      19 October 2015.  The present proceedings, challenging the refusal  or
      refusals under reg 29AA, were brought on 9 October 2015.


   4. In view of the urgency of the matter I attempted to direct in  advance
      that the application for permission  be  adjourned  into  Court  as  a
      "rolled-up" hearing.  At the hearing before me it  was  apparent  that
      the parties were unaware of that, but  both  counsel  expressed  their
      willingness  to  work  to  a  tight  timetable.   Having  heard   oral
      submissions, I indicated the probable line of my decision,  giving  Mr
      Sternberg an opportunity to make  further  written  submissions  after
      considering  the  matter  overnight.   On   consideration   of   those
      submissions I made on 15  October  2015  an  order  granting  judicial
      review, quashing the decisions refusing the  applications  made  under
      reg  29AA,  and  requiring  the  respondent  to  grant  the  applicant
      permission to be temporarily admitted in order to make submissions  in
      person at the hearing of his appeal on 19 October 2015.


   5.  Regulation  29AA  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 is as follows:


        "Temporary admission in order to submit case in person
        29AA. - (1) This regulation applies where -
           (a) a person ("P") was removed from the United Kingdom  pursuant
              to regulation 19(3)(b);
           (b) P has appealed against the  decision  referred  to  in  sub-
           paragraph (a);
           (c) a date for P's  appeal  has  been  set  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal or Upper Tribunal; and
           (d) P wants to make submissions before the First Tie Tribunal or
              Upper Tribunal in person.


        (2) P may apply to the Secretary of  State  for  permission  to  be
        temporarily admitted (within the meaning of paragraphs 21 to 24  of
        Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act(a), as applied by  this  regulation)  to
        the United Kingdom in order to make submissions in person.
        (3) The Secretary of State must grant P permission, except when P's
        appearance may cause serious troubles to public  policy  or  public
        security.


        (4) When determining when P is entitled to be given permission, and
        the duration  of  P's  temporary  admission  should  permission  be
        granted, the Secretary of State must have regard to the dates  upon
        which P will be required to make submissions in person.


        (5) Where -
           (a) P is temporarily admitted to the United Kingdom pursuant  to
           this regulation;
           (b) a hearing of P's appeal has taken place; and
           (c) the appeal is not finally determined,
        P may be removed from the  United  Kingdom  pending  the  remaining
        stages of the redress procedure (but P may apply to return  to  the
        United Kingdom to make submissions in person during  the  remaining
        stages  of  the  redress  procedure   in   accordance   with   this
        regulation).


        (6) Where  the  Secretary  of  State  grants  P  permission  to  be
        temporarily admitted to the United Kingdom under  this  regulation,
        upon such admission P is to be  treated  as  if  P  were  a  person
        refused leave to enter under the  1971  Act  for  the  purposes  of
        paragraphs 8, 10, 10A, 11, 16 to 18 and 21 to 24 of  Schedule  2(b)
        to the 1971 Act.


        (7) Where Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act so applies, it has  effect  as
        if -
           (a) the reference in paragraph 8(1) to leave  to  enter  were  a
              reference to admission to  the  United  Kingdom  under  these
              Regulations; and
           (b) the reference in paragraph  16(1)  to  detention  pending  a
              decision regarding leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom were to detention pending submission of P's  case  in
              person in accordance with this regulation.


        (8) P will be deemed not  to  have  been  admitted  to  the  United
        Kingdom during any time during  which  P  is  temporarily  admitted
        pursuant to this regulation."


   6.  The  regulation  implements  art  31.4  of  the  Citizens   Directive
      2004/38/EC:


        "Member States may exclude  the  individual  concerned  from  their
        territory pending the redress procedure, but they may  not  prevent
        the individual from submitting his/her defence  in  person,  except
        when his/her appearance may cause serious troubles to public policy
        or public security or when the appeal or judicial review concerns a
        denial of entry to the territory."


   7. I was not referred to any relevant authority on  the  meaning  of  any
      part of reg 29AA.  I  was,  however,  referred  to  the  Secretary  of
      State's  guidance,  in  s  5  of  the  guidance  on  Regulation   24AA
      Certification Guidance for European Economic Area  Deportation  Cases,
      version 2.0 dated 20 October 2014.  That guidance summarises reg  29AA
      and its effect.  At para 5.3 it indicates the standard  paragraphs  to
      be inserted in a decision to make a deportation order, which  indicate
      the person's ability to make  an  application  under  the  regulation.
      Amongst those paragraphs are the following:


        "Permission will not be granted if the Secretary of State considers
        that your presence would cause serious troubles to public policy or
        public security.


        You must apply for permission in advance of attempting to  re-enter
        the UK or you will be refused admission at the UK Border.


        If permission is granted, it will be a temporary admission pursuant
        to Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  If  you  were  deported
        under the Early Removal Scheme then you will be recalled to  prison
        if you are admitted to the UK before the expiry of  your  sentence.
        In any other  case  you  are  liable  to  be  held  in  immigration
        detention for the duration of your stay.


        You must leave the UK immediately after your appeal hearing or  you
        will be enforcedly removed.


        In the case of any subsequent hearing at which you wish  to  submit
        your case in person, you must apply again  for  permission  to  re-
        enter.


        Any return to the United Kingdom is entirely at your own cost."


      Paragraph 5.4 reads as follows:


        "Under regulation 29AA the  Secretary  of  State  must  grant  such
        permission, except where the person's re-admission for the  purpose
        of appearing and making submissions at  their  appeal  hearing  may
        cause serious troubles to public policy or public security."


   8. It is immediately apparent that the Secretary of State has  a  general
      duty to grant permission for these purposes, subject to an  exception.
      It is also immediately apparent that the  exception  is  expressed  in
      three different ways in the materials to which I have made  reference.
      The Directive, and the regulation  itself,  phrase  the  exception  as
      "except when P's [in the Directive, "his/her"]  appearance  may  cause
      serious troubles  to  public  policy  or  public  security".   In  the
      guidance, at para 5.4, the exception is phrased as "except  where  the
      person's  re-admission  for  the  purpose  of  appearing  and   making
      submissions at their appeal hearing  may  cause  serious  troubles  to
      public policy or public security".  In the letter to  be  sent  to  an
      affected person, the exception is expressed as "if  the  Secretary  of
      State considers that your presence would  cause  serious  troubles  to
      public policy or public security".


   9. The legal test must be that  set  out  in  the  Regulations.   If  the
      guidance indicates  a  wider  exception,  it  is  wrong;  and  if  the
      Secretary of State applies a  wider  exception  her  decision  may  be
      challengeable.   The primary  question  must  therefore  be  the  true
      construction of the phrase "when  P's  appearance  may  cause  serious
      troubles to public policy or public security".   It  is  necessary  to
      start with the meaning of the word "appearance".   It  might  have,  I
      think, three meanings.  The first is, in general terms,  his  presence
      on the scene; the second is what he  looks  like;  the  third  is  the
      formal sense of attendance at Court to take part in  the  proceedings.
      The second meaning appears to me to be so  unlikely  to  be  the  sole
      intended meaning that I exclude it; although, for  example,  a  person
      who had a racist slogan tattooed on his forehead  might  be  a  person
      whose appearance in either of the other  senses  might  cause  serious
      troubles.  The general meaning of "presence on the scene"  appears  to
      be that adopted by the draftsman  of  the  standard  sentences  to  be
      included in decision letters.  In my view that is unlikely to  be  the
      correct meaning of the word "appearance" in either  reg  29AA  or  art
      31(4).  If that is the sense intended, it is extremely surprising that
      either the word "return" or the phrase "presence in the Member  State"
      was not chosen, rather than a word which has a precise meaning in  the
      very context of the matter being regulated.


  10. Indeed in art 31.4, the phrase under discussion is  the  exception  to
      the rule that the Member State "may not prevent  the  individual  from
      submitting his/her defence in person" which in my  judgement  gives  a
      clear indication that the word "appearance" is  specifically  directed
      to the process of making representations in person before a  Court  or
      Tribunal.  I conclude that "appearance" in reg 29AA  means  appearance
      in the appeal process: it does not mean presence in the United Kingdom
      in any general sense.


  11. I was not asked to look at the versions of the Citizens  Directive  in
      any other language.  Such comparison as I  have  been  able  to  make,
      however, does not suggest an interpretation different from that  which
      I have already set out.  In German the phrase  is  'sein  pers�nliches
      Erscheinen', in which the noun has much  of  the  wide  sense  of  the
      English 'appearance'.  In French, however,  it  is  'sa  comparution',
      which unambiguously refers to one's presentation before authority,  in
      particular before a Court.


  12. It has to be recognised, however, that a person  entering  the  United
      Kingdom in order to attend a hearing is certain to be  in  the  United
      Kingdom for a period of time longer than the hearing itself, and  will
      have to travel from the point of entry to the hearing.  It seems to me
      that the process of getting to and from the hearing, as  well  as  the
      hearing itself, needs to be incorporated in the interpretation of  reg
      29AA as a matter of common sense.  For this reason I  think  that  the
      guidance, at para 5.4, is probably more  or  less  accurate:  but  the
      standard paragraph set out in para 5.3 of the guidance  expresses  the
      exception much too widely.




  13. I do not think that the phrase "serious troubles to public  policy  or
      public security" is capable of precise definition in the abstract, but
      clearly there is an echo of the  "grounds  of  public  policy,  public
      security or public health" that under regs 19 and  21  permit  an  EEA
      national's exclusion or removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is,
      however, of some interest that  the  public  health  ground  does  not
      appear in art 31.4 or reg 29AA: I shall return to this in a moment.


  14. One issue of considerable difficulty, which formed the basis  of  both
      oral submissions at the hearing and Mr Steinberg's subsequent  written
      submissions, concerns the extent to which, in considering whether  the
      person's appearance may cause serious troubles  to  public  policy  or
      public security, it is right to take into account the  fact  that  any
      such troubles can be ameliorated by the Secretary of State's  dealings
      with the person while he is in the United  Kingdom.   I  have  already
      noted that, if he is a prisoner released on licence, his return to the
      United Kingdom will (according to the standard paragraphs)  result  in
      his return to custody.  It does seem very  difficult  to  say  that  a
      person who will spend his time in the United Kingdom in  custody  will
      pose any serious risk to public policy or public security.   The  next
      question is therefore whether, in considering whether a person who  is
      not released on licence is to  be  allowed  to  return,  consideration
      should be given to the fact that, under the general law and  again  by
      reference to the standard paragraphs, he can  be  detained  under  the
      Immigration Acts, or, if not detained, can be  subject  to  reporting,
      residence and other conditions.  In both these cases I do not think it
      can be right to say that the possibility (or moral certainty)  of  the
      person's being  in  detention  wholly  removes  the  risk  of  serious
      troubles to public policy or public security: if it did, it  might  be
      difficult to justify such a person's removal  or  exclusion  from  the
      United Kingdom in the first place by reference to  grounds  of  public
      policy or public security.  On the other hand, given the  phrasing  of
      art 31.4 and reg 29AA, and the clear presumption that a person  is  to
      be allowed into the United Kingdom subject only to the  exception,  in
      my judgment the means available  for  reducing  any  risk  of  serious
      troubles is a factor which must be taken into account  in  determining
      whether permission to re-enter is to be granted.


  15. I notice that, although a person  can  be  excluded  from  the  United
      Kingdom on grounds related to public health, the  continued  existence
      of those grounds does  not  apparently  prevent  his  claiming  to  be
      allowed to re-enter the United Kingdom in order to present  his  case.
      That is the effect of the omission of the health grounds from reg 29AA
      (and indeed art 31.4).  That seems to me to point to  the  correctness
      of the view just expressed in relation to  public  policy  and  public
      security.  The fact that a person whose state of  health  may  pose  a
      risk to the United Kingdom is nevertheless entitled to be remitted  to
      argue an appeal, appears necessarily to suggest that his  re-admission
      will need to be under such conditions as would prevent the eventuation
      of the risk he poses.   Thus,  the  Secretary  of  State's  powers  of
      constraint must be part of  the  general  context  of  decision-making
      under reg 29AA.


  16. I summarise my interpretation of reg 29AA(3) as follows.  There  is  a
      presumption of a person's re-admission to make submissions  in  person
      before a Tribunal hearing his  appeal.   The  exception  is  when  his
      appearance before the Tribunal, including necessary  arrangements  for
      getting him to and from the hearing  may  cause  serious  troubles  to
      public policy or public security.  In deciding whether  the  exception
      applies,  the  possibility  of  the  person's  detention,  under   the
      Immigration Acts or otherwise, does not of itself remove the  risk  of
      trouble, but is a factor to be taken into account.


  17. I turn now to the actual decisions made  in  the  present  case.   The
      first decision is that of 17 July 2015.  It sets out  the  applicant's
      history,  noting  that  in  relation   to   violent   offences,   "the
      circumstances of these offences are  unknown",  but  setting  out  two
      paragraphs of the judge's sentencing remarks in the most recent  case.
      The letter adds the observations that the applicant has the  potential
      to act violently whilst under the influence of alcohol and is  capable
      of causing psychological and physical harm to others; and that he  has
      been convicted of failing to comply with the requirements of suspended
      sentence and community orders.  He is thus, it is  said,  unlikely  to
      comply with reporting restrictions.  Further,  there  is  no  evidence
      that he has  adequately  addressed  the  reasons  for  his  persistent
      violent offending, and that there is consequently  reason  to  believe
      that there is a real risk of his reoffending.  The final paragraph  is
      as follows:

          "15. Accordingly it is considered that  granting  [the  applicant]
              permission to temporarily  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom  to
              attend the hearing may cause serious trouble to public policy
              or public security and so, pursuant  to  Regulation  29AA(3),
              permission is refused."

  18. The second decision is that of 2 April  2015.   I  was  not  asked  to
      consider it in detail: indeed the bundles do not appear to  contain  a
      complete copy of it.   This  decision  apparently  made  reference  to
      reasons for considering that  the  applicant  presented  a  threat  to
      anyone involved with managing his detention.  The  decision  expressed
      as  a  decision  to  maintain  the  refusal  to  grant  the  applicant
      permission "to temporarily  enter  the  United  Kingdom  to  attend  a
      hearing, on the ground that to do so  may  cause  serious  trouble  to
      public policy or public security".


  19. Following that decision there were representations on  behalf  of  the
      applicant, dated 26 September 2015.   Those  representations  were  in
      part directed to suggesting that, at the previous hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, the Presenting Officer had said or done something
      that might now bind the Secretary of  State  to  grant  the  applicant
      permission to re-enter.  That position is not now maintained.  But  so
      far as concerns the question whether the applicant might pose  a  risk
      to those detaining him, the applicant's solicitors write as follows:


          "[The applicant] was detained in the UK when serving his sentence.
           We understand that he has always been classified as being  a  low
          risk of serious harm to staff and other prisoners".


      The third decision, dated 30 September 2015, is a  response  to  those
      submissions, and does indeed respond to the first point, but does  not
      mention the second.

  20. As I indicated at the hearing, I consider that each of these decisions
      is unlawful, for reasons which appear from  the  first  part  of  this
      judgment.  First, it appears to me that  the  decision-maker  was  not
      properly alive to the rule that the applicant was  entitled  to  enter
      the United Kingdom for his  hearing  unless  his  appearance  at  that
      hearing (as distinct from general matters relating to his presence  in
      the United Kingdom) would cause serious troubles to public  policy  or
      public security.  It is to be noted that none of  the  decisions  make
      any reference to difficulties that might arise  at  or  in  connection
      with the hearing  itself.   Secondly,  none  of  the  decisions  takes
      properly into account the facilities available  to  the  Secretary  of
      State for managing and reducing any risk that she might fear.  When it
      was specifically put to her that the evidence appeared  to  show  that
      there would be no risk to staff managing  the  applicant's  detention,
      the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  respond.   Thus,  in  making  her
      decisions, the Secretary of State failed  to  take  into  account  two
      relevant factors.  That is the reason for  quashing  the  decision  or
      decisions in question.




  21. Given that the Secretary  has  had  three  discrete  opportunities  to
      establish that the exception to the principle of re-admission  applied
      and had failed to do so, and given also the  timescale,  I  considered
      that the right thing to do was to take the view that the exception did
      not apply.  I therefore ordered that  the  Secretary  of  State  grant
      permission under reg 29AA.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 15 January 2016
