
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

               AAN (Veil) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00102 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2013                           |.............................|
|                                              |.........                    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY,
                    THE VICE PRESIDENT, MR C M G OCKELTON

                                     and

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AAN
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  Where the face of a party or witness  is  substantially  covered  by  a
    veil or other form of attire, it is incumbent on the Tribunal to strike
    the  balance  between  the  rights  of  the   person   concerned,   the
    administration of justice and  the  principle  of  open  justice.   The
    Tribunal will consider options which should, simultaneously, facilitate
    its task of assessing the strength and quality of the  evidence,  while
    respecting as fully as possible the rights and religious beliefs of the
    person concerned.

(2)  Such measures may include the following:

      a) A sensitive enquiry about whether the cover can be removed, in
         whole or in part.


      b) Where  appropriate,  a  short  adjournment  to  enable  the  person
         concerned to reflect and, perhaps, seek guidance or advice.

      c) The adoption of limited screening of the person  and/or  minimising
         the courtroom audience.

    This is not designed to operate as an exhaustive list.


(3)  In cases where a Tribunal considers that the maintenance of  the  cover
    might impair its ability to properly assess the person's evidence  and,
    therefore, could have  adverse  consequences  for  the  appellant,  the
    Tribunal must ventilate this concern.

(4)  Issues of religious attire and symbols must  be  handled  by  tribunals
    with tact and sensitivity.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

1.   The Appellant is  an  Afghani  national,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom  on  23rd  January  2009,  claimed  asylum  and   was   granted
    discretionary limited leave to enter.  He is now aged 20 years,  having
    been born on 3rd February 1993.  This  appeal  has  its  origins  in  a
    decision made on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("the Secretary of State") dated 4th June 2009, whereby  the
    Appellant's application for asylum was refused.  By  its  Determination
    dated 4th August 2009, the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  dismissed
    the  Appellant's  appeal.   In  due  course,  the   Appellant's   legal
    representatives applied on his behalf for an extension of stay  in  the
    United Kingdom on a discretionary basis. Within the  same  application,
    the solicitors concerned reasserted the Appellant's asylum  application
    and invoked paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention. As these representations demonstrate,  the
    Appellant continued to profess a fear of proscribed  treatment  in  the
    event of returning to Afghanistan.

2.   Progress thereafter was rather  sluggish,  the  evidence  indicating  a
    process of requesting and receiving  further  information,  such  as  a
    marriage certificate, a witness statement  and  evidence  of  earnings.
    During  this  increasingly  protracted  period,   the   Appellant   was
    convicted, on 24th May 2012, of assaulting his wife, a British citizen.
     (His wife re-enters the narrative at a later stage: see  infra).   The
    index  offence  was  assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm.    The
    Appellant received a commensurate sentence of 21 months detention in  a
    Young Offenders' Institution.  In due course, on 12th  June  2013,  the
    Secretary of State decided to deport  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  This was the  stimulus  for  his  appeal  to  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal ("the FtT") and the ensuing appeal to this Tribunal.

DETERMINATION OF THE FtT

3.   On 16th August 2013, the FtT dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  The Appellant was represented at  that  hearing  by  counsel,
    while the Secretary of State was represented by the  same  official  at
    both levels.  Certain material aspects of the  course  of  the  hearing
    conducted by the FtT emerge from its Determination.  Evidence was given
    by the Appellant on his own behalf.  In addition, evidence was  adduced
    from two witnesses, who were:

    (a)  His sister, who is variously described as "A", "M" and "AE" in the
         Determination.   [We shall describe her as "AE" hereinafter].

     (b) His sister's spouse, "JE".

    It is clear that the evidence adduced  from  these  two  witnesses  was
    designed  to  confirm  and  fortify   the   Appellant's   international
    protection claims, in particular  his  assertions  concerning  fear  of
    exposure  to  proscribed  treatment  in  the  event  of  returning   to
    Afghanistan.

4.   In paragraph 16 of the Determination,  there  is  a  reference  to  the
    evidence given to the FtT by the female person  professing  to  be  the
    sister of the Appellant and the spouse of JE.  It is recorded:

         "The witness AE was called.  She appeared before us  fully  veiled.
         The  Appellant's  counsel  stated  she  was  satisfied  as  to  the
         witness's  identity.   The  witness  stated  that  the   photograph
         appearing  in  ..........    the   Appellant's   bundle   was   her
         photograph."


     [Our emphasis]

     According to the Determination, AE adopted her witness  statement.   In
    cross examination she testified, inter alia, that she is the sister  of
    the Appellant, she does not know either of their ages and is unaware of
    their dates of birth. Prior to marriage, she had been known as "M" and,
    upon wedding, she adopted  the  name  "AE".   She  could  not  describe
    precisely the place of her alleged marriage to JE in Afghanistan.

5.   The FtT refers  to  the  evidence  of  AE  in  paragraph  [27]  of  its
    Determination, in the following terms:

         "In support of the assertion that A and M  are  one  and  the  same
         person, we heard evidence from a female witness  M.   She  appeared
         before us fully veiled, but asserted that she was the person  whose
         photograph appears in [a visa document] ....


         Her evidence is that she  is  also  the  person  appearing  in  the
         Marriage Certificate....


         We did not see the original of either document,  but,  because  the
         witness was veiled, we cannot  make  any  judgment  as  to  whether
         either of those photographs  bear  [sic]  any  resemblance  to  the
         person in front of us."

         [Emphasis added]

     In paragraph [28] the FtT makes the following finding:

         "We find that the Appellant has  not  proved,  even  to  the  lower
         standard, that the witness A is one and  the  same  person  as  his
         younger sister.  As to the circumstances of the wedding  between  A
         and JE the evidence is so unsatisfactory that we can only  conclude
         that whilst the Appellant and JE are known to either other,  as  to
         who participated in that wedding we are unable to say."

     The FtT proceeded to reject the Appellant's asylum,  human  rights  and
    humanitarian protection claims, dismissing his appeal in its entirety.

THE MAIN ISSUE: THE NIQAB ATTIRED WITNESS

6.   The cornerstone of the Appellant's case has consistently been  that  he
    is a person at risk as a result of the marriage of his older sister  in
    Afghanistan.  The evidence of the veiled, female person claiming to  be
    this sister was, self evidently, of substantial importance to his case.
     However, the Determination contains no considered  assessment  of  the
    evidence of this witness who, as recorded above,  was  attired  in  the
    Niqab, the Muslim veil which  enshrouds  almost  the  entirety  of  the
    wearer's  face.   In  particular,  there  is  no  evaluation   of   its
    reliability or credibility.  Nor is it possible to make  any  confident
    inference about this matter. Thus her evidence was neither believed nor
    disbelieved by the FtT. The absence of a finding about her  credibility
    is stark.  The same observation applies to the evidence of  JE.   While
    the FtT made clear adverse credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant, it failed to make any such findings as regards  AE  and  JE,
    who were important  witnesses.  Furthermore,  the  FtT  engaged  in  an
    exercise  of  attempting  to  compare  AE's  veiled  visage  with   two
    photographic images. We consider that there are  combined  elements  of
    insufficient findings and inadequate reasoning  in  paragraphs  [25]  -
    [28] of the Determination, which contain key passages  assembled  under
    the heading "Our Reasons and Decision". These failings per  se  vitiate
    the Determination of the FtT.

7.   Next, we turn to consider the fairness of the hearing conducted by  the
    FtT.  In doing so, we would highlight that, before this  Tribunal,  the
    following matters were confirmed on behalf of the Secretary of State:

    (a)  At the hearing, the FtT did not  express  any  concern  about  the
         veiled attire of the witness.   In particular, there  was  no  hint
         that this presentation might influence the FtT's assessment of  the
         evidence of this witness and its ensuing findings.

     b) The FtT made no enquiries of the Appellant's counsel or the witness
        about the issue of attire.


     c) In particular, no attempt was made to establish whether the witness
        might testify without her veil.  Nor was any consideration given to
        the adoption of a mechanism such as the witness removing her  veil,
        partially or fully, in appropriate conditions, or permitting her to
        be screened in some way or receiving her evidence before a  limited
        audience.

8.   We consider that the failures  adumbrated  immediately  above  rendered
    the hearing before the FtT  procedurally  unfair.   It  is  clear  from
    paragraph [27] of the  Determination  that  the  veiled  attire  of  an
    important witness became a source of concern  for  the  Tribunal.   The
    substance of this concern is understandable: the FtT found it difficult
    to evaluate certain photographic evidence  on  account  of  her  veiled
    attire.  This, in turn, had a bearing on the Tribunal's  evaluation  of
    other evidence, in particular a marriage certificate.  We consider that
    it was incumbent on the FtT, in the interests of fairness, to ventilate
    this concern, with due sensitivity and tact, in  the  presence  of  the
    parties.  However, this did not occur.  Secondly, we consider that  the
    dictates of a procedurally  fair  hearing  required  the  FtT  to  make
    sensitive enquiries about whether the witness could testify without the
    veil or partially veiled.  No such enquiry was made. Thirdly, we are of
    the opinion that fairness required the FtT to give consideration to the
    acceptability and viability of a mechanism such as simple screening  or
    limiting the courtroom audience.  No consideration was  given  to  this
    kind of device. We conclude that these failures  rendered  the  hearing
    procedurally unfair.

9.   We acknowledge the argument advanced on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State that, viewing the Determination  as  a  whole,  these  procedural
    irregularities are insufficient to give rise to a successful appeal  as
    they made no  real  difference  to  the  outcome.   In  rejecting  this
    argument, we refer particularly to the decision of the Divisional Court
    in R - v - Chief Constable of Thames Valley  Police,  ex  parte  Cotton
    [1990] IRLR 344 and, in particular,  the  principle  enshrined  therein
    that  a  reviewing  or  appellate  court  should  exercise  caution  in
    concluding that  the  outcome  of  the  first  instance  hearing  under
    scrutiny  was  unaffected  by   the   relevant   diagnosed   procedural
    irregularity or impropriety.  Simon Brown J stated, at page 13B/D:

         "It is sufficient if an Applicant can establish  that  there  is  a
         real, as opposed to a purely minimal, possibility that the  outcome
         would have been different."

    As the judgment of Bingham LJ makes clear,  the  test  is  whether  the
    first instance decision might have been different if  the  irregularity
    concerned had been avoided: see page 16.  Bingham LJ continued:


         "While cases may no doubt arise in which it can  properly  be  said
         that denying the subject of a decision an adequate  opportunity  to
         put his case is not  in  all  the  circumstances  unfair,  I  would
         emphasise these cases to be of great rarity."

         [Emphasis added.]

    We would add that the relevant passages in the judgment of  Bingham  LJ
    repay full  reading.  Furthermore,  as  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  held
    recently in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105  (IAC),  the
    principles to be distilled from the decision in Cotton  (and  in  other
    comparable decisions of superior courts) apply as fully to  appeals  to
    the Upper Tribunal under  section  11  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 as to applications for judicial review.

10.  The subject of veiled attire  featured  in  interim  advice  to  judges
    promulgated by the President of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal,
    Hodge J, on 9th November 2006.  The specific focus of this guidance was
    the wearing of a veil  by  a  party's  representative.   The  President
    stated:

         "Immigration Judges must exercise discretion  on  a  case  by  case
         basis  where  a  representative  wishes  to  wear  a   veil.    The
         representative in the recent case has appeared veiled previously at
         AIT hearings without difficulties.  It is important to be sensitive
         in such cases.  The presumption is that if a representative  before
         an AIT wishes to wear a veil, has  the  agreement  of  his  or  her
         client and can be heard reasonably clearly by all  parties  to  the
         proceedings, then the representative should be allowed to do so."

     The President added the following:

         "If a Judge or other party to the proceedings is unable to hear the
         representative clearly, then  the  interests  of  justice  are  not
         served  and  other  arrangements  will  need  to  be  made.    Such
         arrangements will vary from  case  to  case,  subject  to  judicial
         discretion and the interests of all parties."

    The sentiments expressed in this latter passage are clearly capable  of
    extending to veiled parties and witnesses.

11.  At the same time, the Lord Chief Justice of England and  Wales  decided
    to seek advice from the  Equal  Treatment  Advisory  Committee  of  the
    Judicial Studies Board ("the JSB").  This culminated in the publication
    of new guidance on the wearing of the Niqab,  the  full  veil  worn  by
    Muslim women, on  24th  April  2007.   Summarising  the  guidance,  the
    Chairman of the Committee, Mrs Justice Cox, stated:

         "At the heart of our guidance is the principle that each  situation
         should be  considered  individually  in  order  to  find  the  best
         solution in each case.  We respect the right for  Muslim  women  to
         choose to wear the  Niqab  as  part  of  their  religious  beliefs,
         although the interests of justice remain paramount.  If a  person's
         face is almost fully covered a Judge may have to  consider  if  any
         steps are required to ensure effective  participation  and  a  fair
         hearing - both for the woman wearing a Niqab and for other  parties
         in the proceedings.  This is not an issue that lends  itself  to  a
         prescriptive approach - we have drawn on a  wealth  of  cases  that
         demonstrate that and we have drawn up guidance for different  court
         personnel and parties."

    Notably, the impetus for the guidance promulgated by Hodge  J  and  the
    ensuing JSB guidance was a hearing in the AIT which  gave  rise  to  an
    adjournment as the Judge stated he was unable to hear a veiled advocate
    clearly.  The JSB guidance emphasises that where witnesses and  parties
    are concerned:


       . A sensitive request to remove a veil may be appropriate.   However,
         this requires careful reflection, since attending court  can  be  a
         daunting experience for many and the ability of a witness or  party
         to give their best evidence should not be compromised.


       . Experience demonstrates that  evidence  can  be  given  effectively
         without removing one's veil.

       . Where the issue is raised, a short adjournment may  be  appropriate
         to enable the woman concerned to  reflect  and,  perhaps,  to  seek
         guidance or advice.

       . Ideally, any issue of this kind should be addressed at  the  outset
         of the hearing.

    The latter recommendation clearly places some responsibility  on  legal
    representatives.


    The guidance repays full reading and we would urge all Judges  of  both
    Tiers to study it.

12.  The  subject  of  religiously  motivated  attire  and  the  display  of
    religious symbols has received  much  attention  during  recent  years.
    This is at least partly due to the advent of the Human Rights Act 1998,
    effective from 2nd October 2000 and, by  this  means,  the  importation
    into  domestic  United  Kingdom  law  of  Article  9  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("the Convention").
     Article 9 protects religious freedom in the following terms:

         "Everyone has the right  to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
         religion; this right includes freedom to  change  his  religion  or
         belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
         public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in  worship,
         teaching, practice and observance."

     This is not an absolute right, by virtue of Article 9(2):

         "Freedom to manifest one's religion or belief shall be subject only
         to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a
         democratic society in the  interests  of  public  safety,  for  the
         protection of public order, health or morals or for the  protection
         of the rights and freedoms of others."

    This particular freedom had already been recognised  in  the  Universal
    Declaration of Human Rights two years previously, in Article 18:


        "Everyone has the right  to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
        religion; this right includes freedom to  change  his  religion  or
        belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
        public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in  teaching,
        practice, worship and observance."

    The simple exercise of juxtaposing these two provisions exposes clearly
    the genesis of Article 9 of the  Convention.   Less  than  two  decades
    later, this freedom was expressed in more  expansive  and  prescriptive
    terms in  Article  18  of  the  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
    Political  Rights,  another  measure  of  the  United  Nations.    This
    contained the new provision that States Parties should have respect for
    the liberty of parents and legal guardians to ensure the religious  and
    moral  education  of  their  children  in  conformity  with  their  own
    convictions.  Later, the right  of  a  child  to  freedom  of  thought,
    conscience and religion was specifically recognised in  Article  14  of
    the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989).

13.  Thus the particular right, or freedom, which manifested itself  in  the
    unpretentious setting of the FtT in Newport, Wales, on 12  August  2013
    is one of unmistakable international stature and pedigree.  It was  the
    subject of moderate publicity  approximately  one  year  ago,  on  15th
    January 2013, when  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  pronounced
    judgment in the cases of  Eweida  and  Others  -  v  -  United  Kingdom
    (Application nos. 48420/10, 59842/10, 51671/10 and 36516/10).   In  one
    of these cases, the Court awarded E2,000 to an air hostess who had been
    required by her employer not to display a religious cross, ruling  that
    this was a  disproportionate  measure  in  pursuit  of  the  employer's
    legitimate aim of having and enforcing a uniform policy.  In one of the
    other  cases,  the  employer's  legitimate  aim  prevailed,  the  Court
    dismissing a similar claim  brought  by  a  nurse  against  a  hospital
    authority.  Article 9 of the Convention has also been considered by the
    House of Lords.  In R (Begum) - v  -  Head  Teacher  and  Governors  of
    Denbigh High School  [2006]  UKHL  15,  their  Lordships  held  that  a
    school's refusal to allow a pupil to wear a Jilbab at  school  did  not
    interfere with her right to manifest  her  religion.   It  was  further
    held,  in  the  alternative,  that  any  interference  was  objectively
    justified under Article 9(2).  Subsequently, the High Court held that a
    school's refusal to permit  a  pupil  to  wear  a  purity  ring  as  an
    expression of her Christian faith and  affirmation  of  her  belief  in
    celibacy before marriage did not infringe Articles  9  and  14  of  the
    Convention: see R (Playfoot) - v - Millis School Governing Body  [2007]
    EWHC 1698 (Admin).

14.   The  intense  public  interest  and  debate  which  this  subject  has
    generated is reflected in certain recent happenings in a nearby  fellow
    EU Member State,  France,  where,  in  2011,  legislation  was  enacted
    banning the wearing  in  public  of  most  face  coverings.   This  was
    declared a criminal offence, attracting fines  of  up  to  E150  euros.
    France is home to  the  largest  Muslim  minority  in  Western  Europe,
    accounting for some five million people, almost 8% of  its  population,
    most  emanating  from  its  former   North   African   colonies.    The
    controversial French law has been challenged by an application  to  the
    European Court of Human Rights by a  young  Muslim  woman  residing  in
    France. The debate in that country intensified further as a  result  of
    the Paris Appeals Court deciding that a private nursery school had been
    justified in dismissing an assistant director who refused to remove her
    Islamic head scarf at work, overturning a decision of the  High  Court.
    The hearing in Strasbourg was  conducted  on  27th  November  2013  and
    judgment is awaited with interest.

15.  The ruling made by Mrs Justice Macur in SL  -v-  MJ  [2006]  EWHC  3743
    (Fam) demonstrates  that  practical  and  proportionate  solutions  lie
    within the hands of courts and tribunals.  The issue arose in a nullity
    suit, in which the Petitioner, a practising Muslim, appeared  in  court
    wearing a full face veil.  Her concern was that she should not  exhibit
    her face in the presence of any male person.  The only such  person  in
    court was her counsel.  The solution devised by  the  judge,  with  the
    Petitioner's agreement, was that she would  remove  her  veil  screened
    from the view of her counsel.  Her Ladyship stated:

        "[16]     In those circumstances, although these  proceedings  have
        been in open Court, a careful  supervision  of  entrance  into  the
        Court has ensured that any male entering within the doors has  been
        stopped before he approached that part  of  the  Court  whereby  he
        would have the opportunity  to  observe  the  Petitioner  and  [her
        Counsel] has been screened from the Petitioner's view by means of a
        large umbrella."

     The immediately succeeding passage is of some importance:

         "The ability to observe a witness's demeanour and deportment during
         the giving of evidence is important and, in my view,  essential  to
         assess accuracy  and  credibility.   It  is  a  matter  of  extreme
         importance that witnesses in such sensitive cases as this should be
         permitted to present their case to the satisfaction  of  the  Court
         but also observing their religious observance of dress."

     Her Ladyship added the following cautionary words:

        "[17]     Each  case  must  obviously  be  looked  at  in  its  own
        circumstances and the Court must  be  alert  to  any  opportunistic
        attempt to  derail  proceedings  listed  with  all  expectation  of
        conclusion ...."

16.  Most recently, in a case which attracted some publicity, a  ruling  was
    made in the Crown Court  relating  to  a  Muslim  woman,  who  was  the
    Defendant, attired in  the  Niqab.   The  charge  was  one  of  witness
    intimidation and the proceedings were conducted  at  Blackfriars  Crown
    Court.  The issue raised by the presiding judge was the  importance  of
    the court  being  satisfied  that  the  person  in  the  dock  was  the
    Defendant.  Having received  adversarial  argument,  the  Judge,  in  a
    careful reserved decision, ruled as follows:

     a) The Defendant must comply with all directions given by the court to
        enable  her  to  be  properly  identified  at  all  stages  of  the
        proceedings.


     b) The Defendant would be at liberty to wear the Niqab throughout  the
        trial, except when giving evidence.

     c) The Defendant would give evidence from behind  a  screen  shielding
        her from public view but visible to the presiding judge,  the  jury
        and counsel.

     d) No drawing, sketch or other image of  any  kind  of  the  Defendant
        would  be  permitted  while  her  face  was   uncovered   and   the
        dissemination or external publication of any such  image  would  be
        prohibited.

        See R -v- D (R) [2013] EWCC (unreported, 17th September 2013).

17.  As Judge Murphy recognised correctly  in  R  -v-  D,  the  issues,  the
    factors and the solutions will vary from  one  court  and  tribunal  to
    another.  One of the principles common to every judicial forum  is  the
    long established principle of open justice.  This principle is  engaged
    in circumstances where facial  religious  attire  arises  as  an  issue
    demanding of a solution.  The screening of a party or  witness  or  the
    imposition of restrictions on the courtroom audience are both  measures
    which impinge on  this  principle.    Where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    contemplating a derogation from this principle, it will  be  guided  by
    two landmark decisions of the House of Lords and,  in  particular,  the
    related principle that derogation is permissible in furtherance of  the
    protection of the administration  of  justice.   See  Scott  -v-  Scott
    [1913] AC 417 and Attorney General -v- The Leveller Magazine [1979]  AC
    440, where Lord Scarman stated:

         "To justify an order for hearing in camera, it must be  shown  that
         the paramount object of securing that justice is done would  really
         be rendered doubtful of attainment if the order were not made."


     And per Lord Diplock:

         "However, since the purpose of the general rule  is  to  serve  the
         ends of justice it may be necessary to depart  from  it  where  the
         nature or circumstances of the particular proceedings are such that
         the application of the general rule in its entirety would frustrate
         or render impracticable the  administration  of  justice  or  would
         damage some other public interest ....


         Where a Court in the exercise of its inherent power to control  the
         conduct of proceedings before it,  departs  in  any  way  from  the
         general rule, the departure is justified to the extent  and  to  no
         more than the extent that the Court reasonably believes  it  to  be
         necessary in order to serve the ends of justice."

         [Emphasis added.]

    In the modern era, complexity  and  sophistication  are  added  to  the
    exercise which courts and tribunals must perform in  appropriate  cases
    by virtue of the Human Rights Act 1998 and,  in  particular,  the  duty
    imposed on the court by section 6 not to act incompatibly with  any  of
    the protected Convention rights.


18.   The approach of courts and tribunals to issues  of  the  present  kind
    may also be viewed through the prism of Article 6  of  the  Convention,
    where engaged, which recognises explicitly the permissibility  of  some
    encroachment  on  a  fully  public  hearing  "to  the  extent  strictly
    necessary in the opinion of the Court in  special  circumstances  where
    publicity  would  prejudice  the  interests   of   justice".   In   its
    jurisprudence, the Strasbourg Court has recognised the  scope  for  the
    unequivocal waiver by a party to  one  or  more  of  its  rights  under
    Article 6(1): see, for example, Pauger -v- Austria [1997] 25 EHRR  105,
    paragraph [58].

19.  Finally, returning to the specific context  of  hearings  conducted  by
    the FtT and the Upper Tribunal, we are satisfied that there  are  ample
    powers to give directions to deal with and resolve issues of  the  kind
    discussed above.  We refer particularly to rule 45 of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and Rule 5 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

20.  In an increasingly multi-ethnic  and  culturally  diverse  society,  we
    would emphasise that issues concerning attire and symbols motivated  by
    religious belief and conviction must be handled by all judicial  bodies
    with great tact and sensitivity.  This will serve  the  twin  goals  of
    promoting fairness and avoiding insult or offence.  The exercise to  be
    carried out will not infrequently  involve  the  striking  of  delicate
    balances.  Tribunals should be  considerate  and  respectful  in  their
    approach.  They should also be resourceful  and  imaginative  in  their
    quest to explore  and  discover  solutions.  Simple  measures  such  as
    limited screening or minimising the courtroom audience  -  which  could
    extend to briefly excluding the Appellant, with  consent  -  should  be
    considered. Evidence by video link, while another possible  compromise,
    should not be adopted as  a  solution  without  first  considering  all
    relevant practicalities and the factor of delay.  Tribunals  should  be
    particularly careful to point out, in cases where it is appropriate  to
    do so, that the maintenance of attire of this  kind  might  impair  the
    panel's ability to evaluate the  reliability  and  credibility  of  the
    evidence of the party or witness concerned and could,  in  consequence,
    have adverse consequences for the Appellant.  Where issues of this kind
    arise, a Tribunal's experience, expertise, common sense, pragmatism and
    sense of fairness will be invaluable tools.

THE OTHER GROUND OF APPEAL

21.  Finally, we refer briefly to the remaining ground of appeal,  which  is
    that the FtT erred in law in treating the Appellant's claims as  having
    been finally  determined  in  the  2009  appellate  proceedings  (noted
    above).  This ground of appeal recites that  since  there  had  been  a
    challenge to the AIT's determination of July 2009 before the  Court  of
    Appeal, with an ensuing remittal to first  instance,  the  conventional
    approach declared in Secretary of State for the Home Department  -v-  D
    (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702 was  not  necessarily  applicable.   At  the
    hearing, this Tribunal explored this issue with some  care  and,  as  a
    result,  received  certain  further  documentary  evidence   from   the
    Secretary of  State,  which  was  admitted  under  rule  15(2A).   This
    established to our satisfaction that there had been no remittal by  the
    Court of Appeal to the AIT.  Rather, the Appellant withdrew his appeal,
    as documented in the "CID" record of 1st November 2011.  This ground of
    appeal has no merit accordingly.

DECISION

22.  For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the decision of  the
    FtT involved the making of material errors of law.  As announced at the
    conclusion of the hearing conducted on 19th December  2013,  therefore,
    we allow the appeal to the extent that the decision of the FtT  is  set
    aside and  the  appeal  is  remitted  to  be  determined  afresh  by  a
    differently constituted FtT, with no findings of fact preserved.


                                             [pic]
                                              THE HON. MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY,
                                            PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL,
                                              ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION CHAMBER


                                                     Dated:  15 January 2014

