
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |

                 GW (FGM and FGMPOs) Sierra Leone CG [2021] UKUT 00108 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 October and 14 December 2020|On 25 February 2021              |
|                                 |                                 |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                            (1) GW (SIERRA LEONE)
                               (2) FM (GAMBIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the First Appellant:        Ms A Weston QC and Ms G Brown of counsel,
                      instructed by Luqmani Thompson & Partners Solicitors

For the Second Appellant:  Mr R De Mello of counsel, instructed by Fountain
                      Solicitors

For the Respondent:        Ms C Van Overdijk of counsel, instructed by the
                      Government Legal Department
                                     Law

 1) Under the Female Genital Mutilation Act  2003,  as  amended,  a  Female
    Genital Mutilation Prevention Order ("FGMPO") may be issued by a Family
    Court to protect against a domestic or extraterritorial threat of FGM.


 2) Where a person ("P") seeks international protection in  reliance  on  a
    threat of FGM in a country to which she  might  otherwise  be  lawfully
    removed, the fact that an FGMPO is made to protect  P  against  such  a
    threat is likely to be a relevant consideration in  the  assessment  of
    P's protection claim.  That is  particularly  so  when  the  FGMPO  has
    extraterritorial effect in the proposed country of return.

 3) Where P is subject to immigration  control,  a  judge  sitting  in  the
    family jurisdiction cannot restrain the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department from removing P  from  the  United  Kingdom.   That  applies
    equally to  FGMPOs  as  it  does  to  other  orders  issued  in  family
    proceedings.

 4) Neither the respondent nor a judicial  decision-maker  considering  P's
    claim for international protection is bound  by  an  FGMPO  or  by  the
    judgment which precedes it.  That decision has no  precedential  effect
    in the protection appeal: SSHD v Suffolk County Council  &  Ors  [2020]
    EWCA Civ 731; [2020] 3 WLR 742.

 5) Neither the FGMPO nor the judgment in the family proceedings provides a
    default position or a starting point, in the Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1
    sense, for the assessment of the claim  for  international  protection;
    and principles of judicial comity do not require a  judicial  decision-
    maker who is considering P's  claim  for  international  protection  to
    reach the same findings of fact as the  judge  who  made  an  FGMPO  to
    protect P.

 6) An FGMPO made in favour of P is, instead, a potentially relevant matter
    in the assessment  of  P's  claim  for  international  protection.   To
    determine the weight which should properly be given  to  the  FGMPO,  a
    judicial decision-maker should consider:
      i) the extent to which the Family Court's assessment addresses  ('maps
         over') the same or similar factual issues to  those  considered  in
         the protection appeal;
     ii) the extent and the cogency of any reasons given by the Family Court
         for making the order; and
    iii) the similarity of the evidence before  the  Family  Court  and  the
         judicial decision-maker in the protection appeal.

 7) Even in cases in which it is appropriate to attach  significant  weight
    to judicial assessment in the family proceedings of the risk of FGM  in
    the proposed country of return, it remains for the  judicial  decision-
    maker in the protection appeal to consider whether  there  might  be  a
    sufficiency of protection or an internal relocation alternative in that
    country.  In considering the  former  question,  the  existence  of  an
    extraterritorial FGMPO might in itself provide a measure of  protection
    on return.


 8) Where P seeks international protection in reliance on a risk of FGM and
    her claim is refused by the respondent,  the  fact  that  an  FGMPO  is
    subsequently made in P's favour is not a new matter for the purpose  of
    s85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

                              Country Guidance

 9) Sierra Leonean women are today  among  the  most  marginalized  in  the
    world, socially, economically and politically.


10) The Bondo society, which  is  extremely  powerful  and  influential  in
    Sierra Leone, has an entrenched role in tribal and  political  life  in
    the country, and membership confers social  status  and  respect,  even
    opening doors to tribal chief posts and government jobs.  It  continues
    to play a leading role in the social, religious and political  life  of
    communities.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  life  in  Sierra   Leone.
    Politicians are at pains to gain the support  of  Bondo  societies  and
    thereby the votes of those under their  influence.  The  power  of  the
    Bondo  society  and  relationship  between  the   Bondo   society   and
    politicians ensures that the authorities typically do not get  involved
    in the issue of FGM. Male interference  in  Bondo  Society  matters  is
    'known' to have terrible consequences  -  like  disease  and  death  or
    developing an extended ('female') scrotum,  or  "elephantiasis  of  the
    testicles." Neither state courts nor members of the police  are  likely
    to intervene in cases involving initiation into Bondo which has its own
    laws that are more effective and inescapable than state law.

11) Bondo societies exist in every village and town across Sierra Leone and
    are  a  vital  communications  link  between  politicians   and   rural
    communities. Whether a girl/woman is a Christian or a Muslim has little
    influence on her risk of being subjected to FGM and initiated into  the
    Bondo   society.   Rather,   this   will   depend   on    her    ethnic
    identity/identities and on the traditions and customs of the ethnic and
    local group/s she and her parents belong to.  Where  marriages  between
    Fula women and Krio men are concerned, the Fula wife will often  insist
    on maintaining her Fula traditions and customs because as  a  dispersed
    diaspora, the Fula are particularly keen on upholding their  traditions
    also in interethnic marriages which are less common among the Fula than
    among other groups.

12) Excision takes place within the context of a secret  society-the  Bondo
    Society. Excised women and girls automatically become  members  of  the
    Bondo, which is operated by "powerful" women called 'Digba' or  'Sowei'
    who have consistently laid claim to cultural expertise with  regard  to
    the practice.

13) Girls and women are expected to have  undergone  the  Bondo  initiation
    ceremony before marriage, and are ostracized, called  names,  and  even
    abused, if they do not. It is a cultural norm in  Sierra  Leone.  If  a
    young woman has not been "cut" before the age of 18, she can  still  be
    subjected to the process, either forcibly or by choice.  She  is  still
    expected to undergo the initiation and FGM in order to be eligible  for
    marriage.

14) Soweiship is often  hereditary  and  handed  down  from  generation  to
    generation. The institution itself is synonymous  with  women's  power,
    their  political,  economic,  reproductive  and   ritual   spheres   of
    influence. Excision, or removal of  the  external  clitoral  glans  and
    labia minora, in initiation is a symbolic representation of matriarchal
    power. The ban on FGM during the Ebola crisis is not  continuing.  Once
    the Ebola crisis was over in 2015 there was a return  to  'business  as
    usual'.

15) The overall effectiveness of the  police  in  providing  protection  is
    limited by endemic corruption and a lack of resources. A number of NGOs
    campaign for  the  abolition  of  FGM,  but  these  generally  work  in
    advocacy, and would not  be  able  to  provide  protection.  There  are
    women's organisations in Sierra Leone making efforts to improve women's
    position in society,  but  they  do  not  function  as  shelters.  With
    millions of Sierra Leonean women  suffering  violence  these  NGOs  are
    unable to protect women from domestic and sexual  violence  perpetuated
    against them within their own families and communities.

16) A young single  woman  without  family  support  is  at  high  risk  of
    destitution, exploitation and abuse resulting from her unwillingness to
    adhere to the customs  of  the  Bondo  Society,  which  result  in  her
    marginalisation. Single women in particular  are  in  need  of  family
    support and a male companion in order to be able to live  a  relatively
    secure life away from home, which may  be  impacted  by  the  lack  of
    initiation by way of  undergoing  FGM.  This  is  true  for  towns  and
    villages alike, the latter being even less  accessible  because  people
    tend to live a more traditional life there than in towns. They live  in
    clans and extended families which would have no access to and which  do
    not let strangers become members. Whether in urban or rural  areas,  it
    is not possible for  a  single  young  woman  to  find  protection  and
    accommodation without a reliable  kin/ethnic/social  network if  as  a
    result of her decision to reject initiating to the Bondo society,  thus
    undergoing FGM, would lead to them being marginalised by  their  family
    members and their ethnic/social network. There is  an  efficient  civil
    registration  system.  The  National  Civil   Registration   Act   2016
    establishes the National  Civil  Registration  Authority  and  requires
    every Sierra Leonean to register. This makes it easier for people to be
    traced.


17) Those at risk  of  FGM  with  mental  health  problems  are  likely  to
    experience stigma and discrimination and lack of appropriate treatment.
    Mental  illness  is  extremely  stigmatized  and  the  one  psychiatric
    hospital   continues   to   suffer   from   stigmatizing   and   severe
    underfunding. However, this is only the case, if  the  stigma  results
    from the subject's family/ethnic and social support system.  And if as
    a result of deciding not to be initiated  to  the  Bondo  Society,  the
    subject is marginalised to the extent that  they  would  be  unable  to
    avail themselves of adequate  access  to  such  medical  facilities  by
    virtue of their lack of access to work, economic destitution, and their
    inhibited ability to secure support from  their  community. There  are
    only two psychiatrists, two Clinical Psychologists and 19 Mental Health
    Nurses in a country of seven million people.

18) Women who are not compliant with or are perceived as rejecting cultural
    norms for women in Sierra Leone, including rejecting the Bondo  society
    and refusing to be cut are a 'particular social group'.





                            DECISION AND REASONS

A.   INTRODUCTION

 1.  These  two  appeals,  brought  by  female  appellants   of   different
    nationalities, were linked because they presented  an  opportunity  for
    the Upper Tribunal to consider and to give guidance upon a legal  issue
    which was framed as follows:


         In a protection appeal before the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber,
         what significance, if any, is to be attached to  the  fact  that  a
         judge in the Family Court has  made  a  Female  Genital  Mutilation
         Prevention Order in respect of the appellant or a  relevant  member
         of the appellant's family?

 2. In the event, the respondent conceded that the first appellant's appeal
    should be allowed on  protection  grounds  and  that  her  appeal  also
    provided an opportunity for the Upper Tribunal to revise,  by  consent,
    the  guidance given by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  in  RM  (Sierra
    Leone - Female Genital Mutilation - membership of a  particular  social
    group)  Sierra  Leone  [2004]  UKIAT  00108  and  by  the  Asylum   and
    Immigration Tribunal in FB (Lone women - PSG - internal relocation - AA
    (Uganda) considered) Sierra Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090.

B.   THE FIRST APPELLANT - GW

    Background
 3. The first appellant is a national of Sierra Leone who was  born  on  12
    September 1997.  She is single and has no children.  On 22 April  2014,
    she made an application  in  Freetown  for  UK  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor.  The  application  was  granted,  and  she  was  issued  entry
    clearance in that capacity from 9 June 2014 to 9 December 2014.


 4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 9  August  2014.   She  subsequently
    made an application for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules.
    That application  was  refused  on  9  February  2015.   The  appellant
    appealed and her appeal was heard by the FtT on 22 January  2016.   The
    appellant did not  attend.   The  appeal  was  then  withdrawn  by  the
    appellant.

    Protection Claim
 5. On 6 May 2016, the appellant applied for asylum.  On 19 May  2016,  she
    underwent a screening interview.  She stated that she had travelled  to
    the UK with her stepmother, BBW.  She gave brief details of  the  basis
    upon which she feared return to Sierra Leone, stating that she would be
    forced by her stepmother to undergo Female Genital Mutilation  ("FGM").
    She stated that BBW was a member of the Bondo Society and that she  had
    been consistently violent to the appellant in the past.

 6. The respondent was informed by the Metropolitan Police on 22  September
    2016 that there was an ongoing investigation into  an  allegation  that
    the appellant was being coerced to return to Sierra  Leone  to  undergo
    FGM.  On 18 October 2016, she was advised by  the  Metropolitan  Police
    that they had made an application  at  the  High  Court  for  a  Female
    Genital Mutilation Prevention Order ("FGMPO").


 7. The appellant underwent a substantive asylum interview  on  2  November
    2016.  She submitted an email from her father in which he  stated  that
    he had decided to accede to BBW's demands and to ask the  appellant  to
    return to Sierra Leone so that she could  undergo  FGM.   She  provided
    further details of her stepmother's senior role in  the  Bondo  Society
    and of the expectation that she would be initiated into the society  by
    undergoing FGM. Her stepmother had spoken to her two days  before  they
    left for the UK and had told her that she was  at  the  right  age  for
    initiation. She was a Christian and a Jehovah's Witness,  however,  and
    she did not believe in going through 'the ritual'.  Her stepmother  was
    a Muslim who was committed to the practice.   She  had  been  protected
    from FGM by her grandfather, but he had passed away a year  before  she
    came to the UK. Her stepmother had no children of her own and  she  was
    her father's only daughter.

 8. The appellant said that her  stepmother  had  decided  that  she  would
    inherit her role in the Bondo society.  Her stepmother had been in  the
    UK and had mistreated the appellant here.  A lawyer  connected  to  her
    stepmother and her father had made the application for leave to  remain
    outside the Rules and she knew nothing about it.  She did  not  believe
    that she could approach the authorities  for  assistance  or  that  she
    could relocate within Sierra Leone to avoid the threat from  the  Bondo
    Society.  The appellant was asked no questions about the proceedings in
    the High Court.

    Refusal of Asylum
 9. The appellant was refused asylum on 17 November 2016.  It was  accepted
    that  the  appellant  fell  within  the  Particular  Social  Group   of
    uninitiated indigenous females in Sierra Leone, as identified by  Arden
    LJ (as she then was) in Fornah [2005] EWCA Civ 680; [2005] 1 WLR  3773;
    [2005] Imm AR 479 and endorsed by the House of Lords on appeal:  [2006]
    UKHL 46; [2007] 1 AC 412; [2007] Imm AR 247.  The  respondent  did  not
    accept, however, that the appellant would be forced to undergo  FGM  on
    return to Sierra Leone.  That conclusion was based on what were said to
    be inconsistencies  and  inherent  implausibility  in  the  appellant's
    account, and on her failure to claim asylum in the United  Kingdom  for
    nineteen months.  In the alternative, the respondent concluded that the
    appellant could avail herself of a sufficiency of protection in  Sierra
    Leone or that she could relocate internally so as to avoid  any  threat
    from her stepmother and the Bondo Society.

10. For reasons which are unclear, the respondent's refusal letter was  not
    sent to the appellant or her solicitors until 1 November 2017.   On  13
    November 2017, she appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  that
    decision.

    FGMPO Proceedings
11. In the meantime, the application for an FGMPO had proceeded before  the
    Family Division of the High Court.  The application  was  made  by  the
    Metropolitan Police Service ("the MPS").   The  appellant's  stepmother
    BBW and BBW's UK-resident brother, BM, were the named respondents.  The
    application was heard by Peter Jackson J, as  he  then  was,  over  the
    course of a 48-minute  hearing  on  13  December  2016.   The  MPS  was
    represented by counsel.  The respondents appeared in person,  with  the
    first respondent being assisted by a McKenzie friend.  The  judge  gave
    an ex tempore judgment, a transcript of which is before us.


12. Peter Jackson J recorded that the MPS had filed an array of evidence in
    support of the application.  That included evidence from GW herself and
    from the investigating officer, DC Roberts,  'and  from  a  variety  of
    other sources': [2].  He set out the relevant  background  at  [4]-[6].
    He made reference to the legislative amendments which had been made  in
    2015 which provided for the issuance an FGMPO  to  protect  a  girl  or
    woman against the criminal offence of FGM:  [6].  He  directed  himself
    that he was to have regard to all the circumstances, including the need
    to ensure the health, safety and wellbeing of the girl to be protected:
    [7].

13. At [8], Peter Jackson J recalled what had been said by Macdonald  J  in
    London Borough of Camden v RZ & Ors [2015] EWHC 3751  (Fam)  and  Re  E
    [2016] EWHC 1052: that the court is dealing  with  the  assessment  and
    management of risk.  The court was not required, he noted,  to  make  a
    specific finding of fact in relation to the central question of whether
    or not FGM will or will not be performed.   Although  some  conclusions
    were to be drawn, it was essentially a broad  canvas,  considering  not
    only what had taken place in the past but also what protection might be
    necessary to protect the individual in question.

14. Peter Jackson J returned to the chronology in some detail at  [9]-[12],
    including the email from the appellant's  father.   He  summarised  the
    submissions made by the MPS about that email  at  [13].   It  had  been
    confirmed, he noted, that the email had been sent from Freetown but  it
    might not be genuinely supportive of the risk which was said to  exist.
    Peter Jackson J's 'best interpretation' was that it was a message  from
    GW's father but that it referred to a threat from her mother,  not  her
    step-mother.  He also took the view that  it  was  genuinely  from  the
    appellant's father, who had subsequently sent a detailed message to  DC
    Roberts, confirming that the risk was from the appellant's mother,  not
    the stepmother: [14].

15. Peter Jackson J noted that there were competing  accounts  of  relevant
    events and that there was some evidence which tended  to  suggest  that
    the appellant's account of  being  at  risk  of  FGM  at  her  age  was
    implausible: [15]-[19]. He carefully balanced the 'various speeches  of
    the evidence' at [20]-[21] before concluding, at [22], that the task of
    providing a clear account of what had happened was an 'impossible one'.
     He had heard evidence from GW and from BBW but  he  had  no  means  of
    knowing what conclusions to  draw:  [23].   There  was,  he  noted,  an
    absence of sufficient evidence and it was 'impossible for  me  to  tell
    what the real family  dynamics  are'.   The  stepmother  had  not  been
    legally  represented  and  had  not  even  had  formal  interpretation,
    although  she  had  been  assisted  to  present  her  case.    In   the
    circumstances, he was required to do his best.

16. It was on that basis that Peter Jackson J asked and answered  a  number
    of questions.  He concluded that BBW had probably assaulted GW  in  the
    United Kingdom: [26].  It had not been proved that BBW was involved  in
    FGM, whether as a cutter or in other  ways:  [27].   Nor  did  he  know
    whether the appellant's birth mother was involved in FGM: [28].  It was
    quite possible that BBW had spoken to the appellant about  the  process
    but that did not necessarily mean that it was a  serious  threat.   The
    appellant's father had probably written the emails and he was  probably
    referring to the  appellant's  mother,  not  her  stepmother.   It  was
    possible that the emails had been written to assist the appellant  with
    her immigration position but he did not have the evidence  to  reach  a
    final conclusion.  It was possible that there was a core of  truth  but
    that it had  been  exaggerated  for  that  reason:  [30].   These  were
    unsatisfactory conclusions reflecting  unsatisfactory  evidence:  [31].
    At [32]-[33], he concluded as follows:

         [32] Having reviewed matters in that way, I return to consider  all
         the circumstances including the need to secure the  health,  safety
         and wellbeing of [GW].   I  do  consider,  in  agreement  with  the
         submission made by the police, that [GW]  is  a  young  person  who
         requires the protection of a female genital mutilation [sic] order.
          She is someone who is in the middle of a family conflict that  has
         proved very hard to penetrate.  She has a mother and  a  stepmother
         who have themselves been subjected to  female  genital  mutilation.
         She has a father whose motives and ability to protect her  are  not
         known, and her ability to  remain  in  this  country  is  similarly
         uncertain.


         [33] I therefore consider that there is a risk and that an order is
         necessary for her protection.  However, I do not consider that  the
         order should have, as a respondent, [MB].  If he was considered  to
         be somebody who increased that risk, he would fall to be made,  but
         in this case I do not find him to fall in that  category.   I  will
         therefore make the order directed to BW.  Subject  to  any  further
         submissions, I consider that the order should last until [GW] is 21
         years of age.

17. Peter Jackson J ordered accordingly, with his order being sealed on the
    same day: 13 December 2016.  The order  forbade  BBW  from  taking  any
    steps to cause, force or permit the appellant to undergo FGM or to  use
    or threaten any violence against the appellant or any other person with
    the aim of causing her to undergo FGM.  GW was 19  years  old  at  that
    time.  The order was to remain in force until she reached  the  age  of
    21.

    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
18. GW's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 26 July 2018.  Judge
    Oliver heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  her  cousin.   In  his
    reserved decision, he set out the oral and documentary evidence in some
    detail before reaching his findings of fact on the protection claim  at
    [34]-[37].  He concluded that there were a number of difficulties  with
    the appellant's account; that it had  been  fabricated;  and  that  the
    email had been sent disingenuously by her father in order to support  a
    false claim.  In reaching  those  findings,  he  said  this  about  the
    judgment of Peter Jackson J:


         [35] I find the judgement of the High Court to be  of  no  help  in
         establishing the genuineness of the appellant's claim  because  any
         judge, in the absence of any evidence against the making of such an
         order, would have made one on the receipt of any possibly  credible
         evidence that such an abhorrent practice would be caried out.

     Appeal to the Upper Tribunal
19. Permission to appeal was sought and granted by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Buchanan).  On 1 November 2018, the  appeal  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam, who concluded in a decision which was sent to
    the parties shortly thereafter that the FtT had erred in law in several
    respects.  As contended in ground one, she accepted that the judge  had
    erred in attaching no weight to  the  judgment  of  the  Family  Court.
    Errors were also disclosed by the remaining grounds but they  need  not
    be described here.  Judge McWilliam set aside the decision of  the  FtT
    and remitted the appeal to be heard afresh at Hatton Cross.

    Second FGMPO Application
20. The appellant turned 21 on 9 December 2018.  She made an application to
    the Family Division of the High Court to extend  the  order  which  had
    been made by Peter Jackson J.  The  application  came  before  Gwynneth
    Knowles J on 11 December 2018.  She considered that she was  unable  to
    extend the previous FGMPO because there was no statutory  mechanism  by
    which an order which had lapsed could be extended and  the  ability  to
    vary or discharge an order could only apply to an order which  remained
    in force:  [7].   She  considered  that  the  circumstances  which  had
    obtained at the time that the first FGMPO had been  made  continued  to
    obtain,  however,  and  she  was  'clear  that  it  is  necessary   and
    proportionate for this court to make such  an  order  to  protect  GW's
    health, safety and wellbeing'.  She therefore made a further order  for
    a period of two years: [8].  As she recorded at [9], she did so without
    notice to BBW, who was able to attend a further hearing after the order
    had been served electronically.  The application duly  returned  before
    Gwynneth Knowles J on 11 January 2019.  It was confirmed that the order
    had been served by Facebook and that there  had  been  no  response  or
    attendance on the part of BBW.  The order was consequently  made  final
    and was to remain in force until 11 December 2020.

    Remitted Hearing in the FtT
21. The protection appeal returned before Judge Zahed on 2 September  2019.
    Presumably as a result of what had gone before, he took  some  care  in
    his reserved decision to set out the salient parts of Peter Jackson J's
    judgment.  He also mentioned that there had been a further  order  made
    by Gwynneth Knowles J.  At [35], he then said this:


         I do not find that the decision by Justice Jackson [sic] to grant a
         FGM protection order automatically means that the appellant  has  a
         well founded fear of FGM by her stepmother if she  is  returned  to
         Sierra Leone.


22. The judge then continued, over the course of [36]-[51], to explain  why
    he had concluded that the appellant had 'fabricated her  entire  asylum
    claim to remain in the UK'.  He did not accept that  she  was  at  risk
    from her  stepmother  or  from  the  Bondo  Society.   The  appeal  was
    accordingly dismissed for a second time.


    Second Appeal to the Upper Tribunal
23. The appellant sought permission to appeal again.   It  was  granted  by
    Judge Appleyard and the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen
    Smith on 9 January 2020.  He concluded that the judge in the First-tier
    Tribunal had misdirected himself on the evidence and that he  had  also
    erred in his treatment of the FGMPOs.  In the latter respect,  he  said
    this:


         [20] There are other weaknesses in the  judge's  analysis.  In  one
         sense, the judge must have been right to conclude at [35] that  the
         existence  of  the  FGMPO  did  not  automatically  mean  that  the
         appellant had a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted  in  Sierra
         Leone.  The focus of each High Court Judge's  discussion  was  what
         would happen to the appellant in the  United  Kingdom,  given  each
         judge  noted  the  continuing  uncertainty  over  the   appellant's
         immigration  status.   However,  the  position  is  nuanced.    The
         territorial reach of an FGMPO is capable of  extending  to  outside
         England and Wales.  See paragraph 1(4)(a) of Schedule 1 to the 2003
         Act, and the final recital to the first FGMPO,  which  recalls  the
         extraterritorial  nature  of  the  statutory  regime.   While   the
         operative analysis of the High Court was not conducted pursuant  to
         the  1951  Refugee  Convention  in   relation   to   Sierra   Leone
         specifically, the High Court found, on two occasions, that B  posed
         a risk to the appellant.  Both  constitutions  of  the  High  Court
         noted that B travelled between the United Kingdom and Sierra Leone.
          There was, therefore, a clear potential risk that the findings  of
         fact the High  Court  made  under  the  2003  Act  pursuant  to  an
         extraterritorial statutory regime could "match  across"  to  events
         that were reasonably likely to take place in Sierra  Leone.   Those
         risks are particularly acute when one considers the possibility  of
         B also returning from this country  to  Sierra  Leone,  as  is  her
         practice, according to the findings of the High Court.  The  First-
         tier Tribunal judge did not consider the statutory framework within
         which the FGMPOs were made, in particular  the  statutory  findings
         each High Court Judge was bound to reach before making  the  order.
         Nor did the judge consider the standard of  proof  to  which  those
         orders were made, namely the balance of probabilities.  That  is  a
         higher standard of proof than is applicable in asylum  proceedings.
         The judge did not consider those factors.  The  High  Court  issued
         the orders sought by (in the case of the first FGMPO)  the  police,
         and (in the case of the second FGMPO) by  the  appellant,  in  both
         cases being satisfied that the  relevant  statutory  criteria  were
         satisfied.  The First-tier Tribunal judge's failure to engage  with
         these factors was an error of law.

24. UTJ Stephen Smith set aside the decision of  the  FtT  once  again  and
    ordered that the appeal should be retained in the Upper Tribunal for re-
    making.  The pandemic ensued shortly thereafter and steps were taken to
    case manage the appeal, including alerting the parties  to  the  common
    issue which arose in this case and FM's.

    Remaking in the Upper Tribunal
25. It was the Upper Tribunal's intention to hear the appeal  on  the  same
    day as that of the second  appellant:  8  October  2020.   Bundles  and
    skeleton arguments had been filed and served  in  preparation  for  the
    hearing but FM's case occupied the entire day and, in any event, Ms van
    Overdijk indicated that the respondent intended to instruct  an  expert
    to provide a report on the likelihood of the appellant  being  required
    to undergo FGM on return to Sierra  Leone.   The  respondent  confirmed
    shortly after the hearing that she had instructed  the  expert  witness
    who  had  prepared  a  report  for  the  second  appellant:   Professor
    Jacqueline Knorr.  We issued directions for the filing and  service  of
    that evidence, together with directions for the exchange  of  questions
    for the experts and other such matters.

26. The appeal returned before us on 14 December 2020, by which  stage  the
    respondent had filed and served an expert report written  by  Professor
    Knorr.  She had also reviewed her position in the  specific  appeal  in
    light of that report, the report from  the  appellant's  expert  (Karen
    O'Reilly) and a response  dated  by  9  November  2020  from  the  Home
    Office's Country Policy and Information Team to a specific request  for
    information about the prevalence of FGM,  the  Bondo  Society  and  the
    availability of protection.  It was as a result of that review that the
    respondent contacted the Upper Tribunal on 8  December  2020  to  state
    that she did not intend to contest the appellant's case  and  that  she
    intended to make a new decision to grant the appellant leave to  remain
    as a refugee.  She did not intend, however, to withdraw her case as she
    still wished to make submissions on the issue of principle.

27. There followed an exchange between the representatives, the  result  of
    which was that further skeleton arguments were filed  and  served.   It
    was clear from those skeleton arguments that  the  representatives  for
    the appellant and the respondent  agreed  that  the  case  provided  an
    opportunity for the Upper Tribunal to issue  country  guidance  on  the
    issue of FGM in Sierra Leone and to revisit the  earlier  decisions  of
    the IAT and the AIT on that subject.  By the morning  of  the  hearing,
    the latest iterations of the  skeleton  arguments  contained  suggested
    country guidance 'headnotes'.

28. It was in these unusual circumstances that we turned to Ms van Overdijk
    first and asked her to outline the respondent's position on the country
    situation.  She stated that there had been further discussions  between
    the advocates, that she had taken further instructions  on  the  issue,
    and that there was almost total agreement between the  parties  on  the
    guidance which might be issued.  We suggested that agreement should  be
    reached, if possible, and that any agreed  country  guidance  could  be
    communicated to the Upper Tribunal immediately after the  hearing.   Ms
    van Overdijk contacted the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  afternoon  of  the
    hearing to confirm that  the  parties  were  in  total  agreement  that
    country guidance might be issued in  the  following  terms.   (We  have
    removed the helpful  cross-referencing  to  the  expert  reports  which
    appeared at the end of each sub-paragraph.)


    (a) Sierra Leonean women are today among the most marginalized  in  the
    world, socially, economically and politically.


    (b) The Bondo society, which is extremely powerful and  influential  in
    Sierra Leone, has an entrenched role in tribal and  political  life  in
    the country, and membership confers social  status  and  respect,  even
    opening doors to tribal chief posts and government jobs.  It  continues
    to play a leading role in the social, religious and political  life  of
    communities.  It  is  an  integral  part  of  life  in  Sierra   Leone.
    Politicians are at pains to gain the support  of  Bondo  societies  and
    thereby the votes of those under their  influence.  The  power  of  the
    Bondo  society  and  relationship  between  the   Bondo   society   and
    politicians ensures that the authorities typically do not get  involved
    in the issue of FGM. Male interference  in  Bondo  Society  matters  is
    'known' to have terrible consequences  -  like  disease  and  death  or
    developing an extended ('female') scrotum,  or  "elephantiasis  of  the
    testicles." Neither state courts nor members of the police  are  likely
    to intervene in cases involving initiation into Bondo which has its own
    laws that are more effective and inescapable than state law.


    (c) Bondo societies exist in every village and town across Sierra Leone
    and are a vital  communications  link  between  politicians  and  rural
    communities. Whether a girl/woman is a Christian or a Muslim has little
    influence on her risk of being subjected to FGM and initiated into  the
    Bondo   society.   Rather,   this   will   depend   on    her    ethnic
    identity/identities and on the traditions and customs of the ethnic and
    local group/s she and her parents belong to.  Where  marriages  between
    Fula women and Krio men are concerned, the Fula wife will often  insist
    on maintaining her Fula traditions and customs because as  a  dispersed
    diaspora, the Fula are particularly keen on upholding their  traditions
    also in interethnic marriages which are less common among the Fula than
    among other groups.


    (d) Excision takes place within the context  of  a  secret  society-the
    Bondo Society. Excised women and girls automatically become members  of
    the Bondo, which is operated by  "powerful"  women  called  'digba'  or
    'Sowei' who have consistently laid claim  to  cultural  expertise  with
    regard to the practice.


    (e) Girls and women are expected to have undergone the Bondo initiation
    ceremony before marriage, and are ostracized, called  names,  and  even
    abused, if they do not. It is a cultural norm in  Sierra  Leone.  If  a
    young woman has not been "cut" before the age of 18, she can  still  be
    subjected to the process, either forcibly or by choice.  She  is  still
    expected to undergo the initiation and FGM in order to be eligible  for
    marriage.


    (f) Soweiship is often hereditary and handed down  from  generation  to
    generation. The institution itself is synonymous  with  women's  power,
    their  political,  economic,  reproductive  and   ritual   spheres   of
    influence. Excision, or removal of  the  external  clitoral  glans  and
    labia minora, in initiation is a symbolic representation of matriarchal
    power. The ban on FGM during the Ebola crisis is not  continuing.  Once
    the Ebola crisis was over in 2015 there was a return  to  'business  as
    usual'.


    (g) The overall effectiveness of the police in providing protection  is
    limited by endemic corruption and a lack of resources. A number of NGOs
    campaign for  the  abolition  of  FGM,  but  these  generally  work  in
    advocacy, and would not  be  able  to  provide  protection.  There  are
    women's organisations in Sierra Leone making efforts to improve women's
    position in society,  but  they  do  not  function  as  shelters.  With
    millions of Sierra Leonean women  suffering  violence  these  NGOs  are
    unable to protect women from domestic and sexual  violence  perpetuated
    against them within their own families and communities.


    (h) A young single woman without family support  is  at  high  risk  of
    destitution, exploitation and abuse resulting from her unwillingness to
    adhere to the customs  of  the  Bondo  Society,  which  result  in  her
    marginalisation. Single women in particular  are  in  need  of  family
    support and a male companion in order to be able to live  a  relatively
    secure life away from home, which may  be  impacted  by  the  lack  of
    initiation by way of  undergoing  FGM.  This  is  true  for  towns  and
    villages alike, the latter being even less  accessible  because  people
    tend to live a more traditional life there than in towns. They live  in
    clans and extended families which would have no access to and which  do
    not let strangers become members. Whether in urban or rural  areas,  it
    is not possible for  a  single  young  woman  to  find  protection  and
    accommodation without a reliable  kin/ethnic/social  network if  as  a
    result of her decision to reject initiating to the Bondo society,  thus
    undergoing FGM, would lead to them being marginalised by  their  family
    members and their ethnic/social network . There is an efficient  civil
    registration  system.  The  National  Civil   Registration   Act   2016
    establishes the National  Civil  Registration  Authority  and  requires
    every Sierra Leonean to register. This makes it easier for people to be
    traced.


    (i) Those at risk of FGM with mental  health  problems  are  likely  to
    experience stigma and discrimination and lack of appropriate treatment.
    Mental  illness  is  extremely  stigmatized  and  the  one  psychiatric
    hospital   continues   to   suffer   from   stigmatizing   and   severe
    underfunding. However, this is only the case, if  the  stigma  results
    from the subject's family/ethnic and social support system.  And if as
    a result of deciding not to be initiated  to  the  Bondo  Society,  the
    subject is marginalised to the extent that  they  would  be  unable  to
    avail themselves of adequate  access  to  such  medical  facilities  by
    virtue of their lack of access to work, economic destitution, and their
    inhibited ability to secure support from  their  community. There  are
    only two psychiatrists, two Clinical Psychologists and 19 Mental Health
    Nurses in a country of seven million people.


    (j) Women who are not compliant with  or  are  perceived  as  rejecting
    cultural norms for women in Sierra Leone, including rejecting the Bondo
    society and refusing to be cut are a 'particular social group'.

29. In light of  the  agreement  between  the  parties  about  the  country
    situation and the disposal of the appellant's appeal, we indicated that
    we would be content to hear submissions on the issue of principle only.


    Submissions for the First Appellant
30. For the appellant, Ms Weston  QC  invited  us  to  adopt  the  approach
    reflected at [22]-[24] of her  primary  skeleton  argument:   where  an
    FGMPO was in place, that should normally stand - in a protection appeal
    - as evidence of risk of FGM sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden upon an appellant as to the presence of the risk  identified  by
    the Family Court.  The Tribunal's determination of the issues before it
    in a protection claim may well be determined,  she  submitted,  by  the
    Family Court's finding of risk but that would not always  be  so  where
    the evidential findings of the Family Court  did  not  'map  over'  the
    issues to be evaluated  by  the  Tribunal.   Ms  Weston  and  Ms  Brown
    submitted at [24] of their skeleton that appropriate guidance would  be
    as follows:

          i) An FGMPO is conclusive evidence that a risk of  FGM  has  been
             found at the date of the order for the reasons  given  by  the
             court;


         ii) The duration of the order granted by the court  establishes  a
             presumption that during the order there is risk  of  FGM  such
             that protection is required.

        iii) Such presumption may  only  be  displaced  by  evidence  of  a
             material change in circumstances.

         iv) The Secretary of State should review any immigration  decision
             materially affected by the fact of the FGMPO in light of  such
             order before any hearing before the FtT; and

          v) The FtT should evaluate any related  protection  claim  issues
             before it treating the  FGMPO  as  evidence  of  a  sufficient
             extant risk to meet the lower standard (as above at points (i)
             and (ii)); but

         vi) Such evidence may or may not be determinative  of  the  issues
             before the Tribunal at the date of the hearing before it.

31. Ms Weston submitted that the decision  to  make  an  FGMPO  was  to  be
    considered in its proper context, which was provided by  the  statutory
    framework and the statutory guidance issued under s5C(1) of the  Female
    Genital Mutilation Act 2003: Multi-agency statutory guidance on  female
    genital mutilation, dated July 2020. The Family Court's function was  a
    protective one, as was reflected in that guidance.   The  functions  of
    the Family Court and the IAC  were  totally  different.   A  family  or
    criminal court was required to have  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the
    exercise of its  functions.   A  pubic  authority  should  follow  that
    guidance unless there was good reason  not  to  do  so.   The  guidance
    listed at 1.4 a number of underpinning principles which applied to  all
    agencies in relation to identifying and respondent to those at risk  of
    FGM.


32. It was to be noted that the application for an FGMPO in GW's  case  had
    been made not by her or by her representatives but by the  Metropolitan
    Police Service.  The Secretary of State might properly consider whether
    to be joined as an intervener in FGMPO  proceedings  where  immigration
    considerations arose.  In deciding whether to make an  FGMPO,  a  court
    was required to have  regard  to  all  the  circumstances  of  a  case,
    including the need to secure the health, safety and  wellbeing  of  the
    potential or actual victim: [3.3] of the guidance referred.  Chapter  4
    of the guidance showed that all agencies were required to work together
    and adopt a victim-centred approach.  The Family Court had access to  a
    wide field of information and was under a duty - as were other agencies
    - to safeguard those at risk.  That was to be contrasted with a hearing
    before the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal in
    an appeal against the refusal of protection; there was no  safeguarding
    obligation in that context.  A court considering an application for  an
    FGMPO would often be assisted by expert evidence and  the  court  would
    not  be  concerned  with  points  which  had  been  taken  against   an
    individual's credibility in a decision refusing protection status;  the
    enquiry undertaken by the court was not undertaken against a background
    of the refusal of such a claim.  The court would focus, instead, on the
    risk factors which appeared at Annex B of the statutory guidance.  Upon
    the making of the order, it had been established to the satisfaction of
    a specialist court that a specific risk had been found.


33. It was accepted by Ms Weston that the function of the FtT did  not  end
    with considering an FGMPO and reading across the conclusions upon which
    it  was  based  into  the  protection  enquiry.   It  was  critical  to
    determine, in any given case, the extent to which the findings made  by
    the Family Court 'mapped over' the assessment to be undertaken  by  the
    refugee status decision maker.  It  was  also  accepted  that  not  all
    FGMPOs attracted the same weight in the IAC's assessment.  There might,
    for example, be an absence of reasons given by the Family Court for the
    making of the order.   Ms  Weston  recognised  that  a  refugee  status
    decision maker (whether the Secretary of State or a judge) might not be
    particularly assisted by an FGMPO which had been made without  reasons,
    and it might be appropriate for the Protocol on Communications  Between
    the Family Court and the IAC to be invoked.

34. Ms Weston also accepted that information  might  come  to  light  which
    entitled the respondent or a judge in a  protection  appeal  to  depart
    from a reasoned judgment on an FGMPO application in the  Family  Court.
    Equally, a refugee status decision maker may conclude that a risk which
    had been found to exist in the Family Court had  ceased  to  exist.   A
    judge in  the  IAC  was  not  entitled  to  depart  from  the  reasoned
    conclusions reached by the Family Court merely because adverse  matters
    had arisen during the oral testimony of  an  appellant  or  a  witness,
    however.  That would represent an impermissible attempt  to  re-open  a
    matter which had already been decided by the  court.   There  must,  Ms
    Weston submitted, be truly supervening events or a lapse of time  which
    undermined the conclusions reached by the Family  Court.   Because  the
    functions of the two  judicial  bodies  were  different,  the  IAC  was
    required  to  treat  the  findings  made  by  the   Family   Court   as
    determinative of the issues which were before it.  The IAC was required
    to  treat  those  findings  as  a  'fixed  point',   subject   to   the
    considerations above.  This was a familiar exercise for the FtT and the
    Upper Tribunal, which had been  receiving  and  considering  themselves
    bound by best interests assessments in the Family Court for many years.




    Submissions for the Respondent
35. For the respondent, Ms van Overdijk invited us to endorse the  approach
    to FGMPOs adopted in the respondent's  guidance  note  entitled  Gender
    issues in the asylum claim, version 3.0, issued on 10 April  2018.   In
    her skeleton, she particularly highlighted the following passage:


         In cases where there is  a  protection  order  the  detail  of  the
         individual protection  order  must  be  carefully  considered,  for
         example you may see cases which involve  an  FGM  Protection  Order
         (FGMPO) or Forced  Marriage  Protection  Order.  The  fact  that  a
         protection order has been made by  the  Family  Court  may  provide
         strong evidence of risk of persecution or  serious  harm.  However,
         the order may not provide evidence about risk on  return  to  their
         country, so does not in itself  mean  that  refugee  status  should
         automatically be granted. The asylum claim must still be considered
         on its individual merits, taking into account that the Family Court
         has made an order and the reasons for it doing so. Such orders must
         be considered in the round and given appropriate weight in reaching
         your decision on future protection needs.

36. The ultimate question, Mr van Overdijk submitted, was the weight  which
    was to be attached to the FGMPO.  It was not correct to submit that the
    FGMPO created a rebuttable presumption  that  international  protection
    was required, or even  that  it  provided  a  starting  point  for  the
    assessment of a refugee status decision maker.  To adopt that  approach
    would be to fetter the discretion of the IAC, she  submitted.   It  was
    accepted by the respondent, however, that the order could not merely be
    ignored or side-lined, as had previously  occurred  in  these  appeals.
    The correct approach was to consider the basis upon which the order was
    made and to assess the weight which it should  carry  in  the  holistic
    assessment which the refugee status  decision  maker  was  required  to
    undertake.


37. Ms van Overdijk noted that it had been submitted by  the  Secretary  of
    State in SSHD v Suffolk County Council  &  Ors  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  731;
    [2020]  3  WLR  742  ("the  Suffolk  County  Council  case")  that  the
    assessment of risk undertaken by the FtT (IAC) is to be  taken  as  the
    starting point or default position in any subsequent assessment of risk
    by the Family Court in considering whether  to  make  an  FGMPO.   That
    submission had been rejected by the President of the Family Division  -
    Re A [2019] EWHC 2475 (Fam) - and then by the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
    reasons given by the Court of Appeal for  rejecting  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission in  that  appeal  applied  equally  in  the  reverse
    situation.  The Family Court had not made a decision in rem.  There was
    no issue estoppel or cognate principle which prevented the Secretary of
    State or the IAC from reaching conclusions different from those in  the
    Family Court.  Judicial comity was a relevant  consideration  but  that
    had also been considered by the Court of Appeal.

38. It was said by the appellants that there was a direct comparison to  be
    drawn between the circumstances presently under consideration and those
    in which an assessment of a relevant child's best  interests  had  been
    made by the Family Court.  In truth, there was no real comparison.   It
    was also relevant to recall that the IAC and the Family Court were  not
    courts of coordinate jurisdiction.  In GW's case,  it  was  clear  that
    Peter Jackson J had made a finding in the  round,  notwithstanding  his
    clear  concerns  about  aspects  of  the  evidence  and  his   explicit
    conclusion that the appellant had not shown that her stepmother  was  a
    'cutter'.

39. The respondent agreed with the appellant that it was necessary, in  any
    given case, to determine the extent to which the findings made  by  the
    Family Court 'mapped over' the assessment which was to be conducted  by
    the IAC.  Even where the factual basis on  which  the  FGMPO  was  made
    mapped over the IAC's  assessment  precisely,  however,  there  was  no
    reason for there  to  be  a  rebuttable  presumption  that  the  former
    assessment should govern the latter, or even that former represented  a
    starting point.  The reality, as was clear from the judgment in GW  and
    the order in FM, was that the proceedings  in  the  Family  Court  were
    inquisitorial and that the accounts given were often not fully tested.

40. Addressing a question from the bench, Ms van  Overdijk  confirmed  that
    the respondent accepted that the making of  an  FGMPO  was  not  a  new
    matter as defined in s85(5) of the 2002 Act, providing  the  claim  for
    protection was based on a fear of FGM.  That was to be contrasted  with
    the position in which the protection claim was  based  on  a  different
    reason (political opinion, for example) and an FGMPO came  to  be  made
    subsequently.

    Submissions in response
41. Ms Weston made five short points in response.  She submitted,  firstly,
    that the appellant's main,  underlying  submission  was  that  the  IAC
    should recognise the specialist function  of  a  court  which  made  an
    FGMPO.  Secondly, it was accepted  that  the  Family  Court  could  not
    injunct the Secretary of State.  The authorities recognised that  clear
    demarcation of functions.  Nothing which was said in the Suffolk County
    Council case was inconsistent with the appellant's suggested  approach.
    Thirdly, it was correct and accepted that the conclusions of the Family
    Court in this case were such that there was still a relevant enquiry to
    be undertaken by the IAC.  It was not open to the FtT, however,  simply
    to reach its own conclusions in the absence of evidence which warranted
    departure from those reached by the Family Court.  There had  to  be  a
    proper reason - rooted in evidence which  was  not  before  the  Family
    Court - to justify departure from its conclusions.   Fourthly,  it  was
    critical in any given case to consider the extent to which the findings
    which led to the FGMPO mapped over  the  assessment  which  was  to  be
    undertaken by the IAC.  It would be open to a refugee  status  decision
    maker (whether the respondent or a judge in the IAC) to  consider  that
    the findings of the judge in the Family  Court  were  determinative  of
    certain questions and then to make his own  findings  on  issues  which
    were  not  considered  by  the  Family  Court.   Fifthly,   this   case
    represented a good  opportunity  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  provide
    guidance on how the Family Court and the IAC might assist each other in
    cases such as this.  Any guidance to the Family Court should  underline
    the importance of ensuring that the factual basis upon which  an  FGMPO
    was made was made clear.


42. Responding to a question  from  the  bench,  Ms  Weston  accepted  that
    paragraph 24(ii) of her skeleton should be amended by the insertion  of
    the word "its", so as to read as follows:


         The duration of the  order  granted  by  the  court  establishes  a
         presumption that during the order there is risk of  FGM  such  that
         [its] protection is required.

43. She had not sought to submit, she explained, that the existence  of  an
    FGMPO created a rebuttable presumption  that  international  protection
    was required; the existence of an extant FGMPO  instead  established  a
    presumption that the protection of the  FGMPO  was  required.   Ms  van
    Overdijk observed that this had not been the respondent's understanding
    of the appellant's position.


44. We reserved our decision on the issue of principle.


C.   THE SECOND APPELLANT

     Background
45. The second appellant is a national of The Gambia  who  was  born  on  3
    February 1979.  Her two daughters, ZN and AN, who were born in 2008 and
    2011 respectively, are dependent upon  her  claim.   Her  husband,  and
    their father, occupies a senior diplomatic position, having  previously
    risen to a senior rank in the Gambian military.  The appellant  is  the
    second of his two wives.  The appellant has an  older  daughter  -  FS,
    born in 2002, - from a previous marriage.


46. The appellant is from the Wolof tribe.  Her husband is from the  Serere
    Tribe.  They are both Muslims.


47. On 17 March 2015, the appellant was  granted  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor, valid until 17 March 2017.  ZN and AN also
    received entry clearance in that capacity. The appellant's husband  had
    been posted to Turkey in 2012.  The appellant lived with him, his first
    wife, and their children in Ankara from that point onwards,  and  their
    entry clearance was issued in Turkey.

48. The appellant first came to the UK with ZN and AN in summer 2015.  They
    stayed with her husband's half brother for  two  months  or  so  before
    returning to Turkey.  They returned to the UK on 22 December  2016  and
    claimed asylum on 11 July 2017.

    Protection Claim
49. The appellant claims that her daughters are  at  risk  of  FGM  in  The
    Gambia.  The claim was outlined in the appellant's screening  interview
    on 11 July 2017 and detailed in a witness  statement  dated  21  August
    2017 and an asylum interview which took place on 29 November 2017.

50. The appellant stated she had met her husband in  2005,  at  a  hospital
    where she worked as a laboratory attendant.  She had  been  tending  to
    his father, who was an inpatient at the time.  The appellant's  husband
    exchanged  contact  details  with  her   after   a   conversation.    A
    relationship developed and they married.  Apart from  his  father,  she
    did not meet any other members of his family before they married.

51. It was only when the appellant fell pregnant with  ZN  that  she  first
    learned of the family's views on FGM.  Her sister-in-law and her mother-
    in-law had both been cut and the former told the appellant that she was
    praying for her to have a girl so that the 'haraf' could  be  performed
    upon her.  The appellant - who has not had FGM because it is not common
    amongst the Wolof - made her own views on the subject clear  and  there
    was a disagreement between the two of  them.   Six  months  after  ZN's
    birth, there was a physical fight between the appellant and her sister-
    in-law because she had insisted that ZN would have to  have  FGM.   The
    appellant's  mother-in-law  sided  with  her  own  daughter.   When  he
    returned home, the appellant's husband refused to become involved.

52. The appellant stated that husband's eldest  daughter  (from  his  first
    wife) had already been 'cut' and it would also happen to his other  two
    daughters from that relationship.  They are from the Mandinka tribe, in
    which FGM  is  widely  practised.   The  practice  in  the  appellant's
    husband's family was to perform the procedure on  all  female  children
    every five years.  ZN and AN were too young in 2012 but there  was  due
    to be another ceremony in 2017.  The daughters of the  husband's  first
    wife were due to undergo the procedure at that time, most likely in the
    school  summer  holidays.   The  appellant's  husband  and  his  family
    expected ZN and VN to be cut at the same time.  The appellant  did  not
    consider that the prohibition on FGM  in  The  Gambia  would  serve  to
    protect her children.

53. The appellant had come to the UK with her children  in  December  2016,
    ostensibly to attend her niece's graduation.  She had  initially  lived
    at her cousin's address.  Her husband came to visit in May.  He  stayed
    for a few days and they had an argument about FGM.  She had  taken  the
    precaution of hiding the children's passports, lest her husband  sought
    to abduct them.  She reported the threat to the police  and  the  local
    authority after he had left the country.  He sent her a text message at
    the end of June 2017.  It was in the following terms:

         I have been trying to let you  understand  the  importance  of  the
         tradition for almost a year but you refused to allow  the  kids  to
         perform the rites.  I also visited you to discuss  further  on  the
         matter, but the situation provided difficult  as  you  continue  to
         refuse my parents request.  As tradition demands it,  the  kids  in
         the future will have to perform it anytime they visit  The  Gambia.
         As it stands now, the situation has caused a serious  rift  between
         my parents and me as they consider me as someone who  goes  against
         our tradition.  I  want  you  to  consider  this  to  avoid  future
         problems.  Get back to me soon.

54. It was three weeks  after  this  message  that  the  appellant  claimed
    asylum.  Her contact with her husband was said - at  the  time  of  the
    interview - to be by way of telephone calls  two  or  three  times  per
    week, although he just asked to speak to the  children.   She  had  not
    seen him since he left the UK in June 2017. She was not in contact with
    his family, although she was in contact with her own  mother,  who  she
    had told of her fears.

    Refusal of Asylum
55. The respondent refused the appellant's protection claim  on  9  January
    2018.  She accepted that the appellant was a national of The Gambia and
    that she was married to a senior diplomatic figure  from  that  country
    but she did not accept that ZN and AN were at risk of  FGM  on  return.
    It was not accepted that the removal of the appellant and her  children
    to The  Gambia  would  place  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  her
    obligations under the Refugee Convention or the European Convention  on
    Human Rights ("ECHR").

56. The appellant appealed against this decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    on 22 January 2018.

    FGMPO Proceedings
57. Nine days after the refusal letter, the appellant made  an  application
    to the Family Court in Wolverhampton for a  Female  Genital  Mutilation
    Prevention  Order  ("FGMPO").   The  order  was  sought   against   the
    appellant's husband. She completed form FGM001 with the  assistance  of
    the solicitors who have represented her in the asylum proceedings.  The
    form itself contained the most limited information but appended  to  it
    was a statement which was signed by the appellant on 19  January  2018.
    There was a good deal of commonality between  this  statement  and  the
    statement submitted to the respondent in support of the  asylum  claim.
    The appellant added, however, that she had received 'numerous telephone
    calls' from her husband and his family, pressuring her to return to The
    Gambia so that the children could  undergo  the  procedure.   The  most
    recent such call was said to have been on 16 January 2018.  It had been
    made clear to her, she said at [28] of the statement, that the children
    would have to undergo the procedure at any  time  that  they  returned,
    despite the five year cycle which usually governed  the  occurrence  of
    the procedure in the family.  The appellant stated that she  was  being
    constantly  'harassed,  pestered  and  emotionally  pressured'  by  her
    husband and his family; that she was caused stress and anxiety by this;
    and that she was concerned that he or his family members would  try  to
    take the children abroad.   She  sought  the  protection  of  an  FGMPO
    accordingly.


58. On 9 February 2018, the application for  an  FGMPO  was  heard  by  HHJ
    Clayton, sitting in the Family Court in Birmingham.  The appellant  was
    legally represented.  The application was made without  notice  to  the
    respondent  father.   HHJ   Clayton   heard   the   appellant's   legal
    representative and read the statement described  above.   On  the  same
    date, the judge made an FGMPO 'for  the  immediate  protection  of  the
    children'. The material part of the order is in the following terms:

         [7] The respondent must halt any arrangement for the  procedure  of
         Female Genital Mutilation to be carried out on the children: [names
         and dates of birth given].


         [8] The Respondent shall not attempt  to  commit,  or  conspire  to
         commit, a Female Genital Mutilation Offence whether in this or  any
         other jurisdiction, on the children:  [names  and  dates  of  birth
         given].


         [9] The Respondent must not arrange for  any  medical  or  surgical
         procedures, and must not perform any procedure to cause  injury  to
         the genitalia, or genital organs of the children, whether  in  this
         or any other jurisdiction, on the children:  [names  and  dates  of
         birth given].


         [10] The Respondent must not take the children: [names and dates of
         birth given] out of England  and  Wales,  without  consent  of  the
         Applicant in writing or permission of the Court.


         [11] The Respondent must not harass, pester or put pressure on  the
         Applicant in respect of the children: [names  and  dates  of  birth
         given] undergoing the procedure of Female Genital Mutilation.


         [12] The Respondent shall  not  apply  for  any  travel  documents,
         either new or replacement document, in the names of  the  children:
         [names and dates of birth given] for any other documents that shall
         enable the children [names and dates of birth given] to be  removed
         from the jurisdiction.


         [13] The Respondent must not instruct or encourage anyone  else  to
         do any of the above (paragraphs 7-12).

59. The judge recorded, at [6], that the appellant had given an undertaking
    to serve  the  application  and  the  supporting  evidence  (seemingly,
    therefore, the statement) upon her husband  in  Turkey  by  signed  Air
    Mail.  HHJ Clayton ordered that the matter should return to court on  9
    March 2018 so that consideration could be given to the renewal  of  the
    order and any other  matters,  including  further  orders  and  further
    directions.

60. The matter returned before HHJ Clayton on 9 March 2018.  She ordered on
    that date that her earlier order was to continue to apply until further
    notice.  For present purposes, however, it is important to record  that
    the recitals to the order included the following:

         UPON IT BEING RECORDED THAT the respondent [name  given]  confirmed
         through an email that he received the order  of  the  9th  February
         2019 and that he agreed with the terms thereof and did not want  to
         attend any further hearings.


         [...]


         AND UPON it being recorded that the respondent was unable to attend
         court as he received the papers on the evening of  8th  March  2018
         and that he resides in Turkey but that he does not have  notice  of
         the hearing today.

    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
61. The appellant's appeal against the refusal of her protection claim  was
    then heard by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 11 May  2018.   She
    heard oral evidence from the appellant and her  cousin.   She  received
    the FGMPOs made by the Family Court.  She also  had  an  expert  report
    from Professor  Jacqueline  Knorr,  who  had  been  instructed  by  the
    appellant's solicitors to opine on the threat of FGM.  In her  reserved
    decision, which was sent to the parties on  25  June  2018,  the  judge
    reached similar conclusions to the respondent.    She  found  that  the
    FGMPO did not 'of itself' establish that the children were at  risk  of
    FGM and that the orders 'cannot be taken  as  an  indication  that  the
    children are at risk of FGM'.  On the contrary,  she  held  that  there
    were proper reasons to conclude that the appellant's  account  was  not
    capable of belief.  At [38], she  summarised  her  conclusions  in  the
    following way:


         In conclusion, because of all of the above factors which render the
         appellant's claim not credible, I conclude that  the  appellant  is
         not a truthful witness.  I find the appellant  has  fabricated  the
         account of receiving threats from her husband's  family  simply  to
         enable her to make an asylum claim in the UK.  I do not accept that
         on return the appellant's children are reasonably  likely  to  face
         the threat of FGM either from her husband or his family.   This  is
         because I do not accept the appellant's account  of  her  husband's
         family practising FGM.

     Appeal to the Upper Tribunal
62. The appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    FtT.  Six grounds of appeal were settled by Mr de Mello,  who  had  not
    appeared at first instance.  It was only the  first  of  those  grounds
    which persuaded Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal.  He considered it arguable that the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    assessment of the relevance of, and weight to be given to, the  FGMPOs.
    He considered the remaining grounds to be unarguable.


63. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal first came before UTJ  Allen,  sitting
    in Birmingham  on  12  July  2019.   Judge  Allen  concluded  that  the
    appellant's first ground of appeal disclosed an error  of  law  on  the
    part of the FtT.  He considered that the judge had erred in  concluding
    that she should attach no weight to the FGMPOs.  As a  consequence,  he
    decided, 'there will have to be a revisiting of  this  issue  and  this
    issue only, before the Upper Tribunal.'


64. The appeal returned for a  resumed  hearing  before  Nicol  J  and  UTJ
    Blundell on 19 November 2019.  Noting that the FGMPOs were said  to  be
    central to the evaluation which was to be conducted, the Upper Tribunal
    was concerned that it did not have before it, at that stage, either the
    evidential basis upon which HHJ Clayton had made those  orders  or  any
    note of the reasons she had given for so ordering.  In particular,  the
    Upper Tribunal did not have the statement which had been  made  in  the
    Family Court or any note of the oral evidence given  by  the  appellant
    before that court.  The proceedings were accordingly adjourned so  that
    the Upper Tribunal could invoke the Protocol on communications  between
    judges of the Family Court and the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal (19 July 2013) with  a  view
    to obtaining those documents.


65. On 15 January 2020, the Designated Family  Judge  for  Birmingham  (HHJ
    Thomas) made an order disclosing  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  FGM001
    application form and the statement made by the appellant on 19  January
    2018.  Further copies of the FGMPOs were also provided.  The appeal was
    due to return before the Upper Tribunal, sitting at Field House  on  20
    March 2020, but was adjourned due to the pandemic.


    Remaking in the Upper Tribunal
66. The appeal returned - before this constitution of the Upper Tribunal  -
    on 14 October 2020.  The  appellant  and  her  cousin  were  physically
    present, as was the respondent's legal team.  Mr de Mello was unable to
    travel to Field House during the pandemic.  He  participated  remotely,
    via Skype for Business, and we are satisfied that the proceedings  were
    conducted fairly in this way.

67. At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  De  Mello  submitted  that  the
    appellant's appeal should be considered  de  novo,  rather  than  being
    limited in the way which had  been  ordered  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen.  He submitted, in summary, that  an  assessment  of  credibility
    must be undertaken holistically and that the error of law  which  Judge
    Allen had accepted vitiated the FtT's decision as  a  whole.   For  the
    respondent, Ms van Overdijk opposed that course,  submitting  that  the
    Upper Tribunal could consider the significance of  the  FGMPO  and  re-
    evaluate the appellant's credibility in  the  light  of  the  preserved
    findings.   We  retired  to  consider  the  competing  submissions  and
    indicated upon our return that we preferred Mr de Mello's  submissions.
    The error of law which had been identified sufficed, in  our  view,  to
    undermine the entirety of the FtT's assessment and  the  proper  course
    was for the appeal to be reconsidered de novo.

68. That indication having been given, the parties were  content  that  the
    appeal should be retained in the Upper Tribunal and counsel were  ready
    to put questions to the appellant and her witness despite  the  broader
    canvas of analysis required.

69. We heard oral evidence from the appellant through a Wolof  interpreter.
    She confirmed that she was able to converse  freely  with  him  and  no
    problems of interpretation arose during the hearing.  She  adopted  her
    statements and was asked a small number of additional questions  by  Mr
    de Mello before being cross examined at length by Ms van Overdijk.  She
    was not re-examined.  After the short adjournment,  we  heard  evidence
    from the appellant's cousin, NB.  She adopted her witness statement and
    was cross-examined by Ms van Overdijk.  There was no re-examination  of
    this witness. She was asked two clarificatory questions from the bench.
     We do not propose to rehearse the oral evidence in this decision.   We
    will return to our evaluation of it below.

    Submissions for the Respondent
70. Ms van Overdijk relied upon her skeleton argument.  She  accepted  that
    the appellant's claim engaged the Refugee Convention  and  that  Female
    Genital Mutilation existed in The Gambia. The  factual  question  which
    the  Upper  Tribunal  had  to  resolve  was  whether  this   particular
    appellant's daughters were at risk of FGM at the hands of  her  husband
    and his family.  Although the FtT's  findings  of  fact  had  been  set
    aside, the points taken against the appellant by the judge in  the  FtT
    remained cogent and  were  adopted  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
    following points were particularly potent.  It was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant would not have known about her husband's belief in FGM before
    they married, as the FtT had found at  [22].   The  appellant's  expert
    also suggested that this would have been the case.  The points made  at
    [29]-[33] of the FtT's decision, regarding  the  appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum and her behaviour at that time were also strong.

71. Additional concerns arose, in Ms van Overdijk's  submission,  from  the
    oral evidence which had been given  by  the  appellant's  cousin.   Her
    account had been discrepant  as  regards  the  disagreement  which  had
    supposedly taken place between the appellant and her husband  when  the
    latter came to visit.  She had  variously  stated  that  she  had  been
    physically present and that she had only been told about the  argument.
    It remained unclear, in any event, why the appellant and her cousin had
    not sought to alert the police to these events.

72. Ms Van Overdijk submitted that the claim should not succeed even if  it
    was taken at its highest.  The appellant had accepted  when  the  point
    was put to her in cross-examination that  the  risk  to  her  daughters
    would not crystallise until the end of the five-year  cycle,  in  2022.
    That was different from the account she had given in the past  but  the
    fact remained that the threat was too remote.  The appellant had  given
    no evidence that the threat had been re-affirmed by her husband and she
    had completely cut ties with him and his family.  She did not even know
    whether he was in Turkey or The Gambia.  The appellant  contended  that
    the risk subsisted but there was no evidence of  any  such  risk.   The
    respondent submitted that there was no real risk of the children  being
    subjected to FGM in 2022.

73. As regards the legal issue which arose in both appeals, Ms van Overdijk
    submitted, firstly, that the making of an FGMPO  in  the  Family  Court
    could not bind the respondent: GD (Ghana) [2017] EWCA Civ 1126;  [2018]
    Imm AR 1, at [47]-[51] and Re A [2019] EWHC 2475; [2020] 1 FLR 253,  at
    [53]  et  seq.   The  other  cases  which  had  been  included  in  the
    authorities bundle were for background only.  It  was  to  be  recalled
    that the Family Court and the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the
    FtT and Upper Tribunal were tasked with very different  functions.   It
    was accepted, however, that some weight should be given to  the  making
    of an FGMPO in the Family Court, and that the FtT in the  instant  case
    had erred in its approach.  It was also accepted by the respondent that
    more weight should properly be given to the making of an FGMPO when the
    issues considered by the Family Court and the IAC overlapped.  That was
    properly recognised and reflected in the respondent's guidance entitled
    'Gender issues in the asylum claim', version 3.0, published on 10 April
    2018.  Ms van Overdijk commended that guidance and invited the Tribunal
    to endorse it.


74. It was to be submitted by the appellants that the making of an FGMPO in
    the Family  Court  represented  at  least  a  starting  point,  in  the
    Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 sense.  That was not  the  correct  approach
    and decision makers in protection cases should, instead,  consider  the
    making of the FGMPO in  the  round,  as  part  of  the  evidence.   The
    Secretary of State had submitted in the  Suffolk  County  Council  case
    that the Family Court should take the IAC's conclusions as its starting
    point when deciding whether to make an FGMPO.  That submission had been
    rejected for a raft of cogent  reasons.   That  conclusion  -  and  the
    reasoning which underpinned  it  -  applied  equally  in  the  opposite
    direction.

75. Drawing the two threads of her submissions together,  Ms  van  Overdijk
    submitted that the weight which could be attached to the FGMPO in  this
    appeal was minimal.  It was apparent  that  the  order  had  been  made
    without any substantive consideration of the facts, which had also  not
    been tested in any way.  The Family Court had expressed no view on  the
    credibility of the appellant's account and it  could  not  properly  be
    said - as Mr de Mello sought to submit - that the appellant's husband's
    response to the Family Court's initial  order  bore  any  weight.   The
    Upper Tribunal was able to consider evidence which was not  before  the
    Family Court and to reach a considered view on  her  oral  and  written
    testimony.


76. There was a final point, which was potentially of significance in  this
    case and others of its kind.  The FGMPO  had  extra-territorial  effect
    and had been sent to the appellant's husband.  As a senior diplomat, it
    was unlikely that he would wish to contravene the order  of  a  foreign
    court and the order was likely, in those circumstances, to  afford  the
    appellant's children some protection in The Gambia, even if there was a
    threat of some description to them.   The  extent  to  which  an  FGMPO
    served to offer protection upon return was an issue to be considered in
    any such case.

    Submissions for the Second Appellant
77. For the appellant, Mr de Mello adopted the written and oral submissions
    on the law made by Ms Weston QC and Ms Brown.   On  the  facts  of  the
    appellant's case, he submitted as follows.  The respondent was wrong to
    submit  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  an  extant  threat  to  the
    appellant's daughters.  The appellant had  consistently  described  the
    extant nature of the threat in her various witness statements.  It  was
    understandable that her husband was not presently taking action,  given
    the FGMPO which was in place, but different considerations  applied  on
    the girls' return to The Gambia.  The respondent had submitted that the
    appellant had not called the police in the face of the threat from  her
    husband, but it was clear from her statement in the Family  Court  that
    she had in fact done so.  It could not be thought  that  the  appellant
    and her husband had somehow colluded in order to secure asylum for  her
    and the children.  The appellant's husband had  been  served  with  the
    FGMPO out of the jurisdiction and had  accepted  both  receipt  of  the
    order and its terms.  It was unlikely that he would  have  taken  those
    steps if he was colluding with the appellant.

78. The FGMPO which had been made in this case was made in order to protect
    the appellants' daughters from a risk  which  had  been  found  by  the
    Family Court to exist.  That order provided the starting point for  the
    IAC's assessment and it was for the respondent to  adduce  evidence  to
    displace the conclusions of the Family Court.  It was accepted that the
    FGMPO did not fetter the discretion of the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department.  The order was specifically concerned,  however,  with
    the welfare of the children in the event that they  were  removed  from
    the jurisdiction to the country of their nationality and it was binding
    on the parties to that extent.  The Family Court had made a finding  of
    fact on the balance of probabilities and it had before it the same type
    of evidence as  was  considered  by  the  IAC.   It  was  open  to  the
    respondent to submit, as Ms van Overdijk had, that an FGMPO might, in a
    given case, reduce the risk of FGM on return but the position  in  this
    case was clear: there was a real risk that the appellant's  husband  or
    his family would take matters into their own hands in  The  Gambia  and
    there would be no effective recourse to the  authorities,  irrespective
    of the existence of the order.

79. We reserved  our  decision  in  the  second  appellant's  case  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing on 8 October.  It had  been  hoped  that  the
    first appellant's case would follow but that was not  possible  as  the
    court day was drawing  to  a  close.   We  issued  directions  for  the
    progression of the other case and it was duly relisted for 14 December.



80. In light of the inevitable delay between the hearing of this appeal and
    the issuing of a decision upon it, we were conscious  of  the  need  to
    reflect promptly upon the credibility of the appellant's  account.   We
    did so as a panel and agreed, subject to the resolution  of  the  legal
    issue at the centre of this case, that we had each  formed  an  adverse
    view of the evidence given by the appellant and her cousin.

D.   THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

81. A specific offence of female genital mutilation was enacted by  section
    1 of the Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003 ("the 2003 Act").   Section
    2 created an offence of assisting a girl to mutilate her own genitalia.
     Section 3 created a further offence of assisting a  non-UK  person  to
    mutilate overseas a girl's genitalia.  From 3  May  2015,  s3A  created
    another offence of failing to protect a girl from a risk of FGM.   From
    the  same  date,  s4  extended  ss1-3A  to  extra-territorial  acts  or
    omissions.

82. From 17 May 2015, provision was made at s5A for the  making  of  Female
    Genital Mutilation Prevention Orders.  Section 5C permits (but does not
    require) the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  to  issue
    guidance about the effect of the Act or other matters relating to  FGM.
    By s5C(2), a person exercising public functions  must  have  regard  to
    that guidance in the  exercise  of  those  functions  but,  by  s5C(3),
    nothing in the section permits the Secretary of State to give  guidance
    to any court or tribunal.


83. By s5A, it is schedule 2 to the 2003 Act which makes detailed provision
    for the making of FGMPOs.  For present purposes, only paragraph 1  need
    be set out in full:

    (1)  The court in England and Wales may make an order (an "FGM
         protection order") for the purposes of-
         (a)  protecting a girl against the commission of a genital
             mutilation offence, or
         (b)  protecting a girl against whom any such offence has been
             committed.


    (2)  In deciding whether to exercise its powers under this paragraph
         and, if so, in what manner, the court must have regard to all the
         circumstances, including the need to secure the health, safety and
         well-being of the girl to be protected.

    (3)  An FGM protection order may contain-
         (a)  such prohibitions, restrictions or requirements, and
         (b)  such other terms,
             as the court considers appropriate for the purposes of the
    order.


    (4)  The terms of an FGM protection order may, in particular, relate to-


         (a)  conduct outside England and Wales as well as (or instead of)
             conduct within England and Wales;
         (b)  respondents who are, or may become, involved in other respects
             as well as (or instead of) respondents who commit or attempt
             to commit, or may commit or attempt to commit, a genital
             mutilation offence against a girl;
         (c)  other persons who are, or may become, involved in other
             respects as well as respondents of any kind.


    (5)  For the purposes of sub-paragraph (4) examples of involvement in
         other respects are-
         (a)  aiding, abetting, counselling, procuring, encouraging or
             assisting another person to commit, or attempt to commit, a
             genital mutilation offence against a girl;
         (b)  conspiring to commit, or to attempt to commit, such an
    offence.


    (6)  An FGM protection order may be made for a specified period or
         until varied or discharged (see paragraph 6).


84. Provision is made in paragraph 2 for the court to make FGMPOs  with  or
    without specific application being made, and  for  applications  to  be
    made by various people, whether as a part of family proceedings or not.
     Paragraph 3 concerns the circumstances in which a criminal court might
    make an FGMPO.  Paragraph 4 creates an offence  of  failing  to  comply
    with an FGMPO.  Paragraph 5 concerns  the  circumstances  in  which  an
    FGMPO might be made without notice  to  the  respondent.   Paragraph  6
    governs the variation  or  discharge  of  an  FGMPO.   Paragraphs  7-15
    concern the arrest, detention and bail of those suspected of  breaching
    an order.  Paragraph 16 makes clear that the availability of  an  FGMPO
    does not affect any other protection or assistance which  is  available
    to a potential victim of FGM.  Paragraph 17 contains four  definitions,
    including the definition of "the court", which means the High Court  or
    the Family Court in England and Wales, except where the power  to  make
    an FGMPO is exercisable by a criminal  court.   Paragraphs  18-31  make
    like provision for Northern Ireland.


85. There was some reference to the statutory guidance before us.  As noted
    above, the guidance is issued by the Secretary of State  under  s5C  of
    the 2003 Act.  The current guidance  runs  to  89  pages  and  provides
    invaluable information to relevant agencies about the practice  of  FGM
    and the legislative and other measures which are in place in an attempt
    to eradicate it.  We do not propose to precis the  document.   We  note
    that page 11 provides percentages of girls and  women  aged  15-49  who
    have undergone FGM in Africa,  the  Middle  East  and  Indonesia.   The
    percentage in Somalia is given as 98%.  In the two countries with which
    we are concerned, Sierra Leone and The Gambia, the percentages are  90%
    and 75% respectively.  Section 3 of the guidance, to  which  Ms  Weston
    referred, provides guidance on the law in England and Wales.  Paragraph
    3.3 provides particular guidance on  FGMPOs,  emphasising  the  court's
    protective role in making such an order.  Section 4 is entitled Working
    Together to Tackle FGM and emphasises the  need  for  multi-agency  co-
    operation to reduce the incidence of FGM.

E.   ANALYSIS

     The Authorities
86. The relationship  between  the  Family  Courts  (including  the  Family
    Division of the High Court),  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  (and  their  predecessors)  has  been  the
    subject of a great deal of authority.  At [33]  of  R  (Anton)  v  SSHD
    [2004] EWHC 2730 (Admin); [2004] EWHC 2731 (Fam);  [2005]  2  FLR  818,
    Munby J (as he then was) drew on  authority  dating  back  to  1968  in
    holding that:


         A judge of the Family Division cannot in the exercise of his family
         jurisdiction grant an injunction to restrain the Secretary of State
         removing  from  the  jurisdiction  a  child  who  is   subject   to
         immigration control - even if the child is a ward of court.

87. At [42], however, Munby J underlined a point made by Hoffman LJ (as  he
    then was) in R v SSHD ex parte T [1995] 1 FLR 292:


         Clearly, any order made or views expressed by the court would be  a
         matter to be taken into account by the Secretary of  State  in  the
         exercise of his powers. If he simply paid no attention to  such  an
         order, he would run the risk of his decision being reviewed on  the
         ground that he  had  failed  to  take  all  relevant  matters  into
         consideration.

88. Anton was cited by the Upper Tribunal (McFarlane LJ, Blake  J  and  UTJ
    Martin) in Nimako-Boateng [2012] UKUT 216 (IAC).   The  Upper  Tribunal
    held that orders in relation to children made in family proceedings did
    not bind the Secretary of State in  immigration  proceedings  but  that
    informed decisions of a family judge were likely to be of  value  to  a
    judge of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


89. Nimako-Boateng and RS (India) [2012] UKUT 218 (IAC) (which was  decided
    by the same senior constitution of the Upper Tribunal) were endorsed by
    the Court of Appeal in Mohan v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363; [2013] 1  WLR
    922; [2013] Imm AR 210.  It was in the wake of these decisions that the
    Protocol on Communications Between  Judges  of  the  Family  Court  and
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal was signed by The President of the Family Division (Munby  LJ)
    and the Senior President of Tribunals (Sullivan LJ) on 19 July 2013.


    The FGMPO Authorities
90. It was submitted by the applicant in Re A (a child: FGM: asylum) [2019]
    EWHC 2475 (Fam); [2020] 1 FLR 253 that the 2015 amendments to the  2003
    Act signalled an intention to depart  from  these  settled  principles,
    albeit to a limited extent.   It  was  submitted  that  Parliament  had
    'plainly intended' that the Family Court could make an FGMPO to prevent
    the Secretary of State from removing an  individual,  even  if  removal
    directions had been set and to do so would frustrate the  intention  of
    the Home Office and the IAC: [25].

91. The President of  the  Family  Division  (McFarlane  LJ)  reviewed  the
    authorities, including Anton and SSHD v  GD  (Ghana)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1126; [2018] Imm AR 63,  before  confronting  the  submission  made  by
    leading counsel for the applicant that the court should  draw  a  'firm
    distinction' between FGMPOs and the orders with which the existing case-
    law was concerned: [29].  It was also submitted by Ms Monaghan QC,  for
    the applicant, that it was the Family Court, and  not  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber, which had been tasked by Parliament with conducting
    risk assessments in FGM cases: [29].  She also emphasised,  in  support
    of her position, 'the different weight accorded to the interests of the
    child, the separate representation of the child afforded in the  Family
    Courts and the higher level of scrutiny as to the fact-finding exercise
    provided by the Family Courts.': [32].

92. The President of the Family Division rejected these arguments at  [44]-
    [54], holding that there is no jurisdiction for a Family Court to  make
    an FGMPO against the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  to
    control the exercise of her jurisdiction with  respect  to  matters  of
    immigration and asylum.  He considered that the authorities to which we
    have referred above applied equally to the situation in which a  Family
    Court was asked to make an FGMPO and, at [49], that there was

         .... simply no jurisdictional space in the structure that has  been
         created by Parliament in which the Family Court  can  reach  across
         and directly interfere in the exercise by the Secretary of  State's
         exclusive powers with respect to the  control  of  immigration  and
         asylum.

93. At [51], McFarlane LJ said this, echoing the point made by  Hoffman  LJ
    in ex parte T:


         [51] Thirdly, the discharge by a State of its positive  obligations
         under Art 3 is to be contemplated by looking at  the  operation  of
         the State's engagement with the issue as a whole. In this regard, I
         accept the Secretary of State's analysis of the Family Court's FGMA
         jurisdiction being complementary to the separate scheme  regulating
         immigration and asylum operated  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
         specialist tribunals. Where a Family Court has  undertaken  a  risk
         assessment with respect to FGM relating to a family which  is  also
         the subject of immigration control, then the Secretary of State and
         the tribunals will take account of that assessment when making  any
         relevant determination, or, if  the  family  proceedings  have  (as
         here)  followed  the  immigration  process,  may  re-consider   the
         immigration decision under Rule 353.


94. At [55]-[56], McFarlane LJ gave short shrift  to  a  separate  argument
    which had been advanced by the Secretary of State, who  had  intervened
    in the proceedings.  She  had  submitted  that  the  Family  Court  was
    obliged to take any prior assessment of the risk of FGM by the  FtT  as
    its starting point or 'default position' in deciding whether to make an
    FGMPO.  In that applicant's case, the FtT had not accepted  that  there
    was a risk of FGM.  The appellant had  subsequently  failed  to  secure
    permission to appeal and had exhausted her rights of appeal against the
    FtT's decision.  It  was  this  finding  which  was  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State to represent  the  proper  starting  point  for  the
    assessment of whether an FGMPO should be made.


95. McFarlane LJ considered the Secretary of State's submission not  to  be
    supported by authority.  It was clear from authority that the  approach
    to risk assessment in a family case was a different exercise from  that
    undertaken in the context of immigration and asylum.  The Family  Court
    had a duty under the 2003 Act to have regard to all  the  circumstances
    and, to discharge that duty,  it  had  to  consider  all  the  relevant
    evidence before deciding any facts on the balance  of  probability  and
    then move on to assess the risk and the need for an  FGMPO.   It  would
    'necessarily take note' of the  FtT's  assessment  but  the  assessment
    undertaken in the IAC was not a compatible process with  that  required
    in the Family Court.  The court had a duty to form its own  assessment,
    'unencumbered by having to afford priority or precedence to the outcome
    of a similarly labelled,  but  materially  different,  process  in  the
    immigration jurisdiction.": [56].

96.  McFarlane  LJ  therefore  discharged  the  part  of  the  order  which
    restrained the Secretary of State and replaced it with a 'request' that
    the Secretary of State should restrain enforcement of  the  immigration
    decisions until the conclusion of the FGMPO application and 'thereafter
    to re-consider the immigration determination in the light of  any  risk
    assessment undertaken by the Family Court.'

97. The Secretary of State appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal  against  the
    conclusions which McFarlane LJ had reached at [55]-[56].  She  repeated
    her submission that the  IAC's  assessment  was  to  be  taken  as  the
    starting point or default position for the Family Court.  In a judgment
    delivered by the Senior President of Tribunals,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    (Ryder,  King  and  Hickinbottom   LJJ)   unanimously   rejected   that
    submission.  The basis upon which it did so was a primary focus of  the
    written and oral submissions before us and it is necessary to  consider
    the reasoning in some detail.

98. The court set out what had been said by McFarlane LJ  at  [55]-[56]  of
    his judgment and the salient parts of Re H (A Child)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    988, on which he had  based  those  conclusions.   It  noted  that  A's
    application had subsequently returned for a  three-day  hearing  before
    Newton J, after which he had made an FGMPO and had observed that it was
    'difficult to think of a clearer or more serious case'  of  a  risk  of
    FGM.

99. At [25], the court summarised the submissions made by the Secretary  of
    State.  It was not submitted that the decision of the FtT  was  binding
    on the Family Court but, instead,  that  its  decision  should  be  the
    starting point for the court before whom the application for  an  FGMPO
    was made.  The reasoning was in three parts.  Firstly, that the  Family
    Court must respect the decision of the IAC in respect of  the  risk  of
    FGM in the country of return and must consider that conclusion as  part
    of its analysis of all the circumstances.  Secondly, whilst the  Family
    Court was still required to consider an application for an  FGMPO,  the
    starting point should be the IAC's decision  that  the  risk  does  not
    provide a basis for the person to remain  in  the  UK.   Thirdly,  that
    although the Family Court might in  exceptional  circumstances  take  a
    different view from the IAC, that should be rare and there  would  need
    to be a  material  basis,  identified  by  the  court,  for  doing  so.
    Evidence leading to a  change  in  circumstances  might,  for  example,
    justify that course.  At [26], it was noted that  leading  counsel  for
    the respondent was unable to support these arguments with authority but
    he sought to  support  them  with  reference  to  judicial  comity  and
    proportionality.


100. The  Senior  President  considered,  however,  that  there  were  three
    anterior matters which provided a complete answer to the appeal.   They
    were as follows.  Firstly, that the proceedings  before  the  IAC  were
    adversarial, and not in rem.  It was only the parties  to  that  appeal
    who were bound by the decision of the FtT.  He added:

         We accept that an assessment of risk made by one court or  tribunal
         may be a relevant consideration for a subsequent  assessment  by  a
         different court or tribunal: but, whether it  is  relevant  at  all
         and, if so, the weight to be given to the earlier  assessment,  are
         matters for the subsequent court or tribunal. They will depend upon
         (among other things) the degree  of  similarity/difference  between
         the precise assessment in which each court or tribunal is involved,
         the  available  relevant  evidence   and   any   particular   rules
         (evidential or otherwise) that apply.

101. Secondly, the Family Court's role in FGMPO  proceedings  was  given  in
    statute, and it was required by the 2003 Act to have regard to all  the
    circumstances.  That statutory language neither required nor  permitted
    'any  limitation,  presumption  or  assumption  in  the  task   to   be
    performed'.   The  only  starting  point  in  law  was  that  all   the
    circumstances included the  need  to  secure  the  health,  safety  and
    wellbeing of the  girl  to  be  protected.   Thirdly,  a  Family  Court
    considering an application for an FGMPO might be required  to  consider
    the evidential basis on which a prior decision of the IAC had been made
    and the nature of any further evidence, including expert evidence which
    might be necessary to assist the  court  to  resolve  the  proceedings.
    There was no need for any additional gloss on that rule.


102. At [31]-[38], the court considered the Secretary  of  State's  reliance
    on the principle of judicial comity.  No support for the  argument  was
    to be found in the decision of Holman J in A v A  (FGMPOs:  Immigration
    Appeals) [2018] EWHC 1754 (Fam); [2018] 4 WLR 105,  which  was  not  an
    application of the principle of comity as between the court and the IAC
    but careful avoidance of what would  otherwise  have  been  a  tactical
    attempt to use the Family Court to interfere in the jurisdiction of the
    IAC: [33]-[34].  The exercise performed in the  two  jurisdictions  was
    largely distinct and separate  and  driven  by  very  different  policy
    considerations: [36].  It was not even clear that the Family Court  and
    the  FtT(IAC)  could  be  considered  to  be   courts   of   coordinate
    jurisdiction.  Neither the Family Division of the High  Court  nor  the
    Family Court could make a decision which had 'precedential  effect'  in
    either the FtT(IAC) or the UT(IAC).  The proceedings  in  the  IAC  are
    adversarial  whereas  those  under  the  2003  Act   were   essentially
    investigatory: [38].

103.  The  respondent's  arguments  on  proportionality  were  dismissed  as
    missing the point at [39]-[41].  Even where the evidence  presented  to
    the Family Court and the IAC was the same, the context  and  nature  of
    the decision-making process were materially different.  The child would
    be separately represented  and  would  have  her  own  voice  in  FGMPO
    proceedings but that would  not  be  the  case  before  the  IAC.   Her
    interests would be the paramount consideration before the Family  Court
    but not before the IAC.  The statutory schemes had  a  different  focus
    and function.  At [43], the court concluded materially as follows:

         When a Family Court comes to consider an issue  upon  which  it  is
         said a tribunal has  already  opined,  including,  for  example,  a
         tribunal's specialist view about third country risk, the  relevance
         of the tribunal's conclusion, any intermediate  findings  of  fact,
         and the nature and extent of the  evidence  upon  which  these  are
         based will  be  examined  as  part  of  all  the  circumstances  in
         accordance with paragraph 2 of schedule 2 of the FGMA 2003.

104. We should note, before leaving the decision in Suffolk County  Council,
    the Court of Appeal's obiter endorsement, at [15],  of  McFarlane  LJ's
    conclusion that an FGMPO could not be made to restrain the Secretary of
    State in the exercise of her immigration jurisdiction.  That conclusion
    was said to reflect  correctly  the  marked  differences  in  functions
    between a Family Court in FGMPO proceedings and those of the  Secretary
    of State and the IAC in the  exercise  of  their  functions  under  the
    Immigration Acts.


    Discussion
105. There is, to our knowledge, no authority which bears  directly  on  the
    question at issue in the present proceedings, which is the  obverse  of
    that considered by the President of the Family Division and  the  Court
    of Appeal in the Suffolk County Council case.  We do, however, consider
    that much of the reasoning in that  decision  applies  equally  to  the
    situation in which a judge in the Family Court (or the Family  Division
    of the High Court) has made an FGMPO in favour of a  person  (or  their
    dependant) who subsequently comes before the IAC in a protection appeal
    which concerns the risk of FGM.

106. We do not understand it to be controversial between the parties that  a
    judge in the IAC must first assess the relevance of  an  FGMPO  or  any
    findings of fact which were  made  in  the  Family  Court.   Ms  Weston
    suggested that a judge in the IAC should consider the extent  to  which
    the findings and the order made by the  Family  Court  'map  over'  the
    assessment which is to be undertaken by the IAC.  We consider  that  to
    be a useful shorthand for the assessment which must first be undertaken
    by the judge in a protection  appeal  (or,  for  that  matter,  by  the
    Secretary of State herself in circumstances where she is notified  that
    an FGMPO has been made in favour of a person awaiting a decision  on  a
    protection claim).

107. The paradigm case, in which an FGMPO maps neatly  over  the  assessment
    to be undertaken by the IAC, is as follows.   A  girl  who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom with limited leave to remain is said to be  at  risk  of
    FGM at the hands of her family in  her  country  of  nationality.   The
    child's father wishes for her to undergo the procedure, the mother does
    not and she seeks the protection of an FGMPO in order to  restrain  the
    father from removing the child from the jurisdiction so as to safeguard
    her against the risk in that country.  The Family  Court  is  satisfied
    that there is a risk and makes the order.  When the mother's protection
    appeal comes before the IAC, she relies upon the risk to her  child  at
    the hands of the father's family.  The risk of  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 ECHR[1] which has been found to exist by the Family Court  is
    therefore the same risk which is at issue before the judge in the IAC.

108. In other cases, the FGMPO and the  findings  upon  which  it  is  based
    might map over the IAC's assessment very little, if at  all.   A  child
    might, for example, be found to be at risk of FGM from a  person  based
    solely in the United Kingdom, who has no  connections  to  the  child's
    country of origin and  might  not  even  be  permitted  to  enter  that
    country.   Consider,  for  example,  a  child  of  mixed   Somalian   /
    Cameroonian parentage.  The Somalian father is present  in  the  United
    Kingdom as an overstayer.  The mother - who is separated from  him  and
    has sole custody of their daughter - claims asylum on  the  basis  that
    her daughter is at risk of FGM in Cameroon, where the incidence of  the
    practice is 1% (according to the Multi-Agency Statutory Guidance).  She
    also seeks an FGMPO to protect her daughter from the risk of FGM at the
    hands of her father, who seeks to abduct her and take her  to  Somalia,
    where the incidence of FGM is 98%.  Were the Family Court  to  make  an
    FGMPO to protect the child in the United Kingdom and in  Somalia,  such
    an order would have little, if any, bearing on  the  assessment  to  be
    undertaken by the IAC in the  mother's  protection  appeal,  since  the
    IAC's assessment would focus on the risk to the child in Cameroon.


109. The real issue between the parties is the significance to  be  attached
    to the FGMPO in  a  case  where  the  Family  Court's  conclusions  map
    directly over the assessment to be undertaken by the IAC.

110. It cannot properly be suggested that the Secretary of State or the  IAC
    is bound by the conclusions reached, or the order made, by  the  Family
    Court.  In fairness to the appellants' counsel, no  such  argument  was
    advanced in oral submissions before us, although there was a glimmer of
    it in Mr de Mello's skeleton argument.  In this respect, we can  do  no
    better than to return to what was said by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
    Suffolk County Council case.  The proceedings before the  Family  Court
    are not in rem; the outcome of those proceedings is not  binding  on  a
    non-party, including the Secretary of State.  And,  as  has  been  made
    clear in the long line of authority which we have mentioned  above,  it
    would be an error of law for a judge making an  FGMPO  to  injunct  the
    Secretary of State so as  to  restrain  her  in  the  exercise  of  her
    functions as regards immigration  and  asylum.  And  the  Family  Court
    cannot, as the Senior President explained in the Suffolk County Council
    case, make a decision which has 'precedential effect' in the IAC.

111. Nor, for the same reasons, could  it  properly  be  submitted  that  it
    would be an abuse of process for the Secretary of State to submit in  a
    protection appeal that a judge of the  IAC  should  reach  a  different
    conclusion from that of a Family Court judge as to the existence of  an
    FGM risk in any given case.   She  is  not  bound  by  the  conclusions
    reached in the Family Court and she is entitled to invite the judge  in
    the IAC to reach a different conclusion.

112. There are practical and evidential considerations which  also  militate
    against any suggestion that the Secretary of State or the IAC are bound
    by the FGMPO.  As illustrated by the two cases before  us  and  by  the
    reported decisions from the Family Division, the protection  claim  and
    the application for an FGMPO will often not march in  step.   An  FGMPO
    might be made whilst a protection claim is  under  investigation.   The
    judge in the Family Court might not, as a result, have  access  to  the
    applicant's asylum interview or other material which  would  ordinarily
    be considered in a  protection  claim.   It  would  be  absurd  if  the
    respondent was prevented, at a hearing  before  the  IAC,  from  making
    submissions on the impact of material which was not  available  to  the
    judge in the Family Court, whether because it had not been  filed  with
    the court or simply because it had not come into existence.

113. As we have  stated  above,  it  was  not  seriously  suggested  by  the
    applicants in this case that the respondent or the IAC is bound by  the
    assessment undertaken in the Family Court.  Ms Weston's  submission  on
    the law - which was adopted by Mr de Mello -  was  more  nuanced.   She
    invited us to place significance on the fact that the Family Court is a
    specialist body, tasked under the  2003  Act  with  the  protection  of
    children from FGM.  She emphasised the essentially investigatory powers
    of the Family Court under the 2003 Act and the fact that it is  obliged
    to consider all the circumstances in order to secure the safety of  the
    applicant for an FGMPO.

114. We accept all of these points but we do  not  consider  that  they  can
    lead us properly to conclude that the obligation on  the  Secretary  of
    State or a judge in  the  IAC  is  anything  more  than  to  weigh  the
    significance of an FGMPO as part of the evidence in a protection claim.
     We are unable to accept, in particular, that the making  of  an  FGMPO
    creates a rebuttable presumption in the IAC that there  is  a  relevant
    risk of FGM, or even that the Family Court's assessment should be taken
    as a starting point, in the sense envisaged in Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR
    1.  Many of the reasons given by the Court of Appeal for rejecting  the
    Secretary of State's submission in the  obverse  situation  apply  with
    equal force here.  In deciding a claim  for  international  protection,
    the Secretary of State or the IAC considers whether the removal of  the
    individual in question would breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the Refugee Convention.  Just as the 2003 Act requires the Family
    Court to consider all the circumstances in deciding whether to make  an
    FGMPO, there is no statutory mechanism -  whether  in  Part  5  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  or  elsewhere  -  which
    delimits the scope of that enquiry in a case in which an FGMPO has been
    made. Also, as the Court of  Appeal  observed  in  the  Suffolk  County
    Council case,  the  IAC  and  the  Family  Courts  are  not  courts  of
    coordinate jurisdiction.  Judicial comity provides no  reason  why  the
    decision of the specialist Family Court should  be  afforded  automatic
    'starting point' status in the assessment of the specialist IAC  whilst
    it is conducting an assessment under a different statutory scheme which
    is driven by very different policy considerations.


115. A further, practical difficulty with affording an  automatic  status  -
    whether as a 'starting point'  or  as  a  default  position  -  to  the
    decision of the Family Court is highlighted very  clearly  by  the  two
    cases before us.  In the case  of  the  first  appellant,  there  is  a
    reasoned judgment from a judge in  the  Family  Division  of  the  High
    Court, followed by another reasoned judgment of  another  puisne  judge
    after the  appellant  reached  the  age  of  21.   But  as  the  second
    appellant's case shows, an FGMPO  might  be  made  without  a  reasoned
    judgment, or indeed any record of the factual  conclusions  reached  by
    the judge in the Family Court.  If some form of automatic  status  were
    to be given to the decision of the Family Court in such a case, a judge
    in the IAC would be required simply to assume in  the  latter  type  of
    case that certain findings of fact had been made,  and  to  take  those
    findings as  a  starting  point  in  the  assessment  of  a  claim  for
    international protection.

116. The correct approach, in our judgment, is that the  assessment  in  the
    Family Court is not to be afforded any automatic  status.   It  is  not
    binding on the respondent or the IAC.  Nor does it establish a starting
    point or a default position.  Instead, the significance  of  the  FGMPO
    and the findings of fact upon which it was made are to  be  weighed  by
    the Secretary of  State  or  a  judge  in  the  IAC  in  considering  a
    protection claim.  Our conclusion  in  this  regard  accords  with  the
    Secretary of  State's  policy,  as  helpfully  highlighted  by  Ms  van
    Overdijk and reproduced at [35] above.

117. There is, we think, a spectrum of cases.  At one end of  that  spectrum
    lies a case in which an FGMPO is demonstrably made on nothing more than
    the ipse dixit of the applicant.  A judge of the Family Court might  in
    such a case have accepted the superficially attractive submission which
    was made (and rejected by Lieven J) in AB v AN & BN  [2020]  EWHC  2048
    (Fam): that there is no harm in granting such  an  order.   The  weight
    which can properly be afforded to such an  order  is  necessarily  very
    limited, and possibly nil.

118. At the other end of the spectrum is a case in which  there  is  one  or
    more fully reasoned  judgments  from  the  Family  Court,  setting  out
    detailed findings of fact on the  balance  of  probabilities.   Such  a
    judgment might be the product of extensive investigation on the part of
    the court.  It might have heard contested evidence from  the  applicant
    and the respondent(s).  It might have received expert evidence  on  the
    prevalence of FGM in the country of origin, or even of  the  prevalence
    of the practice amongst a specific ethnic group.  It  might  even  have
    considered all of the evidence which is to be considered by the IAC  in
    the  course  of  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   international
    protection.  In such a case, the weight which might properly  be  given
    to the assessment undertaken in the Family Court and  the  findings  of
    fact reached  in  the  course  of  that  assessment  is  likely  to  be
    significant.  That is not because the Family Court's assessment has any
    special legal status before the IAC, whether as a precedent, a starting
    point or a decision to  which  principles  of  judicial  comity  should
    apply; it is simply in recognition of the fact that  cogently  reasoned
    findings have been made  by  a  specialist  judge  who  has  considered
    evidence which is similar to that before the IAC.  The decision in  the
    FGMPO proceedings in such a case becomes a  persuasive,  possibly  even
    highly persuasive, part of the  evidence  before  the  IAC.   It  might
    properly be thought to go much of the way to discharging the burden  of
    proof upon the appellant. What it cannot do is to cast  the  burden  of
    proof upon the respondent to disprove the existence of the risk in  the
    order.


    Assessments Not Coextensive
119. There is a further point which  must  be  made  about  the  assessments
    undertaken in FGMPO proceedings in the Family Court and in a protection
    appeal before the IAC.  In FGMPO proceedings, the court is likely to be
    focussed on the existence of a risk of FGM in the UK or  overseas.   In
    respect of the overseas assessment, there might well  be  a  degree  of
    commonality with the investigation undertaken in the IAC.   The  Family
    Court will not necessarily proceed, however, to consider the avenues of
    redress which might be available to an applicant in order  to  mitigate
    any such risk in their country of origin.  A judge in the Family  Court
    might  not,  in  other  words,  consider  whether  there  might  be   a
    sufficiency of domestic protection  or  a  viable  internal  relocation
    alternative.  Whilst a judge considering an application for an FGMPO is
    required by statute to consider all the circumstances, we have not been
    shown and are not aware of any authority  in  which  these  established
    aspects of refugee status determination have come  to  feature  in  the
    analysis of whether an FGMPO should be made.  Even where the assessment
    of risk in the Family Court maps over that which is to be undertaken in
    the IAC, it might well be that the former will be entirely  coextensive
    with the latter.

120. As Mr de Mello recognised in  his  submissions,  it  is  likely  to  be
    appropriate for a judge hearing a protection appeal which  features  an
    FGMPO to consider the extent to which the order  might  itself  provide
    extra-territorial protection against FGM.  The order  is  made  against
    named individuals against whom penal sanctions might be imposed in  the
    event of a breach.  The existence of such an order might, depending  on
    the facts, operate to reduce or to obviate the risk under consideration
    in the IAC.  That might particularly be the case where  the  respondent
    named in the order  is  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  travels
    regularly to the United Kingdom.  Any such respondent  would  have  the
    most cogent of reasons to take steps to ensure that FGM was not carried
    out on a girl protected by an FGMPO.  All will naturally depend on  the
    facts, including an assessment of whether  the  named  respondents  are
    likely to be deterred by the FGMPO and the  extent  of  any  risk  from
    persons not named in the order.


121. Given the concession made by the respondent that the first  appellant's
    appeal should be allowed on international  protection  grounds,  it  is
    unnecessary for us to examine or to  reach  detailed  findings  on  her
    claim.  Her case does, however, provide one of  two  real  examples  to
    illustrate how in practice a judge of  the  IAC  might  decide  on  the
    weight to be attached to an FGMPO.  The  first  question,  as  we  have
    explained, is to consider whether if at all the  FGMPO  maps  over  the
    assessment to be undertaken by the  IAC.   The  orders  made  by  Peter
    Jackson J and Gwynneth  Knowles  J  clearly  map  over  the  protection
    assessment to a significant extent.  The appellant  claimed  to  be  at
    risk of FGM in Sierra Leone and Peter  Jackson  J  was  satisfied  that
    there was such a risk and that an order should be made.

122. It is then necessary to consider  the  intermediate  findings  of  fact
    made by Peter Jackson J and Gwynneth Knowles  J,  and  the  nature  and
    extent of the evidence upon which these are based.  Certain findings of
    fact made by Peter Jackson J are of the utmost significance.  Into that
    category falls his finding - based on the investigations  conducted  by
    the Metropolitan Police - that the emails relied upon by the  appellant
    were sent from Sierra Leone, and that they were genuinely sent  by  her
    father.

123. Had we been required  to  determine  the  appellant's  application  for
    international protection, we would however have observed the  notes  of
    caution sounded repeatedly by Peter Jackson J.  He found that the  task
    of providing a clear account of what had happened  was  an  'impossible
    one': [22].  He noted that there was an absence of sufficient evidence:
    [23].  BBW was not legally represented and  had  not  even  had  formal
    interpretation: [24].  He did not know whether BBW was involved in  FGM
    but it had 'certainly not been proved in this  proceeding':  [27].   He
    simply did not know whether BBW had spoken to the applicant about  FGM:
    [29].   He  noted  that  the  findings  he  was  able  to  reach   were
    unsatisfactory and that they reflected the unsatisfactory nature of the
    evidence.  It was on that basis that he considered, in  agreement  with
    the police, that GW required the protection of a FGMPO.

124. This was a reasoned assessment made  by  a  High  Court  judge  on  the
    balance of probabilities but it was an assessment made  after  a  forty
    eight minute hearing with evidence which was considered  unsatisfactory
    in various respects.  We consider that the FtT clearly erred,  on  both
    occasions that it heard  the  case,  in  attaching  no  weight  to  the
    decisions of the High Court.  Some weight was clearly to be attached to
    those decisions, and particularly the  decision  of  Peter  Jackson  J.
    Importantly, however, no assessment was  made  by  the  High  Court  on
    either  occasion  about  the  questions  of  internal   relocation   or
    sufficiency of protection.  Even if - as we think - weight was properly
    to be attached to the rather cautious conclusions expressed by the High
    Court as to risk, it would remain for a judge in the  IAC  to  consider
    those matters for herself.

    Guidance to the Respondent and the Family Court
125. We were invited by Ms Weston to issue guidance to  the  respondent  and
    to the Family Court.  She invited  us  to  state  that  the  respondent
    should be required to reconsider an adverse decision  in  a  protection
    claim when an FGMPO was subsequently made.  We  decline  to  issue  any
    such guidance.  As we have endeavoured to explain, the weight which  is
    to  be  attached  to  an  FGMPO  varies  according  to   a   range   of
    considerations.  The order might not map over the assessment which  has
    already been undertaken by the respondent.  The findings of  fact  upon
    which the order was based may be clear, unclear or  even  absent.   The
    evidence considered by the Family Court might be similar  or  different
    from that considered by the respondent.  Even if there was a  mechanism
    by which we could require the respondent to reconsider a decision under
    appeal (which we doubt), it would place an unduly onerous burden on the
    respondent, given the limited weight which might properly  be  attached
    to some FGMPOs.

126. It is also necessary to  consider,  in  this  context,  the  additional
    delay which might be occasioned by such a requirement.  The  respondent
    would be entitled to a reasonable period in which to reconsider, during
    which time any appeal before  the  IAC  would  have  to  be  adjourned,
    potentially causing  unnecessary  distress  to  an  appellant.   It  is
    undesirable, for all of these reasons, for  any  such  guidance  to  be
    issued.  Although we decline  to  issue  any  such  guidance,  it  will
    doubtless be recognised by  the  respondent  that  there  are  cases  -
    including the first appellant's -  in  which  weight  can  properly  be
    attached to the reasoned basis on which an FGMPO was made and in  which
    reconsideration in light of that decision might save  time  and  public
    expense.


127. We also decline Ms Weston's invitation to issue guidance to the  Family
    Court on the content of its decisions.  It is for the Family  Court  to
    issue guidance to its judges on the extent of  the  reasons  given  for
    concluding that an FGMPO should or should not be  made.   We  do  note,
    however,  that  the  Protocol  on   communication   between   the   two
    jurisdictions  represents  an  agreed  mechanism   by   which   further
    information about the making of such an order can be requested.  It was
    that mechanism which was used by Nicol J and UTJ Blundell in the second
    appellant's case.



F.   DECISIONS IN THE INDIVIDUAL APPEALS

    Remaking the Decision in GW's Appeal
128. GW's appeal is allowed on  protection  grounds  by  consent.   We  have
    recorded above that the parties were not only content with that  course
    but that we were also urged by Ms van Overdijk and Ms Weston  to  issue
    country guidance in the terms we have recorded in full at [28] above.


129.  Having  considered  the  expert  evidence  and  the  other  background
    material before us, we are satisfied that it is appropriate to  do  so.
    We are also satisfied that the time has come to make it plain  that  RM
    (Sierra Leone) and FB (Sierra Leone) are no longer to  be  relied  upon
    for what they  say  about  FGM  in  that  country.   Neither  of  those
    decisions is a  country  guidance  decision  to  which  the  principles
    discussed at [208]-[211] of SMO & Ors (Iraq) CG [2019] UKUT  400  (IAC)
    apply and we need not consider whether there has been  well-established
    and durable change in  Sierra  Leone.  We  are  satisfied  that  it  is
    appropriate to issue country guidance in the  terms  suggested  by  the
    parties.


    Remaking the Decision in FM's Appeal
130. Having resolved the legal issues as  we  have  above,  we  move  on  to
    consider the case of the second appellant.  We begin by considering the
    weight which can properly be attached to the interim and  final  FGMPOs
    made by HHJ Clayton.  Mr de Mello submitted in  his  skeleton  argument
    that 'the weight to be  given  to  the  FGMPO  is  a  heavy  one'.   We
    disagree.   Whilst  the  order  seemingly  maps  over  the  appellant's
    protection claim to an extent, naming her husband as the respondent and
    prohibiting him from removing the children or subjecting them  to  FGM,
    it is clear on the face of the  orders  that  they  were  made  on  the
    thinnest conceivable evidential basis and, with respect to HHJ Clayton,
    that no reasons were given for making the order.  The initial order  of
    9 February 2018 was made without notice to the respondent  father.   It
    was based - according to its first page - on a  sworn  statement  which
    was made by the applicant on 19 January 2018 and submissions  from  her
    representative.  Given the  terms  of  the  order,  it  was  presumably
    accepted by HHJ Clayton that  it  was  necessary  for  the  purpose  of
    protecting a girl  against  the  commission  of  a  genital  mutilation
    offence, but there are no reasoned conclusions supporting that apparent
    acceptance.


131. The application returned before HHJ Clayton on 9 March 2018,  by  which
    stage the initial order had been sent to the respondent father.  He had
    then confirmed by email that he had received the  order  and  "that  he
    agreed with the terms thereof and did not want to  attend  any  further
    hearings".  It was on that basis that the order was made final.  Again,
    there were no findings of fact recorded.  The inference is  that  these
    were simply uncontested proceedings - for whatever reason  -  and  that
    the judge made the order because  there  was  nothing  to  gainsay  the
    application.

132. In making these observations, we hope that it is clear that  we  intend
    no criticism whatsoever of HHJ Clayton.  Nor do we  intend  to  suggest
    that she was not entitled to make the order on the basis that she  did.
    In gauging the weight which can properly be attached to that  order  in
    this appeal, however, we come  to  the  clear  conclusion  that  it  is
    deserving of very little weight indeed, for reasons which will  already
    be clear.  Seemingly  in  recognition  of  the  difficulties  with  the
    orders,  Mr  de  Mello  submitted   that   significant   weight   might
    nevertheless be given to them  because  of  the  appellant's  husband's
    emailed response to the court.  We have not seen that response; it  was
    not provided to the Upper Tribunal with the disclosure from the  Family
    Court, nor does it feature in the appellant's bundle.   On  any  proper
    view, however, that email might have been sent for any one  of  several
    reasons.  It might have  been  sent  because  the  appellant's  husband
    wished his daughters to undergo FGM but he is willing to abide  by  the
    terms of the FGMPO because he is a senior diplomat who would  not  wish
    to contravene an order made by an English court.  It  might  have  been
    sent because he is in favour of his daughters being  subjected  to  FGM
    and he simply does not care what the English court  does  or  does  not
    order.  It might have been sent because he would like the appellant and
    his daughters to secure asylum in this country so that he can join them
    here.  In contrast to the position in GW's  case,  the  Family  Court's
    decision sheds no light on which of these possibilities was thought  by
    HHJ Clayton to be the case.  It seems likely that she  thought  it  was
    the first or the second possibility but we simply cannot know.  In  the
    circumstances, we are unable to accept the submission  made  by  Mr  de
    Mello that the email from the appellant's husband  makes  any  material
    difference to the weight which can properly be attached to the FGMPO in
    the holistic assessment we are required to undertake.


133. In addition to the FGMPO, we have taken careful account of  the  expert
    evidence relied upon by this appellant.  We take it that the author  of
    that report - Professor Knorr - is accepted by  the  respondent  to  be
    entitled to provide her opinion on the appellant's  claim,  given  that
    she was instructed by the respondent to provide her opinion on the case
    of the other appellant.  She is eminently well qualified to  do  so  as
    the Head of a research group which focuses on Integration and  Conflict
    along the Upper Guinea Coast and in  West  Africa  at  the  Max  Planck
    Institute for Social Anthropology in Halle/Saale, Germany.  Prof  Knorr
    was brought up in the region and has conducted extensive field research
    there.

134. We have taken account of the whole of the report but  we  are  grateful
    to Mr de Mello for his concise summary of it at [14]  of  his  skeleton
    argument, which is as follows:


         Parents who object to FGM were unable to protect  their  daughters.
         The ethnic identity of mothers  is  of  minor  importance  in  this
         context.  The husband and his family determines whether FGM  should
         take place.  Living within the  Mandinka  community  heightens  the
         risk of FGM.  Not being  genitally  cut  puts  Serere  girls  at  a
         considerable disadvantage in terms of being considered as potential
         wives.  The risk of abduction and forced FGM  by  kin  is  high  in
         order to make the girls marriageable.  The effect of the  FGMPO  on
         the girls is to subject them to discriminatory treatment  (as  they
         are taken out of the marriage market) and subjected to abuse and to
         expose the  appellant  to  ostracism  amounting  to  discriminatory
         treatment.  The appellant is herself at risk of FGM.  Relocation is
         not a realistic option.  There is a lack  of  state  protection  at
         every level for such females.  State courts have less  effect  than
         Islamic courts in this area of concern.  Female access  to  justice
         is illusory.  Police protection is lacking.  The FGMPO is a writ in
         water.

135. We note that Prof Knorr states that 75% of women  in  The  Gambia  have
    been subjected to FGM.  She states that it remains a persistent feature
    of society for a variety of  reasons,  including  the  preservation  of
    income and status for those involved  and  the  desire  to  reduce  the
    occurrence of pre-marital and extra-marital sex.  FGM is practised only
    slightly less amongst more educated women, she states, citing a  UNICEF
    report from 2007.  Prof Knorr states that the Serere,  the  appellant's
    husband's ethnic group, represents only 2% of  the  population  of  The
    Gambia.  Intermarriage with other ethnic groups is commonplace  amongst
    the Serere. Figures concerning the prevalence of FGM amongst the Serere
    in The Gambia vary from 46% to 64%.  Amongst the Wolof, the appellant's
    ethnic group, the incidence  is  around  17.5%.   The  area  of  origin
    influences the likelihood of a girl being required to undergo FGM,  and
    those of Serere or Wolof backgrounds might be subjected to the practice
    along with the girls belonging to the majority group in their  village.
    This is the case, she states, with the  appellant's  husband's  family,
    which lives in a Mandinka area.  The occurrence of FGM in  that  ethnic
    group is between 94% and 97%.  Prof Knorr considers that the risk  will
    exist - as a result of familial  abduction  to  perform  the  ritual  -
    throughout the country, and that the children will be at  risk  for  as
    long as they have not been initiated.  She opines that  the  initiation
    interval (of every five years in the case of the appellant's  husband's
    family) depends upon the number  of  girls  deemed  ready  and  on  the
    financial resources available, not only for the ceremony but  also  for
    the  festivities  which  accompany  it.   Prof  Knorr  summarises   her
    conclusions in this way:


         Due to the importance attached to initiation and FGC  among  [FM's]
         husband's and her daughter's paternal family and community,  it  is
         very likely that her daughters would be forced to undergo FGC.  She
         and her daughters could neither live with her husband nor with  her
         own (maternal) family without facing a severe  risk  of  FGC  being
         performed on the daughters.  For the reasons stated, [FM] would not
         be able to protect her daughters from genital cutting.   She  would
         have to live an illegal existence and go into hiding in The  Gambia
         to prevent her daughters' initiation.  In hiding, [FM] would not be
         able to find legal and non-exploitative employment to  provide  for
         her own and her daughter's needs who would  therefore  all  face  a
         severe  risk  of  socio-economic  destitution  and   of   suffering
         exploitation, discrimination and  violence.   The  risks  described
         cannot be avoided by turning  to  state  authorities  or  NGOs  for
         support and protection or by relocating within The Gambia.


136. Prof Knorr's conclusions on the  background  situation  in  The  Gambia
    essentially chime with the conclusions reached in  the  extant  country
    guidance decision of K & Ors (FGM) The Gambia CG [2013] UKUT 62  (IAC).
    The Upper Tribunal in that decision concluded that there  was  unlikely
    to be a sufficiency of state protection or a viable internal relocation
    alternative for a woman at risk of FGM.  It  also  concluded  that  the
    assessment of whether there was such a risk was highly  fact-sensitive.
    The starting point is to consider the incidence of the practice amongst
    the ethnic group(s) in question and  then  to  consider  the  variables
    which might affect the risk.  Those variables were described as follows
    at (6) of the headnote:


         (a) In the case of an unmarried woman, parental opposition  reduces
         the risk. In the case of  a  married  woman,  opposition  from  the
         husband reduces the risk. If the husband has no other "wives",  the
         risk may be reduced further. However, it should be  borne  in  mind
         that parental/spousal opposition may be insufficient to prevent the
         girl or woman from being subjected to FGM where the extended family
         is one that practises it, although this will always be  a  question
         of fact.
         (b) If the prevalence of the practice amongst the  extended  family
         is greater than the prevalence of the practice in the ethnic  group
         in question, this  will  increase  the  risk.  Conversely,  if  the
         prevalence of the practice amongst the extended family is less than
         the prevalence of the practice in the  ethnic  group  in  question,
         this will reduce the risk.
         (c) If the woman is educated (whether she is  single  or  married),
         the risk will reduce.
         (d) If the individual lived in an urban area prior to coming to the
         United Kingdom, this will  reduce  the  risk.  Conversely,  if  the
         individual lived in a rural area prior  to  coming  to  the  United
         Kingdom, this will increase the risk.
         (e) The age of a woman does not affect the risk measurably;  it  is
         an issue upon marriage. Amongst the Fula, FGM has been carried  out
         on babies as young as one week old.  The average age at  which  FGM
         is carried out appears to be  reducing  and  this  may  be  due  to
         concerns about the international pressure  to  stop  the  practice.
         Although there are statistics about the average age at which FGM is
         carried out on girls and women for particular  ethnic  groups,  the
         evidence does not show that, in general, being above or  below  the
         relevant average age has  a  material  effect  on  risk.  It  would
         therefore be unhelpful in most cases to focus on  the  age  of  the
         girl or woman and the average age at which FGM is carried  out  for
         the ethnic group of her  father  (if  unmarried)  or  that  of  her
         husband (if married).
137. We have also considered the background material which is  to  be  found
    at section G of the  appellant's  consolidated  bundle,  including  the
    detailed, if now rather old, Country Policy and Information Note on FGM
    in The Gambia, dated  December  2016.  Paragraph  6.3  of  that  report
    highlights - with reference to  2013  data  -  the  way  in  which  the
    prevalence of FGM varies not only by ethnicity but also  by  region  of
    origin.   In  the  Upper  River  Region  of  Basse,  for  example,  the
    prevalence is recorded as 99%.  In Banjul, where the appellant and  her
    husband were previously based[2], the  prevalence  is  56.3%.   Medina,
    where her husband's family is based, is in the Kerewan Local Government
    Area, in which the prevalence is the lowest in the country: 49.2%.


138. Applying the guidance  in  K  &  Ors  and  considering  the  background
    material to which we have referred, including the report of Prof Knorr,
    we consider the most relevant statistics to be  the  following.   Since
    the appellant is married, it is  the  prevalence  of  FGM  amongst  her
    husband's ethnic group - the Serere - which is  most  significant.   Dr
    Knorr states that the prevalence amongst that group  is  43%-64%.   The
    respondent's CPIN states at 6.4.8 that the prevalence is 43%.  The most
    significant geographical statistic - given  what  is  said  to  be  the
    influence of the appellant's husband's family - is  the  prevalence  in
    Kerewan which, as  noted,  is  a  little  less  than  50%.   These  are
    obviously only statistics, but they  form  a  starting  point  for  our
    analysis of the likelihood of the appellant's children being at risk of
    FGM.  The picture which emerges is that it is likely but  by  no  means
    inevitable that the appellant and her children would be required  by  a
    family such as her husband's to undergo FGM.   Much  therefore  depends
    upon our assessment of the appellant's evidence; this is not  simply  a
    case in which the appellant's ethnic origin, or that  of  her  husband,
    speaks for itself in dictating the risk to which the children  will  be
    exposed on return.  The evidence shows, in short,  that   approximately
    half of the families in the relevant area and of  the  relevant  ethnic
    group choose to avoid  the  practice.   The  question  is  whether  the
    appellant's husband and his family fall into that group or whether,  as
    claimed by the appellant, they are proponents of FGM.


139. We have serious  concerns  about  the  appellant's  evidence,  for  the
    following reasons.

140. Firstly, we note that the account given by the appellant in support  of
    her application for an FGMPO contrasts markedly with the account  given
    to the respondent and the IAC in support of her claim for international
    protection.  In her interview with the respondent, which took place  on
    29 November 2017, she was asked whether she had any  contact  with  her
    husband.  In answer to question 71, she stated that he called  her  two
    or three times a week and that she did not have much to say to him.  He
    called her to speak to the children and she would pass the phone to the
    children so that they could have a word with him.   There  was  further
    reference to this contact via telephone at questions 94, 100 and 158.

141. At question 100, the appellant was asked  when  her  husband  had  last
    threatened to take the children.  She said that he had threatened  this
    on the telephone before he came to London and that there  were  further
    discussions  about  it  when  they  saw  each  other  in  person.   The
    appellant's husband was in the UK between  27  May  and  5  June  2017,
    according to the answer given to question 72 of the same interview.  We
    also note that she stated in answer to question 96  that  she  did  not
    speak to her husband's family.


142. The appellant's account at interview  was  therefore  of  a  threat  of
    abduction being made before and during her husband's  visit  to  London
    but of no threats being made thereafter.  Indeed, she  was  content  at
    the time of the interview to receive her husband's calls  and  to  pass
    the phone to the children.  And there was no suggestion whatsoever that
    she had been contacted or threatened by her husband's family.

143. The account given in the statement made in support of  the  application
    for the FGMPO was very different, however.  The statement was  made  on
    19 January 2018, ten days after the refusal of asylum by the  Secretary
    of State.  In the statement made to the  Family  Court,  the  appellant
    described how she had received  'numerous  telephone  calls  from  [her
    husband] and his family pressurising me to return  to  Gambia  for  the
    children to undergo the FGM Procedure' since June 2017.    The  account
    given to the respondent and that given to the Family Court  are  flatly
    contradictory.

144. We also note that the appellant made no  suggestion  in  the  statement
    which accompanied her application for the FGMPO that her husband was in
    regular contact with their children, using her telephone and  with  her
    permission.  In various  important  respects,  therefore,  the  written
    evidence given to HHJ Clayton and  the  account  given  in  the  asylum
    interview were contradictory.

145. Secondly, a further concern arises from the appellant's evidence  about
    the five-yearly basis upon which she maintains that FGM is performed in
    her husband's community.  Ms van Overdijk asked a number  of  questions
    about this cycle of FGM, and the appellant  maintained  that  the  next
    point in time when the risk would manifest itself  would  be  in  2022.
    She said that the children had missed the ceremony in 2017 and that  it
    would therefore occur in the summer of 2022.  The account she  gave  in
    oral evidence conflicts with the account she gave in her  statement  in
    support of the FGMPO.  In that statement, she referred to the five-year
    cycle but she went on, at [28], to say that it had been made  clear  to
    her by her husband that the children would be subjected to FGM whenever
    they returned to The Gambia, 'despite the five year  deadline'.   There
    was no suggestion  whatsoever  during  the  appellant's  oral  evidence
    before us that the risk would manifest itself before 2022.

146. Thirdly, we are concerned by the timing of the appellant's decision  to
    involve the British police.  She claims that her husband came to the UK
    at the end of May and that he threatened to abduct her children and  to
    take them to The Gambia so that they could be subjected to FGM  against
    her will.  She made no contact with the police at that point and it was
    only after he had left the country  that  she  chose  to  do  so.   The
    appellant has been unable to explain satisfactorily  why  she  did  not
    report the threat to the police when it  was  supposedly  at  its  most
    acute, or why she did so after they would have been powerless  to  take
    any action.  The timing of the report suggests an  attempt  to  bolster
    her asylum claim, collusion on the part of her husband, or both.

147. We heard oral evidence from the appellant and her  cousin.   Both  gave
    evidence about the argument which is said to have been instrumental  in
    the appellant's decision to claim asylum.  In the statement  which  she
    signed in  May  2018,  the  appellant's  cousin  stated  that  she  had
    'witnessed' the appellant's husband threatening to abduct the  children
    when he stayed at her house,  with  the  appellant  and  the  children,
    during his visit in May/June 2017.   She said that she  tried  to  calm
    the situation and speak to the appellant's husband rationally,  telling
    him that 'what he was doing was not right'.   In  answer  to  questions
    from Ms van Overdijk about  this  argument,  however,  the  appellant's
    cousin stated that she had merely been told about it by the  appellant;
    there was no suggestion that she had witnessed the argument, much  less
    that she had actually intervened.   Upon  the  difference  in  the  two
    accounts being put to her, she attempted to suggest that she had been a
    witness to the argument because it had happened  in  her  house.   This
    made no sense and served to compound our concern, not  to  address  it.
    It caused us to doubt  that  this  central  event  in  the  appellant's
    protection claim had ever taken place.


148. Fifthly, there are serious difficulties with  the  appellant's  failure
    to claim asylum at an earlier point.  She claimed asylum on her  second
    visit to the UK and fails to explain with any degree of cogency why she
    did not claim asylum when she first came.  It is to  be  recalled  that
    she has claimed all along that she was aware of the threat of FGM  from
    the time that she was pregnant with her first child, and that she had a
    physical fight with her sister-in-law, about FGM, when her first  child
    was a baby.  When she  came  to  the  UK  for  a  second  time,  having
    supposedly left Turkey due to her husband's wish to take the  girls  to
    The Gambia for FGM, she did  not  claim  asylum  for  some  time.   The
    decision to claim asylum was supposedly prompted by the argument during
    his visit to the UK, the account of which is unreliable for the reasons
    set out directly above.

149. Sixthly, the appellant's claim that she was not aware of her  husband's
    family's beliefs about FGM cannot be reconciled with other  aspects  of
    her account and the expert evidence.  It is said in the expert evidence
    that  those  who  practise  FGM  believe  it  to  be  a  precursor   to
    'sisterhood' and that those who have not undergone  the  procedure  are
    shunned by those who believe in it.  The appellant's  husband's  family
    are said to be staunchly in favour of the practice, to the extent  that
    the appellant fears her children being kidnapped in  order  to  undergo
    the procedure.   Seen  through  the  prism  of  the  country  evidence,
    therefore, the appellant's claim that there was never any enquiry about
    whether she had herself undergone the procedure, is of concern.

150. Taking a step back, and considering the evidence as a whole, we do  not
    accept the appellant's account that her husband  and  his  family  have
    determined that her daughters should be subjected to  FGM,  whether  in
    2022 or at all.  He is from a tribe and an area in which the  incidence
    of FGM is comparatively low.  He did  not  insist  that  the  appellant
    should undergo the procedure before they married, nor did  his  family.
    There are serious difficulties with her account, which lead us  not  to
    accept that account on the lower standard  and  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant has colluded with her husband (and her cousin)  in  order  to
    secure status in the  United  Kingdom.   We  do  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's husband's family are staunchly in favour of FGM.  Nor do we
    accept that  his  first  wife  and  her  children  have  undergone  the
    procedure.  Instead, we think  the  reality  is  that  the  appellant's
    husband's family are well-educated people who are content  for  members
    of the family, such  as  the  appellant,  not  to  have  undergone  the
    procedure.

151. In light of those primary  findings  of  fact,  we  will  not  consider
    whether the appellant and her children  could  relocate  internally  or
    whether they might be adequately protected in The  Gambia,  whether  by
    the state or by the FGMPO which remains in place.  Her appeal  will  be
    dismissed on protection grounds because  we  do  not  accept  that  her
    daughters are at risk in The Gambia.  We do not consider  there  to  be
    any impediment to the appellant and  her  daughters  returning  to  The
    Gambia to re-join their family in that country.  To expect them  to  do
    so would not place the respondent in breach of  her  obligations  under
    the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside,  we  re-make
the decisions on the appeals as follows.  The first  appellant's  appeal  is
allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.  The  second  appellant's  appeal  is
dismissed on all grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   We  make
this direction owing to the nature of the appeals and because this  decision
contains extracts from family proceedings.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                              18 August 2021


                                    ANNEX

               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

|Item |Document                                               |Date    |
|1    |Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board: Sierra Leone:  |27.03.09|
|     |The practice of FGM; the government's position with    |        |
|     |respect to the practice; consequences of refusing to   |        |
|     |become an FGM practitioner in Bondo Society,           |        |
|     |specifically, if a daughter of a practitioner refuses  |        |
|     |to succeed her mother                                  |        |
|2    |Business Insider UK: Secret societies in Sierra Leone  |24.08.15|
|     |are perpetuating one of the most heinous traditions    |        |
|     |imaginable                                             |        |
|3    |Huffington Post: Teen dies during FGM procedure in     |18.08.16|
|     |Sierra Leone                                           |        |
|4    |Awoko.org: Sierra Leone News: 28 year old forcefully   |22.09.16|
|     |initiated into the Bondo Society in Kenema             |        |
|5    |FORWARD research article: If you go into the Bondo     |Oct.    |
|     |Society, they will honour and respect you              |2017    |
|6    |28 Too Many (UK): Sierra Leone: The Law and FGM        |01.09.18|
|7    |European Asylum Support Office, COI Query Response:    |29.10.18|
|     |Sierra Leone: The Ojeh/Oje Society                     |        |
|8    |Social Institutions and Gender Index (OECD Development |07.12.18|
|     |Centre: Country Profile, Sierra Leone                  |        |
|9    |The Borgen Project (USA): Ending FGM in Sierra Leone   |15.03.19|
|10   |Johanna Horz: Dissecting the link between FGM and      |03.05.19|
|     |politics in Sierra Leone                               |        |
|11   |Reuters: Sierra Leone's first lady confronted over FGM |06.06.19|
|     |controversy                                            |        |
|12   |The Conversation: Why it's so difficult to end FGM     |05.02.20|
|13   |US State Department: 2019 Human Rights Report on Sierra|11.03.20|
|     |Leone                                                  |        |
|14   |PLOS One research article: Understanding the           |21.05.20|
|     |association between parental attitudes and the practice|        |
|     |of FGM among daughters                                 |        |
|15   |Expert report of Karen O'Reilly                        |01.06.20|
|16   |HM Government, Multi-agency statutory guidance on FGM  |July    |
|     |                                                       |2020    |
|17   |Wikipedia page: FGM in Sierra Leone                    |14.09.20|
|18   |Country Policy and Information Team response to an     |09.11.20|
|     |information request regarding "Sierra Leone, Bondo,    |        |
|     |Protection".                                           |        |
|19   |Expert report of Prof Dr Knorr                         |30.11.20|


-----------------------
[1] In A Local Authority v M [2018] EWHC 870 (Fam); [2018] 4 WLR 98,  Hayden
J noted that Article 3 ECHR was not raised expressly in  the  2003  Act  but
that it was 'self-evidently intrinsic to it': [22].
[2] The appellant gave this account of locations at [4] of her statement in
response to the reasons for refusal letter, dated 6 February 2018, stating
that his family lived in Medina, he was living in Bakau and she was based
in Wellingara when they first met.

