

                                                       [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                     AZ (Trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                           |                           |
|On 26 January 2010                              |                           |
|                                                |                           |



                                   Before

                       Senior Immigration Judge Keki?
                         Immigration Judge Freestone

                                   Between

                                     AZ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:            Ms M Brewer, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Ms H Akbar, Home Office Presenting Officer



1. Whilst former victims of trafficking in Thailand constitute members of  a
particular social group, not all will be at risk of serious harm on  return;
the risk will depend upon a number of factors and  must  be  assessed  on  a
case by case basis.

2.  Relevant  factors  will  include  the  age,  marital  status,   domestic
background, educational level, qualifications and  work  experience  of  the
appellant. The availability of employment and a familial  or  other  support
network will also be significant factors.

3.  Although  anti-trafficking  legislation  has   been   implemented,   the
involvement of corrupt  officials  with  traffickers  and/or  criminals  has
weakened the steps taken by the government to combat trafficking.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.       This is the reconsideration of the determination of the Tribunal
      (Immigration Judge Drummond-Farrall) dismissing the appeal against the
      decision of the Secretary of State to remove the appellant from the UK
      as an illegal entrant under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 1999. The appellant is a Thai citizen born on 16  August  1983  in
      Nong Khai Province, in the north east of Thailand.

   2.       The core of the appellant's claim is accepted by the respondent.
      It is that she was trafficked to the UK in early 2006 and forced  into
      prostitution until her escape from  her  captors  in  September  2006.
      When attempting to leave the UK on a false passport, the appellant was
      stopped  by  the  immigration  authorities  at  Heathrow  Airport  and
      arrested. She was subsequently convicted for using  a  false  document
      and sentenced  to  four  and  a  half  months  in  prison.   What  the
      respondent disputes, and what we must assess, is whether a  victim  of
      trafficking is a member of a  particular  social  group,  whether  the
      appellant's trafficker acted alone or as part of an organised gang and
      whether the appellant would be  at  risk  on  return  from  those  who
      trafficked her.

Details of the appellant's claim

   3.       The appellant has painted a picture of a  deprived  and  abusive
      childhood which has not been challenged by the respondent. She grew up
      with her paternal  grandparents  (now  deceased),  her  mother  having
      abandoned her when she was just one year old. There was little contact
      with her father and  no  reference  to  any  maternal  relatives.  The
      appellant had six years of schooling following which she worked  until
      the age of 15 when  she  left  home.  She  became  pregnant  but  then
      discovered that her boyfriend was married. He disputed  paternity  and
      the appellant attempted suicide. She spent a week  in  hospital  as  a
      result and then returned to work. She sent her child, then  aged  9-10
      months to be looked after by her paternal aunt and cousin as  she  was
      unable to work and care for the child at the same time.  She continued
      to financially support the child.

   4.       In 2004 the appellant moved to Pattaya. It was there she met the
      man who was responsible for her trafficking - M. She described him  as
      British  but  "Arab  looking".  The  appellant  was   working   in   a
      bar/restaurant at the  time.  A  relationship  commenced  and  when  M
      suggested a holiday to the UK, the appellant agreed. She used her  own
      passport and M arranged a visa. It would appear that she went  to  the
      British Embassy with M and signed some forms but was  not  interviewed
      and did not apparently have to adduce any  documentary  evidence.  The
      appellant left her child with her aunt. When passing  through  Bangkok
      airport she heard one of the immigration officials indicate to another
      that M was one of  "theirs".  Although  she  did  not  understand  the
      meaning of that at the time, she later believed it to mean that M  had
      connections with Thai Immigration. The appellant's passport was  taken
      from her by M during the  journey.  Having  arrived  in  London,  they
      stayed at M's friend's house and did some sightseeing. A week later  M
      took the  appellant  to  another  house  and  it  was  then  that  the
      appellant's troubles began.

   5.       The appellant was told she had to repay M for the investment  he
      had made in her by bringing her to the UK and she was  kept  in  three
      brothels on a rotating basis where she was  forced  into  prostitution
      for the next eight months. She was afraid to refuse as M threatened to
      harm her and/or her child if she resisted. She was also transported to
      hotels for sex. She endured anal intercourse, was made to perform oral
      sex and to act out perverse sexual fantasies. She  was  injected  with
      drugs. She was frequently whipped. She was made to behave like a  dog.
      Condoms were not always used and she could not object.  She  continued
      to work during menstruation. If she refused to carry out  any  of  the
      acts men desired, she was sent to another house where she had to  work
      twenty hours a day  and  service  20-30  men.  On  one  occasion  when
      visiting a hotel she tried to escape but was caught and beaten with  a
      gun. She was punished by being locked up in a small dark room  without
      food. M then slapped her and threatened to kill her.  She  met  a  few
      other women also working in the houses with her.  She  said  that  the
      houses were guarded and that there was always an escort when they were
      taken to other houses or to hotels. She was given  no  money  for  her
      work.

   6.       In September 2006 the appellant was able to escape with the help
      of a regular client. The appellant had a passport that M had given her
      for  identification  purposes  when  she  visited  hotels.  She   then
      attempted to return to Thailand using that  document.  There  followed
      the prosecution already referred  to.  On  19  February  2007  removal
      directions were set but cancelled when the appellant informed a prison
      officer that she was afraid to return. The appellant  was  transferred
      to Yarl's Wood Detention Centre. On 21  February  2007  the  appellant
      disclosed her true identity to the authorities. On 3  March  2007  she
      was referred to the UK Human Trafficking Centre (UKHTC).  On  5  March
      2007 she was placed in a safe house  run  by  the  Medaille  Trust,  a
      charity founded by Catholic nuns, brothers and priests with the aim of
      helping women, young men and children who have been  freed  from  sex-
      trafficking. On 7 March 2007 removal directions  were  set  again  but
      cancelled when the appellant refused to comply.

   7.       The appellant claimed asylum on 15 July 2007. She  claimed  that
      if returned to Thailand she would be hunted  down  by  M's  gang.  She
      believed that M had links with Thai immigration. She claimed that  the
      Thai police were corrupt. On 26 July 2007  she  was  referred  to  the
      Poppy Project. Their initial assessment took place on 15 August  2007.
      The substantive asylum interview took place on 26 September  2007.  On
      10 October 2007 the Poppy Project accepted the appellant's account  of
      being trafficked and forced into prostitution.




Respondent's refusal

   8.       The application was refused on 17 October 2007 and a decision to
      remove the appellant from the UK was made on the same date.

   9.       The Secretary of State  decided  that  "due  to  your  level  of
      consistency  and  detail  bearing  in  mind  the   trauma   you   have
      experienced, your age and your level of education, that  your  account
      will be largely accepted. In particular, it is accepted that you  were
      trafficked to the UK and forced into prostitution  during  which  time
      you were beaten and mistreated by your traffickers and you escaped and
      attempted to return to Thailand".

  10.       The Secretary of State did not accept, however, that "women  who
      had been sexually trafficked in the past in  Thailand"  constituted  a
      social group. He found that there was no social  recognition  of  this
      group as distinct from the rest of society. He considered that if  the
      appellant faced persecution it was not because of  her  membership  of
      that group but because she was specifically wanted by her traffickers.



  11.       The Secretary of State did not accept that M was part of a  well
      organised criminal gang  with  connections  to  the  Thai  immigration
      service. He considered that if M had been part of a gang, he would not
      have become the appellant's boyfriend and would not have  brought  her
      to the  UK  and  spent  a  week  with  her  before  forcing  her  into
      prostitution. He also considered that if the appellant believed that M
      was connected to Thai immigration, she would not have tried to  return
      to Thailand in October 2006 and would have sought asylum earlier.

  12.       The Secretary of  State  considered  that  the  appellant  could
      prevent being re-trafficked by ensuring "that you do not return  to  a
      situation that would result in you being economically driven back into
      prostitution" (paragraph 33).  He was of the view that even if it  was
      accepted that the appellant faced persecution, there was a sufficiency
      of protection available. He noted that the Thai  government  announced
      the formation of a national committee in 2005  to  assist  victims  of
      trafficking and to crack down on trafficking gangs. He considered  the
      appellant had the support of her aunt and cousins. He also  considered
      that the option of internal relocation would be open to the appellant.



  13.       The Secretary of State noted that the appellant had used a false
      visa to enter the UK and had attempted to leave on a  false  passport.
      He considered this adversely affected her credibility.

  14.       He did not consider that the appellant could  benefit  from  the
      Human Rights Convention  and  found  that  she  was  not  entitled  to
      Discretionary  Leave.  He  considered  that  the  appellant's  medical
      problems could be treated in Thailand.


Previous appeal and error of law

  15.       The appellant gave notice  of  appeal  under  s.  82(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on 29 October 2007.

  16.       The appeal came before an Immigration Judge at Taylor  House  on
      25 January 2008. She heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  from
      Lucy Kralj, a senior clinician at the Helen Bamber Foundation and in a
      determination promulgated on 25 February 2008 allowed  the  appeal  on
      Article 3 grounds but dismissed it under the Refugee  Convention.  The
      respondent sought reconsideration  and  this  was  ordered  by  Senior
      Immigration Judge Spencer on 10 March 2008.

  17.       On 23 May 2008 Senior Immigration Judge Freeman heard the  first
      stage of the  reconsideration  at  Field  House.  He  found  that  the
      Immigration Judge had made a material error of law and adjourned for a
      second stage reconsideration. He gave the following  reasons  for  his
      decision:


           1. The judge found for the appellant on her individual  history,
           but against her on the general (as I accept paragraph 19 must be
           read) sufficiency of protection for victims  of  trafficking  in
           Thailand; then she moved directly  (after  a  quite  unnecessary
           reference to a decision of the Australian  Federal  Magistrates'
           Court at paragraph 20) to the following conclusion:


                 21. In the particular circumstances of this case my finding
                 is that there are substantial grounds to believe  that  the
                 appellant is at real risk of being re-trafficked.  She  has
                 been trafficked before. She is  undoubtedly  known  to  the
                 gang who trafficked her. She is  a  very  vulnerable  human
                 being from the medical reports and from my own  observation
                 of her in court and added to this she has a family  history
                 which is far from being supportive. She is  undoubtedly  in
                 debt to her trafficker who would want as put at the hearing
                 "his money's worth" and the risk of her being re-trafficked
                 is very high. I therefore find that there  are  substantial
                 grounds to believe that she is at risk of serious  harm  or
                 inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  should  she  return   to
                 Thailand and I allow this appeal.

           2. This is challenged by Miss Leatherland for the Home Office as
           not dealing in  particular  either  with  the  question  of  how
           traffickers would be able to trace the appellant  on  return  to
           the teeming (65m) city of Bangkok, or with why she should be  at
           risk from them in any other part of  Thailand  where  she  could
           reasonably be expected to go.

           3. Miss Chandran for the appellant asked  me  to  uphold  it  as
           amounting to proper reasons for the judge's  decision  to  allow
           the human rights appeal by reference to her  acceptance  of  the
           appellant's account of immigration officers at  Bangkok  airport
           apparently  being  in  collusion  with   traffickers,   and   by
           incorporating the reports of Klara Scrivankova  (sic)  and  Lucy
           Kralj (who also gave  oral  evidence,  which  should  have  been
           referred to under that name at paragraph 6).

           4. Miss Scrivankova's (sic) evidence, however, as related by the
           judge at paragraph 16, does no more than state the general modus
           operandi  of  traffickers  in  Thailand,  and  opine  that   the
           appellant's account was consistent with it,  none  of  which  is
           relevant to the issues in  dispute.  Miss  Kralj  described  her
           remit as 'clinical': in other  words,  she  was  there  to  give
           evidence about the risk of the appellant's  committing  suicide.
           While she did refer to two previous attempts, the judge  did  no
           more on this point than refer to her  (see  above)  as  "a  very
           vulnerable human being". While the possibility exists of a  case
           succeeding under article 3 of the Human Rights Convention on the
           basis of suicide risk, such cases are  problematic,  and  cannot
           conceivably be dealt with on  the  basis  of  such  an  unspoken
           inference.

           5. That leaves the problem with the immigration officers,  based
           on the appellant's own evidence. If the  judge  had  dealt  with
           this in her conclusions, then she might or might not  have  been
           able to spell out of it a case for  this  appellant's  being  at
           risk at the point of return; but she did not even  begin  to  do
           so. Unfortunately for this appellant in  her  mental  condition,
           there will have to be a completely fresh hearing  on  the  human
           rights appeal. The Home Office concessions on the primary  facts
           of the case will  no  doubt  stand,  though  subject  of  course
           consideration to what  ought  to  be  concluded  from  them,  in
           particular on the points raised by the presenting officer before
           the judge at paragraph 7.

           6. The judge had dismissed the asylum appeal, on the basis  that
           the appellant's social group did not exist independently of  her
           persecution, and of her findings about the  general  sufficiency
           of protection. The appellant challenged this by  r.  30  notice,
           mainly on the basis that the judge had not dealt  with  SB  (PSG
           -Protection Regulations -Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008]  UKAIT  00002,
           to which she had been referred, according to Miss Chandran  with
           considerably more emphasis than on the Australian  case  already
           mentioned.

           7. The r. 30 notice suggests that the judge should have  allowed
           the asylum appeal too on the basis of SB; but Miss Chandran (who
           also appeared in that case)  wished  to  argue  that  the  (very
           exhaustive decision) in it had gone too far in dealing with  the
           state of the law on the  point,  which  had  been  substantially
           agreed between her and Treasury counsel. It is open to her to do
           so, since neither was SB a starred case, or was this  point,  as
           opposed  to  the  Tribunal's  conclusions  on   the   background
           evidence, a country guidance one; but I  do  not  hold  out  any
           particular encouragement.

  18.       A long history of adjournments followed before the  appeal  came
      to us. It is helpful to set out the detail as this is relevant to  the
      issue of an adjournment sought by the respondent at the hearing before
      us (see paragraphs 19-20 below). The  hearing  of  29  July  2008  was
      adjourned because Ms Chandran was not available. On 19 August 2008 the
      hearing was adjourned because Ms Skrivankova was unavailable. The next
      hearing was 30 September 2008 and the appeal had to be adjourned again
      due to Ms Skrivankova's unavailability. The matter was  re-listed  for
      18 November 2008 but had to be adjourned because a Senior  Immigration
      Judge was not available. The hearing was then set down for  a  hearing
      on 16 December 2008 but had to be adjourned  to  19  December  due  to
      Counsel's  unavailability.  The  hearing  on  19  December  was   then
      adjourned (before the hearing) because a Senior Immigration Judge  was
      not available. Attempts were made to list the appeal for a hearing  in
      April but the representatives notified the Tribunal that  Ms  Chandran
      was on maternity leave until June. The representatives were advised to
      instruct alternative Counsel and the appeal was then listed for 12 May
      2009. At the hearing the appellant's representative requested  an  all
      female court so the appeal had to be adjourned again.  It  was  listed
      for 28 July 2009 but Ms Kralj was not available. Various attempts were
      then made for re-listing until the matter finally came before us.


Addition to claim

  19.       Since the last  hearing  the  appellant  has  prepared  a  fresh
      witness statement in which additional evidence has been provided.  The
      appellant states that she developed  a  relationship  with  a  British
      citizen, whom we shall call AB. They met in April 2008 at an emergency
      accommodation centre for asylum seekers to  which  the  appellant  was
      referred and where AB was working as  night  receptionist.  After  the
      appellant left the centre, she and AB maintained contact. AB then left
      his employment at the centre and they began a relationship. They spent
      a lot of time together but did not live together because AB is  Muslim
      and does not approve of cohabitation outside marriage. Notwithstanding
      that, however, they have  a  sexual  relationship  and  the  appellant
      terminated a pregnancy in March 2009 because they  agreed  they  could
      not afford a child. They plan to marry in the future.

Reconsideration hearing

      Adjournment application

  20.       The hearing came before us in an all female court held in camera
      on 26 January 2010.  At the start of the proceedings Ms  Akbar  sought
      an adjournment as although she had some of the papers for the  appeal,
      she was without the Home Office file. She indicated that she had tried
      the previous day to contact the representatives but  without  success.
      When asked whether any attempt had been made to contact the  Tribunal,
      she replied in the negative.

  21.       We considered the application which we decided to refuse. In  so
      doing we  gave  consideration  to  paragraph  21  of  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005. The relevant provisions say:
           21.  - (1) Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing
           of an appeal, he must -

                 (a) if practicable, notify all other parties of the
                 application;

                 (b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and

                 (c) produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon in
                 support of the application.

                      (2) The Tribunal must not adjourn  a  hearing  of  an
           appeal on the application of a party, unless satisfied that  the
           appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.
      We were mindful of the numerous adjournments that had taken place  and
      although none of these had been made on application by the  respondent
      we gave weight to the strenuous efforts made to re-list the matter for
      a hearing date  suitable  to  all  parties,  there  being  two  expert
      witnesses with busy schedules to  accommodate  and  the  necessity  of
      organising an all female court with a Senior Immigration  Judge  as  a
      panel member. We were mindful of the impact of  repeated  adjournments
      on the appellant's fragile  state  of  health,  as  indicated  by  the
      medical evidence before us and  we  considered  that  had  to  be  our
      priority.   We considered that no  prior  notice  of  the  adjournment
      request had been given and we were of the  view  that  the  respondent
      could and should have taken steps to approach the  Tribunal  prior  to
      the hearing or even earlier in the morning of the hearing to obtain  a
      copy of the papers. We did not consider that the respondent's lack  of
      papers amounted to good cause for an adjournment  particularly  as  Ms
      Akbar had some of them and as the rest  were  available  for  her.  We
      considered that the appeal  could  be  justly  determined  without  an
      adjournment once Ms Akbar had been given time to prepare. We  bore  in
      mind that there were limited credibility  issues  and  that  the  case
      largely turned on the background evidence. We arranged for  copies  of
      the bundles to be made for Ms Akbar and allowed her time to prepare.

  22.       Before we rose, Ms Brewer asked for clarification from Ms  Akbar
      as to whether she had any information on what had transpired following
      the appellant's referral to the UK Human  Trafficking  Centre  by  the
      Poppy Project. We are aware that following the  UK's  ratification  of
      the Council of Europe Convention  on  Action  against  Trafficking  in
      Human Beings, a national referral mechanism  for  identifying  victims
      was required to be in place for 1 April 2009. Ms Akbar confirmed  that
      as far as she was aware, nothing  appeared  to  have  been  done.  The
      hearing then resumed at midday.

  23.        It has not  been  possible  to  promulgate  this  determination
      before the abolition of the AIT on  15  February  2010.   Pursuant  to
      Schedule  4.4  of  the  Transfer  of  Functions  of  the  Asylum   and
      Immigration Tribunal Order 2010 (S.1.2010/21), the reconsideration  of
      this appeal therefore continues as an appeal before the Upper Tribunal
      of the IAC.

      Appellant's oral evidence

  24.       The appellant gave evidence first. She was accompanied by  Diane
      Chipperfield, her therapist. She  spoke  in  Thai  through  the  court
      interpreter. Both confirmed that  they  understood  one  another.  The
      appellant confirmed her address to  be  as  on  the  court  file.  She
      confirmed that the signatures on the two statements  dated  7  January
      2008 and 18 January 2010 were hers, that she was aware of the contents
      and that they were true and accurate. She confirmed she was  happy  to
      rely on them as part of her evidence.

  25.       The appellant was asked about her knowledge of English  in  2006
      when she attempted to return to Thailand. She said she had very little
      knowledge of the language and could just speak a few basic words.  She
      said had been very afraid to speak to the police about her problems as
      she believed they would side with M and his gang. At this stage in the
      proceedings the appellant  grew  distressed  but  indicated  that  she
      wished to continue.

  26.       She was asked about her relationship with AB. She confirmed they
      had discussed marriage although no date had yet been set. She said  he
      had just finished his studies and had started a new job on 4  January.
      She was referred to the photographs in the supplementary  bundle.  She
      confirmed that the originals had been  sent  to  her  solicitors.  She
      identified herself in the photographs with AB and his nephew in one of
      them and with AB and a friend in another. She stated that AB was  very
      special to her and that if she were to be returned to Thailand without
      him she would lose the hope to live.  That  completed  examination  in
      chief.

  27.       In response to Ms Akbar's questions, the appellant  stated  that
      the relationship had begun in May  2008.  She  stated  that  since  AB
      obtained his new job he lived and worked in Slough but had  previously
      lived in the 'zone  two'  area  of  London.  She  now  saw  him  every
      Wednesday. She obtained a free ticket to travel and report to the Home
      Office on Wednesdays and so she then used the ticket to visit him. She
      would stay overnight and travel home the next day. He had one room  in
      his landlord's house. The  appellant  stated  he  had  never  been  to
      Thailand and they had not discussed what would happen if  she  had  to
      return there. She expected, however, to maintain contact with  him  if
      returned. She confirmed that she had one  child  who  was  eight  last
      September. They were sometimes in  touch.  The  appellant's  aunt  was
      looking after her. Her aunt financially supported  the  child  as  the
      appellant had no job and could not afford to, but  sometimes  AB  gave
      her money to send to Thailand. At  this  stage  the  appellant  became
      extremely distressed and was  unable  to  compose  herself.  Ms  Akbar
      indicated that she had  intended  to  ask  some  questions  about  the
      appellant's attempted return to Thailand but she  would  refrain  from
      doing so given the appellant's obvious and extreme distress and  would
      rely on the information  contained  in  the  witness  statements.  The
      appellant was assisted from the hearing room by Ms Chipperfield and Ms
      Brewer; she appeared physically unable to make her own way out.

      AB's evidence

  28.       We then heard evidence from AB. He was not aware of the  details
      of the appellant's claim as she has not yet felt able to fully discuss
      it with him. He confirmed his address and indicated that he was  aware
      of the contents of his witness statement upon which he relied. He  did
      not speak Thai and had never been to Thailand. He  said  it  would  be
      difficult for him to live there because he had work in the  UK  and  a
      family here. He started his present job on 4 January 2010. He  was  an
      account assistant. He did not live with the appellant but intended  to
      save for a deposit for the next three months. They  had  talked  about
      getting married at some point. He said that her removal would  have  a
      detrimental effect on him as he loved her and  they  had  been  seeing
      each other for almost 2 years. She came to visit him  every  Wednesday
      after signing on at the Home Office but was  only  able  to  stay  one
      night a week because his  landlord  was  not  keen  on  more  frequent
      overnight stays. He stated that he came to London at weekends and they
      would spend the day  together.  He  said  no  specific  date  for  the
      marriage had been set but that once they started living together  that
      would be the next step. If the appellant had to return to Thailand  he
      would communicate with her and would travel there to visit her. He had
      not been supporting her financially for the last seven  months  as  he
      had been studying. He would be willing to offer financial help if  she
      returned to Thailand. He said she had an aunt and a daughter there. He
      had spoken to the daughter, just to say hello.  That  completed  cross
      examination. There was no re-examination.

  29.       In response to questions from the bench the witness stated  that
      he had lived in the UK for almost 10 years. He had one relative in the
      UK - an uncle. When asked about plans for the  appellant's  daughter's
      future, he stated that the appellant  had  indicated  she  wanted  the
      child to remain in Thailand because she would get a better  upbringing
      with the appellant's aunt. She had no plans to bring  her  here  until
      she was of the age when she would go to college.

  30.       Ms Akbar had no questions arising. Ms Brewer asked  the  witness
      about the child in one of the photographs. The witness stated this was
      his sister's son who lived in Holland but had come to  the  UK  for  a
      holiday.  That completed his evidence.

      Lucy Kralj's evidence

  31.       The next witness was Lucy Kralj, leading clinician at the  Helen
      Bamber Foundation. She  confirmed  that  the  updated  report  in  the
      supplementary bundle had been prepared on 16 January 2010.  She  stood
      by the contents of that report and her earlier report. She stated that
      the Foundation worked  with  survivors  of  human  rights  abuses.  It
      assisted  them  to  obtain  services,   with   social   rehabilitation
      programmes and with clinical therapy. She confirmed  they  received  a
      number of referrals for therapeutic support from  the  Poppy  Project.
      She was asked about the amount of  contact  she  had  with  trafficked
      victims in her role at the Foundation. She  replied  that  she  had  a
      great deal of contact.  She  had  been  co-ordinator  of  the  Women's
      Programme and had overall clinical responsibility for  all  trafficked
      women. Additionally, she worked  individually  with  trafficked  women
      over the last five years; many of these women  remained  in  long-term
      therapy.

  32.       Ms Kralj stated that  she  had  seen  some  improvement  in  the
      appellant's mental state but had no  doubt  she  would  'decompensate'
      rapidly if returned to Thailand; by this she meant the appellant would
      lose her coping strategies should she be re-traumatised. She confirmed
      that the appellant's current support  network  consisted  of  herself,
      Diane Chipperfield and AB. She stated that the  appellant  had  a  low
      threshold with respect to re-traumatising triggers. Anything from  the
      past could act as a trigger. She gave the example of how the appellant
      avoided contact with any individual from Thailand and that despite the
      presence of other Thais at the Medaille  Trust,  where  the  appellant
      used to live, she shied away from them. She avoided talking about  her
      past trauma.  The  name  'M'  still  carried  significant  weight  and
      continued to "send a shudder through her".

  33.       Ms Kralj was  asked  for  her  opinion  of  the  impact  on  the
      appellant of removal. She replied that  the  appellant  had  made  two
      serious suicide attempts and she had  no  doubt  the  appellant  would
      expedite a suicide attempt if she were to be  removed.  She  explained
      that the appellant was not suicidal at the current time and managed to
      live  adequately  with  support,  but  emphasised  that  her   history
      indicated that she was not afraid of death and indeed was more  afraid
      of trafficking. She needed to have suicide as an option in the face of
      danger.

  34.       Ms Kralj stated that the appellant found her past to  be  deeply
      traumatic and did not like to talk about it. She  also  lived  with  a
      sense of stigma and defilement and a  profound  sense  of  shame.  The
      combination of all those factors meant that it was unlikely she  would
      talk about her experiences to the police in Thailand. It was  possible
      to  facilitate  her  ability  to  discuss  the  past  but  only  in  a
      relationship where her feelings could be managed.

  35.       Ms Kralj was asked about the appellant's attempt  to  return  to
      Thailand in 2006. She explained that the appellant was returning there
      to die. She believed her choices  were  to  die  here  or  to  die  in
      Thailand and she wanted her daughter to be close so as  to  carry  out
      death rites. It was also important to remember that in 2006 the UK was
      a country that represented great danger to her and the  appellant  had
      not been thinking in a straightforward  or  rational  manner  at  that
      time. That completed examination in chief.

  36.       In cross-examination the witness stated that  she  believed  the
      appellant's suicide attempt in the UK had taken place in 2007 not long
      before she met her. Ms Kralj stated that the appellant saw her and  Ms
      Chipperfield on a fortnightly basis which meant that she  had  contact
      with one of them every week. The appellant was not on medication.  Her
      condition had improved  somewhat.  This  was  partly  because  of  her
      relationship but the relationship itself  had  been  able  to  develop
      because she had made  progress  in  therapy.  The  appellant  and  the
      Foundation were now considering ways in which she  might  be  able  to
      offer hope to others in similar  situations  in  the  future.  It  was
      possible that a booklet would be prepared but at present this was just
      an idea.

  37.       Ms Kralj stated that the appellant found it very painful to talk
      about her daughter and that the subject triggered great distress.  The
      appellant felt very responsible for her and guilty that  her  daughter
      was living without a mother. She worried that her aunt  did  not  care
      for the child properly.

  38.       Ms Kralj was asked why it was better for the appellant to remain
      in the UK than to  return  to  Thailand  given  the  horrors  she  had
      experienced here. Ms Kralj replied this was because the  problems  had
      started in Thailand. She emphasised the  importance  of  understanding
      the  appellant's  situation  from  a  psychological  perspective.  The
      appellant had never been protected in her life. She had experienced no
      safe care during growing up and she was then preyed upon and exploited
      by M who abused her in horrific ways. There was a lack  of  protection
      in Thailand whereas the UK offered some hope. She  stated  that  after
      the appellant had succeeded in her  appeal  before  Immigration  Judge
      Drummond Farrell, she expressed astonishment that someone  had  looked
      at her and seen something worthy of protection. She explained that the
      appellant could not simply seek alternative  therapy  if  returned  to
      Thailand. She emphasised that a  therapeutic  relationship  could  not
      just be manufactured; it had to be developed and if it were  destroyed
      prematurely  it  could  do  great  damage.   That   completed   cross-
      examination. There was no re-examination.

  39.        We  asked  Ms  Kralj  if  she  could  explain   the   seemingly
      contradictory evidence between  her  description  of  the  appellant's
      grief at being separated from her daughter and  AB's  claim  that  the
      appellant was happy for the child to remain in Thailand with her aunt.
      Ms Kralj replied that this was a psychological defence structure.  The
      reality was that the appellant was separated from her daughter and had
      to accept the situation. In order  to  function,  she  had  to  defend
      herself from  the  grief  she  felt  when  she  accessed  feelings  of
      separation. She had to tell herself that all was well with  the  child
      because if she allowed herself to experience the grief that  sometimes
      arose during therapy, she was ground down  and  could  not  physically
      move. There were no questions arising and that completed the  witness'
      oral evidence.

      Klara Skrivankova's evidence

  40.       We then heard from Klara Skrivankova, Trafficking Programme  Co-
      ordinator at Anti-Slavery International. She relied upon the  contents
      of her two reports which she confirmed to be true  and  accurate.  She
      stated that since summer 2008 she had been  a  member  of  the  Expert
      Group on Trafficking in Human beings.  This  was  an  expert  advisory
      organisation created through a decision of  the  European  Commission.
      The group gave the Commission expert advice  on  policy  and  provided
      information on changes in trends of trafficking.  She  explained  that
      the UKHTC was set up in October 2006 by the government but  under  the
      umbrella of South  Yorkshire  police  with  the  purpose  of  being  a
      depository of data and to provide victim care.

  41.       Ms Skrivankova was asked to comment on the respondent's  refusal
      to accept that M was part of an organised crime network.  She  replied
      that the activities described by the appellant in Thailand and in  the
      UK suggested that he was part of an organised group.  She  said  there
      were several indicators which led to this conclusion. First, he  spoke
      Thai. By so doing he could target women that fitted  the  profile  for
      trafficking. She explained that traffickers kept their victims  behind
      a language barrier. If the women were unable to speak the language  in
      their country of destination, they were even more  isolated  and  were
      only able to communicate through the traffickers.  Second,  he  had  a
      flat in Pattaya. This was an area of Thailand known  for  sex  tourism
      and notorious as a place of recruitment of women for  sex  trafficking
      purposes. Third, he had developed a relationship with  the  appellant.
      It was common practice amongst traffickers  that  men  would  pose  as
      boyfriends, so-called 'lover boys', as by doing so they were  able  to
      create a relationship of power and vulnerability  and  to  make  women
      feel that they owed something to them. Fourth,  M  had  been  able  to
      obtain a British visa for the appellant and later a passport  for  her
      which suggested he had connections with those who were involved in the
      business of fraudulent documents.

  42.       With regard to the appellant's description  of  how  she  exited
      Thailand, the witness stated that her organisation and the  UN  office
      on drugs  and  crime  had  last  year  produced  a  working  paper  on
      corruption and how it aided trafficking. She explained that corruption
      was a key element. Very similar cases were found by her colleagues  in
      Thailand where immigration officials at the airport were found  either
      to be part of gangs or to have been bribed by them.

  43.       She explained that there were also indicators arising from facts
      in the UK. For example, M had access to several  houses  with  several
      girls in each one.  Clearly,  the  houses  had  to  be  guarded;  that
      required  manpower.  He  was  running  an  escort  agency   as   well,
      transporting girls  to  hotels;  this  meant  someone  would  have  to
      advertise the service,  make  the  arrangements,  transport  women  to
      hotels and make arrangements with the hotels themselves so  that  such
      activity could take place. The appellant had given evidence  of  being
      drugged and had referred to guns. It was most unlikely that M would be
      operating in isolation if he had access to  drugs,  guns  and  several
      houses. She pointed out that  the  appellant  had  been  subjected  to
      sadistic treatment which indicated that M had arrangements in place to
      serve a special clientele. These men had to  be  sought  out  as  such
      'services'  could  not  be  openly  advertised.  That   suggested   an
      infrastructure. She said it was common for traffickers to give victims
      false passports because if they escaped and approached the  police  or
      were found in raids, they would be prosecuted for possession of  false
      documents.

  44.       Ms Skrivankova was asked about the lack of any action  following
      the appellant's referral to the UKHTC by the Poppy  Project  in  March
      2007. She expressed surprise that no investigation  had  been  carried
      out. She stated that the UK was bound by certain agreements and had  a
      policy to combat trafficking. She would have expected this information
      to have been investigated.

  45.       With regard to the availability of assistance  and  shelters  in
      Thailand,  the  witness  stated  that  assistance  was   not   readily
      available. She agreed there were shelters but  emphasised  that  these
      were  temporary  and  were  not  equipped  to  deal   with   long-term
      situations; moreover, they focused on giving help to those  trafficked
      into Thailand.

  46.       The witness was asked whether financial assistance  alone  would
      be sufficient to enable the appellant to integrate. She  replied  that
      migrants returning with cash were often  stopped  at  the  border  and
      asked for money as a bribe. They were easily identifiable  because  of
      the type of documents they were travelling on and officials were aware
      that they might have been assisted under certain schemes  here;  hence
      they were targeted. Given the appellant's long absence  and  the  fact
      that she would be returning from Europe, there would be  a  perception
      that she had  worked  abroad  as  a  prostitute.  She  would  find  it
      difficult to obtain work without qualifications or references. Due  to
      the recession, and the closure of factories, hundreds of thousands  of
      factory workers had turned to the sex  trade.  She  expressed  concern
      about the risk to the appellant of being targeted or being  forced  by
      her circumstances to turn to the sex trade.  She  stated  that  former
      victims of trafficking were more  vulnerable  to  being  re-trafficked
      because they were  seen  as  ideal  victims.  They  already  knew  the
      business and knew how to be compliant and did not have  to  be  taught
      how to obey. She was clearly a lucrative investment to her trafficker.
      If she had been servicing 20 men a day at a cost of  between  �50  and
      �100, the value could be easily assessed. It  was  important  to  note
      that the appellant herself never received any money.

  47.       In cross-examination the witness was asked whether she had  ever
      been to Thailand. She said she had. The last time was  2008  when  she
      attended a meeting there. She was asked  to  explain  the  benefit  to
      traffickers in issuing their victims with false passports. She replied
      this was so they would be prosecuted if  caught  by  the  police.  She
      explained it was unlikely that the authorities would believe  a  woman
      who could not  even  name  the  person  from  whom  she  obtained  the
      passport.  Many  victims  had  been  prosecuted,  like  the  appellant
      herself, and Article 26 of the Council of Europe Convention  had  been
      inserted to prevent punishment in such circumstances. It  was  put  to
      her that as the  appellant  now  spoke  English,  she  would  be  less
      vulnerable to traffickers. Ms Skrivankova replied  that  language  was
      not the only element that came into play. She added  that  there  were
      trafficking gangs who focused on Eastern Europe as well and  that  the
      destination country could just be  changed  in  a  case  such  as  the
      appellant's.

  48.       With regard to the prospect of finding employment on  return  in
      Thailand, the witness stated that the appellant had no  qualifications
      and no recent references. Her knowledge of English in itself would not
      necessarily  find  her  a  job.  The  information  she  received  from
      colleagues based in Bangkok was that work in  the  lower  end  of  the
      market, i.e. employment without qualifications,  was  the  hardest  to
      come by. Further, the appellant's vulnerability had  to  be  borne  in
      mind. There was still a perception that women  returning  to  Thailand
      without a husband or money had engaged in the sex trade.

  49.       As for relocation, it would be very difficult  to  find  a  safe
      place which would provide an opportunity for work. Most employment was
      related  to  the  entertainment  industry  and  entailed   sex   work.
      Traffickers worked in that area. Their  agents  reached  out  to  poor
      communities where they expected less resistance. There  was  a  recent
      case in which Thai workers were found in a factory  in  Romania.  That
      indicated that people could be trafficked from anywhere to anywhere.

  50.       In re-examination the witness was asked whether it was common in
      her  experience  for  victims  of  trafficking   to   denounce   their
      traffickers to the police when  they  were  arrested.  Ms  Skrivankova
      replied that this was very uncommon. She said that  fear,  a  lack  of
      understanding, the language barrier and the fact that the police  were
      usually men,  made  disclosure  very  uncommon  at  that  stage.  That
      completed the oral evidence.

Submissions

      Respondent's submissions

  51.       Ms Akbar relied upon the refusal letter. She accepted that  most
      facts were not in dispute and the issue to be resolved was the risk to
      the appellant on return, including the risk  of  re-trafficking;  this
      entailed a finding on whether M  was  involved  with  organised  crime
      and/or Thai  immigration  officials,  and  whether  a  sufficiency  of
      protection would be available.  She  submitted  that  the  appellant's
      attempt to return to Thailand in 2006 undermined her claim to fear for
      her safety on return. Had she genuinely believed that M had been  part
      of a gang and that he would find her, she would not have been  willing
      to return. The appellant had lived with M for six months and if he was
      part of a gang she would have known  this.  The  remarks  made  by  an
      immigration officer at the airport in Thailand proved nothing; it  was
      just an assumption by the appellant that the official was involved  in
      a gang. In any event, given the time that had lapsed, it was  unlikely
      that an immigration official would remember her or that she  would  be
      traced.

  52.       Ms Akbar submitted  that  the  case  of  SB  (PSG  -  Protection
      Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 0002 was  very  different
      to the appellant's case. The appellant in SB had  gone  to  court  and
      given evidence about her trafficker and he had then been released.  It
      had also been found that there was a  lot  of  discrimination  against
      trafficked women in Moldova. M had not tried to  trace  the  appellant
      and he had not contacted her family. The appellant had  not  therefore
      established that she would be re-trafficked on return. Further,  there
      was a sufficiency of protection available to her. This  was  confirmed
      by the US report on trafficking. The appellant was wiser now. She  did
      not need to return to Pattaya. She  could  relocate  to  any  part  of
      Thailand. She had worked in Thailand before coming to the UK and could
      find work if she returned.

  53.       It was submitted that the appellant's mental health had improved
      and the latest medical report showed no current suicide risk. She  was
      not on any medication and was fit enough to try and help  others.  She
      would not try and commit suicide because she had a daughter  and  aunt
      in Thailand and a partner in the UK. He had confirmed he  would  visit
      her. The appellant would have a support structure in Thailand and  she
      could obtain counselling if required. Facilities  were  available  and
      the government recognised that victims  of  trafficking  needed  help.
      There  was  no  objective  evidence  that  the  appellant   would   be
      stigmatised for her past. She did not belong to a social group and the
      human rights convention was not engaged either. The appellant and  her
      partner did not live together and had no idea of when they planned  to
      marry. The emotional support he might provide her with could  continue
      if she returned to Thailand. She could apply for entry clearance  from
      there. The interference in her family life would be proportionate. Her
      private  life  showed  nothing  exceptional  and  could  continue   in
      Thailand. The case of Y and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362 differed
      from the appellant's circumstances in that those appellants were found
      to be suicidal. Because they feared the Sri Lankan government, it  was
      found that they would  not  try  to  seek  treatment.  The  appellant,
      however, did not fear  the  Thai  government.  The  appeal  should  be
      dismissed.

      Appellant's submissions

  54.       Ms Brewer relied on her skeleton argument.  She  submitted  that
      the evidence pointed in only one direction and that was for the appeal
      to be allowed. She submitted that the respondent had fallen far  short
      of his  obligations  under  Article  4  and  the  UN  Convention.  The
      intelligence the appellant had provided in a substantive interview had
      not been investigated despite her referral to the UKHTC by  the  Poppy
      Project. The respondent was making  suppositions  in  the  appellant's
      case  without  undertaking  any  investigations.  The  respondent  had
      focused on what the appellant believed but that was immaterial. It was
      important to consider  the  facts  that  had  been  accepted  and  the
      interpretation of those facts by the experts. M had been profiled as a
      key player, a recruiter, by an expert who advised the government.  The
      appellant's account of how she got to the UK was  not  disputed;  what
      was  challenged  was  the  interpretation  of  those  facts.  Detailed
      evidence  had  been  given  by  an  expert  that  the   facts   showed
      organisation and a sophisticated operation. The appellant spoke barely
      any English at the time she attempted to return to  Thailand  and  she
      suspected that immigration officials  may  have  been  linked  to  her
      traffickers. She was arrested and prosecuted for possession  of  false
      documents and it was not  credible  that  she  would  have  sought  to
      denounce her traffickers in such circumstances. The report  by  Jackie
      Pollock, Executive Director of Migrant Assistance Programme  (MAP)  in
      Thailand, explained how the appellant  would  be  flagged  up  on  her
      return. Neither that report  nor  the  contents  of  Ms  Skrivankova's
      report had been rebutted by the respondent.

  55.       Miss Brewer submitted that the appellant would not feel able  to
      access shelters in Thailand because she had been trafficked  with  the
      complicity  of  Thai  officials.  The   evidence   demonstrated   that
      trafficked victims were far more vulnerable  to  being  re-trafficked.
      The previous immigration judge had  found  the  appellant  had  little
      family support in Thailand and that was not a finding  that  had  been
      challenged by the  respondent  when  he  sought  reconsideration.  The
      appellant would be at real risk of harm  on  return.  She  had  worked
      before yet was trafficked.  Finding  employment  on  return  did  not,
      therefore, take away the risk.

  56.       The appellant was a member  of  a  particular  social  group  on
      account of her gender, the case of Fornah and K  [2006]  UKHL  46  was
      relied upon. Gender was an innate characteristic and there was no need
      to show discrimination in society  over  and  above  that  experienced
      because of gender. Women  in  Thailand  already  had  a  lower  social
      status.

  57.       Evidence had been given by an expert on the  appellant's  mental
      state both here and if she were to be returned. Her case  was  on  all
      fours with Y and Z. With regard  to  Article  8,  it  appeared  to  be
      accepted that family life  had  been  established.  That  resulted  in
      situations as in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and Beoku-Betts [2008]  UKHL
      39;  why  should  she  return  simply  to  make  an  entry   clearance
      application. She would have to disrupt her therapy to do so and  would
      lose the support network she had here. The appeal should be allowed.

  58.       As there had been several references to the  Council  of  Europe
      Convention, we invited Ms Brewer to make that  document  available  to
      us.  Although she undertook to do  so  in  the  next  few  days,  that
      document has not been received since the hearing.  Ms  Akbar  did  not
      object and Ms Brewer also undertook to make a copy available to her.

  59.       At the conclusion of submissions we invited the parties to leave
      the hearing room so that we could discuss the  case  with  a  view  to
      deciding whether it would be possible to give an oral  decision  there
      and then. After a period of consultation the parties returned  and  we
      indicated that we would be allowing the appeal  under  Article  3  but
      that we reserved our decision on all the other issues. We now give our
      determination and reasons.

Country material

  60.       Ms Brewer did not refer us to any country  material,  either  in
      her skeleton argument or in oral submissions. We  have,  nevertheless,
      considered  the  background  material  submitted  by  the  appellant's
      representatives and the IAS research analysis papers contained in  the
      bundle which consist of extracts from various reports  some  of  which
      are now several years out of date. We found the format of the  bundle,
      which was not  properly  paginated  or  indexed,  to  be  particularly
      unhelpful, given its size. We have also  considered  the  material  to
      which we were referred by Ms Akbar.

  61.       We have considered the US Trafficking in  Persons  (TIP)  Report
      (June 2009) relied upon by  the  respondent.  The  report  covers  the
      period of  April  2008  through  March  2009  and  is  complied  using
      information  from  U.S.  embassies,  foreign   government   officials,
      nongovernmental and international  organizations,  published  reports,
      research trips to every region, and information submitted  to  the  US
      State Department. There are three Tiers of countries as designated  by
      the US government, of which Tier 1 denotes countries where  the  state
      is considered to have complied fully with minimum standards and Tier 3
      which denotes countries not fully complying with minimum standards and
      not making an effort to do so. Thailand is  designated  as  a  Tier  2
      country  because  despite  making  considerable  efforts,   the   Thai
      government still does not fully comply with the minimum standards  for
      the elimination of trafficking.  We note that Thailand  is  a  source,
      transit  and  destination  country  for  men,  women,   and   children
      trafficked for the purposes of forced  labour  and  commercial  sexual
      exploitation and we note that steps are being taken by the  government
      in an attempt to combat this. The report states the following:

           The Royal Thai Government does not fully comply with the minimum
           standards for the elimination of  trafficking;  however,  it  is
           making significant  efforts  to  do  so.  The  government  began
           implementing a new,  comprehensive  anti-human  trafficking  law
           that  came  into  force  in  June  2008  and  trained  the   law
           enforcement community on the new legislation. In  recent  years,
           the  number  of  annual  convictions  for  sex  trafficking  has
           declined.  Three  sex  traffickers  were  convicted,   and   the
           government  initiated    prosecutions  of  54  individuals   for
           trafficking offences, including forced child labour, during  the
           reporting period. The  government did not,  however,  achieve  a
           conviction for a labour trafficking offence during the year.


           The government trained police  officers,  immigration  officers,
           prosecutors and social workers on the new anti-trafficking  law.
           A police division established in 2006 - the Children  and  Women
           Protection Division - continues to have nationwide  jurisdiction
           to conduct anti-trafficking  investigations.  In  addition,  the
           police's  newly  established  Transnational  Crime  Coordination
           Centre  collects  and  analyzes  trafficking   information   and
           conducts strategic planning for anti-trafficking  efforts  along
           with  the  Office  of  the  Attorney  General's  Centre  Against
           International Human  Trafficking.  Nevertheless,  investigations
           for trafficking offences were disrupted or  delayed  because  of
           frequent  personnel  turnover,  and  observers   reported   that
           cooperation  between  police   and   prosecutors   on   criminal
           (including trafficking) cases  could  be  improved.  There  were
           reports that local police protected brothels, other sex  venues,
           and  seafood  and   sweatshop   facilities   from   raids,   and
           occasionally facilitated the movement of women into  or  through
           Thailand. In the absence of specific,  credible  allegations  of
           official complicity  in  trafficking,  the  government  did  not
           report any investigations or prosecutions of Thai officials  for
           trafficking-related corruption.


           The government expanded its network of  temporary  shelters  for
           trafficking victims from 99 to 138, with at least one  temporary
           shelter  in  each  Thai  province.  In  2008,  the  government's
           shelters provided protection and social services  for  at  least
           102 repatriated Thai victims and 520  foreigners  trafficked  to
           Thailand. The Department of Consular Affairs in the Ministry  of
           Foreign Affairs reported that 443 Thai nationals  classified  as
           trafficking victims were repatriated from a number  of  overseas
           locations. Thailand has not ratified the 2000 UN TIP Protocol.

  62.       The respondent and the appellant both relied upon the  US  State
      Department report for 2008. We note the following extracts  which  are
      relevant to the appellant's case:

           Women and children (particularly girls) tended to  be  the  most
           frequent trafficking victims for sexual exploitation. Women were
           trafficked to Japan, Malaysia,  Singapore,  Taiwan,  Hong  Kong,
           Bahrain, Australia, South Africa, Europe, and the United States,
           chiefly  for  sexual   exploitation.   Because   foreign   women
           frequently were unable to speak the language and were considered
           illegal  immigrants,  they  were  particularly   vulnerable   to
           physical abuse and exploitation.
           The law allows for extradition of citizens; however,  none  were
           extradited for trafficking-related offences.  Requesting-country
           nationals charged  with  trafficking-related  crimes,  including
           paedophilia,  were  extradited  to  Japan,  Australia,  Germany,
           Bahrain, the PRC, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
           There were reports of bribe taking by  some  low-  or  mid-level
           police  officers  facilitating  the   most   severe   forms   of
           trafficking in persons. There was no  evidence  that  high-level
           officials benefited from or protected the practice.  Compromised
           local police  protected  brothels  and  other  sex  venues  from
           surprise raids. Officials found complicit in  any  part  of  the
           illegal economy rarely were prosecuted but instead were moved to
           positions thought to limit opportunities for future  corruption.
           Funds for  fighting  trafficking  or  aiding  its  victims  were
           limited. There was limited psychological counselling. Corruption
           remained widespread  among  police  officers.  Police  officials
           suggested that low pay made them susceptible  to  bribes.  There
           were reports that police tortured, beat,  and  otherwise  abused
           detainees and prisoners, generally  with  impunity.  There  were
           also  reports  that  some  police  officers  were  involved   in
           facilitating prostitution and trafficking in women and children.
           Trafficking in women and children for prostitution was a serious
           problem.
  63.        The  UN  Committee  monitoring  compliance  with  women's  anti
      discrimination Convention (20 January  2006)  found  that  trafficking
      remained a problem throughout the  country  despite  the  government's
      initiatives to improve the status of Thai women. Results had not  been
      seen  due  to  widespread  corruption.   A  crucial  obstacle  to  the
      trafficking problem was reported to be weak law enforcement.

  64.       The Bangkok Post (January 2008) reported traffickers as being in
      "deep collusion" with other  cross  border  criminals  including  drug
      traffickers.

  65.       The Freedom House report for  2007  noted  that  corruption  was
      widespread  in  Thailand  and  that  law  enforcement  officials  were
      regularly paid to ignore trafficking. This is repeated  in  US  report
      prepared by the Women's Commission  for  Refugee  Women  and  Children
      (January 2006).

  66.       The Nation (2 October 2007) reported that  little  progress  had
      been made in protecting the  rights  of  trafficked  persons.  It  was
      reported that little assistance was given to women after they returned
      home and that the state rarely bothered to assess the mental condition
      of victims.

  67.       No reference was made by Counsel either in submissions or in her
      skeleton argument to the country material submitted by  the  appellant
      and contained in the respondent's bundle. As it is several  years  old
      and as we were not referred to any part of it, we do not  consider  it
      necessary to summarise it  here.  It  contains  nothing  that  is  not
      repeated in the more up to date material.


      Report by the Poppy Project

  68.       Contained in the respondent's bundle is  a  report  from  Daphne
      Kapetanaki, Senior Support Worker of the Outreach Team  of  the  Poppy
      Project. It is dated 10 October 2007. The Poppy Project  is  the  sole
      government funded project providing  housing  and  support  for  women
      trafficked into the UK for forced prostitution.  It  has  been  funded
      (since March 2003) by the Office for Criminal Justice  Reform  of  the
      Ministry of Justice to provide this service. It works closely with the
      UK Human  Trafficking  Centre  and  the  Metropolitan  Police  Service
      Trafficking Team. At the time the report was prepared  there  were  35
      spaces available for trafficked women in safe houses  in  London.   We
      understand that since that time the capacity has increased by some 15-
      20 spaces. In order to qualify for housing support a woman  must  have
      been trafficked to the UK and  forcibly  exploited  into  prostitution
      within a certain time scale prior to referral.

  69.       We are told that the appellant was referred to the Project on 26
      July 2007. An initial assessment took place on 15 August 2007. It took
      a total of four meetings for the assessment to be completed because of
      the appellant's disturbed state of  mind.  She  is  described  in  the
      report  as  having  been  "very  traumatised  and  vulnerable",  "very
      distressed" and "tearful". She reported  she  was  on  medication  for
      asthma. She had breathing problems and chest pains. She reported  skin
      problems, toothache, headaches, loss of  appetite  and  difficulty  in
      remembering things. She disclosed symptoms of gynaecological infection
      and injuries as a consequence of anal rape.  She  was  found  to  have
      reported a number of symptoms of Post Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  and
      was  assessed  as  requiring  long  term  support.   Her  account   of
      trafficking was accepted.

      Report of Klara Skrivankova

  70.       Ms Skrivankova has prepared two reports. They address issues  of
      trafficking, both  generally  and  specifically  in  Thailand,  forced
      labour  indications,  vulnerability  factors  and  the  risk  of   re-
      trafficking.  The  availability  of  state  or  other  protection   in
      Thailand, the risk to the  appellant  on  return  and  the  safety  or
      reasonableness of internal relocation are also matters dealt with.

  71.       The first report is dated 18 January 2008. The second  is  dated
      15 August 2008.  Ms  Skrivankova  is  the  Trafficking  Programme  Co-
      ordinator  for  Anti  Slavery   International,   a   member   of   the
      Stakeholder/Consultative Group on Human Trafficking,  chaired  by  the
      Home Office and the Solicitor General. At the time these reports  were
      prepared she had worked in this field for seven years.  Prior  to  her
      work for Anti-Slavery, she had worked as a project manager for 5 years
      with La Strada Czech Republic, a  non-governmental  organisation  that
      supported trafficked persons and was a member of  a  leading  European
      network  of  anti-trafficking  organisations.  It  operated  in   nine
      European   countries.   Ms   Skrivankova    represents    Anti-Slavery
      International at two expert sub-groups of the UKHTC:  the  Expert  Co-
      ordination Team of the Alliance against Trafficking in Human Beings of
      the Organisation for Security  and  Co-operation  in  Europe  and  the
      Council of Europe in its campaign on the Convention on Action  against
      Trafficking in Human Beings. In 2007 she founded the  Trafficking  Law
      and Policy Forum.

  72.        Ms Skrivankova finds the appellant to be: "a vulnerable  victim
      of trafficking that (sic) would be at high risk of  re-trafficking  in
      her country  of  origin  and  due  to  her  personal  and  situational
      vulnerability as a consequence of trafficking experience  as  well  as
      the potential risk from her trafficker". She finds that the  "elements
      of deception, the  abuse  of  power  and  position  of  vulnerability,
      threats or use of force and other  forms  of  coercion  are  the  most
      evident means utilised by the traffickers" to exploit  the  appellant.
      Referring  to  the  relationship  between  M  and  the  appellant,  Ms
      Skrivankova states that:

           Informal recruitment by friends  and/or  with  friends  is  very
           common in trafficking cases. Traffickers  posing  as  boyfriends
           are very skilled at targeting vulnerable women. Initially,  they
           strive to  develop  a  relationship  of  attachment,  trust  and
           dependence.  Once  such  relationship   is   established,   they
           manipulate the victim under false promises to travel  with  them
           abroad. In the place of destination the victim is either sold or
           exploited directly by the traffickers.

  73.       Ms Skrivankova considers that there are  other  aspects  of  the
      appellant's account that meet the profile of trafficking; for example,
      being forced to take drugs, being moved from house to house and  being
      escorted to hotels where she was forced to  provide  sexual  services.
      These were all methods designed to prevent her from getting acquainted
      with her environment and to reinforce the power that  the  traffickers
      had over her. The use of fraudulent documents is another common method
      used by traffickers to exempt themselves from liability.  Victims  are
      often briefed that the authorities would not  provide  them  with  any
      help and assistance.

  74.       Ms Skrivankova finds that the flourishing trafficking  trade  in
      Thailand poses a risk of re-trafficking. She also considers  that  the
      appellant would be at risk of reprisals from her traffickers and  that
      the corruption and involvement of officials in  trafficking  increases
      that risk. She notes that there were "haphazard" facilities for  long-
      term  assistance  for  trafficked  women  in  Thailand  and  that  the
      appellant's vulnerability is increased  by  the  lack  of  her  family
      support, her low level of education, the stigma attached to her  as  a
      prostitute and the attraction of her age  to  traffickers.  She  notes
      that young women separated from their families are frequently targeted
      by traffickers because it is unlikely that such women would be  missed
      by anyone. Such socially excluded groups of women are acknowledged  to
      be at risk of trafficking by trafficking experts.  The  UK  government
      also  recognised  that  poverty  and  social  exclusion  made   people
      vulnerable to trafficking.

  75.       Returned trafficked victims are said to be in a  disadvantageous
      position. Their absence from the social system, from the labour market
      and the  health  insurance  system,  the  lack  of  long-term  support
      programs, the threat of reprisals preventing them  from  returning  to
      their original social environment and their trauma all combine to make
      them particularly vulnerable.

  76.       It is said that there is still discrimination against  returning
      trafficking victims who were all assumed to have been working  in  the
      sex trade and there is an underlying assumption  that  they  all  have
      contracted  HIV.  There  are  other  forms   of   discrimination   and
      stereotyping of people who have been abroad,  with  the  exception  of
      those returning home with money or a rich husband.

  77.       Ms Skrivankova reports that a person can be re-trafficked by the
      same traffickers to the same country or to  a  different  destination;
      internal re-trafficking is  also  a  possibility.  Despite  the  anti-
      trafficking laws enacted in Thailand and anti-trafficking  programmes,
      implementation in practice remains  haphazard.  Although  a  fund  for
      returning trafficking victims was set up in 2005, it remains extremely
      hard for returned victims of trafficking to access it. Reports suggest
      that only women under the age of 25 were able to access funds and that
      detailed information and evidence from the victim is required  by  the
      government which the trafficked woman generally does not want to give.
      A feeling of mistrust on her part towards the authorities  is  common.
      Information received from a community self-help group in the north  of
      Thailand indicates that only two members of the group had been able to
      access the fund.

  78.       Services for women who had experienced any form  of  trauma  are
      said to be very limited  in  Thailand  and  counselling  services  are
      scarce. Although there are 6 regional shelters for trafficking victims
      and some 97 shelters for abused women and children,  they  are  closed
      facilities and women cannot access  general  educational  services  or
      skills training.  In  order  to  access  housing  through  a  shelter,
      information  would  have  to  be  given  by  the  appellant   to   the
      authorities. It is said to be the case that most women in Thailand are
      afraid of the police and are unlikely to ask for assistance  in  cases
      of sexual abuse and trafficking unless accompanied by a  lawyer.  Most
      centres are manned by policemen rather than women.

  79.       Ms Skrivankova reports on the links  between  government  bodies
      and trafficking, a fact which supports the appellant's belief that her
      trafficker was involved with Thai immigration officials.

  80.       Ms Skrivankova's second  report  focuses  on  the  risk  to  the
      appellant in the city of Bangkok and to the sufficiency of  protection
      available to victims of trafficking in  Thailand.  She  explains  that
      women  returning  to  Thailand  on  temporary  travel  documents   are
      identified and perceived as trafficked  women  by  airport  officials.
      Many women have  been  reported  to  have  been  held  by  immigration
      officials  for  several  hours  and  bribes  have  been  demanded.  Ms
      Skrivankova notes that if an immigration official was involved in  the
      appellant's trafficking, he would have been  able  to  have  her  name
      tagged so that she would be identifiable upon  arrival  and  could  be
      connected to the traffickers. The new biometric tracking  system  used
      at the borders makes it easy for officials to identify people entering
      and leaving the country.  The  appellant  might  also  be  seen  as  a
      potential threat to the implicated immigration officials  because  she
      would be able to identify him and report his corruption.  Due  to  the
      lack of security of data, corrupt officials are easily able to  obtain
      information about travellers.

  81.       Ms Skrivankova explains that the trafficker would have  invested
      funds in transporting the appellant to the UK and would be  interested
      in getting her back so that her 'debt' could be repaid.

  82.       With regard to  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of  protection,  Ms
      Skrivankova is of the opinion that the appellant would find difficulty
      receiving protection from the police. She reports that most  women  in
      Thailand are afraid  of  the  police  and  are  unlikely  to  ask  for
      assistance in cases  of  sexual  abuse  and  trafficking.  Options  to
      relocate and socially  integrate  depend  on  qualifications  and  the
      ability to work. If relocating, an individual must also  transfer  his
      registration  details  and  it  is  relatively  easy  to  obtain  such
      information through corruption. Overseas travel is a difficult  option
      as most Thai women would find it very difficult to obtain a visa.

  83.       Information from the Foundation for Women in Bangkok and the MAP
      Foundation indicates that there is a lack of long-term  assistance  in
      reintegration. This factor, along  with  poor  access  to  the  labour
      market and socio-economic need, are among the main factors  why  women
      end up re-trafficked. Given the appellant's  mental  health  problems,
      resulting  from  the  traumatic   experience   of   trafficking,   the
      appellant's  situation  would  be  even  more  difficult.  Counselling
      services are scarce and although the general community often use monks
      as their counsellors, this would not be an option  for  the  appellant
      given her history of sex work.

      Report of Lucy Kralj

  84.       Ms Kralj is a senior clinician and co-ordinator of  the  Women's
      Programme  at  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation.  The  Programme  offers
      therapeutic and healthcare services. Ms Kralj is a senior  trainee  in
      psychotherapy on a Master's level study programme. She has significant
      experience working with torture survivors and with refugees and asylum
      seekers. She is involved in the education of  external  statutory  and
      non-statutory organisations and is employed as an honorary lecturer at
      King's College, London. Prior to her current role,  she  worked  as  a
      specialist nurse for asylum seekers across four  London  primary  care
      trusts. In 2003 she conducted a research study looking at primary care
      provisions for asylum seekers within London. In 2004 she  undertook  a
      review of the literature pertaining to the health consequences of  the
      immigration detention of children. She is an active member of Medact's
      refugee  health  network.  She  regularly  spends  time  working  with
      internally displaced people in northern Uganda. In  her  role  at  the
      Foundation,  she  leads  the  work  undertaken  with  victims  of  sex
      trafficking and has close connections with the Poppy Project and other
      leading agencies involved in the healthcare  and  long-term  treatment
      and support of victims.

  85.       We are told that Ms Kralj's first  report  was  prepared  on  31
      December 2007 although the date does not appear on the report  itself.
      Ms Kralj confirms that the appellant was referred to the Foundation by
      her key worker in the safe house in which she resided.  The  appellant
      had expressed disturbing thoughts, suicidal ideation and  feelings  of
      extreme worthlessness; there were also  concerns  about  her  physical
      health.

  86.       The report notes that the appellant suffers  from  repeated  and
      severe headaches, frequently accompanied by episodes of  vertigo.  She
      has also suffered blackouts. It  is  thought  that  her  symptoms  are
      either caused or exacerbated by the extreme tension with which she has
      been living. The appellant is asthmatic and although on medication her
      symptoms are poorly controlled. She has  a  long-standing  history  of
      dermatitis which is being treated by  her  doctor.  She  suffers  from
      ongoing pelvic pain which  has  been  persistent  since  her  repeated
      sexual assaults. Pelvic pain is said to be a  well-documented  symptom
      amongst sex workers and almost universal among survivors of  rape  and
      domestic violence. When menstruating, she passes clots  of  blood  and
      suffers from dysmenorrhoea. The appellant  also  suffers  from  severe
      lower back pain and she attributed this to the repeated  violence  she
      suffered at the hands of her grandmother from the age  of  seven  when
      she was beaten almost daily with a broom. The pain worsened since  her
      enforced prostitution. She suffers from constipation and  haemorrhoids
      which cause her constant extreme pain. During some  sessions  she  has
      been unable to sit down due to the level of the pain. She was  advised
      to have a full sexual health screening as a matter  of  priority.  She
      suffers  from  vaginal  fissures,  the  result  of  repeated   violent
      intercourse. She also suffers from ongoing pain on micturition.

  87.       The report notes the appellant's lack of memory  of  her  family
      during childhood. It concludes that such blanks  in  childhood  memory
      generally indicate significant emotional distress in  childhood  which
      has overwhelmed the child's emotional  coping  resources.  The  report
      confirms that both the appellant paternal grandparents died  when  she
      was a teenager. Her grandmother was physically  and  verbally  violent
      towards her throughout her childhood. Her grandfather was powerless to
      defend or protect her as he was terrified of his wife.

  88.       The appellant  is  described  as  having  presented  as  a  very
      distressed young woman in a great deal of emotional pain. The majority
      of her sessions with the Foundation were described as spent  with  the
      appellant in intermittent tears. She is described as having spoken  on
      a number of occasions about feelings of negligible self worth and self-
      loathing. She is said to be afraid  to  confide  in  people  whom  she
      believes will laugh at her suffering. She has a long history  of  self
      harm. As a child she used to heat up needles in a flame and  use  them
      to burn herself and pierce the skin. She now bangs  her  head  against
      walls. She feels  no  pain  when  she  self  harms  but  feels  calmer
      afterwards. This behaviour is said to indicate a very  high  level  of
      psychological distress and disturbance.

  89.       The appellant  is  described  as  having  made  two  significant
      suicide attempts, the first of which took place  in  Thailand  shortly
      after the death of her grandfather. She also attempted suicide  whilst
      in the UK by taking 30  Anadin  extra  tablets  with  six  glasses  of
      Guinness. On that occasion she was admitted to hospital  and  referred
      on to the mental health team.

  90.       The appellant expressed great fears for  her  relationship  with
      her daughter who has refused to speak to her for the past year.

  91.       The appellant admitted to isolating  herself  within  the  house
      where she lives and this was confirmed  by  the  Medaille  Trust.  She
      described feeling different to others, somehow apart from the rest  of
      society. She claimed to feel intense rage which she  generally  turned
      towards herself, resulting in self harm. When attempts  were  made  to
      discuss her experiences in the UK, she showed what  was  described  as
      abject terror and began to tremble and sweat.

  92.       The report concludes  that  the  appellant  would  be  extremely
      unlikely  to  spontaneously  access  health  care  and  would   almost
      certainly not access psychotherapeutic care,  were  such  care  to  be
      available in Thailand. Ms Kralj  reports  that  this  is  due  to  the
      appellant's feelings of worthlessness and feelings  that  she  has  no
      right to receive care or nurture herself. It is notable that  she  was
      referred to the Helen Bamber Foundation by a third party  following  a
      recommendation made by the hospital. She felt unable  to  approach  an
      organisation for emotional support herself. Ms Kralj  finds  that  the
      appellant is suffering from a range of symptoms indicative of  extreme
      traumatisation and Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.  Her  symptoms  had
      been persistent for a length of time and  were  consistent  with  this
      diagnosis.  She  required   psychological   treatment   and   possibly
      medication to assist her with symptom control.  Her  history  of  self
      harm and suicide attempts placed her  at  greatly  increased  risk  of
      further attempts with an increased likelihood  of  success.  She  last
      attempted suicide when she found out about the  refusal  by  the  Home
      Office. Grave concerns for the long-term health and well-being of  the
      appellant were expressed in the absence  of  long-term  and  intensive
      therapeutic support.

  93.       A second report was prepared in January 2010. Ms  Kralj  reports
      some improvement in the appellant's situation following  regular  work
      with her over 2 � years. Changes were noticeable over  the  last  year
      with the appellant becoming less impulsive and more inclined to  reach
      out for help than to isolate herself and  resort  to  self-destructive
      behaviour  patterns  in  times  of  distress.  The   report   provides
      information on the appellant's relationship with AB. The appellant  is
      described as being unsure initially about their  relationship  and  of
      being mistrustful. Her partner, however,  had  proven  himself  to  be
      stable and consistent. He encouraged the appellant  to  continue  with
      her therapeutic work and over the past  year  their  relationship  has
      strengthened. Ms Kralj emphasises the importance  of  the  appellant's
      support network  of  three  intimately  trusted  people;  herself,  Ms
      Chipperfield and AB. She advises against removal  from  support  at  a
      time of such fragility of improvement. Such action, she  finds,  would
      be  likely  to  have  a  profound  and  destructive  impact  upon  the
      appellant's mental  state  and  coping  mechanisms.  A  return  to  an
      environment in which so much trauma had been  endured  would,  without
      any doubt, harm the appellant. She would revert to her previous  stage
      of permanent hyper-arousal and  would  be  stripped  of  her  new  and
      adaptive coping mechanisms. Her history of self harm  and  impulsivity
      placed her at great risk should her  support  structures  be  removed.
      Although her progress  was  real  and  consistent,  there  remained  a
      significant risk of reverting to hold coping mechanisms in the absence
      of the things and people the appellant now experienced as keeping  her
      safe.

  94.       We have also had produced to us five letters from Ms Kralj dated
      29 October 2007, 22 January 2008, 22 May 2008, 9 August  2008  and  20
      March 2009. These express concern for  the  appellant  should  she  be
      subjected to rigorous examination at the hearing  of  her  appeal  and
      also report on  the  distress  that  the  repeated  adjournments  have
      caused. It is confirmed that the appellant  attended  weekly  sessions
      with the Foundation. Any interruption in her therapy, which had  taken
      months of nurturing, would be  extremely  detrimental  and  likely  to
      exacerbate her impulses towards self harm.

      Report of Jacqueline Pollock

  95.       Ms Pollock's report is dated 1 December 2008. She is  a  British
      national who has been working in Thailand for some 25  years.  She  is
      currently the executive director of the Migrant  Assistance  Programme
      (MAP) Foundation, a  registered  Thai  NGO  established  in  1996  and
      registered in 2003. Ms Pollock has trained  government  officials  and
      anti-trafficking  units  from  Thailand  and  other  Southeast   Asian
      countries. Prior to her work at MAP, she worked for another Thai  NGO,
      Empower Foundation, which is a sex workers' organisation. She was  one
      of the consultants developing the first project proposal for the  UNDP
      Task Force on combating trafficking in the Mekong sub region  and  was
      also a consultant for the development of the project for the  UN  Task
      Force to combat trafficking in Nepal. She has been involved  with  the
      Global Alliance against Trafficking in Women since it was founded. She
      has had direct contact with Thai and Burmese women working in the  sex
      industry in Thailand and other countries and also with women who  have
      experienced trafficking in Thailand and Japan.

  96.       She reports that as a source country for trafficking, Thai women
      find themselves in East Asia,  Europe,  Australia,  the  Americas  and
      South Africa. Figures for the number  of  people  trafficked  are  not
      available and, where available, are only estimations. Thailand has  no
      comprehensive record of missing persons.

  97.       Ms Pollock discusses the likelihood of M being linked  to  gangs
      and/or to Thai Immigration in her report. She notes that a UK visa was
      obtained for the appellant. She notes that  the  Home  Office  refusal
      letter refers to the visa as being fake. She comments that to  fake  a
      UK or European visa in a Thai passport, there must  have  either  been
      corruption in the Embassy or M must have been connected to  gangs  who
      fake visas. In  order  for  him  to  have  subsequently  provided  the
      appellant with a fake passport, he  must  have  had  connections  with
      gangs  who  falsify  passports.  These  activities  suggest  that  the
      appellant's trafficking was not a one-off operation.  Thai  passengers
      leaving by air are required to pass through Immigration and be stamped
      out of the country. Ms Pollock notes that it would be highly  unlikely
      that a false UK or European visa would pass through  airline  check-in
      counters and immigration officials unless M was complicit with them.

  98.       Ms Pollock notes that the complicity of police  and  immigration
      officers  has  been  documented  in  Thailand  in  trafficking  cases.
      Intelligence reports indicate that some immigration  officers  at  Don
      Muang  International  airport  (through  which  the   appellant   left
      Thailand) were assisting smuggling rings. She cites the  Economist  as
      reporting on corruption amongst the border police. Extracts  from  the
      US State Department country report on human rights practices are  also
      cited to show that corruption amongst police officers  is  widespread.
      Ms Pollock reports that according  to  an  expert  member  of  the  UN
      Committee  on  the  Elimination  of  Discrimination   against   Women,
      government initiatives to combat human trafficking  have  not  brought
      about the desired results, due to widespread corruption.

  99.       Ms Pollock reports that on return to  Thailand,  Thai  nationals
      must pass  through  immigration  control  where  their  passports  are
      checked for the exit stamp and their return is entered into a computer
      system. If the appellant were to return on a passport  which  did  not
      bear the details of her departure  from  the  country,  she  would  be
      questioned. If immigration officials were involved, they might at this
      point get word of her re-entry. If not alerted at this point, her  re-
      entry is recorded in a computerised system and could  be  accessed  by
      others.

 100.        She  reports  that  if  those  involved  in   the   appellant's
      trafficking are informed that she has returned, it would  be  possible
      to locate her. She would have  to  go  through  several  processes  to
      reactivate her access to services and rights,  including  registration
      wherever she wanted to live, at the local council offices. It is  only
      with this house registration document that she would be  able  to  get
      access to health services, education and exercise her  voting  rights.
      Thailand uses a  biometric  system  with  information  stored  on  the
      national ID card. There is  not  a  strong  system  of  protection  of
      information and privacy laws so the  sharing  of  information  between
      different departments is not fully  protected.  Additionally,  the  ID
      card is online and information can be accessed through  the  13  digit
      number. Ms Pollock reports that if the appellant  relocated  from  her
      previous home and registered in her new location, it would  be  fairly
      easy to locate her. Even if she did not live in her home town and  did
      not register, she would  have  to  return  home  at  some  point;  for
      example, for national and local elections as voting  is  mandatory  in
      Thailand and so she could be tracked to her home.

 101.       Ms Pollock notes that the fact that M  spent  time  over  a  six
      month period with the appellant in Pattaya and some time  priming  her
      in the UK suggests that he expected her to bring  him  a  good  return
      over several years. She points out that the evidence suggests that the
      money traffickers gained from women selling sex  overseas  warrants  a
      good deal of investment of time and money in the country of origin. Ms
      Pollock cites the arrest in 2008 of a  retired  British  policeman  in
      Bangkok who had allegedly been involved in shipping Thai women to  the
      UK for prostitution. He travelled with the  women  in  the  UK  before
      selling them into brothels. There is no information as to  whether  he
      was prosecuted or convicted.

 102.       Ms Pollock reports  that  most  women  are  trafficked  overseas
      individually as large groups would draw attention. Couriers  are  paid
      air fare, accommodation and a fee to take one  woman  at  a  time.  An
      article  published  in  the  Harvard  Asia   Quarterly   reports   the
      involvement of a wide range of  participants.  There  is  the  initial
      recruiter, the agent who arranges travel  documents,  the  escort  who
      accompanies the woman overseas and  the  procurers  who  run  the  sex
      establishments and pay large sums of money for the acquisition of  the
      women. In some cases, these networks also rely on the co-operation  of
      government officials who turn a blind eye to violations, in return for
      bribes. Given the low expense of keeping  a  woman  in  Thailand,  the
      investment is minimal compared to the income that could  be  generated
      to the traffickers once the woman was sold abroad.

 103.       With regard to available services, Ms Pollock reports that these
      are very limited in Thailand. She notes that most women are afraid  of
      the police and are unlikely to ask for assistance in cases  of  sexual
      abuse and trafficking. Counselling services are limited,  particularly
      in the provinces. The appellant's home province is one of the  poorest
      areas of Thailand. Shelters are mostly manned  by  policemen  and  not
      women. The Witness Protection Act is difficult for returned victims of
      trafficking to utilise. Shelters provide housing,  food  and  training
      for a limited period. They are mostly closed facilities and women  are
      not free to come and go. The lack of freedom makes  the  centres  feel
      like a place of detention and increases the  sense  of  victimisation.
      The appellant would receive no assistance with finding housing or  any
      other social services. Her level of education and the  fact  that  she
      would be unable to provide references for work for a number  of  years
      limit opportunities for employment. Due to the global economic crisis,
      Thailand has experienced job losses in any event. Ms  Pollock  reports
      that it would be highly likely that the appellant would have to return
      to working as a waitress in  a  tourist  area  where  she  would  work
      without a salary but obtain a commission on the  sale  of  drinks.  As
      such a commission is not usually sufficient  to  survive,  many  women
      also sell sex to customers.  These  areas  are  breeding  grounds  for
      recruiters and traffickers. Women who have experienced abuse and  have
      low self-esteem are extremely vulnerable to being tricked and  cheated
      by these traffickers.

 104.       It is in the context of all this material  that  we  assess  the
      appellant's claim.

Findings and conclusions

 105.       We bear in mind that the burden is on the appellant to make  out
      her case to the lower standard and that  we  are  able  to  take  into
      account facts and evidence as at the date of the hearing.

 106.       The 2000 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
      Persons, especially Women and Children  (the  "Trafficking  Protocol")
      supplementing the 2000 United Nations Convention against Transnational
      Organized Crime provides an international definition  of  trafficking.
      Article 3 of the Trafficking Protocol reads:


            (a)  'Trafficking  in  persons'  shall  mean  the  recruitment,
           transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of  persons,  by
           means of the threat or use of force or other forms of  coercion,
           of    abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse  of  power
           or of a position of vulnerability, or of the giving or receiving
           of payments or benefits to  achieve  the  consent  of  a  person
           having  control  over  another  person,  for  the   purpose   of
           exploitation. Exploitation shall  include,  at  a  minimum,  the
           exploitation of the prostitution of others  or  other  forms  of
           sexual exploitation,  forced  labour  or  services,  slavery  or
           practices similar  to  slavery,  servitude  or  the  removal  of
           organs;
           (b) The consent of a victim of trafficking  in  persons  to  the
           intended exploitation set forth  in  subparagraph  (a)  of  this
           article shall be irrelevant where any of the means set forth  in
           subparagraph (a) have been used;...

 107.       Trafficking is thus defined  by  the  act,  the  means  and  the
      purpose.

      Appellant's credibility

 108.       We found the appellant to be a wholly credible witness. We  note
      that her account is  largely  accepted  by  the  respondent  with  the
      exception of her claim that M is involved in  organised  crime  and/or
      has links with Thai immigration officials. The question of  whether  a
      sufficiency of  protection  would  be  available  to  her  or  whether
      internal relocation would be a viable option are not so  much  matters
      of credibility as matters which turn on the background  evidence.  The
      respondent has accepted that the appellant was trafficked into the  UK
      for sexual exploitation.

 109.       The appellant has given a consistent  account  in  all  respects
      throughout the  prolonged  appeal  proceedings.  She  has  given  oral
      evidence on two occasions and has prepared two witness statements; she
      has also been interviewed at length  by  the  respondent  and  in  the
      course of her therapy by Ms Kralj. When referred to the Poppy  Project
      she underwent a full assessment which took four meetings to  complete.
      We can find no discrepant evidence in any of that material.  We  found
      that the appellant tried her best to provide the information sought of
      her at the hearing before us. We note that the questions which led  to
      her extreme distress concerned her daughter and M. We have  regard  to
      the evidence before us of Ms Kralj, both in  oral  and  written  form,
      that the appellant "shuts down" when questioned on these  matters.  In
      her report Ms Kralj described how the appellant is unable to  function
      and cannot physically move when she is required  to  speak  about  her
      daughter. In her oral evidence Ms Kralj referred  to  the  name  of  M
      sending shudders through the appellant. We were able to  witness  both
      of these reactions at first hand during the course of the  appellant's
      evidence. We find that her reactions were wholly genuine.  We  do  not
      accept that she would have been able to dupe such a number of  experts
      over such a prolonged period.

      The expert evidence

 110.       We have regard to the expertise and experience of Ms Kapetanaki,
      Ms Chipperfield and Ms Kralj in making our assessment of the appellant
      and the risk she is likely to face. They have all worked with her  and
      are united in their view of her credibility and vulnerability. We have
      also given weight to the evidence of Ms Skrivankova and Ms Pollock  on
      the situation in Thailand and how it affects the appellant. They  have
      also provided evidence on the  availability  of  facilities.  We  note
      their long-term experience in the field of trafficking.  We  found  Ms
      Pollock's evidence to be particularly helpful given her  25  years  of
      work in Thailand. Although we do not accept that it can be  said  that
      all trafficked women in Thailand are at risk of  being  re-trafficked,
      we find that generally their evidence sits well with the other country
      information that has been submitted from more  familiar  sources.  The
      consistency of their conclusions and the corroboration of same by  the
      other material before us are factors  which  we  find  reinforces  the
      weight we have given to them (as per NA  v  the  UK  (Application  no.
      25904/07) [2008] ECHR 616). The information provided about  the  modus
      operandi of traffickers comes, we accept, from first hand knowledge on
      the part of Ms Pollock and Ms Skrivankova who have  both  worked  with
      trafficked women.

 111.       We are bound to say that we found Ms Skrivankova's oral evidence
      far more helpful and compelling than  her  reports,  particularly  the
      first, which appeared to rely heavily, if not solely, upon the work of
      Ms Pollock and little upon  her  own  direct  knowledge  which  became
      apparent in the second report and even more so in the course  of  oral
      evidence.  There were also a few errors  in  the  first  report  which
      suggested that the contents were in a general format  used  for  other
      applicants; for example, there was another woman's name in one part of
      the first report and there is a reference to the appellant's children,
      although she has just one.

 112.       We found some of the  statements  made  in  the  reports  of  Ms
      Pollock and Ms Skrivankova to be quite sweeping. For  example,  we  do
      not find it reasonably likely that all  women  returning  to  Thailand
      from Europe would be perceived as prostitutes. Nor do we  accept  that
      most Thai women would be fearful of the police.  It  may  be  that  Ms
      Pollock and Ms Skrivankova meant to refer to  most  trafficked  women;
      that is more believable. We also reject the suggestion that all  women
      would be at risk. The assessment of risk on return is a matter of fact
      finding that we must undertake and we find that it must be done  on  a
      case by case basis. We say more about what will  be  relevant  factors
      later. Nevertheless, despite these limitations and criticisms, we have
      found the evidence to be helpful.

      The appellant's attempt to return to Thailand

 113.       The respondent has relied  heavily  on  the  appellant's  failed
      attempt to leave the UK for Thailand in 2006 after  she  escaped  from
      her abusers. He also relies on the appellant's failure to claim asylum
      at the point when she was stopped from embarking at Heathrow Airport.

 114.       We find that the first point  raised  by  the  respondent  would
      appear  to  be  the  strongest.  In  considering  this  part  of   the
      appellant's evidence, we were greatly assisted by the evidence  of  Ms
      Kralj who has worked with the appellant for  some  three  years  on  a
      regular basis. We accept fully that the appellant's  actions  must  be
      considered in the context of her experiences at  that  time.  She  had
      just escaped from what amounts to sexual slavery over an  eight  month
      period. During this time she had been subjected to constant abuse of a
      physical, sexual  and  emotional  nature.  She  had  been  locked  up,
      occasionally starved, deprived of sleep and made to  work  for  up  to
      twenty hours a day. She was subjected to perverted and sadistic  acts.
      She was whipped,  she  was  drugged  and  she  was  raped  anally  and
      vaginally. She was made to perform oral sex. Intercourse was regularly
      unprotected. Her life was threatened as was the life of her  daughter.
      She was kept isolated from the outside  world  and  her  passport  was
      taken away from her. She had already suffered the consequences of  one
      failed attempt to escape. She was then offered the chance of escape by
      a regular client who, although taking her  to  a  friend's  house  and
      eventually giving her the money to  purchase  a  ticket  to  Thailand,
      expected and obtained sex from her in return.

 115.       It is difficult to imagine how the appellant must have  felt  at
      that time but faced with the choice of remaining in the UK  where  she
      had only known misery and abuse, where she knew no one and had nowhere
      to go, or of returning home where, despite any dangers she might face,
      she at least had her daughter, we can understand why she acted as  she
      did. Ms Kralj explained that in fact  the  appellant  had  decided  to
      return to Thailand "to die"  and  that  is  what  the  appellant  also
      indicated  at  her  interview.  We  can  understand  that  given   her
      experiences, she felt that her choices were very  limited.  We  accept
      that her feelings of shame, unworthiness and despair as  a  result  of
      being trafficked were compounded by the hard life that she had growing
      up in Thailand.

 116.       We do not find that by seeking to return to Thailand instead  of
      approaching the authorities in the UK and claiming  asylum,  that  the
      appellant showed a lack of fear of  persecution.  We  note  the  UNHCR
      guidelines which advise that  women  may  feel  ashamed  of  what  has
      happened to them or may suffer from trauma caused by sexual abuse  and
      violence (paragraph 48). The evidence we have before us confirms  that
      the appellant experiences feelings of defilement, shame and a lack  of
      self-worth. We also note the findings of Rodger Haines QC in his paper
      on gender related persecution prepared for the UNHCR's San Remo expert
      round table in 2001 (referred to by Lord Bingham in Fornah and  K  and
      in Ms Brewer's skeleton argument). On  the  issue  of  how  trafficked
      victims reacted when they encountered the authorities, he warned  that
      they are highly unlikely to reveal what happened to them and that they
      often disclose a distrust of the authorities in  the  host  state.  We
      also note that it is unlikely that the appellant would have been in  a
      situation where only female officials would have been present  and  we
      find that the presence of male officials would have made it even  less
      likely that she would have felt able to disclose her problems  to  the
      authorities. We note that the API gender guidelines advise Home Office
      caseworkers that such an applicant's failure to  disclose  information
      relating to her claim should not automatically count  against  her  as
      there may be many reasons for this including  feelings  of  guilt  and
      shame. Ms Skrivankova also gave evidence that in her experience it was
      very uncommon for trafficked women to denounce their  abusers  to  the
      authorities when first encountered.

 117.       We do not, therefore, consider that in seeking to leave  the  UK
      and return to Thailand, rather than 'coming clean'  with  the  British
      authorities, the appellant  demonstrated  that  she  had  no  fear  of
      return. Nor do we find that that action detracts in any way  from  her
      belief that M was involved with organised crime with links to the Thai
      authorities.

      The situation in Thailand

 118.       No estimates are available for the number  of  women  trafficked
      from Thailand. We are aware that UN estimates put the worldwide figure
      at close to 4 million. The evidence confirms that, despite the lack of
      statistics, trafficking is described as a serious problem in  Thailand
      and Ms Skrivankova gave evidence that a large percentage of trafficked
      women are in fact re-trafficked. Ms Pollock confirmed that there is no
      comprehensive record of missing persons. It seems to us that women who
      are without familial support would have no one to report their absence
      if  they  'disappeared';  that  would  be  a   great   attraction   to
      traffickers.

 119.       We acknowledge from the background material before us  that  the
      Thai government is taking steps  to  tackle  the  serious  problem  of
      trafficking  of  women  and  children,  not  just  of  Thai   citizens
      trafficked out of the country but also of foreigners (mainly  Burmese)
      trafficked into Thailand. The US State Department report confirms that
      women and young girls tended  to  be  the  most  frequent  trafficking
      victims for sexual exploitation although there  are  also  reports  of
      some  men  falling  prey  to   traffickers.   The   government   began
      implementing a new, comprehensive  anti-human  trafficking  law  which
      came into force in June 2008 and trained the law enforcement community
      on the new legislation. Despite this, according to the US  Trafficking
      in Persons report 2009, the  number  of  annual  convictions  for  sex
      trafficking has declined.

 120.       A new police division established in 2006  -  the  Children  and
      Women Protection Division - continues to have nationwide  jurisdiction
      to conduct anti-trafficking investigations but there is no evidence of
      what it has achieved. There is also a newly established  Transnational
      Crime  Coordinator  Centre  which  is  said  to  collect  and  analyse
      trafficking information but no statistics are available.

 121.       Despite these efforts it is reported that as yet  Thailand  does
      not fully comply with the minimum standards  for  the  elimination  of
      trafficking and that for this reason it is  designated  as  a  Tier  2
      country by the US government. We also note that at the time the US TIP
      report was prepared, Thailand had not ratified the 2000 UN Trafficking
      in Persons protocol.

 122.       There  are  widespread  reports  of  the  complicity  of  police
      officers and border officials with traffickers and criminals.  We  say
      more about this below. The issue of available facilities is also dealt
      with later on in our determination.

      M's link to organised crime and/or Thai immigration officials

 123.       The appellant maintains that M is involved with gangs  and  that
      he has links to Thai immigration officials. She  relies  on  what  she
      heard an immigration officer say when she  was  leaving  Thailand.  Ms
      Brewer is right to point out in her submissions  that  the  respondent
      does not dispute that the appellant heard such a comment or  that  she
      was able to leave in the manner she did, without having had a personal
      interview with  the  British  Embassy  or  providing  any  documentary
      evidence in support of the visa application made for her;  it  is  the
      interpretation of those  facts  and  the  appellant's  belief  in  M's
      influential position that is disputed. We agree with Ms Brewer that in
      the face of the available evidence, the appellant's belief  really  is
      immaterial for the purposes of our findings on M's position.  This  is
      because of the profile that can  be  drawn  from  what  is  known  and
      accepted about him.

 124.       In her oral  evidence  Ms  Skrivankova  gave  us  the  following
      indicators which she argued confirmed the  profile  of  M  as  someone
      belonging to an organised and sophisticated operation. M, described as
      a British citizen, spoke Thai, had a  flat  in  Pattaya,  groomed  the
      appellant both in Thailand and briefly in the UK before enslaving  her
      as a prostitute, was able to fly her to the UK with a British visa and
      later obtain a false passport for her.  He  had  access  to  at  least
      three brothels where several women worked and he  could  access  drugs
      and weapons. Clearly he could not have done all this on his  own.  The
      significance of these indicators is set out in greater detail  in  the
      summary of Ms Skrivankova's evidence earlier in this determination and
      it is unnecessary to repeat it at this stage. We have taken account of
      what she has told us and of the view she has formed.

 125.       That view is also expressed by Ms Pollock  in  her  report.  She
      notes that obtaining a visa for a poor  Thai  woman  would  inevitably
      involve a visit to the British Embassy, the production of a great deal
      of supporting documentary evidence and usually an interview.  We  note
      that her conclusion that M must have therefore  had  connections  with
      those who were able to produce false visas  (if  the  visa  was  false
      which we do not know) or within the Embassy. We find that  the  former
      conclusion  is  a  reasonable  one  and  that  the  latter  may  be  a
      possibility. It is certainly a matter that the Foreign Office may wish
      to investigate.  Ms Pollock states that it would not  be  possible  to
      pass through Immigration in Thailand with a fake  visa  unless  M  was
      complicit with an Immigration Officer.  That appears reasonable to us.
      Given the appellant's ability to enter the UK on that  visa,  however,
      we are inclined to the view  that  it  could  have  been  fraudulently
      obtained but through the proper channels.

 126.       The issue of corrupt immigration officials is not just a  matter
      addressed by the appellant's experts but is supported by  the  country
      information  submitted  by  the  respondent  and  the  appellant.   Ms
      Skrivankova told us of the paper (as yet  unpublished)  prepared  last
      year by  the  UN  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  which  discusses  the
      corruption of immigration and other officials as a being a key element
      in the trafficking business.  An article in the Economist (cited in Ms
      Pollock's  report)  noted  the  complicity   of   border   police   in
      trafficking, as has the US State Department report. Ms  Pollock  cites
      an  expert  member  of  the  UN  Committee  on  the   Elimination   of
      Discrimination against Women as reporting that government  initiatives
      to combat trafficking have been hampered by widespread corruption  and
      she speaks of intelligence  reports  that  immigration  at  Don  Muang
      Airport,  through  which  the  appellant  travelled,  were   assisting
      smuggling rings. That is confirmed  by  the  UN  Committee  monitoring
      compliance with women's anti discrimination conventions which  reports
      that a crucial obstacle to the  trafficking  programme  was  weak  law
      enforcement and widespread corruption. The Bangkok  Post  and  Freedom
      House make similar allegations. In the context  of  this  evidence  we
      find that it is reasonably likely  that  M  has  links  to  government
      officials and to organised crime. We do not  accept  the  respondent's
      submission that he acted alone. It is difficult to see how that  would
      be possible, given the accepted facts about his activities.

 127.       The respondent argued  that  the  appellant  would  have  family
      support if she returned to Thailand. We bear in  mind,  however,  that
      the immigration judge who determined the last appeal  found  that  the
      appellant would be without family support on return  to  Thailand  and
      that finding was not challenged  by  the  respondent  when  he  sought
      reconsideration.  The  appellant  was  brought  up  by  her   paternal
      grandparents; both are now deceased. She never knew her mother or  any
      relatives on her mother's side and had  almost  no  contact  with  her
      father with whom she had never lived and who has another  family.  She
      has a paternal aunt and female cousins who appear to be caring for her
      child but it can hardly be said that they would be in  a  position  to
      provide her with any effective support. It must also be borne in  mind
      that having family support before she left Thailand, did  not  prevent
      her from being trafficked in the first place.

      Particular social group (PSG)

 128.       The respondent, whilst accepting  the  appellant's  core  claim,
      maintains that it does  not  engage  the  Refugee  Convention  as  the
      appellant is not a member of a particular social group, would not face
      a likely risk of persecution, and would be able to  access  protection
      in her country of origin. We note that in HC and RC (Trafficked women)
      China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027 a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
      conceded that in light of what Baroness Hale  said  in  the  House  of
      Lords in Hoxha [2005] UKHL  19  (see  paragraph  138  below)  and  the
      determination of SB, a person who had been  a  victim  of  trafficking
      could be a member of a PSG (paragraph  36;  HC  and  RC).   Ms  Akbar,
      however, maintained the position set out in the refusal letter.

 129.        We  have  considered  The  Refugee  or  Person   in   Need   of
      International  Protection  (Qualification)   Regulations   2006.   The
      relevant provisions state:
            3.  In deciding whether a person  is  a  refugee  or  a  person
           eligible  for  humanitarian        protection,  persecution   or
           serious harm can be committed by:

                 (a)the State;

                 (b) any party or organisation controlling the  State  or  a
                 substantial part of the territory of the State;

                 (c) any non-State actor if it can be demonstrated that  the
                 actors mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b),  including  any
                 international organisation,  are  unable  or  unwilling  to
                 provide protection against persecution or serious harm. ...
           5.  (1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee an act of
           persecution must be:

                 (a) sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as  to
                 constitute a severe violation of a basic  human  right,  in
                 particular a right from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
                 under Article 15 of the Convention for  the  Protection  of
                 Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

                 (b)  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,  including  a
                 violation of a human right which is sufficiently severe  as
                 to affect an individual in a similar manner as specified in
                 (a).

               (2) An act of persecution may, for example, take the form
           of:

                 (a) an act of physical or mental violence, including an act
                 of sexual violence;

                 (b) a legal, administrative, police,  or  judicial  measure
                 which in itself is discriminatory or which  is  implemented
                 in a discriminatory manner;

                 (c) prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
                 discriminatory;

                 (d)   denial   of   judicial   redress   resulting   in   a
                 disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;

                 (e)  prosecution  or  punishment  for  refusal  to  perform
                 military service in a conflict, where  performing  military
                 service  would  include  crimes  or  acts   falling   under
                 regulation 7.

               (3) An act of persecution must be committed for at least one
           of the reasons in Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention.
           6.  (1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee:..........

           (d) a group shall be considered  to  form  a  particular  social
           group where, for example:

           (i) members of that group share an innate characteristic,  or  a
           common  background  that  cannot  be   changed,   or   share   a
           characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to  identity  or
           conscience that a person should not be forced  to  renounce  it,
           and
           (ii) that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country,
           because it is perceived as being different  by  the  surrounding
           society;

 130.       We take note of the respondent's guidance on  gender  issues  in
      asylum claims and of the particular section on trafficking. Section  8
      states that the forced recruitment of women for the purposes of forced
      prostitution or sexual exploitation may amount to persecution. We note
      that acts of sexual violence fall  to  be  considered  as  persecution
      under Regulation 5 (2) (a). We have no hesitation in finding that  the
      nature of the ill treatment suffered  by  the  appellant,  amounts  to
      persecution under the definitions set out above. The  respondent  does
      not dispute any  part  of  the  appellant's  description  of  the  ill
      treatment endured.

 131.       We have had regard to  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on  International
      Protection   (HCR/GIP/06/07   of   7   April   2006)   which   provide
      interpretative legal guidance on the application of Article 1A (2)  of
      the 1951 Convention to victims of trafficking and persons at  risk  of
      being trafficked. It  is  quite  rightly  acknowledged  that  not  all
      victims or potential victims of trafficking fall within the  scope  of
      the refugee definition (paragraph 6).

 132.       We have found the following sections to be helpful:

           15.    Asylum  claims  lodged  by  victims  of  trafficking   or
           potential victims of trafficking should   thus  be  examined  in
           detail to establish whether the harm feared as a result  of  the
           trafficking experience, or as  a  result  of  its  anticipation,
           amounts to persecution in the individual case. Inherent  in  the
           trafficking experience are such forms of severe exploitation  as
           abduction, incarceration,  rape,  sexual  enslavement,  enforced
           prostitution,  forced  labour,  removal  of   organs,   physical
           beatings, starvation, the deprivation of medical treatment. Such
           acts constitute serious violations of human  rights  which  will
           generally amount to persecution.

           16.   In cases where the trafficking experience  of  the  asylum
           applicant is determined to be a one-off past  experience,  which
           is not likely to be repeated, it may  still  be  appropriate  to
           recognize the individual concerned as a  refugee  if  there  are
           compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution, provided
           the other interrelated elements of the  refugee  definition  are
           fulfilled. This would include situations where  the  persecution
           suffered during the trafficking experience, even  if  past,  was
           particularly  atrocious  and  the  individual  is   experiencing
           ongoing  traumatic  psychological  effects  which  would  render
           return to the country of origin intolerable. In other words, the
           impact  on  the   individual   of   the   previous   persecution
           continues...

           17. Apart from the persecution experienced by individuals in the
           course of being  trafficked,  they  may  face  reprisals  and/or
           possible re-trafficking should they be returned to the territory
           from  which  they  have  fled  or  from  which  they  have  been
           trafficked. For  example,  the  victim's  cooperation  with  the
           authorities in the country of asylum or the country of origin in
           investigations may  give  rise  to  a  risk  of  harm  from  the
           traffickers upon return, particularly  if  the  trafficking  has
           been  perpetrated   by   international   trafficking   networks.
           Reprisals  at  the  hands  of  traffickers   could   amount   to
           persecution depending on whether the acts feared involve serious
           human rights violations or other  serious  harm  or  intolerable
           predicament  and  on  an  evaluation  of  their  impact  on  the
           individual concerned. Reprisals by  traffickers  could  also  be
           inflicted on the victim's family members, which could  render  a
           fear of persecution on the part of the victim well-founded, even
           if she or he has not been subjected directly to such  reprisals.
           In view of the serious human rights violations  often  involved,
           as described in paragraph 15 above, re-trafficking would usually
           amount to persecution.


           18.  In  addition,  the  victim   may   also   fear   ostracism,
           discrimination or punishment by  the  family  and/or  the  local
           community or, in some instances, by the authorities upon return.
           Such treatment is particularly relevant in  the  case  of  those
           trafficked into prostitution. In  the  individual  case,  severe
           ostracism, discrimination or punishment may rise to the level of
           persecution, in particular if aggravated by the trauma  suffered
           during, and as a result of, the trafficking process.  Where  the
           individual fears such treatment, her or his fear of  persecution
           is  distinct  from,  but  no  less  valid  than,  the  fear   of
           persecution  resulting  from  the  continued  exposure  to   the
           violence  involved  in  trafficking  scenarios.  Even   if   the
           ostracism from, or punishment by, family  or  community  members
           does not rise to the level of persecution,  such  rejection  by,
           and isolation from, social support networks may in fact heighten
           the  risk  of  being  re-trafficked  or  of  being  exposed   to
           retaliation, which could then give rise to a well  founded  fear
           of persecution.

 133.       The European Union Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004
      on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country
      nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise
      need international  protection  and  the  content  of  the  protection
      granted (the EU  Qualification  Directive)  expressly  permits  member
      states to apply standards more favourable to the  applicant  than  the
      minimum laid down. Article 10(1)(d) deals with the issue of a PSG but,
      as was noted in SB the only difference between Article 10  (1)(d)  and
      the corresponding Regulation 6 (1)(d) of the Qualification Regulations
      (cited above) is that the words 'in particular' (in  the  first  line)
      have  been  replaced  by  'for  example'.   In  its  comments  on  the
      Directive, the UNHCR advised that to avoid any protection gaps, member
      states should reconcile  the  two  approaches  to  permit  alternative
      rather than cumulative  application  of  the  two  concepts.  This  is
      referred to in Fornah and K at paragraph 15 where  UNHCR's  definition
      of a PSG is set out.

 134.       Although we were urged by Ms Brewer to find  that  the  two  sub
      sections should be read as alternative  concepts,  we  are  unable  to
      accept that. The matter was considered  at  length  in  SB  where  the
      judgment of Fornah and K was addressed. It was noted by  the  Tribunal
      that the  remarks  of  their  Lordships  were  obiter.  After  lengthy
      submissions on the point the Tribunal found that the two sections  had
      to be read together and that any other interpretation would  only  "do
      violence" to the adjunctive "and" (paragraph 71). The Tribunal found:

           It would  also  be  inconsistent  with  the  insistence  in  the
           Jurisprudence we have considered that the question as to whether
           the group is a particular social group for the purposes  of  the
           Geneva Convention must always be considered in  the  context  of
           the society in question.... if sub paragraphs (i) and  (ii)  are
           alternatives, then it  may  be  said  that  it  is  possible  to
           identify a particular social group without reference to evidence
           relating to any particular country. For example, it may be  said
           that as 'former victims of trafficking' or  'former  victims  of
           trafficking for sexual exploitation' are, per se, members  of  a
           particular  social  group  without  the  need  to  consider  the
           evidence relating to the society in  question,  which  does  not
           seem to us to make sense. It is possible that former victims  of
           trafficking  for  sexual  exploitation  may  be  members  of   a
           particular social group in  one  country,  but  not  in  another
           (paragraphs 71 and 72).


 135.       Ms Brewer, in her skeleton  argument,  referred  us  to  several
      judgments which give guidance on how the Refugee  Convention  and  the
      provisions regarding social groups should be applied.

 136.       We were referred to Lord Bingham's observation in Fornah  and  K
      (at paragraph 10) that:

           It is well-established that the Convention must  be  interpreted
           in accordance with its broad humanitarian objective  and  having
           regard to the principles, expressed in the preamble, that  human
           beings should enjoy  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  without
           discrimination  and  that  refugees  should  enjoy  the   widest
           possible exercise of these rights and freedoms....

 137.        The  following  observation  by  Sedley  J   in   Shah   [1997]
      Imm.A.R.145,153, commenting on the  complexity  of  such  issues,  was
      cited by Lord Steyn in Islam  v.  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department Immigration Appeal Tribunal and  Another,  Ex  Parte  Shah,
      [1999] UKHL 20:

           Its adjudication is not  a  conventional  lawyer's  exercise  of
           applying a legal litmus test to ascertain facts; it is a  global
           appraisal of an individual's past and prospective situation in a
           particular cultural, social, political and legal milieu,  judged
           by a test which, though it has legal and linguistic limits,  has
           a broad humanitarian purpose.

 138.       These views were echoed by Lord Hope  in  Hoxha  when  he  spoke
      about  the  "broad  humanitarian   principles   which   underlie   the
      Convention" (paragraph 6), the "large and liberal spirit"  that  needs
      to be called for "when a court is asked to  say  what  the  Convention
      means" (paragraph 8) and of the Convention and the Protocol as "living
      instruments, to which the broadest effect must be given to ensure that
      they continue to serve the humanitarian principles for  whose  purpose
      the Convention was entered into" (paragraph 7).

 139.       The social  group  put  forward  by  Ms  Brewer  was  'women  in
      Thailand'. We do not accept that, and find that it goes too far  given
      the documentary evidence before us on women in Thailand generally.  It
      was found in SB that where the PSG was the broad one of  gender,  then
      discrimination against the gender, i.e. discrimination  in  the  wider
      sense, must be shown to exist (paragraph 53). We do not find  that  it
      has been shown that all women in Thailand face discrimination or  that
      all women would be unable to access protection or assistance from  the
      state.  Unlike the situation for women in the other  countries  listed
      in Ms Brewer's skeleton argument, we find that there  is  insufficient
      documentary evidence before us to lead to  a  finding  that  women  in
      Thailand form a particular social group.

 140.       We do find, however, that the appellant falls  into  a  narrower
      social group;  that  of  'young  females  who  have  been  victims  of
      trafficking for sexual exploitation'. We  do  not  seek  to  define  a
      specific age group but the appellant as a woman in her early  twenties
      when she was trafficked can clearly be described as  young.  We  adopt
      the words of Baroness Hale in Hoxha and find that "women who have been
      victims of sexual violence in the past  are  linked  by  an  immutable
      characteristic which is at once independent of and the cause of  their
      current  ill-treatment...are  certainly  capable  of  constituting   a
      particular social group under the Convention" (paragraph 37).

 141.       We find that the shared past experience of being trafficked  for
      sexual exploitation amounts to a common, immutable characteristic.  We
      take note of the UNHCR guidelines which advise that:

           In establishing this ground it is not necessary that the members
           of a particular group know each other  or  associate  with  each
           other as a group. It is, however,  necessary  that  they  either
           share a common characteristic other than  their  risk  of  being
           persecuted or are perceived as a group by  society.  The  shared
           characteristic will often be one that is innate, unchangeable or
           otherwise fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of
           one's human rights. Persecutory action against a  group  may  be
           relevant in heightening the  visibility  of  the  group  without
           being its defining characteristic. As with the other  Convention
           grounds, the size  of  the  purported  social  group  is  not  a
           relevant criterion in determining whether a social group  exists
           within the meaning of Article 1A(2). While a claimant must still
           demonstrate a well-founded fear of being persecuted based on her
           or his membership of the particular social group, she or he need
           not demonstrate that all members of the group  are  at  risk  of
           persecution in order to establish the  existence  of  the  group
           (paragraph 37). It should therefore be noted that it is the past
           trafficking experience that would constitute one of the elements
           defining the  group  in  such  cases,  rather  than  the  future
           persecution now feared in the  form  of  ostracism,  punishment,
           reprisals or re-trafficking. In such situations, the group would
           therefore  not  be  defined  solely  by  its  fear   of   future
           persecution (paragraph 38).

 142.       We also take note of  the  findings  in  SB  (PSG  -  Protection
      Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 0002 and  PO  (Trafficked
      women) Nigeria CG [2009] UKAIT 00046. In both cases the Tribunal found
      that former victims of trafficking were capable of constituting a PSG.



 143.       We referred above to  paragraph  16  of  the  UN  Guidelines  on
      Trafficking. The view taken by the UN appears to be  that  the  future
      risk of persecution need not be considered in cases  where  applicants
      have been so atrociously ill treated that  they  are  still  suffering
      psychological trauma as, it is argued, the impact  of  persecution  on
      the appellant continues. This argument arises out of  the  application
      of Article 1 C (5) of the 1951 Convention  which  provides  that  even
      where the circumstances which gave  rise  to  the  claim  for  refugee
      status  have  ceased  to  exist,  a  person  who  is  able  to  invoke
      "compelling reasons arising out of previous persecution" for  refusing
      to avail himself of the protection of his country of nationality.  The
      application of 1 C (5) to 1 A was a matter considered by the House  of
      Lords in Hoxha. It was made clear in that judgment that whilst  it  is
      one thing to withdraw refugee status from someone who has  been  found
      to fear persecution and to whom such status has already been  granted,
      it is another to grant it in circumstances where there is  no  ongoing
      fear, simply on the basis of past persecution.  In  the  case  of  our
      appellant, status has not of course been granted  and  so  she  cannot
      argue, and indeed has not done so, that  her  past  persecution  alone
      entitles her to status under the Convention. Her claim is that she has
      an ongoing fear. The reason we  have  found  the  guidelines  helpful,
      however, is that they deal specifically with  victims  of  trafficking
      and because they acknowledge the  relevance  of  the  impact  of  past
      persecution on an applicant.

      Persecution

 144.       An  assessment  of  whether  an  applicant  as  a  member  of  a
      particular social group is likely to face  persecution  will  be  case
      specific. We do not accept that it can be argued that  all  trafficked
      women are at risk. The risk  will  depend  on  the  age  and  personal
      circumstances of the applicant. Factors such as  her  marital  status,
      domestic background,  familial  support  network,  educational  level,
      qualifications, past work experience and  availability  of  employment
      are all relevant  factors  and  this  list  is  not  exhaustive.  Also
      significant will be the applicant's state of mind.  Someone  suffering
      ongoing trauma will be more vulnerable  to  the  risk  of  persecution
      because of an inability to re-integrate  into  society.  The  reliance
      upon a shelter to provide help may also ironically place an  applicant
      at risk because it will identify her as a former trafficked victim and
      as a woman without the means of  other  support.   Such  a  vulnerable
      female may well be targeted by traffickers. We referred earlier to the
      absence of a missing persons list in Thailand and we observed  that  a
      woman  without  a  family  network  would  not  be   missed   if   she
      'disappeared'.

 145.       The motives of the trafficker are also relevant to the issue  of
      risk. We recognise that this will be difficult to assess as we do  not
      have direct evidence from those involved in trafficking;  however,  it
      will be necessary to consider the accepted facts. A trafficker who has
      worked alone is less likely to expend resources in  tracking  down  an
      escapee than one who works with  others  and  has  greater  resources.
      Where more individuals are involved in the  process  there  will  have
      been greater costs involved and more people who will want a pay  back.
      It may be that the longer a woman has worked  for  a  trafficker,  the
      less risk there is that he would pursue her if she escaped as she  may
      already have earned him a satisfactory amount. The  situation  may  be
      different where a woman has escaped after  just  some  months  as  the
      investment may not have been paid off and the trafficker will want  to
      make good his losses. The situation of the woman on return  will  also
      be relevant.   Clearly if she is in employment and has family support,
      including male relatives to protect her, it  is  less  likely  that  a
      trafficker will succeed in enticing her.

 146.       We now consider the situation for the appellant. We  have  heard
      compelling evidence, which we fully accept, that the  appellant  is  a
      particularly vulnerable young woman. In that sense she is not  in  the
      same position as other women being returned  to  Thailand.  We  accept
      that it would be very difficult  for  her  to  reintegrate  into  Thai
      society and support herself without falling back  into  the  hands  of
      traffickers because her fragility would inevitably attract  the  wrong
      kind of attention. We are also cognisant of the fact that she  has  no
      family support, no home and limited education.

 147.       Ms Skrivankova gave evidence that young, single women  returning
      to Thailand  after  a  long  absence  in  Europe  are  assumed  to  be
      prostitutes and are therefore ostracised by their communities. We find
      it difficult to accept that all such women would be  treated  in  this
      way however we are prepared to accept that some women  may  indeed  be
      viewed as such by society.  This  is  something  which  will  be  case
      specific and will depend on an applicant's personal  profile  and  the
      condition in which she returns.

 148.       We find  that  for  the  appellant  it  would  be  difficult  to
      reintegrate into her home community because of the fact that she would
      be unable to adequately  explain  her  long  absence  and  her  return
      without funds and with a clearly fragile state of  mind.  We  note  Ms
      Kralj's evidence that  the  appellant  has  a  low  threshold  to  re-
      traumatising triggers and that anything from the past could act  as  a
      trigger. We were able to observe at first hand the manner in which she
      fell apart when questions about M were put to her.

 149.       If she felt unable to return to her home area,  the  appellant's
      alternative would be to seek work elsewhere; however, the evidence  is
      that jobs are hard to come by, particularly for somebody who has  been
      away from the job market  for  a  number  of  years  and  who  has  no
      qualifications and no references. It  is  likely  that  the  appellant
      would be forced by economic necessity to seek out work in the  tourist
      industry which would appear to be the only area  where  employment  is
      possible. The problem is, as the  evidence  shows,  that  the  tourist
      industry includes a rampant sex trade where  traffickers  operate.  We
      also bear in mind that during the time she has been  in  the  UK,  the
      appellant has not obtained any qualification or learnt any skills that
      would assist her in finding employment. Although it was not  suggested
      that societal discrimination in itself amounts to persecution, and  we
      do not find that it does, it is a factor which  is  relevant  for  the
      purposes of assessing risk as it contributes to the isolated  position
      a  woman  would  find  herself  in  which,  in  turn,  increases   her
      vulnerability and her attraction to traffickers. We do  not  say  that
      the likelihood that the appellant would be unable to find  work  which
      would be unlikely to expose her to a risk of trafficking,  amounts  to
      persecution, but it is a factor that when viewed cumulatively with the
      other facts of her situation places her at additional risk.

 150.       It could be said that having been trafficked once, she would  be
      wiser the  next  time  round.  However,  the  evidence  indicates  the
      opposite is the case and that former victims of trafficking  are  even
      more vulnerable to  re-trafficking  because  they  have  already  been
      through the business and know how to be compliant. They are easier for
      traffickers to deal with as they do not have to be  taught  the  rules
      from scratch; the 'breaking in' period has already taken place.

 151.       The risk to the appellant then is that without any  prospect  of
      employment other than in the tourist industry, she would find  herself
      in a situation where she could be re-  trafficked.  She  may  also  be
      sought out by the traffickers who brought her to the UK and who  might
      want to recoup their investment in her. She has been told that she had
      a debt to pay and her escape before that had been done would be likely
      to have aggrieved the traffickers. We have already given  reasons  why
      we conclude that M worked as part of a gang with official connections.
      We do not know if any attempts have been made by him to locate her  in
      this country; he may well have tried and been unable to find her,  but
      it would certainly be an easier  task  for  him  if  she  returned  to
      Thailand. We note that in  the  UK  she  has  been  residing  in  safe
      accommodation and has had no contact with other Thai citizens and that
      this is likely to remain the case. We note the evidence before us that
      accessing information on returnees is  a  simple  matter  and  we  are
      mindful of the  various  reports,  cited  above,  which  indicate  the
      complicity of immigration officials with criminals and traffickers.

 152.        Ms  Akbar  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
      appellant's relatives in Thailand had been  approached  by  M  or  any
      member of a gang since the appellant's escape. This question has never
      been put to the appellant. Whilst it is safe to assume that she  would
      have disclosed this information at some point had such an event  taken
      place, we note that there is nothing to indicate that the identity  of
      her aunt and cousins, or indeed their whereabouts, are  known  to  the
      traffickers.  This  was  not  a  matter  pursued  at  the  appellant's
      interview or raised in cross-examination  at  the  hearing  though  we
      accept that the respondent cut short her questioning of the  appellant
      when it became clear that the appellant was unable to  cope  with  the
      examination.

 153.       Paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules provides:

           The fact that a person has already been subject  to  persecution
           or serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or
           such harm, will be regarded  as  a  serious  indication  of  the
           persons well  founded  fear  of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
           suffering  serious  harm,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  to
           consider that such persecution  or  serious  harm  will  not  be
           repeated.

 154.       The leading UK case on past  persecution  is  Demirkaya  v  SSHD
      [1999] ImmAR 498 and closely reflects the principle  set  out  in  the
      above paragraph. The court held that the treatment a person  had  been
      subjected to before leaving his country of origin was very relevant to
      the question of whether  that  person  had  a  well  founded  fear  of
      persecution on his return. The court held that in  the  absence  of  a
      significant change in the country of origin, there may be a real  risk
      of persecutory treatment on return. There is nothing in  the  evidence
      before us which would suggest  that  the  situation  in  Thailand  has
      changed since the time of the appellant's departure. On  the  accepted
      facts, the appellant has already been trafficked from  Thailand  which
      demonstrates a  failure  by  the  state  to  protect  her  from  being
      trafficked. For the reasons given by the appellant,  and  taking  into
      account the evidence of the country experts, we find that  either  her
      traffickers would be reasonably likely to  learn  of  her  return  and
      would be motivated to seek her out or that she would  be  at  risk  of
      being re-trafficked because of her lack of support, lack  of  economic
      opportunity, the stigma attached  to  her  as  a  prostitute  and  her
      vulnerable state of mind.

      Humanitarian Protection

 155.       Under paragraph 339C an applicant is  entitled  to  Humanitarian
      Protection if he can show that:

           (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has  arrived  at  a  port  of
           entry in the United Kingdom;
           (ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation 2
           of The Refugee or Persons in Need  of  International  Protection
           (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
           (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
           person concerned, if he returned to the country of return, would
           face a real risk of suffering serious harm and  is  unable,  or,
           owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection
           of that country; and
             (iv)  he  is  not  excluded  from  a  grant   of   humanitarian
protection.

           Serious harm consists of:


           (i) the death penalty or execution;
           (ii) unlawful killing;
           (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
           a person in the country of return; or
           (iv) serious and individual  threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
           person by reason of indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of
           international or internal armed conflict.

 156.       Although we have found for the reasons set out  above  that  the
      appellant is a member of a particular social group, and that therefore
      the Refugee Convention is engaged, in the event that we  are  mistaken
      in our analysis under the  Convention,  we  consider  that  given  our
      finding that the appellant has shown that she would be at  substantial
      risk  of  serious  harm  (i.e.  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment   or
      punishment) on return to Thailand, she  is  entitled  to  Humanitarian
      Protection if she cannot qualify for refugee status.

 157.       Either grant is of course dependent on the  appellant's  ability
      to show that she would be unable to access a sufficiency of protection
      and that internal relocation would not be a viable option.

      Sufficiency of protection

 158.       We find that the risk to the appellant emanates from  agents  of
      persecution; i.e. traffickers or criminal enterprises and we find that
      despite the attempts of the Thai government to combat the business  of
      trafficking, as discussed above, the authorities are unable  to  offer
      effective protection to women such  as  the  appellant.  We  note  the
      widespread nature and extent of trafficking in and from Thailand which
      is said to have steadily increased; indeed, the evidence before us  is
      that "in recent years,  the  number  of  annual  convictions  for  sex
      trafficking has declined" (US report on TIP). This is despite the anti-
      trafficking legislation implemented in June 2008. The  evidence  shows
      that only three traffickers have been convicted over  the  past  years
      and that during the year covered by the report,  no  convictions  were
      achieved.

 159.       Whether the authorities in an applicant's country of origin  are
      able to protect victims  or  potential  victims  of  trafficking  will
      depend on whether legislative and administrative mechanisms have  been
      put in place to prevent and combat trafficking, as well as to  protect
      and assist the victims and on whether these mechanisms are effectively
      implemented in practice. In Bagdanavicius  and  Anor  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ  1605,  the  Court  of
      Appeal held that sufficiency of state protection, whether  from  state
      agents or non state actors, meant a willingness  and  ability  on  the
      part of the receiving state to provide  through  its  legal  system  a
      reasonable level  of  protection  from  ill  treatment  of  which  the
      applicant for asylum had a well founded fear. The effectiveness of the
      system provided was to be judged by its ability  to  deter  and/or  to
      prevent the form of persecution of which there was a  risk,  not  just
      punishment of it after the event. We note that the UNHCR's  guidelines
      advise that where reasonable  steps  to  prevent  trafficking  and  to
      provide effective protection and assistance to victims have  not  been
      taken, the fear of persecution of the individual is likely to be well-
      founded. We are aware that the Thai government has enacted legislation
      to attempt to tackle the problem of trafficking which, as the  country
      material indicates, is widespread  and  a  serious  problem  all  over
      Thailand. We accept that inefficiency and incompetence is not the same
      as unwillingness (Horvath [2001] AC 489). The country evidence  before
      us, however, indicates  the  problem  is  more  than  inefficiency  or
      incompetence. It is reported that corruption  is  rife  and  that  the
      involvement of  officials,  whether  at  the  border,  at  immigration
      counters  at  airports  or  in  other  government  departments,   with
      traffickers and criminals has weakened the impact of the  steps  taken
      by the government to combat human trafficking.

 160.       We note that women were trafficked to various  countries  around
      the world which gives weight to Ms  Skrivankova's  evidence  that  the
      country of destination can easily be changed for women who  are  being
      re-trafficked, if considered necessary.  We  note  that  the  evidence
      indicates that high-level officials  did  not  participate  in  taking
      bribes from traffickers or criminals and that it was the low  or  mid-
      level police  officers  who  facilitated  the  most  severe  forms  of
      trafficking and for that reason we  do  not  find  that  the  risk  of
      persecution can be said to emanate from the state. However,  officials
      found to be complicit in any part of the illegal economy  were  rarely
      prosecuted and we find  that  this  strengthens  our  finding  that  a
      sufficiency of protection would not be available to the appellant.

 161.       We take account of the fact that there are  shelters  which,  it
      could be argued,  operate  to  provide  some  form  of  protection  to
      trafficked women  however  the  evidence  before  us,  which  we  have
      referred to earlier, is that such shelters are manned by men  and  not
      women, that they provide a detention like environment, that they offer
      no assistance with education or skills training and that they  provide
      only  temporary,  short  term  accommodation.  We   also   note   that
      counselling services are limited and funds to assist trafficked  women
      are scarce. It is important to note that  a  great  deal  of  personal
      information is required before any help can be accessed and that given
      the perception of corruption, and of the appellant's belief  that  her
      trafficker had links with the authorities, she would be  reluctant  to
      provide such information for fear of reprisals. Finally, there is also
      the fact that the appellant has been found to be a woman who would  be
      extremely unlikely to seek such help given her personal  circumstances
      and the ongoing trauma she suffers.

      Internal relocation

 162.       The correct approach to the issue  of  internal  relocation  was
      laid out by Lord Bingham in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 and confirmed  in  AH
      (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49. It is whether a  claimant  can  reasonably  be
      expected to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him
      to do so. It is important to bear in mind that the test for relocation
      must not be equated with a well founded fear of persecution or a  real
      risk of ill treatment. This is reflected  in  paragraph  339O  of  the
      Immigration Rules HC 395, as amended. The assessment must be  directed
      to the situation of  the  particular  appellant,  whose  age,  gender,
      experience, health, skills and family ties may all be  relevant.  Thus
      the circumstances of each applicant must be  carefully  assessed.  For
      some, relocation may well be a possibility.

 163.        We have above set out in some detail  why  we  have  found  the
      appellant to be particularly vulnerable. We have also explained why we
      found that she would be unlikely to obtain employment that would  keep
      her safe from a risk of being re-trafficked. We  heard  evidence  that
      sex traffickers operate throughout Thailand and that poorer areas  are
      particularly targeted.  Single, young women can be at risk in any part
      of the country if they live without family support and are not  strong
      enough to withstand the risk of being duped into the sex trade.  Their
      socio-economic conditions have a direct bearing on the extent of  risk
      they are likely to face.

 164.       We take note of the  fact  that  there  are  some  shelters  for
      victims of trafficking in Thailand. We have addressed  this  issue  in
      paragraph 159.  The evidence from Ms Pollock  and  Ms  Skrivankova  is
      that (unlike the evidence on shelters in Nigeria in PO),  these  focus
      mainly on providing short-term  assistance  to  those  who  have  been
      trafficked  into  the  country.  Moreover,  they  are   described   as
      resembling detention centres with women unable to come and go  freely.
      That would have a negative impact on the  appellant  who  has  already
      struggled with restrictions on her movements when she  was  living  at
      the  Medaille  Trust  as  this  was  reminiscent  of  her  period   of
      trafficking. The evidence has also been that the appellant would  find
      it difficult to access assistance because  of  her  fragile  state  of
      mind. Even if the appellant felt able to approach the authorities  for
      help, the US State Department report, as cited earlier, observed  that
      funds for fighting trafficking or aiding its victims were  limited  as
      was the availability of psychological counselling.

 165.       We have heard evidence that if the appellant is removed from her
      therapy, she would essentially fall apart. We had the  opportunity  to
      observe the appellant give oral evidence in court  and  we  noted  her
      extreme distress and her  inability  to  physically  move  or  compose
      herself upon completion of her examination. In our  judgment,  such  a
      reaction could not have been feigned and indeed  the  lengthy  medical
      reports that are before us confirm that the appellant has  reacted  in
      that way throughout her weekly therapy at the Helen Bamber  Foundation
      although there are now some fragile signs of improvement. The evidence
      before us is that counselling in Thailand is extremely limited and  we
      accept that the appellant  is  not  somebody  who  would  be  able  to
      approach the relevant bodies for assistance.  Her  limited  education,
      her timidity and her perception that officials have  connections  with
      trafficking gangs would all serve to increase her reluctance to do so.
      We note that she was not even able to seek help in  this  country  and
      only came to the attention of  the  Foundation  following  a  hospital
      referral after a suicide attempt. Her feelings of unworthiness and her
      description of herself as defiled and dirty  would  only  put  further
      obstacles in the way of accessing assistance.  In  the  light  of  all
      these factors we find that it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to relocate and we  also  find  that  due  to  her  personal
      circumstances she would be vulnerable wherever she went.

 166.       Ms Brewer did not seek  to  argue  that  the  appellant's  human
      rights were engaged because she was a suicide risk  and  we  have  not
      therefore considered it necessary to address this  point.  Whether  or
      not she is  a  suicide  risk,  it  is  clear  that  her  psychological
      condition is fragile and that is relevant to how  she  would  cope  on
      return and also to how she would be perceived by others,  particularly
      traffickers who  might  find  her  to  be  an  easy  target.  We  have
      considered her state of mind in that context.

      UK's obligations under the Council  of  Europe  Convention  on  Action
against     Trafficking in Human Beings

 167.       On 17 December 2008  the  UK  ratified  the  Council  of  Europe
      Convention on Action against Trafficking in  Human  Beings  (CETS  No.
      197). The Convention is based on recognition  of  the  principle  that
      trafficking in human beings constitutes a violation  of  human  rights
      and an offence to the dignity and integrity of the human being. It  is
      a comprehensive treaty which aims to prevent trafficking, protect  the
      human rights of victims of trafficking and prosecute the  traffickers.
      It  applies  to  all  forms  of  trafficking;  whether   national   or
      transnational, whether or not related to organised crime  whoever  the
      victim and whatever the form of  exploitation.  Ratification  required
      the UK to have a national referral mechanism (a definitive process for
      identifying victims) in place for 1 April  2009.  Other  key  benefits
      included  a  process  by  which  victims  would  be  offered  support,
      including a 45 day reflection and recovery period, and the possibility
      of a one-year renewable residence permit, and  would  be  assisted  in
      giving  information to police so  that  the  authorities  could  bring
      those who exploit them to justice. Victims were to be offered  medical
      treatment,  counselling  and  information  as  well   as   appropriate
      accommodation. There are also provisions for  receiving  compensation.
      The Convention provides the possibility of not imposing  penalties  on
      victims for their involvement in unlawful  activities,  if  they  were
      compelled to do so by their situation.

 168.       The Secretary of State accepted the appellant's  claim  to  have
      been trafficked into the UK for sexual  exploitation.  That  is  plain
      from the refusal letter and was confirmed by Ms Akbar at the  hearing.
      As required under the Convention the UK had  an  obligation  to  offer
      immediate support  and  to  investigate  her  claim  with  a  view  to
      prosecuting those responsible. This duty is emphasised by the European
      Court of Human Rights in the recent  case  of  Rantsev  v  Cyprus  and
      Russia (Application no. 25965/04) - judgment delivered  on  7  January
      2010) where a Russian  national  travelled  to  Cyprus,  worked  as  a
      prostitute in a discotheque and died whilst attempting to  escape  the
      flat she was held in after notifying her employer that she  wanted  to
      return to Russia. Legal proceedings were initiated by her father.

 169.       Ms Brewer criticised the Secretary of State for failing to carry
      out the duties incumbent  on  him,  i.e.  to  undertake  enquiries  or
      investigations following the receipt of the  information  provided  to
      him by the appellant via the UKHTC. We are mindful of  the  fact  that
      this is a relatively recent Convention and there may not yet have been
      time to implement its provisions or to properly train all  appropriate
      Home Office officials but it appears that the Secretary of State could
      have done more to investigate the appellant's very  serious  complaint
      particularly  as  it  was  noted  by  the  interviewing  officer  that
      substantial detail had been provided.

 170.       Although there is a non-punishment  provision  included  in  the
      Convention, the appellant was prosecuted for using  a  false  passport
      and sentenced to nine months in prison. We accept, however, that  this
      was not a breach of the Convention by the respondent  as  he  was  not
      aware at the time of the prosecution that the appellant was  a  victim
      of trafficking as she did not  disclose  this  fact  until  after  her
      sentence was completed. However we do  find  it  surprising  that  the
      appellant's failure to disclose her history 'earlier' was held against
      her,  particularly  as  the   respondent's   own   guidelines   advise
      caseworkers that the failure  of  a  trafficking  victim  to  disclose
      information should not count against her as it  can  be  explained  by
      many reasons.

 171.       When the appellant shared her experiences with the  authorities,
      she was referred to the UKHTC  on  21  February  2007,  presumably  to
      assist in identifying whether she was indeed  a  victim.  Despite  the
      UKHTC referral her to the  Poppy  Project,  a  Home  Office  sponsored
      organisation, she was served with papers as an illegal entrant and two
      attempts were made to remove her from  the  UK  before  she  had  been
      assessed by the Poppy Project and whilst  the  identification  process
      was ongoing.  Moreover, in refusing her  application  for  asylum  and
      Discretionary Leave, the respondent has held against the appellant the
      fact that she did not disclose  her  account  earlier  and  no  action
      appears to have been taken as a result of the information she provided
      to the UKHTC. We can see no consideration having  been  given  to  the
      issue of a renewable residence permit to the  appellant  as  permitted
      under the Convention.

 172.       The appellant also relied upon Articles 4 and 8  but  given  our
      findings it has not been necessary to consider those  aspects  of  the
      claim. Although no submissions were made  on  Humanitarian  Protection
      grounds, we have found that if  we  are  wrong  with  respect  to  our
      analysis on particular social groups, the appellant would be  entitled
      to protection on the basis that she has established  a  real  risk  of
      serious harm in Thailand.

Decision

 173.       The original Tribunal was found to have made a material error of
      law. The following decision is substituted.

 174.       The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

 175.       The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.



Senior Immigration Judge Keki?
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

               LIST OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL


2005  International Migration in Thailand by IOM Bangkok

2006  US Department of State, Country Report on Human Rights  Practices

1 January 2006   Women's Commission for Refugee Women and Children (USA),
                  Abuse Without End: Burmese Refugee Women and      Children
                  at Risk of Trafficking

20 January 2006  UN  Committee  Monitoring  Compliance  with  Women's  Anti-
                  discrimination Convention  Takes  Up  Periodic  Report  of
                  Thailand

3 February 2006  UN Concluding Comments of the Committee on the  Elimination
                  of Discrimination Against Women - Thailand.

17 March  2006     Office  of  the  UNHCR  Concluding  Observations  of  the
                  Committee on the Rights of the Child

7 April 2006     UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection

7 July 2006      The Nation, Judges and  Academics  Discuss  Trafficking  in
                  Thailand "Anti-Trafficking Seminar"

October 2006     API Gender Issues in Asylum Claims

2007  US Department of State, Country Report on Human Rights  Practices

26 January 2007  Inquirer.net 1.36m Trafficked Person from Asia

31 May 2007      BBC Country Profile Thailand and map

12 June 2007     US Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report

26 June 2007     Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2007

28 September 2007      Thai News Service: Report Says Victims of Human
                  Trafficking Receive Little Help.

1 October 2007   Human Trafficking.org

1 October 2007   IOM South East Asia

2 October 2007   The Nation (Thailand) New Law on Trafficking

10 October 2007        Report by Daphne Kapetanaki, Senior Support Worker
                  for the Poppy Project

29 October 2007  Helen Bamber Foundation - Lucy Kralj letter

3 December 2007  Thai News Service: National Legislative Assembly Passes
                  Anti-Human Trafficking Act

31 December 2007       Helen Bamber Foundation - report by Lucy Kralj

               2008. US Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report

2008  US Department of State, Country Report on Human Rights  Practices

2 January 2008   Bangkok Post Opinion Editorial: An Ugly Trade in Human
                  Misery.

18 January 2008  Anti-Slavery International - report by Klara Skrivankova

22 January 2008  Helen Bamber Foundation - Lucy Kralj letter

22 May 2008      Helen Bamber Foundation - Lucy Kralj

9 August 2008    Helen Bamber Foundation - Lucy Kralj letter

15 August 2008   Anti-Slavery International - Klara Skrivankova


1 December 2008  Country Expert Report in Relation to Return of Trafficking
                       Victims to Thailand - Jackie Pollock

2009  US Trafficking in Persons Report

20 March 2009    Helen Bamber Foundation - Lucy Kralj letter

29 April 2009    IAS Research and Information Unit Country of Origin
                  Information Report










