
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Yussuf (meaning of "liable to deportation") [2018] UKUT 00117 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January and 5 March 2018                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              SHARMARKE YUSSUF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Lupins
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 impliedly amends  section  3(5)(a)  of
the Immigration Act 1971 by (a) removing the function of  the  Secretary  of
State of deeming a person's deportation to be conducive to the public  good,
in the case of a foreign criminal within the meaning of the  2007  Act;  and
(b) substituting an automatic  "deeming"  provision  in  such  a  case.  The
judgments of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 make this plain. To that extent Ali  (section
6 - liable to deportation) Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  00250  (IAC)  is  wrongly
decided.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant, born on 1 January 1982, is a  citizen  of  Somalia.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in January  2004  and  claimed  asylum.   An
    adjudicator allowed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse  his  claim.   As  a  result  of  the  adjudicator's
    decision, the appellant was granted refugee status, and also  leave  to
    remain, on 13 October 2004.

 2. The appellant committed a number of criminal  offences  in  the  United
    Kingdom, culminating in  2010,  when  he  was  convicted  of  attempted
    wounding and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

 3. The respondent considered whether to  revoke  the  appellant's  refugee
    status, in the light of this conviction, but ultimately decided not  to
    do so.   On  22  April  2014,  however,  the  respondent  informed  the
    appellant that she was proposing to  revoke  his  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  pursuant  to  section  76(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").   This
    provides as follows:-

         "76. Revocation of leave to enter or remain

             (1)  The Secretary of State may revoke a  person's  indefinite
                  leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
                  person -

                  (a)  is liable to deportation, but

                  (b)  cannot be deported for legal reasons."



B. Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  His appeal was heard at Richmond on 23 December  2014  by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and from Ms Ryan, who worked at St Mungo's Hostel, where  the
    appellant had been living.

 5. The Judge observed that the offence for which the  appellant  had  been
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment was not the first of its kind.  In
    2007 the appellant  had  received  a  custodial  sentence  for  another
    wounding offence.  The appellant's offending  history  appeared  to  be
    linked to problems he had with alcohol.  Ms Ryan,  however,  confirmed
    the appellant's evidence that his behaviour had significantly  improved
    since he had been living at the hostel and that he had not subsequently
    offended.

 6. None of this, however, had any material bearing, insofar as  the  Judge
    was concerned:-

         "15. The scope of this appeal is, however, very  limited.   Section
             76 of the 2002 Act  provides  that  indefinite  leave  may  be
             revoked where a person is liable to  deportation  but  cannot,
             for legal reasons, be deported.   The  appellant  is  still  a
             Somali national.   He  has  a  conviction  for  which  he  was
             sentenced to 2 years imprisonment, which is over the threshold
             for automatic deportation set by section 32 of the Borders Act
             2007, but he retains refugee status.  He is thus shown  to  be
             within the parameters set by section 76.

         16.  Section 76 is clearly a discretionary power, and the  decision
             letter makes clear that the respondent  appreciated  that  and
             considered her discretion, concluding that the seriousness  of
             the offence justified the decision to revoke.  There might  be
             scope for an argument that, certainly by the time the decision
             was finally taken, the appellant had changed so  that  overall
             discretion could or should have been exercised in his  favour,
             although given the nature of the  offence  and  the  statutory
             presumption in section 72(2) it may be  doubted  whether  that
             argument would succeed.  This Tribunal has, however, no  power
             to review the exercise  of  that  statutory  discretion.   The
             grounds on which the Tribunal can act are set out  in  section
             84 of the 2002 Act, and are that the decision is not according
             to law (from various sources, including immigration rules,  or
             otherwise) or that the decision maker  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules.   The
             expression "immigration rules" is defined in  section  113  as
             meaning rules made under section 1(4) of the  Immigration  Act
             1971, and clearly does not extend to other statutes."




C. Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7.  The  appellant  appealed  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's
    decision.  His appeal was heard in the Upper Tribunal on 27 August 2015
    by a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.   The  Deputy  Judge  considered  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)
    [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).  With the aid of that case, the  Deputy  Judge
    analysed the position as follows:-

         "28. In Ukus, the Tribunal held at paragraph [22]:

             There are thus four possible situations where the Tribunal  is
             considering  an  appeal  arising  from  the  exercise   of   a
             discretionary power:

             (i)  the decision maker has failed to make a  lawful  decision
                  in the  purported  exercise  of  the  discretionary  power
                  vested in him and a lawful decision is required;

             (ii) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his  discretion
                  and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to intervene;

             (iii)     the  decision  maker  has  lawfully  exercised   his
                  discretion and the Tribunal upholds the  exercise  of  his
                  discretion;

             (iv) the decision maker has lawfully exercised his  discretion
                  and the  Tribunal  reaches  its  decision  exercising  its
                  discretion differently.

         29.  As I understood Mr Duffy, his submission is  that  the  appeal
             falls into category (i), and thus it would in theory have been
             open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the Secretary  of
             State had failed  to  make  a  lawful  decision  because,  for
             example, she had failed to follow  her  own  published  policy
             when purportedly exercising her discretionary power.

         30.  Ms Robinson's submission is that the judge could have  allowed
             the appeal  in  accordance  with  Section  86(3)(b).   Section
             86(3)(b) provided:

                  The Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar  as  it  thinks
                  that -

                  (b)  A discretion exercised in making a  decision  against
                      which the appeal is  brought  ...  should  have  been
                      exercised differently.

         31.  I consider that Ms Robinson is wrong in  her  submission  that
             this is a category (iv) case.  Section 84(1)(f)  of  the  2002
             Act gave a right of appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  person
             taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised  differently  a
             discretion conferred by Immigration Rules.  It did not provide
             a right of appeal against a discretion conferred  by  statute.
             I consider  that  Section  86(3)(b)  only  applied  where  the
             appellant had a valid ground of appeal under Section 84(1)(f).
              It did not apply where the appeal was against the exercise of
             discretion conferred on the Secretary of State by statute, and
             where the sole ground of appeal was (and is) that the decision
             is not in accordance with the law.

         32.  So, turning to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I find
             that the judge did not err in law in treating himself as being
             unable to substitute his own discretion for that exercised  by
             the Secretary of State.  The judge was right not to treat  the
             appeal as falling into category (iv)."




 D. Was the appellant liable to deportation?

 8. The Deputy Judge  had,  however,  been  presented  with  the  following
    additional argument from the appellant.  Relying on the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in Ali (section 6  -  liable  to  deportation)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 00250  (IAC),  the  appellant  contended  that,  since  the
    Secretary of State had not specifically deemed his  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good, he was not "liable to deportation" within
    the meaning of section 76 of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, the  Secretary
    of State had no power under section 76(1) to deprive the  appellant  of
    his indefinite leave to remain.

 9. In order to appreciate this aspect  of  the  appellant's  case,  it  is
    necessary to examine the legislative scheme.

10. Section 3(5) and (6) of the Immigration Act 1971 provides as follows:-

         "(5) A person who is not a British citizen is liable to deportation
             from the United Kingdom if -

             (a)  the Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good; or

             (b)  another person to whose family he belongs is or has  been
                  ordered to be deported.

         (6)  Without prejudice to the operation of subsection (5) above,  a
             person who is not a British citizen shall also  be  liable  to
             deportation from the United Kingdom if, after he has  attained
             the age of seventeen, he is convicted of an offence for  which
             he is punishable with imprisonment and on  his  conviction  is
             recommended for deportation by a court empowered by  this  Act
             to do so."

11. The UK Borders Act 2007  effected  major  changes  in  the  deportation
    regime.  Sections 32 and 33 provide as follows:-

         "32. Automatic deportation

             (1)  In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
                      and

                  (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

             (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to  a  period
                  of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

             (3)  Condition 2 is that -

                  (a)  the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                      State under  section  72(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
                      Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (c.  41)  (serious
                      criminal), and

                  (b)  the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

             (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act
                  1971 (c. 77), the deportation of  a  foreign  criminal  is
                  conducive to the public good.

             (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in
                  respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).

             (6)  The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order
                  made in accordance with subsection (5) unless-

                  (a)  he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,

                  (b)  the application for  revocation  is  made  while  the
                      foreign criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or

                  (c)  section 34(4) applies.

             (7)  Subsection (5) does not create a private right of  action
                  in  respect  of  consequences  of  non-compliance  by  the
                  Secretary of State.

        33.  Exceptions

             (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-

                  (a)  do not apply  where  an  exception  in  this  section
                      applies (subject to subsection (7) below), and

                  (b)  are subject to sections 7 and 8  of  the  Immigration
                      Act 1971 (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew
                      and other exemptions).

             (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign  criminal  in
                  pursuance of the deportation order would breach -

                  (a)  a person's Convention rights, or




                  (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the  Refugee
                      Convention.

             (3)  Exception 2 is where the Secretary of State  thinks  that
                  the foreign criminal was under the age of 18 on  the  date
                  of conviction.

             (4)  Exception 3 is where the removal of the foreign  criminal
                  from the United Kingdom  in  pursuance  of  a  deportation
                  order would breach rights of the  foreign  criminal  under
                  the EU treaties.

             (5)  Exception 4 is where the foreign criminal-




                  (a)  is the subject of a certificate under section 2 or 70
                      of the Extradition Act 2003 (c. 41),

                  (b)  is in custody pursuant to arrest under section  5  of
                      that Act,

                  (c)  is the subject of a provisional warrant under section
                      73 of that Act,

                  (d)  is the subject  of  an  authority  to  proceed  under
                      section 7 of the Extradition Act 1989 (c. 33)  or  an
                      order under paragraph 4(2) of Schedule 1 to that Act,
                      or

                  (e)  is the subject of a provisional warrant under section
                      8 of that Act or of a warrant under paragraph 5(1)(b)
                      of Schedule 1 to that Act.

             (6)  Exception 5 is where any of the following has  effect  in
                  respect of the foreign criminal-

                  (a)  a hospital order or guardianship order under  section
                      37 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (c. 20),

                  (b)  a hospital direction under section 45A of that Act,

                  (c)  a transfer direction under section 47 of that Act,

                  (d)  a compulsion order under section 57A of the  Criminal
                      Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (c. 46),

                  (e)  a guardianship order under section 58 of that Act,

                  (f)  a hospital direction under section 59A of that Act,




                  (g)  a transfer for treatment direction under section  136
                      of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment)  (Scotland)
                      Act 2003 (asp 13), or

                  (h)   an  order  or  direction  under  a  provision  which
                      corresponds to a provision  specified  in  paragraphs
                      (a) to (g)  and  which  has  effect  in  relation  to
                      Northern Ireland.

             (6A) Exception 6 is where the Secretary of State  thinks  that
                  the application of section 32(4) and (5) would  contravene
                  the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Council  of
                  Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking  in  Human
                  Beings (done at Warsaw on 16th May 2005).]

             (7)  The application of an exception-

                  (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;

                  (b)  results in it being assumed neither that  deportation
                      of the person concerned is conducive  to  the  public
                      good nor that it is not conducive to the public good;

                  but section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
                      Exception 1 or 4."

12. In MK (deportation - foreign criminal - public interest) Gambia  [2010]
    UKUT 281 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal (Sedley LJ;  Upper  Tribunal  Judges
    Latter and Ward) analysed the provisions of the 2007 Act:-

         "21. ... the provisions of s.32-34 of the 2007 Act now provide  for
             the automatic deportation of foreign criminals as  defined  in
             s.32(1).  A foreign criminal is a person who is not a  British
             citizen, who has been convicted in the UK of an offence and to
             whom either Condition 1 or 2 applies as defined in s.32(2) and
             (3).  Condition 1 is that the person has been sentenced  to  a
             period of imprisonment of at least 12  months.   There  is  no
             dispute in the present appeal that the appellant is a  foreign
             criminal within the meaning of s.32(1).

         22.  The consequences are set out in s.32(4) and (5) which  provide
             as follows:

                  "4.  For the purpose of s.3(5)(a) of the  Immigration  Act
                      1971 (c.77) the deportation of a foreign criminal  is
                      conducive to the public good.

                  5.   The Secretary of State must make a deportation  order
                      in respect of a foreign criminal (subject to  section
                      33)."

         23.   Parliament  has  therefore  provided  that  if  the  relevant
             conditions in s.32(1)-(3)  are  met,  the  respondent  has  no
             discretion but must, subject to s.33, make a deportation order
             and that the deportation of the foreign criminal is  conducive
             to the public good.  Thus, as  it  seems  to  us,  legislative
             policy has occupied what was formerly the field  of  executive
             policy.

         24.  S.33 then sets out a number of exceptions to the making of  an
             automatic deportation order.  These include as exception 1  in
             s.33(2)a where the removal of a foreign criminal in  pursuance
             of the deportation order would breach that person's Convention
             rights.  This too now represents legislative policy.  None  of
             the other exceptions are relevant to the present  appeal.   It
             follows in the light of these statutory provisions that it  is
             not open to the appellant to argue that his deportation is not
             conducive to the public good; nor  is  it  necessary  for  the
             respondent to argue that it is.  But the appellant may  resist
             it on the basis that it would nevertheless  be  in  breach  of
             article 8."

13. In  Ali,  the  Upper  Tribunal  examined  the  meaning  of  "liable  to
    deportation" in section 76(1) of the 2002 Act.  The Upper Tribunal held
    that the expression refers only to those whom section  3  of  1971  Act
    says are liable to deportation.  In order to be able  to  exercise  her
    power in section 76(1)  of  the  2002  Act  to  revoke  a  person's  of
    indefinite leave to remain, the Tribunal held  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had specifically to deem the deportation of  that  person  to  be
    conducive to the public good.  This was so, the Tribunal held,  despite
    sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act:-

         "18. As we remarked at the hearing, it  seems  odd  to  describe  a
             person who cannot be deported as "liable to deportation".   It
             is, however, clear that the statutory provisions  rule  out  a
             conclusion based on that simple meaning given  by  subsections
             (5) and (6) of s.3 of the 1971 Act.  It would appear to follow
             from that that liability to deportation for  the  purposes  of
             s.76 can arise in three ways.  They are the ways  set  out  in
             those  subsections,  and  are,  first,  the  deeming  by   the
             Secretary of State that the person's deportation is  conducive
             to the public good (s.3(5)(a));  secondly,  the  making  of  a
             deportation order against another person to whose  family  the
             person in  question  belongs  (s.3(5)(b));  and  thirdly,  the
             recommendation of the person's deportation by  a  court  under
             s.3(6).

         19.  None of those has happened in this  case.   Mrs  Cantrell  was
             clear in her acceptance that the Secretary of  State  has  not
             indicated that she deems this appellant's  deportation  to  be
             conducive to the public  good;  there  is  no  scope  for  the
             application of s.3(5)(b); and, although the appellant has been
             convicted of an offence in relation to which the  court  could
             have recommended his deportation, it did not do so.

         20.   So  far,  therefore,  the  appellant  is   not   "liable   to
             deportation" within the meaning of s.76.  The question,  then,
             is whether ss 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act make any difference.

         21.  As we have said, there can be no doubt that the appellant is a
             "foreign criminal" within the meaning of s.32.   But  s.32(5),
             requiring the Secretary of State to make a deportation  order,
             is subject to s.33, and it is  clear  that  the  Secretary  of
             State took the view (which is, of course, not contested)  that
             the appellant's removal would breach rights under the European
             Convention on Human Rights.  Exception 1 in s.33(2), therefore
             applies to this appellant.  The clear consequence of  that  is
             that s.32(5) does not apply to him: there is no obligation  to
             make  a  deportation  order  against  him.   The  position  in
             relation to s.32(4) is a little more obscure.   Section  33(1)
             says that it does not apply, but that is subject to subsection
             (7).  And subsection (7) provides  that  s.32(4)  does,  after
             all, apply "despite the application of Exception 1 or 4".  The
             provision of subsection (7)(b), leaving open the  question  of
             whether deportation is conducive to the public good, therefore
             applies only to the other Exceptions.

         22.  Thus the journey through  s.33  takes  us  back  to  where  we
             started, which is at s.32(4).  For the purpose of s.3(5)(a) of
             the 1971 Act, the deportation of the appellant  "is  conducive
             to the public good".

         23.  That provision is clearly relevant to liability to deportation
             under s.3(5)(a), but it is not the whole story.  Liability  to
             deportation under s.3(5)(a),  but  is  not  the  whole  story.
             Liability under s.3(5)(a) arises  only  if  the  Secretary  of
             State deems that person's deportation to be conducive  to  the
             public good.  The effect of s.32(4) of the 2007 Act  is  that,
             by statute, his deportation is conducive to the  public  good;
             so that, if the Secretary of State does (also) deem it  to  be
             conducive to the public good there can be  no  argument  about
             the basis for the Secretary of State's conclusion.  But, as we
             see it, under s.3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, the decision  of  the
             Secretary of State (or an officer) is a  crucial  requirement.
             That paragraph cannot possibly  be  read  as  if  it  provided
             merely  that  a  person  is  liable  to  deportation  if   his
             deportation is conducive to the public good.

         24.  As we have said, the Presenting  Officer  before  us  accepted
             that the Secretary of State has reached no such conclusion  in
             the present case.  It follows that, although the effect of the
             statutory provisions is that his deportation is  conducive  to
             the public good, he is not "liable to deportation" because the
             Secretary of State  has  not  deemed  his  deportation  to  be
             conducive to the public good.  She is presumably at liberty to
             do so: but, until she does so the provisions of  s.3(5)(a)  of
             the 1971 Act do not apply to him, and, in  consequence,  those
             of s.76 of the 2002 Act do not either."

14. In Bah (EO (Turkey) - Liability to deport) [2012] UKUT 00196 (IAC), the
    Upper Tribunal (Blake J;  Upper  Tribunal  Judges  Southern  and  Gill)
    considered the correct approach in deportation  appeals  that  did  not
    fall within section 32 of the 2007 Act.  In the course of its decision,
    the Upper Tribunal said:-

         "19. The present appeal  does  not  concern  automatic  deportation
             cases under section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007  ("the  2007
             Act").  If a person is a  "foreign  criminal"  as  defined  in
             section  32(1),  the  effect  of  section  32  is   that   the
             deportation of the individual is conducive to the public  good
             for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of the 1971  Act  (see  MK
             (deportation - foreign  criminal  -  public  interest)  Gambia
             [2010] UKUT 281 (IAC)).  Accordingly, in automatic deportation
             cases, no question can arise as to whether the  individual  is
             liable to deportation and/or the lawfulness of  the  Secretary
             of State's decision to make a deportation order against him."

15. In the present case, the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge distinguished  the
    appellant's case from that in Ali, as follows:-

         "21. On the particular facts of Ali's case, the Secretary of  State
             had in effect communicated to Ali that he was  not  liable  to
             deportation for the index offence,  and  that  he  would  only
             become potentially liable to deportation if he reoffended.  No
             equivalent representation has been made to  the  appellant  in
             this case.  Another potential distinguishing  feature  is  the
             concession by the Presenting Officer before the Upper Tribunal
             that the Secretary of State had not indicated that she  deemed
             Ali's deportation to be conducive to the  public  good.   This
             was clearly the right concession to make in the light  of  the
             wording of the letter dated 1 October 2009  which  was  quoted
             extensively by the Tribunal at paragraph [12] of the decision.
              But I question whether the notice of liability to deportation
             which  set  the  process  in  motion   did   not,   at   least
             constructively communicate to Ali that the Secretary of  State
             deemed his deportation to be conducive to the public  good  by
             making reference to Section 32 of  the  2007  Act,  and  quite
             possibly  specific  reference  to  Section  32(4).   The  same
             question arises in the present case in respect of  the  notice
             of liability to deportation served on the  appellant  in  2011
             (this notice is not in the core bundle, so its precise wording
             is a matter of conjecture).

         22.  In any event, I  prefer  the  statement  of  the  law  by  the
             Presidential panel in Bah to the statement of the law in  Ali,
             although I recognise that the statement of the law in  Bah  is
             obiter dicta.  I consider that the effect of Section 32(4)  is
             to remove discretion from the Secretary of State to  deem,  or
             not to deem, that the deportation of the person  concerned  is
             conducive to the  public  good  where  the  person  meets  the
             definition of a foreign criminal.  Since (a)  by  statute  the
             person's deportation is conducive to the public good, and  (b)
             the Secretary of State's discretion is  fettered  by  statute,
             the Secretary of State must ipso facto deem that the  person's
             deportation is conducive to the public good - and  a  separate
             declaration to that effect  is  not  necessary  to  trigger  a
             person's liability to deportation."

16. In summary, therefore, the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's findings  were
    that:-

      a) the power to revoke indefinite leave to remain conferred by section
         76(1) of the 2002 Act exists, notwithstanding that  the  respondent
         has  not  expressly  deemed  the  appellant's  deportation  to   be
         conducive to the public good; and

      b) the First-tier Tribunal could not allow the appellant's  appeal  by
         exercising its discretion differently from that of the  respondent.



17. The Upper Tribunal, therefore, dismissed the appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




E. Appeal to the Court of Appeal and remittal to the Upper Tribunal

18. Permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  granted  to  the
    appellant and on 14 February 2017 the appeal was allowed by consent, to
    the extent that the matter was remitted to  a  differently  constituted
    panel of the Upper Tribunal.  The associated statement of reasons  said
    this:-

         "The parties are in agreement that the Upper Tribunal determination
         is flawed to the extent that  it  erred  in  its  approach  to  the
         determination in the case of Ali.  The parties also agree that  the
         UT erred in its  approach  to  the  respondent's  discretion  under
         section 76 of the 2002 Act."

19. At the hearing on 23 January 2018,  Mr  Wilding,  for  the  respondent,
    submitted that Ali was wrongly decided.  He did, however, concede  that
    the Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  had  been  wrong  on  the  issue  of
    discretion.   The  Tribunal  directed  the  parties  to  file   written
    submissions concerning the correctness or otherwise of  Ali.   Both  Mr
    Bundock and Mr Wilding have done so with admirable detail and  clarity.
    The Upper Tribunal is grateful for their work.



F. "Liable to deportation": interpreting the relevant enactments

20. Mr Bundock submitted that, as a matter of statutory  construction,  the
    2007 Act could not be taken to have removed the need for the  Secretary
    of State to deem a person's deportation to be conducive to  the  public
    good, in order for that person to be liable to deportation.  It  would,
    said Mr Bundock, have been perfectly possible for  the  legislature  to
    have drafted section 32(4) of the 2007 Act along the following lines:-

         "For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
         (c.77), the Secretary of State is to be taken to  have  deemed  the
         deportation of any foreign criminal to be conducive to  the  public
         good."

21. There is some force in this submission.  The drafting  of  sections  32
    and 33 of the 2007 is not pellucid. In particular, it  has  caused  the
    Supreme Court some difficulty in Hesham Ali v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60: see paragraphs 12, 68 and 128.

22. The consequence if Ali is correct is, however,  intensely  problematic.
    Unless the Secretary of State takes the step of saying what  Parliament
    has already said; namely, that the deportation of a foreign criminal is
    conducive to the public good, then the person concerned  would  not  be
    liable to deportation, even though Parliament requires the Secretary of
    State to make a deportation order  in  respect  of  that  person.   The
    hypothetical man and woman in the street might  reasonably  ask  how  a
    person who is subject to  a  deportation  order  cannot  be  liable  to
    deportation.  Such, though, would be the position, where  there  is  no
    section 33 exception in play.

23. Even where  an  exception  applies,  section  33(7)  makes  plain  that
    Exceptions 1 and 4 do not prevent a person who is the  subject  of  the
    deportation order from being treated by operation of section 32(4) as a
    person whose deportation is conducive to the public good.

24. There is, we consider, considerable significance in the  opening  words
    of  section  32(4):  "For  the  purpose  of  section  3(5)(a)  ...  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the public good".  It
    is, in our view, impossible to resist the conclusion that those opening
    words  impliedly  amend  section  3(5)(a)  by  removing  the  "deeming"
    function of the Secretary of State under that provision, in the case of
    a foreign criminal within the meaning of the 2007 Act, and substituting
    an automatic deeming provision.

25. That is effectively what the Upper Tribunal found in MK, as long ago as
    2010 (see above).  Paragraphs (1) and (2) of the  italicised  words  in
    the  reported  version  of  the  case  are,  in  our  view,  a  correct
    expostulation of the law:-

         "(1) In automatic deportations made under s.32(5) of the UK Borders
             Act 2007 the respondent's  executive  responsibility  for  the
             public  interest  in  determining   whether   deportation   is
             conducive  to  the  public  good  has   been   superseded   by
             Parliament's assessment of where the public interest  lies  in
             relation to  those  deemed  to  be  foreign  criminals  within
             s.32(1)-(3).  In consequence  the  respondent's  view  of  the
             public interest has no relevance to an automatic  deportation.



         (2)  In such cases by virtue  of  s32(4)  it  is  not  open  to  an
             appellant to argue that his deportation is  not  conducive  to
             the public good nor is it  necessary  for  the  respondent  to
             argue that it is."

26. The matter has, we find, been put beyond doubt by the judgments of  the
    Supreme Court in Hesham Ali.  Lord Reed held as follows:-

         "10. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act provides that, for the  purposes
             of section 3(5)(a) of the 1971  Act,  "the  deportation  of  a
             foreign criminal  is  conducive  to  the  public  good".   The
             liability of "foreign criminals" to deportation, under section
             3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act, does  not  therefore  depend  on  any
             assessment by the Secretary of State: it  is  automatic.   The
             expression "foreign criminal" is defined by section  32(1)  of
             the 2007 Act as meaning a person who is not a British citizen,
             who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,  and  to
             whom one of the conditions in section 32(2) and  (3)  applies.
             The first of those conditions is that the person is  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.  The second
             is that the offence is specified  by  an  order  made  by  the
             Secretary of State, and the person is sentenced to a period of
             imprisonment.  No such order has yet been made."




27. Lord Wilson had this to say:-

         "67. A person is a "foreign criminal" under section 32(1)  and  (2)
             of the 2007 Act only if, not being a British citizen,  he  was
             convicted in the UK of an offence for which he  was  sentenced
             to imprisonment for at least 12 months.  So  the  misleadingly
             entitled  "automatic"  deportation,  for  which  the   section
             provides,  applies  in  effect  only  to  a  serious  offence.
             Subsection (4) provides that  the  deportation  of  a  foreign
             criminal is conducive to the public good for  the  purpose  of
             section 3(5)(a) of the 1971  Act,  in  other  words  with  the
             result that he should be liable to deportation.  So it is only
             the liability to  deportation,  not  the  deportation  itself,
             which the section makes automatic.

         ...

         69.  In para 14 above Lord Reed suggests that sections 32 and 33 of
             the 2007 Act were enacted in response to public concern about,
             in particular, the procedures for the deportation  of  foreign
             offenders.  But it is clear to me that there was equal, if not
             greater, dissatisfaction with  the  decisions  themselves,  in
             particular  when   they   rejected   deportation.    Why,   in
             particular, did  the  people  of  the  UK,  by  their  elected
             representatives, take the  unusual  step  of  pre-empting  the
             minister's decision whether a deportation was conducive to the
             public good by making a formal  resolution  in  section  32(4)
             that the deportation of a foreign criminal  was  conducive  to
             it?

         ... "

28. Finally, Lord Kerr (albeit dissenting as to the result):

         "126.    As noted above, (at para 98) foreign criminals are defined
               in section 32(1)-(3) of  the  Act.   By  section  32(4)  the
               deportation of those coming within that category  is  stated
               to be conducive to the public good.  Effectively, therefore,
               this provision removes  from  the  Secretary  of  State  the
               function of deciding whether the deportation of someone  who
               meets the criteria for designation  as  a  foreign  criminal
               conduces to the public good.  But it goes further than that.
               The terms of  the  provision,  that  the  deportation  of  a
               foreign criminal is conducive to the public good, purport to
               foreclose any legal debate as to whether the deportation  of
               anyone who comes within that  category  can  be  other  than
               conducive to the public good.  Thus, the  deportation  of  a
               person convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced to more
               than  12  months'  imprisonment  is  to  be  considered   as
               immutably in the public good, irrespective of, for instance,
               any philanthropy or other worthy endeavours in which he  may
               have engaged since his incarceration." (our emphases)

29. Before us, Mr Bundock submitted that these passages - which he  readily
    acknowledged support the respondent's position on  Ali  -  were  obiter
    dicta.  Even if they were,  we  should  accord  them  very  significant
    weight.  As it happens,  we  do  not  consider  that  they  can  be  so
    categorised.

30. The issue in Hesham Ali concerned the operation of  paragraphs  396  to
    399A of the immigration rules, as they then were.  Those rules are  set
    out at paragraph 23 of Lord Reed's judgment.   Paragraph  396  read  as
    follows:-

         "396.    Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
               shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  ...
               "

31. There is, as far as we are aware, no indication that the  Secretary  of
    State in Hesham Ali had expressly stated, pursuant to section  3(5)(a),
    that the appellant's deportation was  conducive  to  the  public  good.
    Accordingly, if Ali were correct, then paragraph 396 would have had  no
    application to the appellant in Hesham Ali.  Furthermore, the structure
    of paragraphs 396 to 399A strongly indicates that paragraphs 397 et seq
    were, likewise, predicated on the assumption that the person  concerned
    "is liable to deportation".

32. This is made express in the immigration rules,  as  substituted  on  28
    July 2014.  There,  under  the  heading  "Deportation  and  Article  8"
    paragraph A398 provides:-

         "A398.   These rules apply where:
                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention;
                ... "
33. As a result, if Ali  were  correct,  the  ramifications  would  not  be
    confined to section 76 of the  2002  Act.  They  would  extend  to  the
    operation of the immigration rules relating to deportation.

34. A similar point arises in relation to section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.
    This provides:-

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

35. Here too there would be obvious difficulties.

36. Before us, there was debate as to the status of Ali, as a  decision  of
    the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  had  not  been  "starred"  (see  Practice
    Direction 12.1).  A "starred" decision of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber of the Upper Tribunal binds not only  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but also the Upper Tribunal.  A non-starred reported  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, however, is generally to be followed by judges  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, unless the judge is  satisfied  that  the  decision  in
    question is wrong.

37.  For the reasons we have given and in the light  of  the  judgments  in
    Hesham Ali, we are satisfied that Ali was incorrectly decided.



G.  Exercising discretion differently: former sections  84  and  86  of  the
2002 Act

38. The second issue can be disposed of more rapidly.  Mr Wilding  informed
    us that, in this respect, the respondent continued to adopt the  stance
    she had taken in the Court of Appeal, which was that the  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge had been wrong to conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal
    was unable to substitute its own discretion for that of the respondent.



39. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge considered that former section 84(1)(f)
    of the 2002 Act, which provided that one of the grounds of  appeal  was
    that "the person taking the decision should have exercised  differently
    a discretion conferred  by  immigration  rules"  circumscribed  section
    86(3)(b) of that Act.  Section  86(3)(b)  provided  that  the  Tribunal
    "must allow the appeal insofar as  it  thinks  that  ...  a  discretion
    exercised in making a decision against which the appeal is  brought  or
    is treated as being brought should have  been  exercised  differently".
    These provisions have subsequently been repealed by the Immigration Act
    2014.

40. It is trite law that  clear  wording  is  required  in  order  for  the
    legislature to be found to  have  limited  or  restricted  a  right  of
    appeal.  No such clear wording existed in the  present  situation.   On
    its face, section 86(3)(b) was expressed in general terms.  The absence
    of any reference in it  to  the  immigration  rules  was,  accordingly,
    significant.   Indeed,  far  from  reading  down  section  86(3)(b)  by
    reference to section 84(1)(f), it seems to us that the  opposite  ought
    to apply; that is to say, in order to give effect to the  duty  of  the
    Tribunal under section 86(3), section 84 fell to be read as  permitting
    the inclusion of a ground of appeal, to the  effect  that  a  statutory
    discretionary  decision  ought  to  have  been  exercised  differently.
    Otherwise, a wholly unjustified distinction would have  arisen  between
    discretions under the immigration rules and  those  under  primary  and
    secondary legislation.



H.  Outcome and next steps

41. At the hearing on 5 March, we  announced  we  had  concluded  that  the
    respondent did have power under section 76 of the 2002  Act  to  revoke
    the appellant's indefinite leave to  remain  and  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in law in holding that he could not substitute
    his discretion for that of the respondent.  Accordingly,  the  decision
    in the appeal fell to be re-made.

42. Having heard submissions from Mr Bundock and  Mr  Wilding,  we  further
    concluded that, given the passage of time since the hearing in December
    2014, up-to-date evidence concerning the appellant would  be  required.
    The Tribunal accordingly adjourned the re-making of the decision (to be
    taken in the Upper Tribunal), having made case management directions.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  on  a  point  of
law.  The decision is, accordingly, set aside and the  matter  will  be  re-
made in the Upper Tribunal.


                         Signed                      Dated: 9 March 2018




                         The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                         President of the Upper Tribunal
                         Immigration and Asylum Chamber
