
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


           Basnet (validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT
00113(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 7 February 2012                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                KAPIL BASNET
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr D Stevenson of McGill & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A M Lochrie, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


   1. If the respondent asserts that an application was not accompanied by a
      fee, and so was not valid, the respondent has the onus of proof.


   2.  The  respondent's  system  of   processing   payments   with   postal
      applications risks falling into procedural  unfairness,  unless  other
      measures are adopted.


   3. When notices of appeal raise issues about  payment  of  the  fee  and,
      consequently, the validity of the application  and  the  appeal,  Duty
      Judges of the First-tier  Tribunal  should  issue  directions  to  the
      respondent to provide information to determine whether an  application
      was accompanied by the fee.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, as is his wife, Mrs  Sumati  Karki
    Basnet.  He had leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student under the Points Based System (PBS), valid  until  28
    May 2011.  On 13 May 2011 he applied, with his wife as a dependant, for
    extension of his leave under Tier 4.

 2. On 17 May 2011 the respondent wrote to the appellant:

         Thank you for your application ... it will now be passed to a  Case
    Work Unit.


         If there is any problem with  your  application,  such  as  missing
         documentation, a case worker will write to you as soon as  possible
         to advise what action you need to take to rectify the problem.   If
         there is an issue with the fee you have paid then your  application
         will be deemed to be  invalid  and  returned  to  you  as  soon  as
         possible by post.  You will be advised on what action you  need  to
         take to make a valid application.


 3. On 16 June 2011 the respondent wrote again to the appellant:

         Thank you for your attempted application for leave to remain ...


         ... Your application is invalid ... The Immigration  &  Nationality
         (Cost  Recovery  Fees)  Regulations  2011  and  the  Immigration  &
         Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011 specify the fee ... to be  paid
         ... if an applicant does not pay the  specified  fee,  his  or  her
         application is invalid.


         The specified fee has not been paid ...


         The passage next to the box ticked below provides more detail about
         the failure to pay the specified fee and the steps you should  take
         to ensure that you make the correct  payment  when  returning  your
         application.


         [Box  checked]:   Although  credit/debit  card  details  have  been
         provided, the issuing bank rejected the payment.   There  may  have
         been insufficient funds in the account or the details provided  did
         not match the information held by the bank.  For  security  reasons
         the cardholder's  name,  address,  expiry  date  and  issue  number
         supplied on the payment form must  correspond  to  the  information
         held by the issuing bank.  If the details fail to  match  the  bank
         will reject the payment.  Your fresh application should be returned
         to the address given on the application form.


 4. The words in bold above are also in  bold  on  the  original;  but  the
    letter remains silent as to the specific reason for non-payment.

 5. The first letter from the respondent was within the appellant's  period
    of existing leave, but the second letter came after his leave  expired.



 6. The appellant received the second letter  on  21  June  2011,  and  re-
    applied on 22 June 2011.

 7. The respondent refused that application by letter dated 3 August  2011.
    The letter states that  because  the  application  was  made  when  the
    appellant no longer had valid leave to remain in the United Kingdom, he
    did not have "an established presence studying in the United  Kingdom",
    and so did not qualify for the reduced level of maintenance funds to be
    shown.  The bank statements submitted to support  the  application  did
    not meet the maintenance requirements.

 8. It is common ground that throughout the period of both applications the
    appellant had funds in his bank account such that if he had made an "in
    time" application based on an "established presence",  the  application
    would have succeeded.

 9. The respondent's letter also advised the appellant:


         There is no right of appeal against this decision.


10. If the appellant had not made a valid application within his period  of
    leave, that would be a correct statement of the law.

11. The appellant filed a notice of appeal on 16 August 2011 with the First-
    tier Tribunal.  His grounds argue that his leave  continued  beyond  28
    May 2011 by the operation of section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971;
    that the respondent's rejection of the application made on 13 May  2011
    was invalid; that his leave  continued  until  the  "first  substantive
    rejection" of 3 August 2011; and that he had a right  of  appeal  under
    section 82(2)(g) of the Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002.
    The appellant maintained that with his application of 13  May  2011  he
    provided correct bank details, and he showed that  funds  were  in  his
    account at the time.  He referred to BE (Application Fee: Effect of Non-
    payment) [2008] UKAIT 00089, a case based on the 2007 Regulations,  but
    "equally of assistance" to the 2011  Regulations.   The  appellant  had
    accompanied his application by such information  and  authorisation  as
    was  necessary  for  the  respondent  to  be  paid,   so   the   notice
    "invalidating" his  application  was  "itself  invalid".   If  so,  the
    appellant would qualify for the  reduced  maintenance  level,  and  was
    bound to succeed.  The grounds conclude:

         The First-tier Tribunal  is  respectfully  requested  to  list  for
         hearing.  If the respondent wishes to dispute the matter of payment
         and the competence of the appeal, then it is most  appropriate  for
         this to occur by virtue of evidence led and submissions made ... as
         a preliminary matter.


12. The case was listed for oral hearing before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Professor Rebecca M M Wallace at Glasgow on 21 September 2011.
     The appellant was represented by Mr Stevenson, and the  respondent  by
    Mr Young.  The Presenting Officer maintained that there  was  no  valid
    appeal before the Judge, and  she  considered  that  as  a  preliminary
    issue.  As required by Practice Direction 3.4,  the  Judge  issued  her
    findings in the form of  a  determination,  dated  26  September  2011,
    rather than by means of a notice under First-tier Rule 9.  At paragraph
    32, she said:

         The appellant's application fee has not been paid and whatever  the
         reason, even if that  fault  lies  with  the  respondent,  in  that
         someone may possibly have entered a wrong digit, causing payment to
         be refused, the fact remains that there is no valid case before me.


13. The Judge held that the case must fail "for want of jurisdiction",  and
    ended her determination thus:

         Decision: I find there is no valid appeal before the Tribunal.


14. Still undeterred, the appellant on 5 October 2011 sought permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds argue that despite the First-
    tier Tribunal concluding that  no  right  of  appeal  existed,  it  was
    competent for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  the  matter,  on  the
    authority of Abiyat (Rights of Appeal) Iran [2011] UKUT 314 (IAC),  now
    reported at [2011] Imm AR 6.   It is pointed out that  the  grounds  of
    appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  called  for  evidence  from  the
    respondent that the application was not accompanied by  the  fee.   The
    respondent:

         ... failed to do so, simply relying on  a  bare  assertion  without
         evidence.  In contrast the  appellant  had  his  witness  statement
         which was not challenged and which spoke to his belief that he  had
         completed the form correctly.  In addition there was evidence  that
         he held the relevant funds for the fees ...


         The appellant "accompanied" his application with the fee.   Whether
         the fee was taken or not is largely  irrelevant  (contrary  to  the
         IJ's findings at paragraph 32) ...


15. The grounds also contend that the respondent's:

         ... current regime [in respect of fee payments] falls  into  simple
    administrative unfairness.


16. The first matter for us to consider was whether  the  appellant  had  a
    right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision declining jurisdiction.   The  Presenting  Officer,  no  doubt
    advisedly, did not dispute that the  appellant  has  such  a  right  of
    appeal.  The case is on all fours with Abiyat.  The First-tier Tribunal
    reached its decision to decline jurisdiction not by way  of  a  Rule  9
    notice, but following full consideration of the matter  at  a  hearing,
    and expressed its conclusion in  the  form  of  a  determination.   The
    appeal was therefore validly before the Upper Tribunal.

17. The next question was whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  right  to
    decide that it had no jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the  First-tier
    Tribunal turned on whether a valid application had been made  prior  to
    the expiry of leave on 28 May 2011.  That leads to  the  Immigration  &
    Nationality (Fees) Regulations 2011 (2011 No 1055),  which  provide  at
    Regulation 37:

         Consequences of failing to pay the specified fee.


         Where an application to which these  Regulations  refer  is  to  be
         accompanied by a specified fee, the application is not validly made
         unless it has been accompanied by that fee.


18. The question whether the first application was valid therefore  depends
    not upon whether the payment was successfully processed, but on whether
    the application was accompanied by the fee.

19. BE was concerned with the terms of the 2007 Regulations, but  there  is
    no practical distinction for present purposes.  As held in  that  case,
    an application is "accompanied by" a fee if it is:

         ... accompanied by such authorisation (of the  applicant  or  other
         person purporting to pay) as will enable the respondent to  receive
         the entire fee in question, without further recourse having  to  be
         made by the respondent to the payer.

20. Accordingly we conclude  that  the  Judge  erred  at  paragraph  32  in
    considering that non-payment, for whatever reason, even if the fault of
    the respondent, was fatal to the validity of the application and of the
    subsequent appeal. Validity of the application  is  determined  not  by
    whether the fee is actually received but by whether the application  is
    accompanied by a valid authorisation to obtain the entire fee  that  is
    available in the relevant bank account.

21. Having identified that error  of  legal  approach,  we  set  aside  the
    decision. We next have to decide whether to  remake  the  decision  for
    ourselves in the light of all the available information, or leave it to
    the respondent to make a fresh decision.   In  the  light  of  what  we
    subsequently  heard,  we  conclude  that  the  former  course  is  more
    appropriate, for these reasons:

           i) A decision needs to be arrived at as to whether the appellant
              had  tendered  the  relevant   information   in   the   first
              application so as to be a valid one.


          ii) We are at least as well-placed as the First-tier Tribunal  to
              reach that decision, and  remaking  a  decision  following  a
              finding of error of law is the presumptive approach  of  this
              Chamber.


         iii) Ms Lochrie suggested that  the  fact  that  UKBA  marked  the
              second application as "valid" might have been  a  recognition
              that it was in time and otherwise complied with the rules. In
              our judgment, there is a risk that if the case was  left  for
              the respondent to re-examine the conclusion could be that the
              second application was valid in all  respects  save  for  the
              date when it was submitted.

22.  Ms  Lochrie  helpfully  explained  to  us  the  respondent's  standard
    procedures.  This was a postal application, as are most of those  dealt
    with by the respondent.  When such an application is received, a letter
    in the standard form of the letter of 17 May 2011 is issued. The fee is
    not  processed  at  this  stage,  so  the  letter  cannot  act  as   an
    acknowledgement of date of receipt of a valid application. There are no
    instructions that the application should be processed before the expiry
    of  the  applicant's  leave  to  remain.   When   an   application   is
    subsequently processed and the fee cannot be  collected,  for  whatever
    reason, a standard letter is sent out in the form of the letter  of  16
    June 2011. With it there are returned the original application and  all
    accompanying documents, except the page providing for  payment  of  the
    fee, which is shredded, for security reasons.  An applicant is thus:-

          i) Not given an opportunity to check the accuracy of  the  billing
             data  and  re-submit  the  application  before  his  leave  has
             expired;


         ii) Not given the opportunity to check whether the billing data was
             accurate after the processing has failed;


        iii) Not given any evidence-based specific reason why the processing
             has failed.


    Further, no record is kept of what went wrong with the payment that can
    be provided to the Tribunal determining  the  issue.   In  the  present
    case, we had given advance notice that the  respondent  should  produce
    the billing data page, but we were informed  that  this  could  not  be
    complied with because it had been routinely destroyed.

23. By contrast, at  those  offices  where  applications  are  accepted  in
    person, a different procedure applies.  Once an application is received
    the payment is immediately processed, with  the  applicant  waiting  to
    ensure that processing has been successful. The applicant  is  informed
    of the outcome after  about  15  minutes.  If  the  payment  fails,  an
    official advises the applicant and either extends  the  opportunity  to
    check over the details provided previously, or provides a fresh billing
    page to complete. (A frequent inadvertent error is the reversal of  the
    order of 2 digits.)  A second attempt  is  then  made  to  process  the
    application, and in many cases this is successful.

24. The best evidence of whether an application was accompanied by the  fee
    is clearly the original information page supplied by the appellant.  An
    applicant could in theory  be  invited  to  photocopy  and  retain  his
    application form and billing data. Applicants are not presently invited
    to do so, and in any event in a disputed case this could give  rise  to
    an issue that a subsequent version is put forward  as  a  copy  of  the
    original.

25. The best evidence of why an attempt to process a payment  failed  would
    be the record kept by the processor.

26. However, the system as presently operated by the respondent  puts  both
    these items of evidence beyond future reach of either party and of  the
    Tribunal.

27. We turn to the question of who bears the  burden  of  proving  that  an
    application has been validly made. This  would  normally  fall  on  the
    applicant,  who  would  discharge   it   by   producing   evidence   of
    acknowledgement of receipt or proof of postage.  Here  the  application
    was received in time, but the question of whether it was accompanied by
    accurate billing data can be answered only by the respondent. In  those
    circumstances, we conclude that the evidential burden of  demonstrating
    that the application was not "accompanied by such authorisation (of the
    applicant or other  person  purporting  to  pay)  as  will  enable  the
    respondent to receive the entire fee in  question"  must  fall  on  the
    respondent. We reach this  conclusion  both  by  application  of  first
    principles - the party that asserts a fact should normally be  the  one
    who demonstrates it; and because the respondent is responsible for  the
    procedure to be used in postal cases,  and  the  features  noted  above
    prevent both the issue of  a  prompt  receipt  and  an  opportunity  to
    understand why payment was not processed. An applicant is  not  present
    when an attempt to process payment is made, and has  no  way  of  later
    obtaining the relevant information.

28. We now consider whether the evidential burden has  been  discharged  in
    the present case on the basis of what is known to  us  today.   Payment
    may fail for many reasons.   An  applicant  may  fail  to  provide  any
    payment details; may make an inadvertent error; may  give  deliberately
    incorrect details; or may give the correct  details,  but  lack  funds.
    The respondent may enter the details  incorrectly  into  the  automated
    payment system.  The payment system (operated, we understand, by  ATOS)
    may fail.  The Presenting Officer advised us  that  sometimes  payments
    cannot be processed for a period of hours, or even days, due to  system
    failure.  There is the possibility of error or systems  failure  by  an
    applicant's bank.  Perhaps the most common error may be the inadvertent
    supplying of incorrect details, but there could be  no  presumption  to
    that effect, and no presumption that payment systems are infallible, or
    even close to infallible.

29. We recognise that  there  are  good  security  reasons  for  destroying
    financial information that could fall into wrong hands and  be  abused,
    but we see no reason why a system cannot be devised that permits secure
    retention of data pending  resolution  of  any  dispute  about  whether
    accurate billing data has been supplied.

30. In the present case the appellant is an intelligent young man  pursuing
    a business studies course at degree level.  He was well  aware  of  the
    importance  of  accurately  completing  the   application   form,   and
    demonstrated efficiency in  the  timing  of  his  application,  and  in
    replying to the respondent's letter of 16 June.  He has  satisfied  the
    respondent that he had the funds in his account at all material  times.
    He made a statement that he is certain that  he  provided  the  correct
    financial data. Against that is merely the fact of failure  to  collect
    the money.  As we have  said,  we  are  not  prepared  to  assume  that
    processing is infallible. We  accordingly  conclude  that  it  is  more
    probable than not that the appellant is accurate in his assertion  that
    he  provided  the  correct  data;  the  respondent  has  not  given  us
    sufficient information to conclude to the contrary.

31. In those circumstances it is not necessary to determine Mr  Stevenson's
    second submission that  the  respondent's  system  did  not  treat  the
    applicant fairly. A determination of that submission might well require
    further investigation of the practical realities facing the respondent.
     We are however sufficiently impressed  by  the  marked  difference  in
    treatment between the postal application and the  personal  application
    to indicate that it has every  appearance  of  substantive  unfairness.
    This requires an immediate review if time and money is not to be  spent
    on similar appeals, or indeed on applications for  judicial  review  in
    the Court of Session of similar decisions where there is  no  right  of
    appeal.

32. In our judgment one or more of the following measures should be adopted
    to prevent similar disputes in the future:

          i) The fee is processed immediately on receipt of the  application
             and before an acknowledgment letter has been sent.


         ii) The standard letter  is  amended  so  that  it  constitutes  an
             acknowledgement that a valid application has been made.


        iii) In cases of a failure to collect the fee in an application made
             in time, there is prompt communication with  the  applicant  to
             afford an opportunity to check or correct the billing data.


         iv) In cases where the accuracy of the billing data is critical  to
             the success of the application and the existence of a right  of
             appeal, the original  application  form  is  securely  retained
             along with the processing report, and is produced to the  judge
             in  the  event  of  a  challenge  by  way  of  appeal   or   by
             determination of a preliminary issue.

33. The absence of such measures, or cogent  reasons  why  they  cannot  be
    adopted, may well result in a determination that the  consideration  of
    the application has been unfair and therefore not  in  accordance  with
    the law: see Naveed (student - fairness) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).

34. Duty Judges of the First-tier Tribunal should be alert when a notice of
    appeal is received, raising issues such  as  in  this  case,  to  issue
    directions for the respondent to provide the necessary  information  to
    determine whether the application was  accompanied  by  the  fee.  This
    would enable the First-tier Tribunal readily to determine  whether  the
    notice is invalid, in which case  a  Rule  9  notice  would  issue,  or
    whether it should be accepted.

Conclusion

35. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law, by applying  the  wrong  test  to
    whether there was a valid appeal.  We remake the  decision  by  finding
    that the onus was on the respondent to satisfy us that the  application
    was not accompanied by the specified fee. The respondent has offered no
    evidence, or insufficient evidence, to that effect.  On  the  available
    evidence, the application was accompanied by the specified fee, and was
    validly made.  There was consequently a right of appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. It is not disputed that on the merits,  the  application
    for an extension of stay should have been granted, so  the  appeal,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed.  It will  be
    for the respondent to decide what period of leave should be granted, in
    light of the appellant's current circumstances.

Signed

                                             [pic]
Dated


                               14 February 2012
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber



