
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


VB (Student - attendance and progress not equated) Jamaica [2011] UKUT
00119 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE KING
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     VB

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Callinan, instructed by Owoyele Dada & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


    In a student appeal, satisfactory progress  cannot  be  assumed  from  a
    good record of attendance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica.   She  appealed  to  an
    Immigration Judge against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  13
    January 2010 refusing a further extension of stay in the United Kingdom
    as a student.  The appellant said that when she applied on 26  February
    2009 she was attending the London Computer Academy, doing  a  computing
    course.  She received the refusal notice on 13 January 2010,  in  which
    she was informed the Secretary of State  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    college was either a publicly funded institution of further  or  higher
    education maintaining satisfactory records of enrolment and  attendance
    of  students,  a  bona  fide  private  education  institution   or   an
    independent fee paying school outside the maintained sector maintaining
    satisfactory records of enrolment  and  attendance  of  students.   The
    appellant enrolled at the South Chelsea College, on  1  February  2010,
    and this course was due to complete on 31 January 2012.  She said  that
    the college was on the register.

2.    The Immigration Judge commented that the  appellant  had  provided  no
    evidence  of  her  attendance  or  progress  on  the  course  nor   any
    explanation for her sudden change in direction, and made  reference  to
    elements of the Tier  4  points-based  system  concerning  the  current
    course with no evidence being provided of the full Tier 4 requirements.
     She dismissed the appeal.

3.    The appellant sought permission to appeal  against  this  decision  on
    the  basis  that  the  determination  was  inadequately  reasoned   and
    contained irrelevant references to the points-based system which had no
    relevance to this appeal as the application was made under the previous
    student rules.  As the appellant had only  just  commenced  her  course
    after receiving the refusal letter  she  had  not  yet  undertaken  any
    assessments or examinations.   The  issue  of  the  "sudden  change  of
    direction" raised by the  Immigration  Judge  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    determination had not been raised at the hearing and the appellant  had
    not been given the opportunity to address it.

4.     A  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  subsequently  granted  permission  to
    appeal, referring among other things to the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in GO-O v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
    Civ 747.

5.    There was a hearing before a Senior Immigration Judge  on  14  October
    2010 at which it was directed that no later than fourteen  days  before
    the adjourned hearing both parties were to send  to  the  Tribunal  and
    each other up-to-date information and documentation to show the  status
    and registration position  of  South  Chelsea  College,  and  that  the
    appellant's representatives were to lodge and  serve  any  evidence  or
    documents on which they intended to rely including  any  new  material,
    within 28 days of 12 October 2010.

6.    The hearing before us took place on 2 December 2010.

7.    Ms Callinan referred to the previous hearing at which  she  said  that
    there had been an adjournment on the basis of two issues,  firstly  the
    South Chelsea College at the date of that hearing was not on  the  list
    of registered providers and also it was unclear whether  the  appellant
    had been attending and therefore there had  been  an  adjournment  with
    directions.  The college had informed her that it  was  suspended.   In
    March 2010 it was on the register and the appellant had attended 95% of
    classes between 1 February and 5 November 2010.  As of 17 November  the
    college was back on the register.

8.    She also said that on the previous occasion it  was  conceded  by  the
    Secretary of State after  argument  that  the  appellant  could  change
    courses as she had done.

9.    We were concerned to note that there appeared to be no record of  that
    previous hearing or any concession or agreement made in the  course  of
    it on the file, but we accepted what was said by Ms Callinan especially
    since it was confirmed by Ms Pal from the notes on her file.

10.   Ms Callinan therefore argued that it was the  case  that  the  college
    had to be shown to be on the register in March 2010 which was the  date
    when the hearing before the Immigration Judge  had  taken  place.   The
    appellant had been enrolled by then.  It was  argued,  therefore,  that
    the requirements of the Rules were met.

11.   Ms Pal agreed that there had been an issue whether the college was  on
    the register and it was back on now, but there were other issues as  to
    whether there was  satisfactory  evidence  of  regular  attendance  and
    satisfactory progress in the course including any  examinations  taken.
    Sub-paragraph (v) of paragraph 60 of HC 395 was therefore in issue.

12.   Ms Callinan sought to  argue  that  the  appellant  had  not  had  any
    examinations and these would not take place until Spring 2011  and  she
    could give evidence on that, and the further  document  that  had  been
    sent in by the college on 11 November 2010 showing the appellant's high
    degree of attendance and the dates of the course was sufficient to show
    satisfactory progress.  In effect it was argued that the fact that  the
    examinations were  envisaged  as  taking  place  next  Spring  and  she
    attended satisfactorily amounted to satisfactory progress.

13.   We did not agree with this submission.  It seemed  to  us  clear  that
    notions of attendance and progress could not be equated.  We granted Ms
    Callinan on her application an adjournment to obtain evidence,  if  she
    could, of satisfactory progress on the part of  the  appellant  in  her
    course at the South Chelsea College.

14.   Subsequently Ms Callinan was able to produce a document sent today  by
    the Director of Studies at the college concerning  the  appellant,  and
    stating that the appellant's class teacher, who was  named,  said  that
    her class participation  was  totally  acceptable  in  questioning  and
    feedback,  making  individual  presentations  and  in  teamwork.    Her
    application and concentration were said to be  above  average  for  the
    group.  It was also said that she had taken tests in two of  the  three
    units of which the course consisted and had obtained 64% in unit 1 on 5
    November and 58% in unit 2.  Unit 3 was yet to be assessed, but in the
    opinion of the class tutor she would successfully pass this.

15.   In light of this letter Ms Pal accepted that  this  amounted  to  good
    evidence of progress  and  did  not  intend  to  make  any  submissions
    contrary to that.

16.   In the circumstances, given that  evidence  of  satisfactory  progress
    has now been provided, in addition to the college now being back on the
    register, we consider that the appellant  has  satisfied  the  relevant
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   Her  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed.





Signed


Senior Immigration Judge Allen,
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

