
KH

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|MG (Assessing interference with private life) Serbia and          |
|Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00113                                     |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  13 May 2005                 |On 30 June 2005                 |
|                                |................................|
|                                |...............                 |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr P R Lane (Senior Immigration Judge)                            |
|Mr A E Armitage                                                   |
|Mr H G Jones MBE. JP                                              |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms J Fisher, counsel, instructed by Messrs Dhillon &
                 Co. Solicitors.
For the  respondent:     Mr  G  Saunders,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Sympathy for and admiration of an individual do not as such enhance or
  otherwise affect that person's rights under article 8. Errors of law can
  occur if fact-finders fail to address question (2) of Lord Bingham's five
                     questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo),  born  on
      13 September 1977,  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  on
      15 September 1999 and claimed asylum one week later.  The respondent
      refused the appellant's asylum  claim  but  granted  him  exceptional
      leave to enter the United Kingdom until 10 October  2000.   When  the
      appellant applied to extend that leave, a  further  such  period  was
      granted until 10 November 2002. When  the  appellant  applied  for  a
      second extension, that application was refused.

2.    The appellant appealed against the decision to an Adjudicator, Mr C B
      Buckwell, sitting at Bromley, who, in a determination promulgated  on
      20 May 2004, allowed the appellant's appeal on the  ground  that  the
      appellant's removal to Kosovo would violate Article 8 of the European
      Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
      Freedoms.

3.    On 5 August 2004, the respondent was granted permission to  appeal  to
      the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.   By  reason  of  the  transitional
      provisions  made  under  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
      Claimants, etc) Act 2004,  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  is
      required to deal with the appeal as if it had originally decided  that
      appeal and was reconsidering its decision.  By reason of rule 62(7) of
      the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  that
      reconsideration is limited to the grounds on  which  the  IAT  granted
      permission to appeal.

4.    Those grounds assert that the Adjudicator was wrong to find  that  the
      circumstances of the appellant constituted an exceptional  case,  such
      as to entitle the appellant to succeed under Article 8.   The  grounds
      further assert that the  Adjudicator  failed  to  make  a  finding  on
      whether the appellant's private life would be disrupted in any way  by
      returning him to Kosovo.

5.    The facts of the case are essentially as follows.    In  August  1987,
      when the appellant was aged ten, he suffered injuries to his hands and
      eyes as a result of handling a grenade, whilst  in  a  park  with  his
      friends.  The appellant lost the sight of his left eye  and  sustained
      damage to his right.   He lost three fingers from his  left  hand  and
      sustained damage to his  right  thumb.   The  appellant  underwent  an
      operation which resulted in him regaining some  vision  in  his  right
      eye.

6.    Over eleven years later, the appellant,  together  with  others,  left
      Kosovo for Macedonia.   After spending five months there, he undertook
      the journey to the  United  Kingdom.    Upon  his  arrival  here,  the
      appellant commenced English classes at the South East  Essex  College,
      followed by a course designed to  lead  to  the  obtaining  of  Pitman
      qualifications.   He  also  completed  a  course  in   "life   skills"
      (statement, paragraph 9).   In 2001,  the  appellant  began  a  course
      entitled "Access to Social Work" and  during  that  time  also  worked
      voluntarily with special needs students.  He undertook GCSEs in  Maths
      and English, achieving a B grade in Maths and a C grade in English.

7.    In 2002 the appellant began a Higher National  Certificate  course  in
      "learning support," during which time he  was  employed  part-time  by
      South East Essex College.  At the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator, the appellant was still on that course.  He said it would
      lead to the second year of a Certificate of  Education,  which  was  a
      teaching qualification that could be used as a first year  degree  for
      Social Studies.  The appellant's stated aim was to teach  adults  with
      learning difficulties.  At the time of the  Adjudicator  hearing,  the
      appellant was also still working for South East  Essex  College  as  a
      learning facilitator.   He understood that the College would offer him
      a position upon his obtaining a teaching qualification.

8.    The appellant had acquired friends in the  United  Kingdom.    He  had
      also been in a relationship with a lady for some two  years,  although
      that relationship had ended by the time of  the  Adjudicator  hearing.
      At paragraph 17 of the appellant's written statement, he said that  he
      and the lady in question hoped "to reconcile our relationship if I  am
      permitted to stay in the UK".  The appellant further  stated  that  he
      had made his life in the UK and gained qualifications.   He wished  to
      progress further, both educationally and professionally.  He found his
      employment rewarding as he liked to help people who are in need.

9.    In September 2000, the appellant underwent  a  cataract  operation  in
      the United Kingdom, which involved the insertion of a new lens in  his
      right eye.  The operation appears to have been successful. Before  the
      Adjudicator, there was a letter  from  Mr  Siburn,  an  optician  with
      Dollond & Aitchison in Southend-on-Sea,  stating  that,  although  the
      appellant had initially been prescribed a cosmetic soft  contact  lens
      after his cataract operation (as an alternative to spectacles) he  had
      subsequently been provided with a rigid contact lens on his right eye.
       The fitting of that  lens  had  been  "fairly  complex,  due  to  the
      irregular eye shape, but after  the  initial  fitting  and  subsequent
      adjustment, surprisingly good vision was achieved".   Mr  Silburn  and
      his colleagues had continued to monitor the appellant's vision and eye
      health at regular intervals, "an ongoing and necessary service in view
      of the fragility of his sight".   The letter concluded by stating that
      the appellant had  expressed  concern  that  the  necessary  level  of
      clinical care would not be available in his native country.

10.   The Adjudicator did not accept  the  appellant's  assertion  that  his
      medical condition was such that it would be a violation of  Article  3
      of the ECHR to return the appellant to Kosovo.

11.   The Adjudicator then turned to Article 8.   At  paragraph  30  of  the
      determination,  the  Adjudicator  found  that  the   appellant,   "has
      established his private life in the United Kingdom.  He  has  been  in
      the country for a period of over four  and  a  half  years  and  I  am
      satisfied that he has conducted himself quite properly throughout this
      period, including  ensuring  that  his  immigration  status  has  been
      properly secured during that period of time".

12.   At paragraph 31, the Adjudicator  said  he  was  "satisfied  that  the
      circumstances concerning the appellant are really  quite  exceptional.
      He was the victim of appalling injuries at the age  of  around  eleven
      years, with which he had to live for a number of years  thereafter  in
      Kosovo.   Since coming to the United Kingdom the appellant has studied
      and worked, and he has also undertaken voluntary work.  Thanks to  the
      skill  of  surgeons,  and  no  doubt  very  good  attention  from  his
      opticians, the appellant has now gained much clearer sight in one eye.
       The appellant has been studying in a dedicated  manner,  and  is  now
      employed on a full-time basis by South  East  Essex  College.   He  is
      described as being a valuable member of his  department,  hardworking,
      honest and having a natural empathy with the students he teaches.   He
      is now a Learning Facilitator at the college,  and  also  teaches  for
      part of the working week".

13.   The following two paragraphs of the determination read as follows:-

      "32.  Despite significant disability, particularly with respect to his
           eyesight,  the  appellant's  response,  in  the  face  of   such
           adversity, has been most impressive.  He could,  having  arrived
           in the United Kingdom, have relied entirely upon benefits  which
           might generally  have  been  available  to  him.   However,  his
           personal and moral response to the  circumstances  in  which  he
           found himself led him to pursue an academic career, and to  work
           and save in order to have a serious  eye  operation  undertaken.
           Taking into account his background, and the adversities which he
           has had to overcome, his achievements constitute a  considerable
           development of his moral and physical  integrity.   He  has,  in
           this manner, not only developed his skills,  and  found  himself
           providing a significant contribution to his local community, but
           he has also established a strong  private  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom.


      33.   There can be  no  doubt  that  the  enforcement  of  immigration
           control is legitimate, and is the duty  of  the  government,  so
           that order can be achieved.  However, there are  occasions  when
           the particularly circumstances of an individual, when considered
           in  the  round,  mean  that  it  would  be   inappropriate,   or
           disproportionate, for the  authorities  to  enforce  immigration
           control.  In my view this is such a case, albeit exceptional  on
           the facts.  I do not consider that it would be proportionate  to
           require  that  the  appellant  now  be  removed  to  Serbia  and
           Montenegro.  I do not take  that  view  based  only  on  medical
           issues, as I have rejected his Article 3 claim,  notwithstanding
           such information (sic). However I  take  his  medical  condition
           into account as part of the balancing exercise.   In  concluding
           that exercise, I am without doubt satisfied that the requirement
           that this appellant should be removed form  the  United  Kingdom
           would be a disproportionate response.  His circumstances are not
           typical or common, but exceptional.  Noting Ala [2003] EWHC 521,
           I therefore consider it appropriate to  take  a  different  view
           from that adopted by the respondent".


14.   For the appellant,  Ms  Fisher  submitted  that  the  Adjudicator,  in
      reaching the findings set out above, had not erred in law in  that  he
      had correctly reminded himself of the relevant  cases,  as  they  then
      were, on the issue of Article 8.   Furthermore,  the  Adjudicator  had
      adopted the "step-by-step" approach recommended  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Nhundu & Chiwera (01TH0613).

15.   Plainly, where an Adjudicator or other fact-finder can  be  shown  not
      to have had regard to the correct legal approach to the  issue  to  be
      decided, his conclusion on that  issue  is  likely  to  be  defective.
      However the corollary is not, as Ms Fisher appeared to imply,  that  a
      finding which follows upon an accurate  description  of  the  relevant
      case law cannot in any way be impugned.

16.   At paragraph 33 of the determination, the Adjudicator found  that  the
      circumstances of the appellant's case were "exceptional" and that  the
      Adjudicator was therefore entitled, within the  context  of  what  the
      Adjudicator described as a "balancing exercise", to allow  the  appeal
      by reference to the private life aspect of Article 8.

17.   The question of law in the present case is, accordingly, one that  may
      be shortly put.  Can it be said that the Adjudicator was entitled  (i)
      to find  that the facts of this case were such as to  require  him  to
      undertake the determination of proportionality and (ii) then  to  find
      that those facts were so truly exceptional as to make the  appellant's
      removal a violation of Article 8?  The respondent will be entitled  to
      succeed in having the Adjudicator's findings overthrown only if we are
      satisfied that no Adjudicator  could,  on  the  facts,  properly  have
      reached an affirmative answer finding as to (i) and (ii).

18.   At paragraph 59 of Huang [2005] EWCA Civ 105, Laws LJ held that:-

           "The true position in our judgment is that the HRA  and  section
           65(1) [of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999]  require  the
           Adjudicator to allow an appeal against  removal  or  deportation
           brought on Article 8 grounds if, but only if, he concludes  that
           the case is so exceptional on  its  particular  facts  that  the
           imperative  of  proportionality  demands  an  outcome   in   the
           appellant's favour notwithstanding that he cannot succeed  under
           the Rules."

19.   At paragraph 60, Laws LJ rejected the contention that, at this  point
      in  the  Adjudicator's  task,  the  Adjudicator  had  to  apply   any
      Wednesbury  test to the respondent's decision:

           "It is not a question of [the Adjudicator's]  deferring  to  the
           Secretary  of  State's  judgment  of  proportionality   in   the
           individual case.  The Adjudicator's  decision  of  the  question
           whether the case is truly exceptional is entirely his  own.   He
           does defer to the rules; for this approach recognises  that  the
           balance  struck  by  the  rules  will   generally   dispose   of
           proportionality issues arising under Article 8; but they are not
           exhaustive of all cases.  There  will  be  a  residue  of  truly
           exceptional instances.  In our respectful view such an  approach
           is also reflected in Lord Bingham's words in  Razgar,  which  we
           have already cited:


                 'Decisions taken  pursuant  to  the  lawful  operation  of
                 immigration control will be proportionate in  all  save  a
                 small minority of exceptional cases, identifiable only  on
                 a case-by-case basis'."


20.   The effect of Huang was recently considered by the Immigration Appeal
      Tribunal (chaired by its President, Ouseley J) in MB (Croatia) [2005]
      UKIAT 00092.  At paragraphs 32 and 33, the Tribunal found as follows:-



      "32.  Where a Rule or extra-statutory provision covers  the  sort  of
           circumstance upon which an individual  relies,  e.g.  entry  for
           marriage, study, medical treatment or  delayed  decision-making,
           but the individual falls outside the  specific  requirements  or
           limits of the otherwise applicable Rules or policy,  that  is  a
           very clear indication that removal is proportionate.  It is  not
           for the judicial decision maker, except in the clear  and  truly
           exceptional case  to  set  aside  the  limitations  set  by  the
           executive, accountable to Parliament, and, in the  case  of  the
           Immigration Rules, approved by Parliament.


      33.   Where Rules or extra-statutory provisions do not make provision
           at all for circumstances which an individual may rely on for the
           purposes of overcoming [...] the qualification to an ECHR  right
           which is provided by the  legitimate  interests  of  immigration
           control,  his  case  cannot  rationally   be   considered   more
           favourably than one whose circumstances are covered in principle
           by some provision of the Rules or of an  extra-statutory  policy
           but whose circumstances do not meet the detailed requirements of
           the Rules or policy".


21.   At paragraph 35, the President had this to say about the relevance of
      "compassionate circumstances" in an Article 8 case:-

      "35.  Compassionate circumstances are  often  invoked  in  Article  8
           cases, though they may involve in reality no significant  aspect
           of family or private life.  A removal  decision  may  be  harsh.
           There are Rules and  policies  which  deal  with  a  variety  of
           compassionate circumstances for entry or remaining in the United
           Kingdom. If a particular case does not  fall  within  them,  the
           normal conclusion of an assessment of proportionality should  be
           that those circumstances mean that the legitimate  interests  of
           immigration control favour removal.  A  truly  exceptional  case
           would have to be made out.  Article 8 is not a general provision
           justifying the overriding  of  immigration  control  on  general
           compassionate grounds  or  where  there  may  be  harshness  and
           misfortune from removal. It is a provision which creates  rights
           on specific grounds and only applies where those  rights  exist;
           it only precludes the effectiveness of immigration  control,  as
           embodied  in  the  rules   and   extra-statutory   policies   or
           concessions, where the individual circumstances are so  powerful
           and exceptional that those considered provisions should  not  be
           allowed the effect which would normally be afforded to them".


22.   What the President of IAT said in relation to Article 8 is underlined
      by the opinion of Lord Hope in N [2005] UKHL 31.  At paragraph 21  of
      the opinions, Lord Hope made the following important statement  about
      the task  of  determining  whether  the  removal  of  a  person  with
      HIV/AIDS, to a country where advanced medical care is not  available,
      would violate Article 3:-

           "The function of a judge in a case of this kind, however, is not
           to issue  decisions  based  on  sympathy.   Just  as  juries  in
           criminal trials are directed that  they  must  not  allow  their
           decisions to be  influenced  by  feelings  of  revulsion  or  of
           sympathy, judges must examine the law in a way which  suppresses
           emotion of all kind.  The position that they must  adopt  is  an
           austere one. Some may say that it is hard hearted.''


23.    It  is  plain  from  paragraphs  32  and  33  of  the  Adjudicator's
      determination  in  the  present  case  that  his  sympathy  for,  and
      admiration of, the appellant made the Adjudicator lose sight  of  the
      essential purposes of  the  ECHR,  as  an  instrument  to  protect  a
      person's fundamental human rights. As Lord Bingham held in  paragraph
      4 of the opinions in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:-

           "If there is any doubt on this point, it  should  be  dispelled.
           The Convention is directed  to  the  protection  of  fundamental
           human rights, not the conferment  of  individual  advantages  or
           benefits."


24.   If we look, as  we  must,  at  the  facts  of  the  appellant's  case
      objectively, shorn of any sympathy or admiration that we may have, it
      is manifest that his case is in no sense an exceptional one.  So  far
      as the appellant's medical condition is concerned, the position is as
      follows.  Although seriously injured  in  an  incident  involving  an
      explosion in 1987, the appellant had  partial  sight  restored  as  a
      result of the medical treatment he received in Kosovo.  He  continued
      to live there for over ten years before coming to the United  Kingdom
      in consequence of the troubles that beset that province in  the  late
      1990s.  As a result of coming to this country, the appellant has been
      able to undergo a cataract operation, which  has  much  improved  the
      sight of his remaining eye.  His only ongoing medical  needs  in  the
      United Kingdom at the present time appear  to  be  regular  check-ups
      with an optician and, so Ms Fisher told us, some unspecified type  of
      contact lens solution.  There was no evidence before the  Adjudicator
      to show that such continuing medical needs as the appellant may  have
      would be unavailable in Kosovo.

25.   Particularly in the light of the House of Lords' opinions in  Razgar,
      it cannot properly be said that the  appellant's  medical  situation,
      either alone or in combination with any other factor, brings his case
      anywhere near an exceptional one, for the purposes of Article 8.   On
      the contrary, it  would  be  invidious  to  compare  the  appellant's
      situation with that of, say, the claimant  in  Henao,  considered  by
      Lord Bingham in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the opinions in  Razgar  [2004]
      UKHL 27, or  the claimant in Bensaid, considered in paragraph 5. Both
      of  those  claimants  suffered  from  continuing  medical  conditions
      (respectively HIV and schizophrenia) of considerable  severity.  Both
      nevertheless failed in their attempts to invoke the ECHR in order  to
      resist removal.

26.   That the Adjudicator's admiration  for  the  appellant  affected  the
      former's approach to Article 8 is clear from the passage in paragraph
      32 of the determination where the Adjudicator,  taking  into  account
      the appellant's background "and the adversities which he has  had  to
      overcome"  found  that  "his  achievements  constitute   considerable
      development of his moral and physical integrity.   He  has,  in  this
      manner, not only developed his skills, and found himself providing  a
      significant contribution to his local  community,  but  he  has  also
      established a strong private live in the United Kingdom."

27.   This Tribunal has to say  that  it  has  great  difficulty  with  the
      suggestion that a person can, by choosing to undertake  a  particular
      course of study, leading to employment in a job that  an  Adjudicator
      regards as socially worthwhile, achieve a greater "moral and physical
      integrity" than a person who, for whatever reason,  does  neither  of
      these things.  The European Convention and the  domestic  legislation
      that underpins it are not to be used  by  tribunals  as  a  means  of
      recognising and  rewarding  what  is  considered  to  be  industrious
      conduct on the part of an individual.  Very many of those who  appeal
      on human rights grounds against an  immigration  decision  have  been
      working or studying in some capacity in  the  United  Kingdom.   Very
      often,  those  persons  originate  from  countries  in   which   they
      experienced hardship  of  various  kinds,  albeit  not  amounting  to
      persecution  or  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.   Such   persons,
      however, routinely fail  to  show  that  their  removal  would  be  a
      disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights.

28.   In fairness to the Adjudicator, his reference in paragraph 32 of  the
      determination to the development  of  moral  and  physical  integrity
      appears to be based upon  paragraph  31  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal's determination  in  Dine  [2004]  UKIAT  06638,  where  the
      Tribunal recorded the submission made on behalf of  the  claimant  in
      that case, who was said to have "demonstrated that he had travelled a
      long way in the development of his own moral and physical integrity".
       At paragraph 33, the Tribunal found that the  "effort  made  by  the
      appellant, his personal and moral response to his  situation  and  to
      his environment" were such  that  the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
      conclude that removal would violate Article 8.

29.   The Tribunal in Dine  did  not,  however,  specifically  endorse  the
      submission that a  person's  moral  and  physical  integrity  can  be
      significantly  affected  by  subjective  assessments  of  resilience,
      industry  or  value  to  society.  That  they  did  not  do   so   is
      unsurprising, since the then recently decided case of  Beqiri  [2002]
      UKIAT 00725 had found to the contrary.  Furthermore and in any event,
      Dine now has to be read in the  light  of  the  subsequent  cases  of
      Razgar, N, Huang and MB (Croatia).

30.   The Adjudicator in the present case chose to  ignore  the  fact  that
      Immigration Rules exist which enable a person to be  given  leave  to
      enter or remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds of employment or
      for the purposes of study.  The decision whether an immigrant  should
      be permitted to remain for the purposes of carrying out  a  specified
      form of employment or programme  of  study  is  for  the  respondent,
      applying the Immigration Rules. In certain circumstances,  an  appeal
      will lie against a negative decision on the ground  that  the  person
      concerned meets the requirements of the Rules.  But  it  is  not  for
      Adjudicators or Immigration Judges to  use  Article  8  in  order  to
      arrogate to ourselves the  functions  of  the  respondent  under  the
      Rules, by   imposing our own views as to what sort of job, course  of
      study or voluntary activity is of sufficient benefit  to  the  nation
      (either actually or potentially)  as  to  entitle  the  immigrant  to
      enter or to remain here.

31.   In the present case, the appellant's Article 8 claim was based solely
      on his private life.  Although he had enjoyed a relationship  with  a
      United Kingdom citizen, that had  ended  and  the  Tribunal  was  not
      informed it  had  subsequently  resumed  or  that  the  appellant  is
      currently enjoying in  this  country  any  form  of  family  life  by
      reference to any other  individual.   The  appellant's  private  life
      consisted of friends he had acquired during his time  in  the  United
      Kingdom, his studies and employment, and his hopes  for  the  future.
      Stripped of the subjective veneer which the Adjudicator chose to  put
      upon it, there is plainly  nothing  remotely  exceptional  about  the
      appellant's private life.   He  would,  of  course,  much  prefer  to
      remain in the United Kingdom; so too, however, would almost  everyone
      else who makes  a  human  rights  claim.    The  appellant  would  be
      returning  to  Kosovo  in  a  far  better  physical  and  educational
      condition than when he left it.  There is no evidence that  he  would
      be unable to put to good use the industriousness and perseverance  he
      has demonstrated whilst in this country. Nor is  there  any  evidence
      that the appellant's actual or prospective employment in  the  United
      Kingdom cannot adequately be undertaken by someone  who  already  has
      the right to live here.

32.   At paragraph 60 of Huang,  Laws  LJ  referred  to  the  Adjudicator's
      decision on the question of whether a case is  truly  exceptional  as
      being "entirely his own".   By this, Laws LJ meant to distinguish the
      Adjudicator's  decision  from  that  of  the   respondent   and,   in
      particular, to underline the point that the test of whether something
      is "truly exceptional" is not dependent upon a Wednesbury analysis of
      the respondent's decision.    Paragraph 60 is not in any sense to  be
      regarded as authority  for  the  proposition  that  an  Adjudicator's
      finding that a case is "truly exceptional" is immune to any  form  of
      judicial scrutiny.  Such scrutiny is,  as  we  have  already  stated,
      limited, in that it must be shown that the  Adjudicator's  conclusion
      was wrong in law. But scrutiny there is.

  33.    For the reasons we have given,  we  find  that  the  Adjudicator's
      conclusion in the present case does contain such an  error.   If  the
      Adjudicator had approached the matter on the correct basis, he  could
      not possibly have come to the conclusion he did. The medical  aspects
      of the appellant's case amount to no more than a need for eye  check-
      ups and some unspecified form of  contact  lens  solution.  There  is
      nothing exceptional about this aspect, either alone or in combination
      with any other relevant factor. There is nothing in  the  appellant's
      private life that can, on proper analysis, be said to be exceptional.
      Indeed, as we explain at paragraph 37 below, the appellant's  private
      life is  such  that  it  will  continue  in  all  essential  respects
      notwithstanding his removal, with the result that such removal cannot
      properly be said to constitute an interference of sufficient  gravity
      as to bring article 8 into play.

34.      The potential for error in this important area will we consider be
      minimised if the following matters are kept in mind.

35.     The first is to address the questions set out by  Lord  Bingham  at
      paragraph 17 of the opinions in Razgar. These are:

            (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference  by  a  public
      authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect  for
      his private or (as the case may be) family life?

            (2) If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of  such
      gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

            (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

            (4) If so, is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
      society in the interests of national security, public safety  or  the
      economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
      crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the  protection
      of the rights and freedoms of others?

            (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
      public end sought to be achieved?

36.     In very many cases, errors  of  law  occur  beause  judicial  fact-
      finders miss out the second of Lord Bingham's five questions.  Having
      found that a person enjoys a private or family  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom, they then  move  straight  to  question  (5),  in  order  to
      undertake  the  "balancing"  exercise  of  determining  whether   the
      interference is proportionate. There is, as we shall  see,  potential
      for error in answering that last question,  if  one  assumes  wrongly
      that the balancing exercise is  equivalent  to  the  re-taking  of  a
      discretionary decision. But in many  cases,  and  particularly  where
      private life alone is at issue, question (2), if properly  addressed,
      will result in a negative  answer,  thereby  obviating  the  need  to
      address proportionality.

37.      If, as in the present case, the private life consists of a  person
      having a job and friends and carrying on a programme of  studies,  it
      is difficult to see how his removal from the United Kingdom can  have
      "consequences of such gravity" as to engage Article 8. A person's job
      and precise programme of studies may be different in the  country  to
      which he is to be returned and his network of friendships  and  other
      acquaintances is likely to be different too,  but  his  private  life
      will continue in respect of all its essential elements.

38.     In BK (Kosovo - Subesh) Serbia and Montenegro [2005]  UKIAT  00001,
      an  adjudicator  allowed  an  appeal  under  Article  8  because   he
      considered that  the  claimant's  work  as  an  Albanian  interpreter
      (largely in hospitals) and as a "key worker for behaviour improvement
      programmes" meant that "the prevention of disorder and crime and  the
      protection of health and morals require that [the claimant] remain in
      this country" (paragraph 4). At paragraph 26, the Tribunal  found  it
      "difficult to see that the nature of the work done here properly fits
      into a state interest of the sort Article 8(2) is dealing  with.  The
      possible benefit to the community from the  nature  of  the  work  is
      probably better seen as an aspect under Article 8(1) of  the  private
      life of the Claimant". Thus categorised, it is readily apparent  that
      the actual nature of a person's work and its benefit to the community
      cannot conceptually have much part to play in arriving at the  answer
      to Lord Bingham's question (2). To  take  a  hypothetical  case,  why
      should a person who works as a brain surgeon have for that  reason  a
      greater right to respect for his private life  than  a  person  whose
      employment is as a bus driver?

39.      The second important matter is  that  mentioned  in  paragraph  36
      above. Even if the analysis of the facts of a case leads  as  far  as
      question (5), the decision maker is there required to  carry  out  an
      exercise of judgment  in striking "a fair balance between the  rights
      of the individual and the interests of the community"  (paragraph  20
      of Razgar).  This  task  is  not  the  same  as  deciding  whether  a
      discretion exercised by the  respondent in taking  a  decision  under
      the Immigration Rules should be exercised differently ( see paragraph
      21(1)(b) of Schedule 4 to the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  and
      section 86(3)(b) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002). In taking a discretionary decision of that kind, the weight to
      be attached to any particular factor will often  be  largely  if  not
      entirely one for the Tribunal to determine. But this is not  so  when
      answering Lord Bingham's question  (5).  One  of  the  items  in  the
      hypothetical scale - "legitimate  immigration  control"  -  is  as  a
      matter of law to be accorded a weight so great that the only  correct
      answer will be that Article 8 is not  violated,  whatever  items  are
      placed in the opposite scale, unless those  items  disclose  a  truly
      exceptional case or unless there is some truly exceptional reason why
      legitimate immigration control is  itself  not  to  be  accorded  its
      customary weight.

40.      As we have already seen, the adjudicator in the present case,  for
      all that he referred to relevant case law,  failed  to  identify  any
      factors that could properly be said to be exceptional, in  the  sense
      required by Razgar and Huang. That is so, even if one assumes  (which
      we do not) that the adjudicator properly found  himself  at  question
      (5) at all.

41.   None of this is in any way to be taken as meaning that  the  Tribunal
      thinks any less of the  appellant  than  the  Adjudicator  did.   The
      appellant is plainly a most impressive individual  who  has  overcome
      significant physical difficulties and who has diligently  endeavoured
      to improve his position,  as  well  as  to  help  others.   The  fact
      remains, however, that none of this entitles him  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom by reference to a Convention which, in  the  words  of
      Lord Bingham, "is directed to the  protection  of  fundamental  human
      rights, not the conferment of individual advantages or benefits".

42.   The Tribunal finds that there is a  material  error  of  law  in  the
      Adjudicator's determination.

43.   The following decision is accordingly substituted:-

      The appellant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.










                                                                    P R Lane
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge


                                        Approved for electronic distribution

