
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Anwar (rule 17(1): withdrawal of appeal) [2019] UKUT 00125 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        MR M. A. CLEMENTS, PRESIDENT,
             FIRST TIER TRIBUNAL, IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                   Between

                                WASEEM ANWAR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 1) Under rule  17(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, the  decision  whether  to
    withdraw an appeal is for the appellant;

 2) That decision does not require judicial approval, in order for it to be
    effective;

 3) If an issue arises as  to  whether  a  withdrawal  was,  in  fact,  the
    appellant's decision (ie whether it was valid), it is for  a  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to decide it; as  to  which,  the  reasons  for
    withdrawal may assist;

 4) If an issue arises as to  whether  or  not  an  appellant's  notice  of
    withdrawal was legally valid, the Tribunal  should  exercise  its  case
    management powers so as to  decide  the  matter.   This  will  normally
    involve holding a hearing.  The judge's task will be to decide  on  the
    issue of validity. If the judge's decision is a  substantive  decision,
    as opposed to a "procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision"  within
    the meaning of article 3(n) of the Appeals (Excluded  Decisions)  Order
    2009, the decision will be appealable to the Upper Tribunal;

 5) The decision of Upper  Tribunal  in  TPN  (FtT  appeals  -  withdrawal)
    Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295 (IAC)  not  followed.   The  decision  in  AP
    (Withdrawals  -  nullity  assessment)  Pakistan  [2007]   UKAIT   00022
    followed.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

 1. How can an appellant withdraw an appeal that is before the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal? What is the role of  the
    Tribunal in this process? These two questions arise  for  determination
    in the present case.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in 1990. He appealed under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent, on 10 November 2015, to refuse to issue the appellant  with
    a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the extended family member of a person (his brother  in-law)
    present and exercising Treaty rights in this country.

 3.  On  26  September  2016,  the  appellant's  representatives,   Britain
    Solicitors, wrote to the First-tier Tribunal as follows:-

         "We are instructed by the client that  he  wants  to  withdraw  his
         appeal which is pending with the First-tier  Tribunal  with  appeal
         number EA/00270/2016, as he wants  to  leave  the  UK  voluntarily.
         Please update your system and issue IS.52  (Notice  of  Withdrawal)
         accordingly.

         Your co-operation in this matter will be highly appreciated."

 4. On  28  September  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued  a  written
    notification recording the withdrawal.

 5. On 5 October 2016, Britain Solicitors sent to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "an application to reinstate appeal".  In it, they said:-

         "On 26 Sep 2016 we are instructed by the client that  he  wants  to
         withdraw his appeal as he is leaving the UK voluntarily, further we
         requested to the Tribunal this withdraw this EA/00270/2016 appeal.

         On 03 Oct 2016, we received Notice of Withdrawal "the Appellant has
         withdrawn the appeal by notice" dated 28 Sep 2016.

         On 05 Oct 2016, we are instructed by the client that  he  wants  to
         proceed further with his appeal  in  the  UK.   Previously  he  had
         emergency in back home (sic) that's why  he  wants  to  leave  this
         country urgently and now everything is fine and wants  to  continue
         his appeal before the FTT (IAC).

         In the circumstances,  we  respectfully  request  the  Tribunal  to
         reinstate  his  appeal  and  confirm  us  in  writing.   We  really
         apologise for any inconvenience in this matter.

         Your  cooperation  in  this  matter  will  be  highly   appreciated
         (original emphasis)".

 6. On 19 March 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burnett  considered  the
    matter.  He did so without a hearing, as the  appellant  had  confirmed
    that he wanted the appeal to be decided in that manner.

 7. In a careful decision, which included an analysis of the  case  law  we
    shall address in due course, Judge Burnett found  that  there  was  "no
    evidence that the request for the withdrawal  of  the  appeal  was  not
    properly  made  by  Britain  Solicitors"  (paragraph  17).   The  judge
    concluded that the appeal had been withdrawn on 26 September  2016  and
    that he accordingly had no jurisdiction to consider the merits  of  the
    appeal.  He therefore dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction.

 8. In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, seeking permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant submitted that since the
    Notice of Withdrawal of 26 September 2016, was not a judicial decision,
    bearing a judicial signature, the Notice  of  Withdrawal  was  invalid.
    The appellant relied for this proposition  upon  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Hon. Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  President)  in  TPN  (FtT
    appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295 (IAC).

 9. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  Judge  Burnett's
    decision was granted by the First-tier Tribunal. A  notice  of  hearing
    was sent to the appellant, c/o Britain Solicitors,  pursuant  to  their
    email of 4 June 2018 to the Upper Tribunal, in which  they  had  said:-
    "Kindly direct all future correspondence to us".

10. On 29 October 2018, the respondent informed the Upper Tribunal that the
    appellant had been removed to Pakistan on 1 August 2018  and  that  the
    respondent was not aware of his current address.

11. At the hearing on 7 December 2018,  there  was  no  appearance  by  the
    appellant or any representative of the appellant.   The  appellant  had
    been notified of the hearing, at the correspondence  address  given  by
    his representatives. In  all  the  circumstances,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decided that it was appropriate  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant.

12. We observe that on 22 December 2018, Briton Solicitors  (which  appears
    to be the same  entity  as  Britain  Solicitors)  wrote  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to say that, according to their file, the appellant's  address
    was one in London E13, which had been recorded several  years  earlier.
    This communication, however, made no reference to the  reason  why  the
    appellant had not been represented at the hearing on 7  December.   Nor
    did it engage with whether the appellant  had  been  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom.

B. Rule 17 of the FtTIAC Rules

13. Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  ("the  FtTIAC  Rules")  provides  as
    follows:-

           "Withdrawal

           17.-(1) A party may give notice of the withdrawal of their appeal-



              (a)  by  providing  to  the  Tribunal  a  written  notice  of
           withdrawal of the appeal; or

              (b) orally at a hearing,

                and in  either  case  must  specify  the  reasons  for  that
           withdrawal.

           (2) The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an  appeal  as
           withdrawn if the respondent notifies the Tribunal and each  other
           party that the decision (or, where the  appeal  relates  to  more
           than one decision, all of the  decisions)  to  which  the  appeal
           relates has been withdrawn and  specifies  the  reasons  for  the
           withdrawal of the decision.

           (3) The Tribunal  must  notify  each  party  in  writing  that  a
           withdrawal  has  taken  effect  under  this  rule  and  that  the
           proceedings are no longer regarded by the Tribunal as pending."

C. Procedure rules concerning withdrawal in other Chambers etc

14. The Procedure Rules of other Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal are in
    markedly different  forms.   For  example,  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Social  Entitlement  Chamber)  Rules
    2008, so far as relevant, reads:-

           "(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may  give  notice  of  the
           withdrawal of its case, or any part of it -

              (a) ... by sending or  delivering  to  the  Tribunal  written
              notice of withdrawal; or

              (b) orally at a hearing.

           (2) In the circumstances as described in paragraph (3), a  notice
           of withdrawal will not take effect unless the  Tribunal  consents
           to the withdrawal.

           (3) The circumstances referred to in paragraph (2)  are  where  a
           party gives notice of withdrawal -

              (a) ... in a criminal injuries compensation case;

              (b) in a social security and child  support  case  where  the
              Tribunal has directed that notice of  withdrawal  shall  take
              effect only with the Tribunal's consent; or

              (c) at a hearing.

           (4) An application for a withdrawn case to be reinstated  may  be
           made by -

              (a) the party who withdrew the case;

              (b) where an appeal in a social security  and  child  support
              case has been withdrawn, a respondent.

           (5) An application under paragraph (4) must be  made  in  writing
           and be received by the Tribunal within 1 month after the  earlier
           of -

              (a) the date on which the applicant  was  sent  notice  under
              paragraph (6) that the withdrawal had taken effect; or

              (b) if the applicant was present at the hearing when the case
              was withdrawn orally under paragraph (1)(b), the date of that
              hearing.

           (6) The Tribunal  must  notify  each  party  in  writing  that  a
           withdrawal has taken effect under of this rule".

15. The relevant rule  governing  withdrawals  in  the  General  Regulatory
    Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal  is  very  similar,  save  that  the
    requirement for the Tribunal to give its consent is not confined to any
    particular category of appeal. So  too  is  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, save that  the  consent  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  is  not  needed  in  relation  to  withdrawal  of   an
    application for permission to appeal.

16. Rule 22 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Property
    Chamber) Rules 2013 is somewhat different:-

             22. Withdrawal

             (1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of  the
             withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-

                (a) orally at a hearing; or

                (b) by sending or  delivering  to  the  Tribunal  a  written
                notice of withdrawal.

             (2) A written notice of withdrawal must-

                (a) be signed and dated;

                (b)  identify  the  case  or  part  of  the  case  which  is
                withdrawn;

                (c) state whether any part of the  case,  and  if  so  what,
                remains to be determined;

                (d) confirm that a copy of the notice of the withdrawal  has
                been provided to all other parties and  state  the  date  on
                which this was done;

                (e) include the written consent of any of the other  parties
                who have consented to the withdrawal.

             (3) Notice of withdrawal  will  not  take  effect  unless  the
             Tribunal consents to the withdrawal.

             (4) The Tribunal may  make  such  directions  or  impose  such
             conditions on withdrawal as it considers appropriate.

             (5) A party which has withdrawn its  case  may  apply  to  the
             Tribunal for the case to be reinstated.

             (6) An application under paragraph (5) must be made in writing
             and be received by the Tribunal within 28 days after-

                (a) the date of the hearing at which the case was  withdrawn
                orally under paragraph (1)(a); or

                (b ) the date on which  the  Tribunal  received  the  notice
                under paragraph (1)(b).

             (7) The Tribunal must  notify  each  party  in  writing  of  a
             withdrawal under this rule.

             (8) Any party may, within 28 days after the date of receipt of
             notification by the Tribunal under paragraph (7), apply for  a
             case, or part of a case, which has been withdrawn  under  this
             rule to be re-instated."

    D. Other relevant provisions of the FtTIAC Rules

    It is also necessary for us to set out various other provisions of  the
    FtTIAC Rules, which are relevant to our decision:-

         "Citation, commencement, application and interpretation

         1.

         ...

         (4) In these Rules:

         ...

         "Tribunal" means the First-tier Tribunal;

         ...

         Delegation to staff

         3. - (1) Anything of a formal or  administrative  nature  which  is
         required or permitted to be done by the Tribunal under these  Rules
         may be done by a member of the Tribunal's staff.

         (2) Staff appointed by the Lord Chancellor, may, with the  approval
         of the Senior President of the Tribunals, carry out functions of  a
         judicial nature permitted or required to be done by the Tribunal.

         ...

         Failure to comply with rules etc

         6. - (1) An irregularity resulting from a failure  to  comply  with
         any requirement in these Rules, a practice direction or a direction
         does not of itself render void the proceedings or any step taken in
         the proceedings.

         (2) If a party has failed to comply with  a  requirement  in  these
         Rules, a practice direction or a direction, the Tribunal  may  take
         such action as it considers just, which may include-

           (a) waiving the requirement;

           (b) requiring the failure to be remedied; or

         ...

         Consideration of decision with or without a hearing

         25. - (1) The Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision
         which disposes of proceedings except where-

         a) each party has consented to, or has not objected to, the  matter
            being decided without a hearing;

         ...

           (c) the appellant is outside the United  Kingdom  and  does  not
           have a representative who has an  address  for  service  in  the
           United Kingdom;

         ...

         Decisions and notice of decisions

         29. - (1) The Tribunal may give a decision orally at a hearing.

         (2) the Tribunal must provide to each party as soon  as  reasonably
         practicable after  making  a  decision...  which  disposes  of  the
         proceedings-

            (a) a notice of decision stating the Tribunal's decision; and

            (b) notification of any right of appeal  against  the  decision
            and the time within which, and the manner in which, such  right
            of appeal may be exercised.

         (3) Where the decision of the Tribunal relates to-

         a) an asylum claim or a humanitarian protection claim, the Tribunal
            must provide, with the notice of decision in  paragraph  (2)(a),
            written reasons for its decision;

         b) any other matter, the Tribunal may provide written  reasons  for
            its decision but, if it does not do so, must notify the  parties
            of the right to apply for a written statement of reasons.

            ...

         Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

         33.- (1) A party seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
         must make a written application to the Tribunal for  permission  to
         appeal.

         (2) ... an application under paragraph (1) must be provided to  the
         Tribunal so that it is received no later than  14  days  after  the
         date on which the party making the application  was  provided  with
         written reasons for the decision.

            ..."

E. AP (Withdrawals - nullity assessment) Pakistan [2007] UKAIT 00022

17. In AP (Withdrawals - nullity assessment) Pakistan [2007]  UKAIT  00022,
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Senior  Immigration  Judge  Mackey
    and Immigration Judge  Nicholson)  was  required  to  determine,  as  a
    preliminary issue, whether a valid withdrawal of an  appeal  had  taken
    place in an asylum appeal.  The relevant procedure rule  at  that  time
    was rule 17 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
    2005:-

             "Withdrawal of appeal

             17. - (1) An appellant may withdraw an appeal-

                   (a) orally, at a hearing; or

                   (b) at any  time,  by  filing  written  notice  with  the
                   Tribunal.

             (2) An appeal shall be treated as withdrawn if the  respondent
             notifies the Tribunal that the decision (or, where the  appeal
             relates to more than one decision, all of  the  decisions)  to
             which the appeal relates has been withdrawn.

             (3) If an appeal is withdrawn or  treated  as  withdrawn,  the
             Tribunal must serve on the parties a notice  that  the  appeal
             has been recorded as having been withdrawn."

18. The AIT took note of what McDonald's Immigration Law  &  Practice  (6th
    Edition) had to say about withdrawal and abandonment:-

             "Paragraph 18.104:

             "All appeals may be  withdrawn  or  abandoned.  What  are  the
             distinctions between withdrawal and abandonment, and what  are
             the consequences? Withdrawal of an appeal implies  a  positive
             act, while abandonment suggests passive failure  to  prosecute
             the appeal, or an action incompatible with pursuing it whereby
             it is deemed abandoned by statute. In the  case  of  a  deemed
             withdrawal, which happens when the decision  appealed  against
             is withdrawn, the positive  act  is  that  of  the  respondent
             rather  than  the  appellant,  but  the  distinction   between
             withdrawal  and  abandonment  vanishes  with  the  concept  of
             "deemed abandonment" when the appellant is  granted  leave  to
             enter or remain in the UK. Much of the case law deals with the
             issue of who decides whether an appeal has been withdrawn, how
             the decision is made, and whether a decision  that  an  appeal
             has been withdrawn is itself challengeable. ...If an appeal is
             withdrawn or treated as withdrawn, the Tribunal must serve  on
             the parties a notice that the  appeal  has  been  recorded  as
             having been withdrawn. Such a notice is not a  "determination"
             within the meaning of the procedure Rules, or a decision on an
             appeal for the purposes of appeal  or  statutory  review,  and
             could be challenged only by judicial review. It is clear  that
             whether an appeal has been  withdrawn  is  a  matter  for  the
             Tribunal and the courts, not the Secretary  of  State.  ...Now
             that appeal notices go direct to the  Tribunal,  there  is  no
             reason for withdrawal of appeals  to  go  through  immigration
             authorities. When an appeal is validly withdrawn prior to  the
             hearing, and the withdrawal  accepted  by  the  Tribunal,  the
             appeal does not go into a state  of  suspended  animation  but
             ceases to exist, and any determination of the appeal  (on  the
             merits) is a nullity.

             Paragraph 18.105

             The main difficulty in practice has been  whether  the  person
             withdrawing has the necessary instructions and authority to do
             so. The general rule that a retainer of a  solicitor  includes
             authority to compromise an action or withdraw unless  contrary
             instructions are expressly given, does not appear to apply  in
             immigration appeals, and a solicitor without instructions  has
             been held to have no authority to withdraw  an  appeal.  Where
             there is authority withdrawal will be effective. ...The  issue
             in all cases however is likely to be whether it is clear  that
             the appellant intended to withdraw the appeal.  If  appellants
             have signed a letter of withdrawal, the burden is on  them  to
             show that they instructed their representative not to  present
             it, or to withdraw it."

19. The AIT also looked at the position in other jurisdictions:-

           "52. In an effort to ensure consistency with other areas of  the
           law on the issue of withdrawal, (or abandonment as it is  termed
           in the criminal jurisdiction) we have found helpful guidance  in
           the criminal jurisdiction. In Reg v. Medway [1976] 2 WLR 528 the
           Court of Appeal ( Lord  Widgery  CJ,  Stephenson  LJ,  O'Connor,
           Lawson and Jupp JJ ) in a decision delivered by Lawson  J,  held
           that the court had jurisdiction to grant  leave  to  withdraw  a
           notice of abandonment  [withdrawal]  of  either  an  appeal,  or
           application for leave  to  appeal,  only  where  the  court  was
           satisfied that the notice of abandonment was a nullity,  in  the
           sense that the abandonment was not the result  of  a  deliberate
           and  informed  decision;  and  that  there   was   no   inherent
           jurisdiction to grant leave to withdraw a notice of  abandonment
           because of the existence of special circumstances.

           53. Medway was a case where  the  applicant  had  a  history  of
           mental illness, and was convicted of arson offences  and  breach
           of a probation order. Contrary to advice of a medical officer he
           applied to the Full Court for leave to  appeal.  However,  after
           receiving some advice [from] his solicitors,  he  abandoned  the
           application. Later, after consulting  different  solicitors,  he
           made an application to withdraw the notice  of  abandonment,  on
           the ground that the single judge who heard the  application  had
           overlooked the power of the Court of  Appeal  to  substitute  an
           appropriate sentence,  if  relevant  material  became  available
           after sentence had been imposed. The Court of  Appeal  dismissed
           the application finding the court had no jurisdiction  to  grant
           the application since  the  abandonment  was  the  result  of  a
           deliberate decision. At 545 Lawson J stated:


                "The answer to the first question which we  have  to  decide
                depends  upon  whether  alongside  the  jurisdiction   which
                undoubtedly, as authorities show, exists to  give  leave  to
                withdraw  an  abandonment  where  it  is  shown   that   the
                circumstances are present which enable the court to say that
                that abandonment should  be  treated  as  a  nullity,  there
                coexists  an  inherent  jurisdiction,   in   other   special
                circumstances, enabling the court to give such leave. We are
                satisfied and hold that there is no  such  jurisdiction.  In
                our judgment the kernel of what has been  described  as  the
                "nullity test" is that  the  Court  is  satisfied  that  the
                abandonment was not the result of a deliberate and  informed
                decision; in other words, that the mind of the applicant did
                not go with his act of abandonment. In the nature of  things
                it is impossible to foresee when and how  such  a  state  of
                affairs may come about; therefore it would be quite wrong to
                make a list, under such headings as  mistake,  fraud,  wrong
                advice, misapprehension and suchlike, which purports  to  be
                exhaustive of the types of case where this jurisdiction  can
                be  exercised.  Such  headings  can  only  be  regarded   as
                guidelines, the presence of which may justify its existence.




             54. The Criminal Procedure Rules 2005, (S.I. 2005, No  384,  r
             63.5) on the issue of  withdrawal,  (termed  "abandonment"  in
             those Rules), adopts the approach that was taken by in Medway,
             by the Court of Appeal when interpreting the Criminal
             Appeal Rules 1968 (S.I. 1968 No. 1262 - r10).


             55. In the criminal jurisdiction the Magistrates'  Courts  Act
             1980, s 111 , provides a right of appeal against a conviction,
             order, determination or other proceeding that is "wrong in law
             or is in excess of jurisdiction..." Rule 63.5 of the  Criminal
             Procedure Rules 2005 provides for notice of Abandonment of  an
             appeal stating:


                 "63.5-(1) Without prejudice to the power of the Crown Court
                 to give leave for an appeal to be abandoned,  an  appellant
                 may abandon an appeal  by  giving  notice  in  writing,  in
                 accordance with the following provisions of this rule,  not
                 later than the third day before the date fixed for  hearing
                 the appeal."


             Archbold (2007) at para 2-176 comments:



             The Crown Court cannot entertain an appeal once  it  has  been
             validly abandoned, unless the  abandonment  is  a  nullity  by
             reason of mistake or fraudulent inducement  ...  Nor  can  the
             Court reinstate abandoned appeals, unless it is satisfied that
             the notice of abandonment is a nullity."

             56. The approach taken in Medway, and in the current  Criminal
             Procedure Rules, has  been  adopted  by  SIAC,  in  open,  but
             unpublished, decisions."


20.  At paragraph 57, the AIT set out its conclusions:-

             57. We are satisfied therefore, that  the  legal  position  in
             respect of withdrawals in this jurisdiction is as follows:


             (a) Rule 17(1) provides the basis upon which an appellant  may
             withdraw an appeal.


             (b) Rule 17(2) provides how a respondent notifies the Tribunal
             an appeal shall be treated as withdrawn, and Rule 17(3) places
             an obligation on the Tribunal to serve the parties notice that
             the appeal has been recorded as having been withdrawn.


             (c) We consider the previous case law in the former  IAT  such
             as Adewole, El-Tuyeb reflect, but perhaps without the  clarity
             desirable, the fundamental  principle  that  if  a  notice  of
             withdrawal has been given, either orally at a hearing,  or  by
             written notice prior to the hearing, the appeal then ceases to
             exist and is at an end.


             (d) The clear guidelines on  withdrawal/abandonment  given  in
             the criminal jurisdiction both  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
             Medway,  and  in  the  Archbold  commentary  on  the  Criminal
             Procedure Rules 2005, set out above,  we  consider  should  be
             adopted as the correct and consistent approach to be taken  by
             this Tribunal.


             (e) Accordingly when an application is  made  to  challenge  a
             notice of withdrawal as invalid the Tribunal will then proceed
             to hear the application. Based on all of the  evidence  placed
             before it, the Tribunal must be satisfied, on the  balance  of
             probabilities, that the withdrawal was not  the  result  of  a
             deliberate and informed decision; "in other  words,  that  the
             mind of the applicant did not go with his act  of  abandonment
             [withdrawal]" before concluding that be  purported  withdrawal
             was in fact a nullity and the appeal is extant.


             (f) Noting the comments of Lawson  J  in  Medway  (supra)  and
             without being exhaustive of the reasons why a withdrawal could
             be found to lack validity, we consider  that  some  guidelines
             can be given of the types of cases where this  can  arise,  on
             the balance of probabilities. These are:


             (i) The Appellant has had an almost immediate change of  mind,
             which is promptly communicated to a representative,  prior  to
             the matter coming for  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  (as  in
             Adewole);


             (ii) A letter or notice purporting to withdraw an  appeal  has
             been sent to the  Respondent,  rather  than  to  the  Tribunal
             itself - (NB. A notice of  withdrawal  should  have  no  legal
             validity until the actual notice of appeal is communicated  to
             the Tribunal, either in writing or at  a  hearing  before  the
             Tribunal);


             (iii) A withdrawal has been communicated to the Tribunal by  a
             representative without there  being  clear  understanding,  or
             meeting  of  the  minds,  between   an   Appellant   and   the
             representative;


             (iv) A withdrawal has been communicated to the Tribunal  by  a
             representative on the instructions  of  a  Sponsor,  (who  has
             completed section 5 of the appeal form), rather  than  on  the
             actual instructions of the Appellant;


             (v) A representative has  communicated  a  withdrawal  to  the
             Tribunal in error, either through lack of due care, or  simple
             mistake.


21. At paragraph 58, the AIT emphasised that there was no question of  "re-
    instating" an appeal that had been validly withdrawn because  once  the
    withdrawal notice had been given to the Tribunal,  the  appeal  was  no
    longer pending before the Tribunal and that  Tribunal  had  no  further
    function.  Accordingly:-

             "The only  possible  legal  issue  remaining  is  whether  the
             purported withdrawal is in fact a valid one. If it is invalid,
             then  the  appeal  remains  extant  and  pending  before   the
             Tribunal. This point, of course,  has  important  consequences
             relating to the  ability  to  remove  the  Appellant  and  the
             continuation of any leave he or she may have by virtue of s.3C
             of the Immigration Act 1971"

22. Having heard evidence, the AIT concluded, that, in the case before  it,
    the appellant had suffered from various failures in the translation  of
    relevant documentation.  The appellant did not intend to  withdraw  her
    appeal but merely to  note  that  her  solicitor  was  withdrawing  his
    representation.  The AIT, accordingly, found that there "was an invalid
    withdrawal which we find to have no effect in law and  should  be  thus
    treated as a nullity" (paragraph 64).

F. TPN (FtT appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam [2017] UKUT 00295 (IAC)

23. In the present case, Judge Burnett paid close attention  to  the  AIT's
    decision in AP. However,  he  also  had  before  him  the  decision  of
    McCloskey J, President of the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, in TPN (FtT appeals - withdrawal) Vietnam  [2017]  UKUT
    00295 (IAC), a  decision  taken  by  reference  to  the  current  rules
    regarding withdrawal; namely, rule 17 of the FtTIAC Rules.  As we  have
    seen, the appellant relied upon TPN for his  contention  that,  in  the
    present case,  the  notice  of  withdrawal  issued  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was invalid and that,  accordingly,  Judge  Burnett  had  been
    wrong in law to find he had no jurisdiction to determine the appeal  on
    a substantive basis.

24. In TPN, counsel acting for the thirteen  year  old  appellant  who  was
    appealing against the decision to refuse his  international  protection
    claim, withdrew the appeal at the appeal hearing  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Counsel did not provide the judge with any reasons for
    the withdrawal but the judge nevertheless sanctioned the withdrawal.

25. Following the hearing, a member of the Tribunal's administrative  staff
    issued form IA55, recording the withdrawal. By that time, however,  the
    appellant's  solicitors  had  informed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    counsel had acted without instructions.  In apparent response  to  this
    information, form IA55,  as  issued  by  the  Tribunal,  contained  the
    statement:  "counsel  took  the  view   to   withdraw   perfectly   and
    legitimately, in these circumstances there is nothing for the  Tribunal
    to do.  Solicitors should take it up with counsel".

26. Having set out the relevant procedure rules, McCloskey J turned to  the
    Presidential Guidance issued by the First-tier Tribunal on the  subject
    of withdrawal:-

             "9. While the FtT Procedural Rules contain nothing further  of
             significance, I would mention also in this  context  paragraph
             [15] of Presidential Guidance Note No. 1 of 2014 which,  under
             the rubric of "Withdrawal by the Appellant", states:


             "Where an appellant seeks to withdraw an appeal  in  terms  of
             rule 17, provided the Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant
             is doing so freely and understands  the  consequences  of  the
             withdrawal, the Tribunal will be satisfied that the appeal  is
             withdrawn. Where an appellant is legally represented  and  the
             request  to  withdraw  is  made  by  the  representative,  the
             Tribunal will assume that the representative has explained the
             consequences of the action to the appellant and that  this  is
             the intention of the appellant".


             As I  shall  explain  infra,  I  consider  this  statement  to
             faithfully reflect the correct construction of Rule 17 and its
             discernible underlying intention".


27. The substantive parts of the decision in TPN were as follows:-


            "17. In order to determine the issues raised in this appeal  it
             is  necessary  to  construe  certain  provisions  of  the  FtT
             procedural rules.  No special principles fall to be applied in
             this exercise.  Three overarching  principles,  each  of  them
             orthodox, are,  in  my  estimation,  engaged.   First,  it  is
             necessary to ascertain the intention of the agency which  made
             the Rules, namely the Tribunal Procedure Committee ("TPC"),  a
             specialist body which draws on the expertise of, inter  alios,
             judges hailing from various corners of the world of tribunals.
              Second, it will normally be appropriate  to  ascribe  to  the
             words of any rule their ordinary and natural meaning.   Third,
             regard  should  be  had  to  the  full  context,  as  I   have
             highlighted in [10] above.


         18.   Rule  17  of  the  FtT  Procedural  Rules  establishes   two
             mechanisms for withdrawing an appeal, namely the provision  of
             a written  notice  of  withdrawal  or  oral  withdrawal  at  a
             hearing. I consider that  the  rule  makers  clearly  had  two
             distinct scenarios  in  contemplation,  namely  withdrawal  in
             advance of a hearing, in writing and withdrawal on the day  of
             hearing.  In both instances, the central stipulation  in  rule
             17 is uncompromising.  The reasons for the  withdrawal  "must"
             be specified.  This is expressed as a  mandatory  requirement,
             subject to no exceptions.


         19. This mandatory requirement points up and reflects some of  the
             hallmarks of tribunal litigation.   Proceedings  in  tribunals
             involve the determination of the respective legal  rights  and
             obligations of the citizen and the State.  The  administration
             of justice in tribunals has, by long established tradition and
             culture, been designed to  provide  swift,  uncomplicated  and
             inexpensive adjudication.  Litigants sometimes have  no  legal
             advice   or   representation   and,    on    occasion,    have
             representatives  who  may  not  necessarily  be  appropriately
             skilled  or  experienced  in  the  relevant  field   of   law.
             Furthermore, tribunal litigation, particularly in the discrete
             field of immigration and asylum, does not lend itself  to  the
             consensual resolution mechanisms of mediation or  other  forms
             of  conciliation.  Finally,  at  the  first  tier  level,  the
             appellant is always the citizen.


         20. I consider that the TPC would have been alert to  the  various
             features of Tribunal proceedings highlighted above in devising
             Rule 17.  The Committee was, presumptively, operating  in  the
             real world of tribunal proceedings. In my  judgement  many  of
             the  factors  highlighted  explain  why  the  TPC   considered
             judicial oversight and decision necessary  in  the  matter  of
             withdrawing appeals. Furthermore the TPC, in my view,  clearly
             had in contemplation the need for judicial evaluation  of  the
             question of whether the Secretary of State's withdrawal of the
             underlying decision should not operate  to  preclude  judicial
             adjudication of  for  example  an  important  issue  of  legal
             principle, statutory construction or practice  and  procedure.
             Fundamentally, I consider that rule 17 envisages and  requires
             active and properly informed judicial involvement and decision
             making.


         21. I develop this analysis as follows.  The phrase "the Tribunal"
             is employed several times in the Rule  17  regime.   Indeed  -
             unsurprisingly - it  appears  repeatedly  throughout  the  FtT
             Procedural Rules. It is  undefined.  In  some  contexts,  "the
             Tribunal" denotes  the  administrative  organisation  of  this
             judicialised entity.  In others, it plainly denotes a judge of
             the Tribunal.  Rule 17 provides a convenient  illustration  of
             this important distinction.  The requirement to provide to the
             Tribunal a written notice  -  enshrined  in  Rule  17(1)(a)  -
             clearly entails the provision of the document required to  the
             Tribunal's administration in the  ordinary  case.   Similarly,
             the duty imposed on "the Tribunal" to provide the notification
             required by Rule 17(3) clearly envisages an act on the part of
             the Tribunal's administration. However, I consider that in all
             other material respects the words "the Tribunal" in  Rule  17,
             denote a judge of the FtT.


         22. I elaborate on the above analysis in my outline of  what  Rule
             17 means and requires, most conveniently formulated in tabular
             form:


   i. An appeal can only be withdrawn by, or on behalf of, the appellant.




  ii. The requirement to provide the tribunal with the reasons in support of
      a proposed withdrawal clearly envisages that there  will  be  judicial
      consideration.




 iii. If  reasons  are  not  provided,  proper  judicial  consideration  and
      oversight are not possible.




  iv. The combined effect of  the  notice  provisions  in  Rule  17(i),  the
      requirement of judicial oversight in Rule 17(ii) and the notice to  be
      given in accordance with Rule 17(iii) is that the notice given by  the
      appellant is the first step in the Rule 17 withdrawal process.




   v. The best guidance available  to  the  FtT  judge  in  performing  this
      function is what  is  contained  in  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note
      (supra): the judge must be satisfied that the appellant is withdrawing
      the appeal freely and  understands  the  consequences  of  withdrawal.
      This will not be so if, for example, it lacks coherence or is based on
      a material misunderstanding or misconception.




  vi. In practice, enhanced judicial vigilance is likely to be  required  in
      cases where the appellant is unrepresented.




 vii. The reasons must be such as to persuade the FtT Judge that the  course
      proposed is appropriate.




viii. In determining whether withdrawal is appropriate, the Judge will  take
      into account (inexhaustively) that Tribunal proceedings do not partake
      of  the  essential  characteristics  of   private   law   inter-partes
      litigation, with the  result  that  withdrawal  requires,  in  effect,
      judicial adjudication.




  ix. Fundamentally, the FtT Judge must be  satisfied  that  there  is  good
      reason for the withdrawal.




   x. There is no obligation on  the  FtT  Judge  to  approve  the  proposed
      withdrawal. Quite the reverse: Rule 17  plainly  contemplates  that  a
      proposal to withdraw may be refused.




  xi. Fundamentally, where the withdrawal of an  appeal  is  proposed,  this
      takes the form of an application to the tribunal requiring a  judicial
      decision.


         23.  The  exercise  of  juxtaposing  Rule  17(i)   and   (ii)   is
             instructive.  Their phraseology is not identical.  However,  I
             consider that, in substance, they are  indistinguishable.   In
             both cases notice must be given, the notice  must  incorporate
             reasons, judicial scrutiny is then applied and the appropriate
             outcome follows. Withdrawal of the appeal is neither automatic
             nor preordained. I  consider  that  in  both  cases  the  main
             purpose of judicial scrutiny is to protect the appellant.   It
             has the further purpose of enabling detection of any misuse of
             the process of the Tribunal. Each of these  purposes  furthers
             the public interest.


         24. The above analysis is fortified by the free standing provision
             in Rule 17(2) which is directed  to  the  scenario  where  the
             Secretary of State decides  to  withdraw  the  decision  under
             appeal.  A decision of this kind is not binding  on  the  FtT.
             Rather, it too requires judicial oversight and decision.  This
             will entail scrutinising the reasons given for the  withdrawal
             of the underlying decision and the evaluation of whether there
             is "good reason" not to permit the withdrawal of the appeal.


         25. Thus every withdrawal of an appeal under Rule  17  requires  a
             judicial  decision.  I  can  finding  nothing  in  either  the
             language of the Rule or the ascertainable underlying intention
             pointing to any other  persuasive  analysis  or  construction.
             The next question which I address is whether Rule  29  of  the
             FtT Procedural Rules applies to a judicial decision under Rule
             17.  Rule 29 requires that a formal notice of decision must be
             provided.  Where (as in the present case) an asylum  claim  or
             humanitarian protection claim is involved,  this  notice  must
             incorporate or annex "written reasons for its decision" -  per
             Rule 29(3)(a).  In  all  other  cases,  the  FtT  must  either
             provide written reasons or notify the parties of  their  right
             to apply for same - per Rule 29(3)(b).


         26. Notably, Rule 17 contains no reference to Rule 29, while  Rule
             29 contains no reference to Rule 17.  The analysis  that  Rule
             29 is directed to the substantive determination of appeals  is
             readily made.  In my judgment, the contemplation  of  the  TPC
             was that Rule 17 would operate as a  discrete,  free  standing
             regime.   This  analysis  is  fortified  by  the   significant
             contrast between Rule 17(3) and Rule 29(3) and (6).  Thus  the
             question ultimately becomes: what  does  Rule  17(3)  require?
             Given my conclusion that the "notification" mandated  by  Rule
             17(3) must  be  the  product  of  judicial  consideration  and
             decision, it is impossible to escape  the  further  conclusion
             that the notice to be given under Rule 17(3) must be composed,
             signed and dated  by  the  Judge  concerned.   Second,  having
             regard to the common law principles rehearsed in extenso in MK
             (Duty to Give  Reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  641  (IAC)  I
             consider that the judicially composed notice of decision under
             Rule 17(3) must contain an outline of  why  the  decision  has
             been made. The TPC, in my estimation, cannot have contemplated
             a bare, perfunctory, conclusionary pro-forma.


         27. What, in principle, will this require of the  Judge?   Context
             being everything, one immediately contrasts a decision of this
             genre with the substantive determination of an appeal. The key
             to answering this rhetorical  question  lies  mainly,  in  the
             requirement enshrined in Rule 17(1)(b) that the "reasons"  for
             the proposed withdrawal be provided by the  moving  party.   I
             consider that, in all cases, the notice required by Rule 17(3)
             should explain why the FtT has decided that  the  reasons  put
             forward are sufficient and satisfactory - or, as the case  may
             be, are not.  In the typical case nothing elaborate or  unduly
             burdensome will be required of the Judge. Precisely  the  same
             analysis applies to a Notice  of  Decision  under  Rule  17(3)
             belonging to the Rule 17(2) scenario  viz  withdrawal  by  the
             Secretary of State of the underlying decision.


         28.  I apply my construction of Rule 17 to the factual  matrix  of
             this appeal in the following way.  I do not accept  that  bare
             pro-forma   notice   to   the   Appellant   and   his    legal
             representatives in the form which was sent in  this  case  was
             compliant with either the letter or  the  spirit  of  the  FtT
             Procedural  Rules.   The  reason  for  that  is  that  neither
             discloses any proper  judicial  consideration  or  any  proper
             judicial  act  or  judicial  decision.  Added  to   this   the
             elementary requirement of a judicial signature  has  not  been
             observed.  The decision of the FtT is unsustainable in law  on
             this ground alone.  It suffers from the further, free standing
             infirmity that, in contravention of Rule 17,  no  reasons  for
             the proposed withdrawal of the appeal were provided.  It  must
             be set aside in consequence.

         29. The broader point of practice raised by this appeal is whether
             an appeal to the Upper Tribunal in this  kind  of  context  is
             appropriate.  I am satisfied that  it  is.  What  occurred  at
             first instance was  in  breach  of  the  express  and  implied
             requirements of the Rules to the extent that the  decision  of
             the First-tier Tribunal is unsustainable in law.  That per  se
             renders it vulnerable to challenge  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal.

             ..."

G. Discussion

28. The first thing to acknowledge is that the actual decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in TPN was manifestly correct.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    been given information, shortly after the purported withdrawal  of  the
    appeal, which demonstrated that the supposed withdrawal made by Counsel
    at the hearing, was, in fact, invalid because it had been made entirely
    without instructions.  The factual matrix was, in short, very like that
    discussed in paragraph 18.105 of the 6th Edition of MacDonald,  as  set
    out in  the  decision  of  AP.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    undertaken a judicial evaluation of whether  the  purported  withdrawal
    was valid.

29. Given its author, the decision in TPN deserves great respect.  We have,
    however, reluctantly but firmly concluded that TPN misconstrues rule 17
    of the FtTIAC Rules. Our reasons are as follows.

30. In  TPN,  the  President  made  reference  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    Committee which, pursuant to section 22 of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, makes procedure rules for the First-tier Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal.   Schedule  5  to  that  Act  contains  further
    provision for such rules,  including  that  they  are  to  be  made  by
    statutory instrument.

31. The FtTIAC Rules are, accordingly, delegated legislation and, as  such,
    subject to ordinary principles of statutory construction.

32. One such principle is that words in a statute or  statutory  instrument
    should be given their ordinary meaning. Applying that  principle,  rule
    17(1) can readily be seen to do two things; namely -

              a) it enables an appellant to withdraw their appeal, either by
                 written notice or orally at the hearing; and

              b) it requires the  appellant  to  specify  reasons  for  that
                 withdrawal.

33. The requirement to give reasons does not have  the  effect  of  turning
    rule 17(1) into an application to the Tribunal to give its  consent  to
    the withdrawal.  The  requirement  to  "specify  the  reason  for  that
    withdrawal" makes it  plain  that  the  giving  of  reasons  is  not  a
    precondition for withdrawal. The withdrawal has  taken  place  but  the
    Tribunal is entitled to be told why.

34.  If withdrawal under rule 17 of the FtTIAC Rules had been  intended  by
    the drafter to be subject to consent, then it is inconceivable that the
    rule would not have  said  so  in  terms.  As  we  have  seen,  such  a
    requirement is contained in the procedure rules of  other  Chambers  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal Rules.

35. We  must,  therefore,  reluctantly  disagree  with  those  findings  in
    paragraph 22 of the decision in TPN  which  suggest  the  contrary;  in
    particular, (vii) which requires the reasons to be "such as to persuade
    the FTT judge that the course  proposed  is  appropriate";  (ix)  which
    requires the FTT judge to be satisfied "that there is good  reason  for
    the withdrawal"; (x) which holds that rule 17 "plainly contemplates the
    proposal to withdraw may be refused"; and (xi) which speaks of a  "form
    of ... application to the  Tribunal  requiring  a  judicial  decision".
    None of these findings can be properly derived from  rule  17.  On  the
    contrary, what TPN purports to do is create an entirely different rule,
    by means of judicial fiat.

36. We are fortified in our construction of rule 17(1) by the fact that the
    role of reasons in rule 17(2) is significantly different.   There,  the
    use of the word "if" makes the duty of the Tribunal to treat an  appeal
    as withdrawn contingent upon the respondent doing two things; namely:-

        a.  notifying  the  tribunal  when  each  of  the  party  that  the
           decision... has been withdrawn; and

        b. specifying the reasons for withdrawal.

37. At paragraph 23 of TPN, the President  regarded  the  juxtaposition  of
    rule 17(1) and (2)  as  demonstrating  that  "in  substance,  they  are
    indistinguishable" (original emphasis). We  respectfully  disagree.  In
    our view, the juxtaposition of  paragraphs  (1)  and  (2)  of  rule  17
    underscores the impermissibility of  reading  rule  17(1)  in  the  way
    described in TPN.

38. Another principle of statutory interpretation is that  recourse  should
    not normally be had to background materials relating to the legislation
    in question unless the legislation is ambiguous or  would  lead  to  an
    absurd result, if read literally, Since, however,  we  are  disagreeing
    with the decision in TPN, we set out in the Appendix to our decision an
    extract from the published Reply of the Tribunal Procedure Committee to
    the Response to the Committee's Consultation Paper on the proposed  new
    FtTIAC Rules  (October 2014).

39. As can be seen from the extract,  the  Committee's  discussion  of  the
    requirement to give reasons in rule 17 focused entirely on rule  17(2).
    There is, so far as we are aware, nothing in the Reply to  support  the
    construction of rule 17(1) contained in TPN.

40. The purpose of the requirement in rule 17(1) to specify reasons for  an
    appellant's withdrawal is precisely that which was  identified  in  the
    6th edition of MacDonald's Immigration Law &  Practice  and  which  was
    elaborated by the AIT in AP.   The  requirement  provides  a  mechanism
    whereby the Tribunal can see whether the withdrawal is a valid one.  It
    relates to the Tribunal's function under rule 17(3) of  notifying  each
    party in writing that withdrawal has taken effect.

41. What happens if the notice of withdrawal is not accompanied by reasons?
    As with any failure to comply with a requirement of the  FtTIAC  Rules,
    the Tribunal has power under rule 6 to take such action as it considers
    just, which may  include  waiving  the  requirement  or  requiring  the
    failure to be remedied. In practice, the Tribunal's administration  can
    be expected to request reasons, where none have been provided.

42. The Tribunal's response to the reasons given - or the failure  to  give
    reasons - will depend upon the nature of the case,  including  what  is
    known about the appellant.  If, for example, the appellant is  a  child
    (as in TPN), the Tribunal is likely, through the mechanism of  rule  6,
    to insist upon seeing reasons, before issuing a notification under rule
    17(3).

43. In some cases, the Tribunal's administration may well arrange  for  the
    matter to be put before  a  judge  or  a  person  exercising  delegated
    judicial functions under rule 3.  However, the fact  that  a  judge  or
    such a person may be involved in the process at  this  point  does  not
    mean that any resulting  rule  17(3)  notification  must  therefore  be
    regarded as a "full-blown"  judicial  decision.  It  remains  merely  a
    notification of something that  has  happened  without  the  Tribunal's
    input. It is, in other words, "of a formal or  administrative  nature",
    within the meaning of rule 3(1).

44. The problems that arise if one concludes otherwise  are,  we  consider,
    exposed by paragraphs 26-29 of TPN.  If all  rule  17(3)  notifications
    are  treated  as  reasoned  judicial  decisions,   which   dispose   of
    proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal, then it is difficult to see why
    the requirements of rules 25 and 29 of  the  FtTIAC  Rules  should  not
    apply to them.  In paragraph 26  of  TPN,  the  President  nevertheless
    considered  that  "the  contemplation  of   [the   Tribunal   Procedure
    Committee] was that rule 17 would operate as a  discrete,  freestanding
    regime".  We agree. However, the interpretation adopted by  TPN  leaves
    it unclear on  what  principled  basis  rules  25  and  29  are  to  be
    disregarded.

45. Where the Tribunal considers  that  the  reason  given  for  withdrawal
    raises an issue as to whether the appellant's notice of withdrawal  is,
    in fact, legally valid, in the sense described by the  AIT  in  AP;  or
    where it is subsequently asserted that the notice of withdrawal was not
    validly given in that sense, then the Tribunal should exercise its case
    management powers under rule 4 so as to  decide  the  matter.  At  this
    point, the matter lies unarguably in the  purely  judicial  realm.  The
    task for the judge is to pronounce on the  issue  of  validity.    This
    will normally involve holding a hearing, as occurred in  AP.   It  may,
    however, involve dealing with the matter without  a  hearing,  such  as
    happened in the present case, where Judge Burnett was informed  by  the
    appellant's solicitors that they were content  for  the  matter  to  be
    decided without a hearing. Judge Burnett was aware that rules 25 and 29
    applied because he was engaged in a process  that  could  result  in  a
    decision disposing of proceedings (as indeed it did).

46. So, in summary, our conclusions on rule 17(1) are as follows:

         (a) the  decision  whether  to  withdraw  the  appeal  is  for  the
         appellant;

         (b) that decision does not require judicial approval, in order  for
         it to be effective;

         (c) if an issue arises as to whether a withdrawal was, in fact, the
         appellant's decision (ie whether it was valid), it is for  a  judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal to decide it; as to which,  the  reasons
         for withdrawal may assist.

47. How  the  ensuing  decision  on  the  validity  of  withdrawal  may  be
    challenged will depend upon whether it falls to be  categorised  as  an
    excluded decision for the purposes of section 11(5) of  the  2007  Act.
    In the present case, Judge Burnett reached what can  only  properly  be
    categorised  as  substantive  decision,  rather  than  a   "procedural,
    ancillary or preliminary decision", within the meaning of article  3(n)
    of the Appeals  (Excluded  Decisions)  Order  2009.   Accordingly,  his
    decision that he  did  not  have  jurisdiction  in  the  appeal,  which
    resulted from his conclusion that the appellant had  validly  withdrawn
    that appeal on 26 September 2016, was appealable to the Upper Tribunal.

48. We consider it plain that Judge Burnett's  decision  was  correct.  The
    appellant had validly withdrawn his appeal because he  had  decided  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The fact that  he  later  changed  his  mind
    could not affect the validity of that withdrawal.  As the request  from
    his solicitors disclosed, what the appellant was in fact attempting  to
    do was to reinstate his appeal.  But, as we have seen, that  is  not  a
    course which is allowed under the FtTIAC Rules.

    DECISION

49. The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  The appeal, is  accordingly,
    dismissed.


                                                                    The Hon.
                                                             Mr Justice Lane
                                             President of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                                4 March 2019
                                  APPENDIX

     EXTRACTS FROM THE REPLY OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE COMMITTEE TO THE
     RESPONSE TO THE COMMITTEE'S CONSULTATION PAPER ON THE PROPOSED NEW
                         FtTIAC RULES (OCTOBER 2014)




(14) Should the Tribunal have the discretion to  continue  with  an  appeal,
rather than treating it as withdrawn, when the decision to which  it  refers
has been withdrawn?

63. Five respondents supported this proposal. These respondents argued  that
bare withdrawals of the underlying immigration decision were too common  and
had the effect of frustrating the  tribunal  process.  They  also  suggested
that, in some cases, withdrawal of  the  underlying  decision  by  the  Home
Office was motivated by tactical reasons  -  such  as  addressing  perceived
inadequacies in the decision or gaining time
to seek new evidence. These circumstances, the respondents suggested,  could
be more appropriately addressed by  applying  for  case  management  orders,
such as adjournments.

64. The TPC agreed that withdrawal of the underlying decision should not  be
used to secure tactical advantage within the tribunal process and  that  the
Rules should seek to prevent this.

65. The Home Office objected to the  proposal.  It  argued  that  where  the
underlying decision had been withdrawn, there was no longer any  matter  for
the tribunal to determine. It also raised concerns about the  practicalities
of assessing, in a large number of appeals  where  the  underlying  decision
had been withdrawn, whether the appeal should
nonetheless continue. Even if this  could  be  done,  it  argued,  the  cost
implications  for  both  the  Home  Office  and  the   Tribunal   would   be
significant.

66. The TPC recognised that in the majority of cases  where  the  underlying
decision was withdrawn it  would  not  be  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to
continue.

67. Finally, the Home Office argued that the concerns raised about  improper
withdrawals were unnecessary, since Home Office policy was only to  withdraw
the underlying decision where the intention was to  grant  the  application.
Where new points were to be raised Home Office policy was that: "A  decision
should not be withdrawn  simply  because  better  or  stronger  reasons  for
refusal could be given. If a Presenting Officer concludes  that  there  were
additional grounds for refusal, these should be discussed  with  an  Appeals
and Litigation Page 10 of 23 Directorate Senior Caseworker and  -  where  it
is agreed  that  it  is  appropriate  to  raise  additional  matters  -  the
Presenting  Officer  should  do  so  in  writing  to  the  Representative  /
Appellant and the Tribunal."

68. The TPC considered a number of possible approaches  in  the  Rules.  The
approach set out in the consultation secured a discretion for the  Tribunal,
allowing it to continue to hear an appeal,  notwithstanding  the  withdrawal
of the underlying decision. Although  this  would  help  ensure  withdrawals
were not misused, it would also absorb  considerable  resources  as  regards
both the Tribunal  and  litigants.  In  many  cases,  where  the  underlying
decision had been withdrawn, the appellant would not wish  to  continue  the
case or it would be inappropriate for  them  to  do  so.  Identifying  those
cases where the option to withdraw the underlying decision  was  being  used
improperly would also be challenging; in many cases  the  misuse  would  not
become apparent until after a new decision was  made.  This  would  make  it
impossible for a tribunal, at the
point of withdrawal, to distinguish those cases.

69. The TPC therefore also considered a formulation in which  withdrawal  of
the underlying decision would end the appeal - but would  also  provide  for
an application to reinstate the appeal by the appellant. This would  provide
some  security  against  improper  withdrawal,  but   limit   the   resource
implications to those cases where an application to reinstate was  made.  It
would, however, mean that cases would initially be withdrawn,  resulting  in
the loss of any listed hearing.

70. This possibility was raised by the TPC with the Home Office, who  argued
against it. The Home Office suggested that  it  might  not  be  possible  to
remove an individual from the UK  while  the  possibility  of  reinstatement
existed. It also  suggested  that  appellants  might  deliberately  withdraw
their appeal, with the intention to  apply  to  reinstate  it  later,  as  a
tactical measure to prolong their time in  the  UK.  The  Home  Office  also
raised the possibility  that  many  unnecessary  applications  to  reinstate
would be made by appellants either frustrated because  a  new  decision  had
not yet been  made  by  the  Home  Office  or  out  of  confusion  over  the
appellant's immigration position.

71. The TPC did not consider that the possibility  of  reinstatement  of  an
appeal would cause any significant issues with removal. Once an  appeal  had
been withdrawn there would be no ongoing proceedings. The  fact  that  there
might, at some point in the future, be proceedings again did not alter  that
position. The TPC also concluded that there was no realistic possibility  of
litigants  seeking  to  abuse  any  reinstatement  process  tactically.  Any
potential tactical advantage was hard to discern. Withdrawal would,  in  any
event, run the very substantial risk that the tribunal would  not  agree  to
reinstate - especially if it appeared that the  appeal  had  been  withdrawn
for tactical reasons.

72.  But  the  TPC  did  agree  that  there  was  a  real   possibility   of
reinstatement applications using an excessive  amount  of  resources,  given
that reinstatement would only be appropriate in a small number of cases.  In
light of the Home Office's clear statement of policy (see  above),  the  TPC
also concluded that the  danger  of  tactically  motivated  withdrawals  was
reduced.

73. The TPC therefore  concluded  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  provide  a
residual discretion to continue a  case  or  a  process  for  reinstatement.
Instead, Rule 17(2) (as made) requires that notice of the withdrawal  of  an
underlying decision be accompanied for the reasons for that withdrawal.  The
TPC anticipates that this will encourage compliance  with  the  Home  Office
policy, and allow the TPC to monitor the  nature  of  withdrawals.  The  TPC
will   keep   this   area    of    the    rules    under    close    review.

