
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

CHH (Notices Regulations - right of appeal - leave to remain) Jamaica
[2011] UKUT 00121 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 10 February 2011                  |                            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |

                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McKEE

                                   Between

                                     CHH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Mohamed Jaufurally of Callistes Solicitors

For the respondent:    Miss Julie Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team

A person under the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  who  has
under the statute, only a restricted right of appeal, has, by reason of  the
Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003,  a  right  of  appeal   that   is
unrestricted as to time.



Where an appeal can  only  be  brought  on  restricted  grounds  because  of
section 88 of the  2002  Act,  the  Notices  Regulations  2003  lay  down  a
complicated procedure.  The notice of decision need not be accompanied by  a
notice of appeal.  But if the  recipient  of  the  notice  claims  that  the
decision is contrary to the Race Relations Act, the Human Rights  Convention
or the Refugee Convention, then the notice of decision  must  be  re-served,
this time with a notice of appeal, and the time for giving notice of  appeal
to the Tribunal only begins to run from the deemed date of service  of  this
re-served notice, no matter how long a period has elapsed since the date  of
the original notice.

If the 'immigration decision' in question is  refusal  to  vary  leave,  the
application for leave to remain  having  been  made  before  the  expiry  of
existing leave, then the leave is extended by section 3C(2)(a) of  the  1971
Act until the application is decided, and is  further  extended  by  section
3C(2)(b)"during any period when an appeal could be  brought"  under  section
82(1)of the 2002 Act against the decision.  The period when an appeal  could
be brought must be taken to include the  time  between  service  without  an
appeal form and service with an appeal form, as contemplated by the  Notices
Regulations.  Otherwise, an appellant would be  unable  to  give  notice  of
appeal before his leave ran out, despite being able to  make  an  'in  time'
appeal as far as the Procedure Rules are concerned.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  This appeal raises two quite distinct questions.  One is technical,  and
concerns the right of appeal that the appellant  wishes  to  exercise.   The
other is practical,  and  concerns  the  private  and  family  life  of  the
appellant in the United Kingdom.  The technical question must  be  addressed
first, since the first-instance judge thought  that  the  appellant  had  no
right of appeal at all.

2.  I shall start with some background.  The  appellant  is  a  50-year  old
Jamaican lady who came here just before Christmas in the year 2000, and  has
stayed here ever since.  Initially she had six months' leave to enter  as  a
visitor, which was varied to leave to remain as a  student  until  September
2001.  Thereafter the appellant was an overstayer.  She  married  a  British
citizen, E L H, in January 2002, and eventually, on 29  November  2005,  she
was granted discretionary leave to remain for three years on  the  basis  of
this marriage.  A week later, the appellant left her husband, and there  are
letters on file dating from 2006 - from the Fairfield Medical  Centre,  from
Catford Citizens Advice  Bureau,  from  Lewisham  Housing  Office  and  from
Greenwich Women's Aid - showing that she was admitted to  a  women's  refuge
after suffering domestic violence.

3.  In October 2008, before her discretionary leave ran out,  the  appellant
applied for further discretionary leave, at which  point  she  informed  the
Home Office that she had left her husband.  This was backed  up  by  letters
from Greenwich Women's Aid, saying that the appellant had suffered  terrible
domestic violence for two years before plucking up the courage to leave  the
matrimonial home in 2005.  The  application  was  refused,  however,  on  18
February 2009, the 'Notice of Immigration Decision'  telling  the  appellant
that  her  right  of  appeal  was  limited  by  section  88(2)(d)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, because  she  was  seeking  to
remain for a purpose which is not "permitted in accordance with  immigration
rules."  In that  circumstance,  section  88(4)  permits  an  appeal  to  be
brought only on racial discrimination, asylum or human rights grounds.   The
notice was not accompanied by an appeal form, and  no  appeal  was  in  fact
lodged.

4.  On 28 June 2009, however, E L H wrote to the Home Office that,  although
still separated from his wife, he hoped  that  their  differences  could  be
resolved.  By February 2010, according to another  letter  from  Mr  H,  the
couple had finally been reconciled, and were living together  again.   There
had  in  the  meantime  been  an  exchange  of  correspondence  between  the
appellant's representatives (first Huka & Co.,  then  Callistes  Solicitors)
and the Home Office concerning the appeal which had not been lodged  against
the decision of 18 February 2009 and the  failure  of  the  Home  Office  to
provide an appeal form.  Finally,  on  17  February  2010,  a  'Reasons  for
Refusal Letter' was drafted, addressing the  further  representations  which
had been made.  The author adverted to the limited evidence that Mr and  Mrs
H were cohabiting, and did not accept that the appellant  currently  enjoyed
family life in the United Kingdom.  As the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
expected  to  return  to  Jamaica,  the  decision  not  to   grant   further
discretionary leave was maintained.  But  this  time,  an  appeal  form  was
enclosed with the letter.

5.  Notice of appeal was duly given on 1 March 2010,  and  when  the  appeal
came before Immigration Judge Belayeth Hussain at Hatton Cross  on  28  June
2010, both the appellant and her husband gave oral evidence,  which  is  set
out in the hand-written Record  of  Proceedings.   This  evidence  does  not
appear in the Determination, however, because Judge Hussain had  formed  the
view (apparently after the hearing) that there was no  valid  appeal  before
the First-tier Tribunal.  The refusal letter of February 2010  was  not,  he
reasoned,  notice  of  an  appealable  immigration   decision.    The   only
'immigration decision' which had been made was communicated  in  the  notice
of February 2009, and the appellant could only lodge an appeal against  that
decision  during  the  ten  working  days  following  the  receipt  of  that
decision.   After  that,  Judge  Hussain  continued,  her  leave  to  remain
expired, so that she could not appeal on 1st March 2010 against the  refusal
to vary her leave, there no longer being any leave to vary.

6.  Callistes Solicitors sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
praying in aid  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations  2003.   Leave  was
granted, and when the matter came before Senior Immigration Judge  Keki?  on
17 November 2010, it was conceded on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
appellant did have a right of appeal, and that  Judge  Hussain  should  have
raised the validity of the appeal at the hearing, and  sought  the  parties'
views, rather than deciding of his own motion after the hearing that he  was
without jurisdiction.  A material error  of  law  having  been  established,
Judge Keki? adjourned the hearing, so as to give a  proper  opportunity  for
the appellant's Article 8 claim to be ventilated (again).

7.  When the matter came before me on 17  December,  however,  there  was  a
letter from Mr H to say that he could not attend  the  hearing,  because  of
work commitments.  Although this  did  not  seem  to  tally  with  a  strong
commitment on Mr H's part to his wife's cause, I agreed to  Mr  Jaufurally's
request for an adjournment.  This would  give  an  opportunity  for  greater
clarity to be brought to the issue of the validity of the  appeal,  which  I
thought  needed  to  be  explored  in  more  depth  than  the   respondent's
concession at the previous hearing had permitted.  It  was  the  failure  to
include an appeal form  with  the  Notice  of  an  Immigration  Decision  in
February 2009 which prompted the HOPO to concede that  the  appellant  still
had a right of appeal when an appeal  form  was  issued  in  February  2010.
That seemed to me a rather weak basis for the  persistence  of  a  right  of
appeal.  The parties were therefore directed to serve skeleton arguments  on
the issue in time for the next hearing, on 10th February 2011.

8.  By the time  the  proceedings  resumed  before  me,  a  most  impressive
skeleton argument had been prepared on behalf of the respondent,  while  for
his part Mr Jaufurally refined the argument which he had adumbrated  in  the
application for permission to appeal and  then  before  SIJ  Keki?.   During
oral submissions it became  apparent  that  the  parties  were  ad  idem  in
respect  of  the  persistence  of  a  right  of  appeal,  in  light  of  the
Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003.  I agree, and shall  set  out  below
the relevant paragraphs of regulation 5 of those Regulations, which  explain
that persistence.  Regulation  5  prescribes  the  contents  of  the  notice
which, under regulation 4, must be given to the recipient of  an  appealable
immigration decision or EEA decision.

      "(3) Subject to paragraph (6), the notice  given  under  regulation  4
      shall also include, or be accompanied by, a  statement  which  advises
      the person of -
           (a) his right of appeal and the statutory provision on which his
           right of appeal is based;
           (b) whether or not such an appeal may be brought  while  in  the
           United Kingdom;
           (c) the grounds on which such an appeal may be brought; and
           (d) the  facilities  available  for  advice  and  assistance  in
           connection with such an appeal.


      (4) Subject to paragraph (6), the  notice  given  under  regulation  4
      shall be accompanied by a notice of appeal which  indicates  the  time
      limit for bringing an appeal, the address to which it should  be  sent
      or may be taken by hand and a fax number for service by fax.


      (5) Subject to paragraph (6), where  the  exercise  of  the  right  is
      restricted by an exception or limitation by virtue of a  provision  of
      Part 5 of the 2002 Act, the notice  given  under  regulation  4  shall
      include or be accompanied by a statement which refers to the provision
      limiting or restricting the right of appeal.

      (6)  The  notice  given  under  regulation  4  need  not  comply  with
      paragraphs (3), (4) and (5) where  a  right  of  appeal  may  only  be
      exercised on the grounds referred to in section 84(1)(b), (c)  or  (g)
      of the 2002 Act by virtue of the operation of  section  88(4),  89(3),
      90(4), 91(2), 98(4) or (5) of that Act.


      (7) Where notice  is  given  under  regulation  4  and  paragraph  (6)
      applies, if the person claims in relation to the immigration  decision
      or EEA decision that -
           (a) the decision is unlawful by virtue of  section  19B  of  the
           Race Relations Act 1976 (discrimination by public authorities);
           (b) the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
           Act 1998 (public authority not to  act  contrary  to  the  Human
           Rights Convention)  as  being  incompatible  with  the  person's
           Convention rights; or
           (c) removal of the person from the United Kingdom in consequence
           of the immigration decision would breach  the  United  Kingdom's
           obligations under the Refugee Convention or  would  be  unlawful
           under  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as   being
           incompatible with the person's Convention rights,


      the decision maker must as soon as practicable re-serve the notice  of
      decision under regulation 4 and paragraph (6) of this regulation shall
      not apply.


      (8) Where a notice is re-served under paragraph (7),  the  time  limit
      for appeal under the Procedure Rules shall be  calculated  as  if  the
      notice of decision had been served on the date on  which  it  was  re-
      served."


9.  Applying the above regulations to the facts of the present case, we  see
that the notice  of  an  immigration  decision,  which  was  served  on  the
appellant in February 2009, was not accompanied by a notice of appeal,  such
as is normally required under reg 5(4).   That  was  because  the  right  of
appeal was restricted to the grounds specified in section 88(4) of the  2002
Act, namely race discrimination, asylum or human  rights.   Regulation  5(6)
therefore allowed the respondent to dispense  with  including  a  notice  of
appeal when the notice of an immigration decision was served.   But  if,  on
receipt of such a notice, the recipient raises a discrimination,  asylum  or
human rights claim - in the present case, it was  a  human  rights  claim  -
then the respondent must re-serve the notice of  decision  under  reg  5(7),
and this time must include a notice of appeal.  The  ten  working  days  for
lodging an  in-country  appeal  with  the  Tribunal  under  rule  7  of  the
Procedure Rules 2005 will not begin to run until the deemed date of  receipt
of the re-served notice.  There is no question of the appeal  being  out  of
time because it was not made after the original service  of  the  notice  of
decision.

10.  There are two noteworthy features of this rather  complicated  process.
One is that the presumption appears to be  that  people  will  not  want  to
appeal against an immigration decision if the grounds on which they  can  do
so are restricted.  Given the popularity of human rights  grounds  nowadays,
that was perhaps an optimistic view on  the  part  of  whoever  drafted  the
Notices Regulations.  The other feature  is  that  no  time  limit  is  set,
either for raising a human rights claim  after  receipt  of  a  'restricted'
notice of decision, or for the Home Office to respond to this by  re-serving
the notice of decision along with an appeal form.  In the  instant  case,  a
year went by between service of the refusal to vary leave in  February  2009
and re-service of that decision in February 2010.  Not but what, the  notice
of appeal served on the First-tier Tribunal at the beginning of  March  2010
complied with rule 7 of the Procedure Rules, and was in time.

11.  It must be appreciated that the timeliness  of  the  appeal  notice  in
these circumstances does not depend upon the  appellant's  leave  to  remain
continuing under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  In order  to  have
a 'variation' appeal under section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act,  the  appellant
must have applied for a variation before his current leave expired.   If  he
does that, his right of  appeal  is  not  affected  by  the  expiry  of  any
statutorily-extended leave under section 3C.  That  indeed  is  contemplated
by section 3C(2)(b) of the 1971 Act, which extends leave during  any  period
when -


      "(b) an appeal under section 82(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Asylum  and
      Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while the appellant is  in  the
      United Kingdom, against the decision on the application for  variation
      (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time with permission)".

12.  If an appeal is lodged with the Tribunal out of time, the Tribunal  may
still entertain it by extending the time under  rule  10  of  the  Procedure
Rules.  It does not matter that the appellant's leave will  have  lapsed  on
the expiry of the period for giving notice of  appeal  in  time.   A  person
whose leave has lapsed is not precluded  from  appealing  to  the  Tribunal.
Whether he will be allowed to appeal does not depend  upon  the  continuance
of his leave, but upon whether, in the words of rule 10(5),  "by  reason  of
special circumstances it would  be  unjust"  not  to  extend  the  time  for
appealing.

13.  By parity of reasoning, Miss Isherwood in the instant case argues  that
the appellant had no leave to remain when she lodged her  notice  of  appeal
on 1 March 2010, her leave having expired on the expiration of  the  ten-day
period for giving notice of appeal under the Procedure Rules,  after  notice
of the immigration decision had been served in  February  2009.  That  would
normally  be  the  situation  where  the  notice  of  appeal  is  late.   Mr
Jaufurally's position, on the other hand, is that the appellant's leave  has
never come to an end, and although I was not with him at first, I  think  on
reflection that that must be right.

14.  The reason is this.  Section 3C(2)(b) extends a person's leave  "during
any period when an appeal ... could be brought."  Regulation 5(6),  (7)  and
(8) sets out the procedure for appealing on restricted grounds, and no  time
limit is laid down either for raising a human rights claim  in  response  to
the notice of decision, or for re-serving that notice and thus causing  time
to run for giving notice of appeal in time.  This is all a "period  when  an
appeal could be brought", although potentially it could be  very  long.   In
the instant case, it was a year.

15.  One objection to this interpretation is that it leaves  it  open  to  a
person whose leave apparently expired long ago to say that  his  section  3C
leave is continuing, because he was served with a notice of decision  giving
only a restricted right of appeal and he has not yet exercised  that  right,
which he can defer for as long as he wants.  But such is  the  bizarre,  yet
logical, outcome of a statutory provision  which  allows  an  appeal  to  be
brought without setting any time limit  for  bringing  it.   The  difficulty
could be avoided by amending the Notices  Regulations,  or  more  simply  by
ensuring that appeal forms are sent off  with  immigration  decisions  which
attract restricted as well as full rights of appeal.  Regulation  5(6)  says
that the notice "need not comply" with the requirement to include an  appeal
form.  It is not a prohibition.

16.  If, on the other hand, a person makes a late appeal  after  the  period
when an appeal could be brought, and he is given permission  to  appeal  out
of time, his leave is not reinstated.  Section  3C(2)(c)  of  the  1971  Act
provides for leave to be extended while an appeal is pending.   But  if  the
leave has lapsed, it cannot be extended.  So a person appealing out of  time
does not have leave to remain.  Miss Isherwood's  contention  is  that  this
appellant's leave also lapsed after  the  normal  ten-day  period  following
receipt of the original notice of decision, regardless of the fact that  she
was still able to make an in-time appeal.  If that  is  right,  then  people
who go through the procedure outlined in regulation 5(6)-(8) of the  Notices
Regulations will invariably have seen their leave expire by  the  time  they
give notice of appeal.  First they have to communicate  a  human  rights  or
asylum claim to the UK Border Agency, then they  must  await  re-service  of
the original decision.  No doubt they could short-circuit this procedure  by
obtaining an appeal form from elsewhere as soon as they receive  the  notice
of decision and sending it to  the  Tribunal  straight  away,  their  appeal
being based on one or more of the restricted grounds  permitted  by  section
88(4) of the 2002 Act.  But if it is possible to cut out  the  procedure  at
reg 5(6)-(8)  of  the  Notices  Regulations  altogether,  why  have  such  a
procedure at all?  Reading section  3C(2)(b)  with  regulation  5(6)-(8),  I
still feel driven to the conclusion  that  leave  does  not  lapse  in  this
scenario.   The   brief   Immigration   (Continuation   of   Leave)(Notices)
Regulations 2006 offer no assistance on this point.

17.  I  turn  now  to  the  second  question.   Whether  the  appellant  has
continuing leave or not, she certainly has a right of appeal  on  Article  8
grounds.  It was expected that today's hearing would be attended  by  Mr  H,
but again he  did  not  turn  up,  and  this  time  his  non-appearance  was
attributed by his wife to the fact that he did  not  respect  the  Tribunal,
and that he felt it was none of the Tribunal's  business  to  pry  into  his
married life.  The appellant became tearful as she gave her  oral  evidence,
describing how her husband's behaviour had become very strange of late.   He
was smoking marijuana heavily,  talking  to  himself,  and  having  paranoid
delusions that people were coming to murder him  -  although  he  was  still
holding down a job as a Prison Officer at one of Her Majesty's Prisons.

18.  Reconciliation had been effected, the appellant continued, by a  mutual
friend, one L R, who was now back in Jamaica.  She had no relatives left  in
Jamaica, but had no evidence of friendships or  social  activities  in  this
country either.  She had, she said, worked at  one  time  for  the  City  of
Westminster, but she had no documentary evidence of that.

19.  Mr Jaufurally did his best, in his oral  submissions,  to  persuade  me
that his client's Article 8 rights would be infringed if she had to go  back
to Jamaica.  But in truth, I cannot see that  there  is  any  extant  family
life between Mr H and the appellant in Article 8 terms.   There  is  a  very
brief, undated and unsigned statement from Mr H,  saying  that  he  and  his
wife are reconciled.  There are documents showing  that  they  live  at  the
same address, but apart from sleeping in the same  bed,  the  appellant  was
unable to name any  activities  which  she  and  her  husband  do  together.
Indeed, her very frank description  of  Mr  H's  current  erratic  behaviour
raises the distinct possibility that the domestic violence which  drove  the
appellant from the matrimonial home in 2005 might recur.

20.  As for private life, the  appellant  can  hardly  have  lived  in  this
country for ten years without acquiring a private life  with  which  removal
would interfere, but it  is  a  surprisingly  exiguous  private  life.   The
appellant would appear to have made few friends here,  and  none  have  come
forward to support her application to stay in the United Kingdom.  There  is
no documentary evidence before  me  of  any  social,  educational  or  work-
related activities.  The letters from Greenwich Women's Aid say  that  Mr  H
kept the appellant very isolated when they were  living  together  up  until
2005, and the isolation seems to have continued.  It is indeed a sad case.

21.  All in all, the appellant  does  not  have  much  of  a  life  in  this
country.  On the other hand, she has her friend, L  R,  in  Jamaica,  and  I
doubt whether she has no relatives at all  left  in  that  country.   But  I
remind myself that no decision has been taken to  remove  the  appellant  to
Jamaica, or anywhere else.   In  FK  (Kenya)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  1302,  Lord
Justice Sullivan doubted whether it was  appropriate  for  the  Tribunal  to
consider Article 8 in appeals against the refusal of leave to  remain,  when
no removal decision had yet been made.   Not  but  what,  as  an  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds is  before  me,  I  cannot  see  that  the  appellant  has
established such strong private life ties in  the  United  Kingdom  that  it
would be disproportionate to expect  her  to  move  back  to  Jamaica.   The
possibility  of  the  appellant's  coming  under  the  'Ten-Year  Rule'   at
paragraph 276B of HC 395 was raised at one point, but as the  appellant  was
here unlawfully for four years between September  2001  and  November  2005,
that possibility is ruled out.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.




Signed

Senior Immigration Judge McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
