
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

CJ (international video-link hearing: data protection) Jamaica [2019]  UKUT
00126(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 24 and 25 January 2019                     |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WIKELEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     CJ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr R de Mello and  Mr  T  Muman  instructed  by  J  M
Wilson,
     Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Kovats QC, instructed by  the  Government  Legal
Department

   1) The arrangements made to enable the appellant to give evidence in  his
      human rights appeal by video link between the British High  Commission
      in Kingston, Jamaica and the Tribunal's hearing centre in  the  United
      Kingdom did not involve the transfer of data to a third  country,  for
      the  purposes  of  the  General  Data  Protection   Regulation   ((EU)
      2016/679).

   2) Even if that were not the case, the  transfer  was  lawful  under  the
      derogation in Article 49(1)(e) of the Regulation  (transfer  necessary
      for establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698)

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the claimant or any member  of  the  claimant's  family.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     Introduction

    1. This is the decision of the panel. It concerns an appeal against the
       decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ('the  FTT')  which  sat  in
       Birmingham on 17 July 2018 to hear the  appellant's  appeal  against
       the respondent's deportation decision. The appellant,  who  by  that
       date  had  already  been  deported,  participated  in  the   hearing
       (effectively under protest) by way of a video-link from the  British
       High Commission ('the BHC') in Kingston, Jamaica.  In  summary,  the
       appellant's case  is  that  the  FTT  materially  erred  in  law  in
       dismissing his preliminary objection to the video-link  arrangement.
       The appellant contended that this method of giving his live evidence
       necessarily  involved  a  breach  of  both  EU  and  domestic   data
       protection law. He also argued that he was the  victim  of  unlawful
       discrimination by reason of the processing  of  his  personal  data,
       including the transmission of the appeal bundles, through  the  link
       to the BHC in Kingston.


    The factual background


    2. The bare facts of the case and the chronology are  not  in  dispute.
       The appellant was born in Jamaica on 30 April 1993 and is a Jamaican
       citizen. He arrived in the UK at the age of 8 on a 6-month visitor's
       visa in December 2001. He became an overstayer in June 2002 and  his
       immigration status was never regularised.  He  and  his  partner  (a
       British citizen) had a daughter in  October  2012  (who  is  also  a
       British  citizen).  He  has  been  convicted  of  several  offences,
       starting at the age of 15 (three offences of  robbery  in  September
       2008, two counts of burglary in 2011, possession of cannabis in July
       2013 and travelling on the railway without  a  ticket  in  September
       2014), culminating in convictions at Winchester Crown  Court  on  14
       April 2015 for conspiracy to supply crack cocaine and heroin. He was
       sentenced to 3 years' imprisonment, to be served  concurrently,  for
       each of those latter offences.


    3. The appellant was served with IS151A papers as an overstayer  on  14
       June 2013. Following his conviction for the last and by far the most
       serious offences, he was served on 29 July 2015 with notice  of  the
       respondent's decision to remove him to Jamaica. In  August  2015  he
       submitted representations arguing he should not be  removed  because
       of his durable relationship with a British citizen and young  child.
       In March 2016 the appellant applied  for  further  leave  to  remain
       ('FLR') based on his family life. On 15 April  2016  the  respondent
       served the appellant with  a  stage  1  deportation  decision  under
       section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. In August 2016,  following
       his release from prison,  the  appellant  was  immediately  detained
       under the Immigration Acts. On  22  September  2016  the  respondent
       refused the appellant's  FLR  application,  finalised  the  stage  2
       deportation decision and issued a certificate under section  94B  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002  Act').
       As a result, of course, the  appellant  could  only  challenge  that
       decision by way of an out of country appeal once he had left the UK:
       see section 92(3)(a) of the 2002 Act.


    4. On 7 April 2017 the appellant was deported to Jamaica  (there  being
       no statutory bar on deportation before  an  appeal  is  lodged:  see
       section 79(3) of the 2002 Act) and on  5  May  2017  he  lodged  his
       appeal  with  the  FTT  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  22
       September 2016 to refuse his human rights  claim.  This  appeal  was
       brought under section 82(1)(b)  of  the  2002  Act.  Meanwhile,  the
       appellant's challenge to the  section  94B  certificate  by  way  of
       judicial review reached the end of the road when it was dismissed by
       the Court of Appeal on 24 October 2017. It followed  that  the  sole
       substantive issue  before  the  FTT  was  whether  the  respondent's
       decision of 22 September 2016 was unlawful under section  6  of  the
       Human Rights Act 1998. As the appellant fell within  the  definition
       of a foreign criminal (section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act), the FTT was
       charged with assessing  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation,
       bearing in mind the possibility that he might fall within one of the
       exceptions in section 117C(3).



    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    5. Following various case management directions, a three-judge panel of
       the FTT (Judge Clements P, Designated FTT  Judge  McCarthy  and  FTT
       Judge Carter) duly heard the appellant's appeal, as noted above,  in
       Birmingham on 17 July 2018. In the morning  session  the  FTT  heard
       legal argument from counsel on the preliminary issue relating to the
       lawfulness of the proposed video-link facilities. In the  afternoon,
       the FTT having decided to dismiss  the  preliminary  objection,  the
       panel proceeded to hear the substantive human rights appeal.  On  14
       August 2018 the FTT promulgated its detailed and lengthy decision on
       the appeal (running to some 58 pages and 314 paragraphs).


    6. In short, the FTT dismissed the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal.
       However, the bulk of the FTT's decision and reasoning related to the
       preliminary  issue  about   the   lawfulness   of   the   video-link
       arrangement. The FTT recorded that the appellant  had  given  notice
       that he did not consent to giving oral evidence  by  the  video-link
       with  the  BHC  in  Jamaica  (or  for  the  appeal  bundle   to   be
       electronically transmitted to the BHC). The  appellant  argued  that
       the Home Office's proposed methods of transferring his personal data
       involved a breach of Regulation (EU) 2016/679,  otherwise  known  as
       the General Data Protection Regulation ('the GDPR').


    7. On the day of the hearing, the FTT  gave  summary  reasons  for  its
       determination on the preliminary issue in the following  terms  (FTT
       decision at paragraph [126]):

         "Decision:

         The essential question we have had to decide  in  this  preliminary
         hearing is whether the transfers of data via video link and of  the
         appeal bundle from the UK to Jamaica would  entail  any  breach  of
         data protection law.

         We have decided that it would not.

         We agree with the parties that the  GDPR  applies  to  all  of  the
         processing we have been considering.

         We do not however consider it necessary, for the purposes  of  this
         preliminary  matter,  to  consider  the  appropriateness   of   the
         safeguards in place, the effective rights or remedies available  to
         [CJ] as,

         a)   either there is no  transfer  of  personal  data  to  a  third
         country such that article 46 does not arise; or

         b)   assuming there has been a transfer to  a  third  country,  the
         derogation under article 49(1)(e) applies such that  the  transfers
         are necessary for the establishment, exercise or defence  of  legal
         claims.


         We do not consider that any issue around the lack  of  a  mandatory
         provision requiring retention within the EU  is  relevant  to  this
         case, noting in any event that there is not to be any retention  of
         [CJ]'s personal data outside of the EU beyond 7  days  unless  [CJ]
         wishes himself to retain a copy of  the  bundle,  which  of  course
         would be his choice and is highly unlikely  to  give  rise  to  any
         breach of data protection.


         In these circumstances, we have taken the view that the  video-link
         may go ahead and the bundle be transferred.


         Full written reasons will be given in the written determination  of
         this appeal."



     The application for permission to appeal

    8. On 11 September 2018 the appellant made an application  to  the  FTT
       for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  grounds  of
       appeal as set out in the application were divided into two  parts  -
       Part A concerned the preliminary issue and the  EU  data  protection
       provisions, while Part B referred to various human  rights  grounds,
       both procedurally and substantively.


    9. On 19 September 2018 the FTT Chamber President, who had presided  at
       the hearing, granted permission to appeal. As to the various grounds
       in Part A, the President observed that the EU data protection issues
       were novel matters, not previously  considered  in  the  context  of
       immigration appeals, and so it was appropriate to  give  permission.
       In doing so, the President added one caveat.  The  final  ground  of
       appeal in Part A was a discrimination challenge, namely  that  there
       was no objective justification for  treating  the  appellant's  case
       differently  from  that  of  an  appellant  under  the   Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (SI  2016/1052),  who  may
       apply for permission to be temporarily admitted to the UK solely for
       the purpose of making submissions in person at their appeal  hearing
       (see regulation 41). Counsel for the appellant  conceded  that  this
       point had  not  been  fully  argued  before  the  FTT.  When  giving
       permission, the President accordingly observed that it  would  be  a
       matter for the Upper Tribunal to determine the extent to which  that
       point could be argued.


   10. As to Part  B,  the  grounds  of  appeal  broadly  fell  into  three
       categories. The first was that the respondent  had  been  given  too
       much leeway in providing video-link facilities  from  overseas.  The
       second was that the FTT had failed to  appreciate  the  difficulties
       the appellant had in  preparing  and  presenting  his  case  in  the
       absence of legal aid. The third was that - in consequence  of  those
       first two failures - the FTT had  reached  several  unsound  factual
       findings. The President gave permission to appeal given these issues
       also related to the novel procedures adopted on the appeal.


   11. We had several written submissions in advance of the  oral  hearing.
       We  also  had  the  advantage  of  reading  the   multiple   written
       submissions made in the FTT proceedings. We held an oral hearing  at
       Field House in London on 24 and 25 January 2019. The  appellant  was
       represented by Mr R de Mello and Mr T Muman, acting  pro  bono.  The
       respondent was represented by Mr S Kovats QC. At the outset of  that
       hearing we indicated to counsel that in  all  the  circumstances  we
       were prepared to hear full  argument  on  the  discrimination  issue
       despite the fact it had not been fully argued before the FTT.


   12. Both parties recognised that the present appeal was in effect a test
       case about such video-link arrangements. We also had  before  us  an
       uncontested draft witness statement from Mr Andrew Bennett,  a  Home
       Office official,  confirming  that  FTT  substantive  hearings  with
       overseas video-links in section 94B appeals had  been  completed  in
       respect of the following countries:  Albania,  Bangladesh,  Ecuador,
       Gambia, India, Jamaica, Pakistan and Nigeria. In addition, the  Home
       Office was in the process of putting in place  similar  arrangements
       for the following further countries: Democratic Republic  of  Congo,
       Dominica, Grenada, Kosovo, Nepal, South Africa,  Sri  Lanka,  Turkey
       and Vietnam (and possibly also Cameroon and Trinidad & Tobago).



    The framework of data protection law


   13. We now turn to consider the framework of data protection law  as  it
       applies for our purposes. The GDPR replaced Directive  95/46/EC  and
       came into force on 25 May 2018. The GDPR was made  in  pursuance  of
       Article 16 of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European  Union
       (TFEU), which provides as follows:
         "Article 16
         1. Everyone has the  right  to  the  protection  of  personal  data
       concerning them.
         2. The European Parliament and the Council,  acting  in  accordance
         with the ordinary legislative procedure, shall lay down  the  rules
         relating to the  protection  of  individuals  with  regard  to  the
         processing of personal data by Union institutions, bodies,  offices
         and agencies, and by the Member States when carrying out activities
         which fall within the scope of Union law, and the rules relating to
         the free movement of such data. Compliance with these  rules  shall
         be subject to the control of independent authorities.
         The rules adopted on the basis of this  Article  shall  be  without
         prejudice to the specific rules laid down  in  Article  39  of  the
         Treaty on European Union."
   14. It will be observed at  the  outset  that  the  right  enshrined  in
       Article 16(1) applies irrespective  of  citizenship  or  nationality
       ("Everyone  has  the  right  to  the  protection  of  personal  data
       concerning them"); see to similar effect recital (2) of the GDPR.


   15. The GDPR is divided into a total of 11  Chapters.  However,  we  are
       principally concerned with certain provisions in Chapters I (general
       provisions), II  (principles  for  processing  personal  data),  III
       (rights of the data subject) and V (transfers of  personal  data  to
       third  countries  or  international   organisations).   As   an   EU
       Regulation, the GDPR is (at least both as at the material  time  and
       at present) directly applicable in domestic law (see Article 288  of
       the TFEU). However, the scope of the GDPR has been  widened  by  the
       Data  Protection  Act  2018  ('the  DPA  2018'),  meaning  the   two
       instruments must be read in tandem (and see especially section 22(1)
       of the DPA 2018).


   16. The DPA 2018 is arranged in 7 Parts, as explained by the overview in
       section 1 of the  Act.  We  are  primarily  concerned  with  certain
       provisions in  Part  2  (general  processing),  notably  sections  8
       (lawfulness of processing) and 15 (exemptions), along with  Schedule
       2  (exemptions  etc.  from  the  GDPR),  as  well  as   section   22
       (application of  the  GDPR  to  processing  to  which  this  Chapter
       applies). Part 2 of the DPA 2018 accordingly  supplements  the  GDPR
       (see also section 1(3)).


   17. As the DPA 2018 itself states, "most processing of personal data  is
       subject to the GDPR" (section 1(2)).  However,  the  DPA  2018  also
       refreshes parts of the world of data protection that the GDPR cannot
       reach. It achieves this by deploying the  concept  of  the  "applied
       GDPR". This means "the GDPR as applied by Chapter 3 of Part 2"  (see
       section 3(11) of the DPA  2018).  Section  21(1)  of  the  DPA  2018
       provides that Chapter 3 of Part  2  "applies  to  the  automated  or
       structured processing of personal data  in  the  course  of  (a)  an
       activity which is outside the scope of European Union law",  subject
       to certain exceptions which  do  not  arise  for  present  purposes.
       Section 22(2) in turn stipulates that  Chapter  2  of  Part  2  (the
       provisions governing general processing) "applies for  the  purposes
       of the applied GDPR as it applies for the purposes of the GDPR".  As
       section 1(3) of the DPA 2018 sums up, Chapter 3 of Part 2 "applies a
       broadly equivalent regime to certain types of  processing  to  which
       the GDPR does not apply".


   18. For present purposes there is no  material  difference  between  the
       GDPR and the applied GDPR. It followed, Mr  Kovats  submitted,  that
       there was no need to consider and determine whether  the  processing
       of data in this case fell within the material scope of  EU  law.  Mr
       Kovats's position was that  the  data  processing  in  question  was
       governed under domestic law by the DPA  2018  and  thereby  also  by
       either the GDPR (by direct  application)  or  by  the  applied  GDPR
       regime (as supplemented by the DPA  2018).  The  FTT  accepted  that
       analysis (paragraph [134]), as do we. Insofar  as  there  remains  a
       live issue on this point, Mr de Mello submits that the GDPR  applies
       in its pure form, as he says the appellant's data was transferred to
       a non-EU third country, whereas Mr Kovats  contends  that  the  data
       processing took place at all times under the jurisdiction of the UK.
       We return to that issue further below in our  consideration  of  the
       potential application and impact of Chapter V of the GDPR (Transfers
       of personal data to third countries or international organisations).



    Key definitions in data protection law


   19. Before turning to consider  the  specific  challenges  made  by  the
       appellant to the arrangements for processing his  personal  data  we
       need to outline some of the definitions of the key terminology  used
       under the GDPR and the DPA 2018. As a general principle, we note the
       DPA 2018 provides in this context that "Terms used in Chapter  2  of
       this Part and in the GDPR have the same meaning in Chapter 2 as they
       have in the GDPR" (section 5(1)).


   20. Personal data means "any information relating to  an  identified  or
       identifiable  natural  person  ('data  subject');  an   identifiable
       natural person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly,
       in particular by reference to an  identifier  such  as  a  name,  an
       identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one
       or more factors specific to the  physical,  physiological,  genetic,
       mental, economic,  cultural  or  social  identity  of  that  natural
       person" - see GDPR Article 4(1); see also DPA 2018 section 3(2).  It
       is not in dispute  that  information  relating  to  the  appellant's
       criminal convictions amounts to  sensitive  personal  data  that  in
       principle qualifies for an extra layer  of  protection  -  see  GDPR
       Article 10 and DPA  2018  section  10(4)  and  (5)  (but  note  also
       paragraph 34 of Schedule 1 to the  Act,  providing  in  effect  that
       processing such data is lawful "if the processing is necessary  when
       a court or tribunal is acting in its judicial capacity").

   21. Processing means "any  operation  or  set  of  operations  which  is
       performed on personal data or on sets of personal data,  whether  or
       not by automated means, such as collection, recording, organisation,
       structuring,   storage,   adaptation   or   alteration,   retrieval,
       consultation, use,  disclosure  by  transmission,  dissemination  or
       otherwise making available, alignment or  combination,  restriction,
       erasure or destruction" - see GDPR Article 4(2); see also  DPA  2018
       section 3(4).


   22. Controller means "the natural or  legal  person,  public  authority,
       agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines
       the purposes and means of the processing of personal data; where the
       purposes and means of such processing are  determined  by  Union  or
       Member State law, the controller or the specific  criteria  for  its
       nomination may be provided for by Union or Member State law"  -  see
       GDPR Article 4(7). This definition is modified by DPA  2018  section
       6, which makes it subject to section 209 (and section 2010, which is
       not relevant for present purposes). However, section 209(1) provides
       for the Act to bind the Crown while section 209(2)  stipulates  that
       "For the  purposes  of  the  GDPR  and  this  Act,  each  government
       department is to be treated as a  person  separate  from  the  other
       government departments (to  the  extent  that  is  not  already  the
       case)."

   23. Processor means "a natural or legal person, public authority, agency
       or other body  which  processes  personal  data  on  behalf  of  the
       controller" - see GDPR Article 4(7); see also DPA 2018 section 3(6).


   24. Data subject means the identified or identifiable living  individual
       to whom personal data relates - see DPA section 3(5).


   25. Consent (of the data subject) means  "any  freely  given,  specific,
       informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject's wishes  by
       which he or she, by a statement or by a  clear  affirmative  action,
       signifies agreement to the processing of personal data  relating  to
       him or her" - see GDPR Article 4(11).




    A reminder of the appellant's grounds of appeal and a summary of our
    approach


   26. Mr de  Mello's  written  and  oral  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant ranged far and wide, mounting  a  concerted  challenge  to
       both the procedure adopted by the FTT and the substantive outcome of
       the human rights appeal. In the first instance we consider  we  need
       to focus on the FTT's treatment of three specific challenges put  to
       it by the appellant and based on  the  protection  of  his  personal
       data. The first of these concerned the appellant's right  to  object
       to the processing of his personal data.  The  second  challenge  was
       premised on his right to the erasure of his personal data  that  had
       been processed. The  third  aspect  centred  on  what  Mr  de  Mello
       submitted was the transfer of the appellant's  personal  data  to  a
       third country. We then turn to consider the more general  attack  on
       the video-link arrangement based on discrimination arguments.  Those
       heads of challenge deal with the primary grounds of appeal  set  out
       in Part A of the application for permission to appeal. We then  turn
       to consider the Part B human rights arguments,  which  have  both  a
       procedural and a substantive focus.




    Data protection and the right to object


   27. Following the overview in section 1, the first substantive provision
       in  the  DPA  2018  is  section  2,  which  is  concerned  with  the
       overarching goal of the protection of personal data. Section 2(1)(a)
       provides that "the GDPR, the  applied  GDPR  and  this  Act  protect
       individuals with regard to  the  processing  of  personal  data,  in
       particular by - (a) requiring personal data to be processed lawfully
       and fairly, on the basis of the data subject's  consent  or  another
       specified  basis"  (emphasis  added).  It  follows   that   "another
       specified basis" may provide the basis  for  fair  and  lawful  data
       processing,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the  data  subject's
       consent.


   28. Article 6(1) of the GDPR then sets out the  circumstances  in  which
       data processing is lawful:


         "1.   Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at
         least one of the following applies:
             (a) the data subject has given consent to  the  processing  of
             his or her personal data for one or more specific purposes;
             (b) processing is necessary for the performance of a  contract
             to which the data subject is party or in order to  take  steps
             at the request of the data subject prior to  entering  into  a
             contract;
             (c) processing  is  necessary  for  compliance  with  a  legal
             obligation to which the controller is subject;
             (d) processing is necessary in  order  to  protect  the  vital
             interests of the data subject or of another natural person;
             (e) processing is necessary for  the  performance  of  a  task
             carried out in the public  interest  or  in  the  exercise  of
             official authority vested in the controller;
             (f) processing is necessary for the purposes of the legitimate
             interests pursued by the  controller  or  by  a  third  party,
             except where such interests are overridden by the interests or
             fundamental rights and freedoms  of  the  data  subject  which
             require protection of personal data, in particular  where  the
             data subject is a child.


         Point (f) of the first subparagraph shall not apply  to  processing
         carried out by public  authorities  in  the  performance  of  their
         tasks."


   29. As the appellant had not given his consent (i.e. for the purposes of
       Article  6(1)(a)),  the  issue  here  was  whether  processing   was
       "necessary for the performance of a task carried out in  the  public
       interest" within the meaning of Article  6(1)(e).  In  this  context
       Article 6(3) further provides that "the  basis  for  the  processing
       referred to in point (c) and (e) of paragraph 1 shall be laid  down
       by (a) Union law; or (b) Member State law to which the controller is
       subject." To that end, section 8 of the DPA 2018  in  turn  provides
       that:


         "In Article 6(1)  of  the  GDPR  (lawfulness  of  processing),  the
         reference in point (e) to  processing  of  personal  data  that  is
         necessary for the performance of a task carried out in  the  public
         interest or in the exercise of the controller's official  authority
         includes processing of personal data that is necessary for-
         a) the administration of justice."

   30. Article 9 of the GDPR  provides  special  protection  for  sensitive
       personal data, in that processing such data is prohibited unless one
       of a number of defined exceptions applies, one of which is where the
       "processing is necessary for the establishment, exercise or  defence
       of legal claims or whenever courts  are  acting  in  their  judicial
       capacity (Article 9(1)(f)). Likewise,  the  processing  of  personal
       data relating to criminal convictions  must  be  carried  out  "only
       under the control of official authority"  or  when  authorised  with
       appropriate safeguards (Article 10).


   31. Chapter 3 of the GDPR then sets out  a  data  subject's  rights,  of
       which the most significant for present purposes is  in  Article  21,
       otherwise known as the 'right to object'. So, in particular, Article
       21(1) provides as follows:


         "The data subject shall  have  the  right  to  object,  on  grounds
         relating to his  or  her  particular  situation,  at  any  time  to
         processing of personal data concerning him or her which is based on
         point (e) or (f) of Article  6(1),  including  profiling  based  on
         those provisions.  The  controller  shall  no  longer  process  the
         personal  data  unless  the  controller   demonstrates   compelling
         legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests,
         rights and freedoms of the data subject or for  the  establishment,
         exercise or defence of legal claims."


   32. The right to object in Article 21(1) is not absolute. The  terms  of
       that provision itself provide some qualifications  (i.e.  where  the
       data controller demonstrates compelling legitimate  grounds,  etc.).
       In addition, Article 23 of the GDPR ('Restrictions') makes provision
       for a range of potential restrictions, of which we  need  only  cite
       two:


         "Union or  Member State  law  to  which  the  data  controller  or
         processor is subject may restrict by way of a  legislative  measure
         the scope of the obligations and rights provided for in Articles 12
         to 22 and Article 34, as well as  Article 5  in  so  far  as  its
         provisions correspond to the rights and obligations provided for in
         Articles 12 to 22, when such a restriction respects the essence of
         the fundamental rights and freedoms and is a
         necessary and proportionate measure  in  a  democratic  society  to
         safeguard:
         ...
         (f)  the  protection  of   judicial   independence   and   judicial
    proceedings
         ...


         (j) the enforcement of civil law claims"


   33. This is amplified for domestic purposes by section 15(1) of the  DPA
       2018, introducing Schedule 2 to the Act, which makes "provision  for
       exemptions from, and restrictions and adaptations of the application
       of, rules of the GDPR". Specifically, section  15(2)(a)  notes  that
       Part 1 of Schedule 2 "makes provision adapting  or  restricting  the
       application of rules contained in Articles 13 to 21 and  34  of  the
       GDPR in specified circumstances, as allowed for by Article 6(3)  and
       Article 23(1) of the GDPR". There are two provisions  under  Part  1
       which may be relevant in the present context. The first is that  the
       relevant GDPR provisions "do not apply to  personal  data  processed
       for any of the following purposes-(a) the maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control" (paragraph 4(1)(a)). However, before  both  the
       FTT and ourselves Mr Kovats expressly disavowed any reliance on that
       provision, which we understand is being tested in other proceedings.
       That leaves in play the second  possibility,  namely  the  exemption
       provided for by paragraph 5(3) of Schedule 2:


         "(3) The listed GDPR provisions do not apply to personal data where
         disclosure of the data-
             (a) is necessary for the purpose of, or  in  connection  with,
             legal proceedings (including prospective legal proceedings),
             (b) is necessary for the purpose of obtaining legal advice, or
             (c) is otherwise necessary for the purposes  of  establishing,
             exercising or defending legal rights,
         to the extent  that  the  application  of  those  provisions  would
         prevent the controller from making the disclosure."


   34. It should not be overlooked that Part 2 of Schedule  2  also  "makes
       provision restricting the application of rules contained in Articles
       13 to 21 and 34 of the GDPR in specified circumstances,  as  allowed
       for by Article 23(1) of  the  GDPR"  (see  section  15(2)(b)).  This
       brings in paragraph 14(3) of Schedule 2, which  provides  that  "the
       listed  GDPR  provisions  do  not  apply  to  the  extent  that  the
       application  of  those  provisions  would  be  likely  to  prejudice
       judicial independence or judicial proceedings".


   35. Bearing in  mind  those  relevant  statutory  definitions,  the  FTT
       concluded that  the  Tribunal  itself  was  the  controller  of  the
       appellant's personal data for the purposes of the  appeal  and  that
       the Home Office was at times (depending on the  factual  context)  a
       controller and at other times a processor (paragraph [149]). The FTT
       identified no other controllers or  processors  of  the  appellant's
       data in relation to the appeal proceedings (paragraph [150]).  There
       has been no challenge to those findings of fact.  Having  regard  to
       the provisions of the GDPR and DPA 2018  as  cited  above,  and  the
       statutory constraints laid down by the section 94B certificate,  the
       FTT concluded as follows:


         "156.  We  conclude  from  all  these  considerations  that  it  is
         necessary for the Appellant  to  participate  in  the  appeal  from
         overseas because no less restrictive measure  is  available,  which
         will entail the processing of his personal data.


         157. We  find  that  it  is  necessary  and  proportionate  in  the
         circumstances of this appeal to override the Appellant's  right  to
         object  to  the  processing  of  his  personal  data  because  such
         processing is necessary in relation to judicial proceedings  and/or
         is necessary for the  purposes  of  or  in  connection  with  legal
         proceedings or establishing, exercising or defending legal  rights.
         The former exemption applies to the processing by the Tribunal  and
         the latter two exemptions to the processing by the  respondent,  in
         particular where that is otherwise than under the direction of  the
         Tribunal.

         158. In summary, we find the Appellant's right  to  object  to  the
         processing of his personal  data  by  the  respondent  and  by  the
         Tribunal, which he has exercised under article 21 of the GDPR, does
         not apply on account of the qualification in article 21(1)  of  the
         GDPR, and by  the  application  of  the  exemptions  in  paragraphs
         5(3)(a) and (c), and 14(3) of schedule 2 to the DPA 2018."


   36. So how is the challenge to this  finding  by  the  FTT  framed?  The
       appellant's most  ambitious  and  far-reaching  submission  was  the
       contention that the FTT had erred in law in concluding that it could
       only deal with the case as an out of country  appeal.  This  primary
       ground of appeal further argued that the FTT was bound to apply  the
       test of proportionality as understood in EU  law.  Had  it  properly
       done so, Mr de Mello submitted, the FTT would have  been  duty-bound
       to disapply  the  section  94B  certificate  as  there  was  a  less
       restrictive measure available, namely to  permit  the  appellant  to
       return to give live evidence before the FTT in  Birmingham.  Suffice
       to say we remained unconvinced by this line of argument  and  agreed
       with Mr Kovats, who characterised the extant section 94B certificate
       as the inevitable starting point for any analysis of the  lawfulness
       of the arrangements that had been put in place. Thus,  the  FTT  was
       fixed  with  both  a  valid  section  94B  certificate  and   lawful
       deportation, which then acted as the springboard for the inquiry  as
       to  whether  the  video-link  arrangement  was  necessary.  On  that
       question we cannot fault the FTT's analysis.


   37. The only other ground of appeal from Part A that is relevant in this
       context is the bare and  unparticularised  assertion  that  the  FTT
       erred in law by holding that the appellant's right to  object  under
       Article 21 of the GDPR did not apply. However, the more we  listened
       to Mr de Mello the more it seemed  to  us  that  he  was  revisiting
       submissions on the construction of the GDPR and the DPA  2018  which
       had already been ventilated before the FTT and roundly rejected. The
       FTT's central finding in this context (at paragraph [158]) was  that
       the right to object did not apply because of the  cumulative  effect
       of:


       a) the qualification in article 21(1) of the GDPR  (i.e.  where  the
          data controller demonstrates compelling legitimate grounds, etc);
       b) the application of the exemptions in paragraphs 5(3)(a)  and  (c)
          of Schedule 2 to the DPA 2018 (i.e. "necessary  for  the  purpose
          of, or in  connection  with,  legal  proceedings"  or  "otherwise
          necessary  for  the  purposes  of  establishing,  exercising   or
          defending legal rights"); and
       c)  paragraph 14(3) of  Schedule  2  to  the  DPA  2018  (where  its
          application "would be likely to prejudice  judicial  independence
          or judicial proceedings").

   38. In our judgment the FTT directed itself entirely properly as to  the
       interpretation  and  application  of  those   provisions.   Finally,
       however, we should note that in an additional written submission (22
       January 2019) Mr de Mello sought to argue that paragraph 5(3)(a) and
       (c) of Schedule 2 to  the  DPA  2018  went  "way  beyond"  what  was
       permitted by Article 23 of the GDPR and should be disapplied. We  do
       not accept this submission. Article 23 clearly envisages that  there
       may be restrictions on a data subject's rights, including  e.g.  the
       right to object under Article 21(1). Any such restriction must be "a
       necessary and proportionate  measure  in  a  democratic  society  to
       safeguard" one of several specified  interests.  As  already  noted,
       these include both "the  protection  of  judicial  independence  and
       judicial proceedings" (Article 23(1)(f))  and  "the  enforcement  of
       civil law claims" (Article 23(1)(j)). In oral argument Mr  de  Mello
       submitted  that  "the  enforcement  of  civil  law  claims"  was  an
       autonomous concept that  did  not  include  public  law  immigration
       appeals under the 2002 Act. However, we agree with  Mr  Kovats  that
       "civil law" is used here in  contradistinction  to  "criminal  law",
       rather than in any narrower sense as  that  term  is  understood  in
       English and Welsh law. This interpretation is supported  by  Article
       2(2)(d), which excludes the processing  of  personal  data  for  the
       purposes of the criminal justice system from the material  scope  of
       the  GDPR  (see  also  recital  (19)  and  Regulation  2016/680/EU).
       Finally, section 15(2)(a) and (b) explains that  the  exemptions  in
       Part 1 of Schedule 2 restrict the data subject's rights "as  allowed
       for by Article 6(3) and Article 23(1) of the  GDPR"  (and  see  also
       paragraph 1 of Schedule 2).  Rather  than  being  incompatible  with
       Article 23(1), we consider that on an  ordinary  reading  paragraphs
       5(3)(a) and (c) of Schedule 2 are entirely consistent with the terms
       of Article 23(1)(f) and (j) - and indeed Article 6(3).




    Data protection and the right to be forgotten


   39. The second principal challenge mounted by the appellant concerns the
       statutory right to erasure or  the  'right  to  be  forgotten'.  The
       appellant's concern revolved around  the  retention  of  the  appeal
       bundle by the BHC. Article 17(1)(a) of the GDPR provides as follows:




          "The data subject  shall  have  the  right  to  obtain  from  the
          controller the erasure of personal data  concerning  him  or  her
          without undue delay and the controller shall have the  obligation
          to erase personal data without  undue  delay  where  one  of  the
          following grounds applies:
          a) the personal data are no longer necessary in relation  to  the
             purposes  for  which  they   were   collected   or   otherwise
             processed;".


   40. However, the FTT set out the  assurances  that  were  given  by  the
       respondent in the course of the proceedings, namely that  the  staff
       handling the appellant's data at the  BHC  were  Home  Office  staff
       (rather than, e.g., FCO officials) and that the appeal bundle  would
       be retained for no more than 7  days  after  the  hearing.  The  FTT
       concluded that the assurances were reliable, not least as they  were
       made in  response  to  the  FTT's  directions,  and  that  any  data
       protection breach was unlikely, given that if the data was  retained
       beyond the 7-day period "it would be at the behest of the  appellant
       himself" (paragraph [161]). There was no serious challenge by Mr  de
       Mello to those findings of fact. In those circumstances we  conclude
       that the FTT properly directed itself as to the right to erasure.




    Data protection and transfer of data to a third country


   41. The third principal area of dispute revolved around the question  of
       the transfer of the appellant's personal data to a third country. We
       start with the relevant legal framework. Article 44 of the GDPR sets
       out the general principle for transfers, namely that:


         "Any transfer of personal data which are undergoing  processing  or
         are intended for processing after transfer to a third country or to
         an international organisation shall take place only if, subject  to
         the other provisions of this Regulation, the conditions  laid  down
         in this Chapter are complied with by the controller and  processor,
         including for onward transfers of  personal  data  from  the  third
         country or an international organisation to another  third  country
         or to another international organisation. All  provisions  in  this
         Chapter shall be applied in order  to  ensure  that  the  level  of
         protection of natural persons guaranteed by this Regulation is  not
         undermined."


   42. Article 45(1) of the GDPR  provides  that  a  transfer  to  a  third
       country may take place without specific authorisation providing that
       the European Commission has made  what  is  known  as  an  'adequacy
       decision', i.e. a  decision  that  the  third  country  in  question
       ensures an adequate level of data protection. It  is  common  ground
       that the Commission has not made an adequacy decision in relation to
       Jamaica. In the absence of any such adequacy decision, then  a  data
       controller or processor may only transfer personal data to  a  third
       country if appropriate safeguards are  provided  and  "on  condition
       that enforceable data subject rights and  effective  legal  remedies
       for  data  subjects  are  available"  (Article  46(1)).  There  are,
       however, some derogations for specific situations, as  provided  for
       by Article 49:


                                 "Article 49


                     Derogations for specific situations


         1.   In  the  absence  of  an  adequacy  decision   pursuant   to
         Article 45(3), or of appropriate safeguards pursuant to Article 46,
         including binding corporate rules, a transfer or a set of transfers
         of  personal  data  to  a  third  country   or   an   international
         organisation  shall  take  place  only  on  one  of  the  following
         conditions:


          a) the data subject has  explicitly  consented  to  the  proposed
             transfer, after having been informed of the possible risks  of
             such transfers for the data subject due to the absence  of  an
             adequacy decision and appropriate safeguards;
          b) the transfer is necessary for the performance  of  a  contract
             between  the  data  subject  and   the   controller   or   the
             implementation of pre-contractual measures taken at  the  data
             subject's request;
          c) the transfer is necessary for the conclusion or performance of
             a contract concluded in  the  interest  of  the  data  subject
             between the controller and another natural or legal person;
          d) the transfer is necessary  for  important  reasons  of  public
             interest;
          e) the transfer is necessary for the establishment,  exercise  or
             defence of legal claims;
          f) the transfer is  necessary  in  order  to  protect  the  vital
             interests of the data subject or of other persons,  where  the
             data subject is physically  or  legally  incapable  of  giving
             consent;
          g) the transfer is made from a register which according to  Union
             or Member State law is intended to provide information to  the
             public and which is open to consultation either by the  public
             in general or by any person who can demonstrate  a  legitimate
             interest, but only to the extent that the conditions laid down
             by Union or Member State law for consultation are fulfilled in
             the particular case.


         Where a transfer could not be based on a provision in Article 45 or
         46, including the provisions on binding corporate rules,  and  none
         of the derogations for a specific  situation  referred  to  in  the
         first subparagraph of this paragraph is applicable, a transfer to a
         third country or an international organisation may take place  only
         if the transfer is not repetitive, concerns only a  limited  number
         of data subjects, is  necessary  for  the  purposes  of  compelling
         legitimate interests  pursued  by  the  controller  which  are  not
         overridden by the interests or rights  and  freedoms  of  the  data
         subject, and the controller  has  assessed  all  the  circumstances
         surrounding the  data  transfer  and  has  on  the  basis  of  that
         assessment  provided  suitable  safeguards  with  regard   to   the
         protection of  personal  data.  The  controller  shall  inform  the
         supervisory authority of the transfer.  The  controller  shall,  in
         addition to providing the information referred to  in  Articles 13
         and 14, inform  the  data  subject  of  the  transfer  and  on  the
         compelling legitimate interests pursued.
         2.   A transfer pursuant to point (g) of the first subparagraph of
         paragraph 1 shall not involve the entirety of the personal data  or
         entire categories of the personal data contained in  the  register.
         Where the register is intended for consultation by persons having a
         legitimate interest, the transfer shall be made only at the request
         of those persons or if they are to be the recipients.
         3.   Points (a), (b) and (c) of the first subparagraph of paragraph
         1 and the second subparagraph thereof shall not apply to activities
         carried out by public authorities in the exercise of  their  public
         powers.
         4.   The public interest referred to in point  (d)  of  the  first
         subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be recognised in Union law or  in
         the law of the Member State to which the controller is subject.
         5.   In the absence of an adequacy decision, Union or Member State
         law may, for important reasons of public  interest,  expressly  set
         limits to the transfer of specific categories of personal data to a
         third country or an international organisation. Member States shall
         notify such provisions to the Commission.
         6.   The controller or processor shall document the assessment  as
         well  as  the  suitable  safeguards  referred  to  in  the   second
         subparagraph of paragraph 1 of this Article in the records referred
         to in Article 30."

   43. In the event, the FTT decided not to determine whether the  transfer
       of personal data between the Tribunal in Birmingham and the  BHC  in
       Kingston involved such data leaving the jurisdiction of the UK.  The
       FTT, in summarising the  parties'  respective  submissions  on  that
       issue,  recognised   that   its   resolution   was   by   no   means
       straightforward. The FTT found on the facts that there was no reason
       why the appellant's personal data would have to be  transmitted  to,
       or shared with, the Jamaican authorities and also no  evidence  that
       it was liable to being hacked.  The  FTT  therefore  concluded  that
       either there was no transfer of personal data  to  a  third  country
       (and so GDPR Article 46 did not apply) or,  alternatively,  even  if
       the appellant's personal data  was  being  transferred  to  a  third
       country, the derogation in Article 49(1)(e) would apply, namely that
       the transfer was  "necessary  for  the  establishment,  exercise  or
       defence of legal claims".


   44. We have had the benefit of more detailed argument on both points and
       consider that it is appropriate that we should deal with them both.


   45. Thus, the first question  is  whether  the  video-link  arrangements
       between Birmingham and Kingston did indeed involve  a  "transfer  of
       personal data ... to a third country" within the meaning of  Article
       44 of the GDPR. We may summarise the parties'  submissions  on  this
       point as follows.


   46. Mr Kovats submitted that the personal data being  processed  was  at
       all times under the control of Home Office  officials.  He  did  not
       seek to argue that UK domestic law applied within the four walls  of
       the BHC in Kingston. Rather, he pointed to the principles of  public
       international law as guaranteeing the  inviolability  of  diplomatic
       and  consular  premises.  He   contended   that   on   a   purposive
       interpretation of the GDPR, and on the facts of this case, there was
       in effect no transfer of data to a third country.


   47. Mr de Mello, to the contrary, submitted that the appeal  necessarily
       involved the transfer and retention of the appellant's personal  and
       sensitive data to a third country, notwithstanding the processing of
       that data in Jamaica took place within the BHC. The main  thrust  of
       his submissions was that because there was a  transfer  of  data  to
       Jamaica then that third country had to ensure an adequate  level  of
       protection for the appellant's data.


   48. We agree with the FTT (at  paragraph  [171]),  that  if  the  proper
       approach to be applied is a simple geographical test, then there  is
       considerable force in Mr de Mello's argument that the data was being
       transferred to a third country outside the EU.  But,  in  our  view,
       such an analysis is not  just  simple  but  overly  simplistic.  The
       starting point is that the GDPR has a  degree  of  extra-territorial
       effect. The GDPR defines its territorial reach in Article 3:


         "1.   This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data in
         the context of the activities of an establishment of  a  controller
         or a processor in the Union, regardless of whether  the  processing
         takes place in the Union or not.
         2. [omitted as not relevant]
         3.   This Regulation applies to the processing of personal data by
         a controller not established in the Union, but  in  a  place  where
         Member State law applies by virtue of public international law."


   49. We should also observe that Article 3 of the GDPR reflects the terms
       of recital (25) which provides that:


         "Where Member State law applies by virtue of  public  international
         law,  this  Regulation  should  also  apply  to  a  controller  not
         established in the Union, such as in a  Member  State's  diplomatic
         mission or consular post."


   50. The DPA 2018 is likewise extensive in its territorial scope. Section
       207(2) expressly provides that the Act "applies to the processing of
       personal data in the context of the activities of  an  establishment
       of a controller or processor in the United Kingdom, whether  or  not
       the processing takes place in the United Kingdom" (emphasis added).


   51. So far as the relevant public international law is  concerned,  both
       Jamaica and the UK are signatories of, and have ratified, the Vienna
       Convention on Diplomatic Relations (1961). This treaty,  of  course,
       provides that "the premises of  the  mission  shall  be  inviolable"
       (Article 22), along with its archives and documents (Article 24) and
       its official correspondence (Article 27.2). Similar safeguards apply
       under  the  Vienna  Convention  on  Consular  Relations  (1963;  see
       Articles 31, 33, 35  and  70),  which  again  has  been  signed  and
       ratified by both states concerned.  Mr  de  Mello  argued  that  the
       appeal bundle in the present case before the FTT did not count as  a
       consular document. However, that is not to ask the  right  question.
       We observe that "consular functions" are defined very broadly by the
       Vienna  Convention   (1963),   specifically   so   as   to   include
       "transmitting judicial and extrajudicial documents" (Article  5(j)).
       Mr de Mello also contended that the giving of live evidence by video-
       link was not a consular function.  However,  the  Vienna  Convention
       (1963) again provides  more  generally  a  catch-all  definition  of
       consular functions as  including  "performing  any  other  functions
       entrusted to a consular post by the sending State ...  to  which  no
       objection is taken by the receiving State" (Article 5(m)). From  the
       principle of inviolability, it follows that the Jamaican authorities
       have no legal basis for gaining access to the  appellant's  personal
       data, and the integrity of that data is effectively secured  to  the
       same extent as if the data processing was  taking  place  wholly  in
       Birmingham.


   52. In support of his argument that Jamaica was required  to  ensure  an
       adequate level of data protection, Mr de Mello placed great store by
       the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Case C-
       362/14  Schrems  v  Data  Protection  Commissioner  [2016]  QB  527.
       However, Schrems concerned the transfer of  data  from  Austria  (Mr
       Schrems's home Member State) via Ireland to Facebook  Inc's  servers
       in the United States. The Grand Chamber's judgment does not  address
       the special position of mission premises and so does not  assist  Mr
       de Mello's cause.


   53. We agree with Mr Kovats that it makes good sense for the GDPR itself
       to apply to an EU Member State's diplomatic  and  consular  premises
       overseas, rather than to treat any data transfer to such premises as
       a transfer to a third country. This is  because  for  all  practical
       purposes the data remains under  the  sole  control  of  the  Member
       State.


   54. If we are wrong on that first question, and there is a  transfer  of
       data to a third country, we must also consider the second  question,
       namely whether one of the derogations in  Article  49  of  the  GDPR
       applies. The first of these is that the data subject has  explicitly
       consented to  the  proposed  transfer  (Article  49(1)(a)).  In  the
       present case we recognise the appellant has  expressly  refused  his
       consent. It follows that Article 49(1)(a) cannot apply. However, the
       fact that Article 49(1)(a) is a freestanding basis for derogation by
       definition means that any of the other heads of  Article  49(1)  may
       apply irrespective  of  the  data  subject's  consent  (as  is  also
       consistent with section 2(1)(a) of the DPA 2018).


   55. Mr Kovats did not seek to  suggest  that  Article  49(1)(d)  applied
       ("the  transfer  is  necessary  for  important  reasons  of   public
       interest"). Rather, he  submitted  that  Article  49(1)(e)  applied,
       namely that  "the  transfer  is  necessary  for  the  establishment,
       exercise or defence of legal claims". Mr de Mello sought to persuade
       us  that  the  formulation  in  Article  49(1)(e)  applied  only  to
       preliminary steps taken before judicial proceedings  were  launched,
       rather  than  to  steps  taken  in  the  course  of  those  judicial
       proceedings themselves. However, as Mr Kovats argued, such a reading
       cuts across both the natural meaning of the words and the purpose of
       the derogation. We are accordingly satisfied that if the appellant's
       appeal did involve the transfer of his  personal  data  to  a  third
       country, then such transfer  was  lawful  under  the  derogation  in
       Article 49(1)(e). That being so, it is unnecessary to consider Mr De
       Mello's further submissions on the applicability of  the  'read-out'
       at the end of Article 49(1).



    Data protection and the discrimination ground


   56. That  takes  us  to  the  appellant's  challenge  based  on  alleged
       discrimination. In the proceedings before the FTT, this was  put  in
       terms of the data processing involved in the video-link  arrangement
       as amounting to a breach of Article 14, taken together with  Article
       8 of the ECHR. The FTT dealt with this argument shortly as follows:


         "163. We have considered if there is any merit in Mr de  Mello  and
         Mr Muman's argument that the proposed processing of the appellant's
         personal data would violate article 14 taken with article 8 of  the
         ECHR. In the context of the preliminary issue,  we  understand  the
         appellant to be relying on the provision in article 8 of  the  ECHR
         that requires respect for  his  private  life,  which  includes  an
         element of a right to data protection in relation  to  a  right  to
         privacy. To this extent, we appreciate that article 14 of the  ECHR
         might apply.


         164. However, the argument suggesting discrimination is undeveloped
         and unclear.  We find the argument has been included  merely  as  a
         'catch all' provision. There is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant
         would be treated any differently from another person in  a  similar
         situation. The Tribunals, Courts and various government departments
         employ video link and other modern means of communication  to  take
         evidence from people who cannot attend  a  venue,  whether  through
         some physical or legal restriction. The only comparator cited is  a
         British citizen but such a person is not an appropriate  comparator
         because they are not subject to immigration control. We reject  the
         argument based on article 14 as being without merit in relation  to
         the issue of data protection."


   57.  Given the limited way in which the point had been argued before the
       FTT, we consider that its treatment in the decision in  the  passage
       at paragraphs [163]-[164] above was entirely proportionate.  We  had
       the advantage  of  further  written  and  oral  submissions  on  the
       discrimination point. Before us, Mr de Mello  framed  his  arguments
       not in terms of ECHR Articles  8  and  14  but  rather  the  broader
       principles of EU law and the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  of  the
       EU. He argued that the video-link  arrangements  that  were  put  in
       place amounted to  both  direct  discrimination  (on  the  basis  of
       nationality) and indirect discrimination (on the ground of race  and
       ethnicity)  and  (as  regard  the  latter)  was   not   capable   of
       justification.


   58. Furthermore, and more specifically, Mr de Mello submitted there  was
       no  objective  justification  for  treating  the  appellant's   case
       differently from that of an appellant under  regulation  41  of  the
       Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016   (SI
       2016/1052). This provides that an EEA  national  who  is  a  foreign
       criminal may apply for permission to be temporarily admitted to  the
       UK solely for the purpose of making submissions in person  at  their
       appeal hearing. Details of the relevant arrangements are to be found
       in the relevant Home Office guidance to staff (Regulations 33 and 41
       of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016,  3
       August 2017). We understand that most of those who  are  allowed  to
       return to the UK on this basis are housed in  immigration  detention
       centres for the duration of their stay.


   59. We agree with Mr Kovats that these  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant conflate and confuse  two  distinct  matters,  being  data
       protection rights and immigration rights.


   60. So far as data protection is concerned, we have already  noted  that
       the GDPR and the DPA 2018 do not  discriminate  on  the  grounds  of
       nationality. Furthermore, and in any event, Mr Kovats disavowed  any
       reliance on the specific restriction that applies to  personal  data
       processed for the maintenance of effective immigration controls (see
       paragraph 4 of Part 1 of  Schedule  2  to  the  DPA  2018;  and  see
       paragraph 33 above). Nor does Mr de Mello's invocation of Article 16
       TFEU advance his argument, for the simple reason that it matters not
       whether the data processing in this case is or  is  not  within  the
       material scope of EU law (see paragraph 18 above).  The  reason  for
       that was that the very same issues arose whether this case was dealt
       with under the GDPR or the parallel applied GDPR regime.


   61. As regard immigration, the appellant is undeniably a  third  country
       national. Of course, EU citizens have the right  of  free  movement,
       subject  to  carefully  defined  restrictions.  In  contrast  non-EU
       citizens are subject to  the  Immigration  Acts  and  have  no  such
       rights. By virtue of that fundamental  distinction,  EU  and  non-EU
       citizens cannot be seen as being in an analogous position in respect
       of immigration. It follows that e.g. discrimination on the basis  of
       nationality is entirely permissible in, and indeed  fundamental  to,
       immigration law. The simple fact of the matter is that the appellant
       is a non-EU national who thereby lacks EU free movement rights.  For
       that reason, the purported comparison with the EEA foreign  criminal
       who has the possibility of admittance under regulation 41 so  as  to
       attend his appeal hearing in person is based on a false analogy.


   62. In sum, we agree with Mr Kovats that the  whole  edifice  of  Mr  de
       Mello's wide-ranging submissions on discrimination is founded on the
       premise  that  whenever  any  immigration  decision  involving   the
       processing of personal data - in practical terms nearly  every  such
       decision - a non-EU citizen might be given the same rights as an  EU
       citizen. Obviously, that is not what the law mandates.


   63. Furthermore, it seems to us that, at least in substance  if  not  in
       form, the appellant's challenge is  in  reality  an  attack  on  the
       section 94B certificate. However, as the FTT  correctly  identified,
       case law has consistently stated that the  FTT  does  not  have  the
       power to set aside a section 94B certificate. In  the  present  case
       the section 94B certificate was  challenged  through  the  available
       route of judicial review  but  foundered  at  every  stage  and  was
       ultimately  dismissed.  The  inevitable  consequence  was  that  the
       certificate stood (paragraph [141]). Thereafter, given  the  Supreme
       Court's judgment in R (Kiarie and Byndloss) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42; [2017] 1 WLR 2380, the issue was
       whether the procedure adopted for the  appellant's  out  of  country
       appeal  satisfied  the   procedural   requirements   of   guaranteed
       effectiveness and fairness. We therefore also turn to address  those
       arguments.




    The procedural challenge under human rights law


   64. The appellant's case before the FTT - putting to one side  his  data
       protection  concerns  -  was   that   the   arrangements   for   his
       participation in the hearing and giving his evidence by way of video-
       link did not amount to a fair procedure for the determination of the
       substantive human rights  issues  arising  on  his  out  of  country
       deportation appeal. The FTT considered this challenge in  depth.  It
       began by setting the relevant legal framework, directing  itself  at
       length in accordance with the principles set out in  R  (Kiarie  and
       Byndloss) and further explained in R (Nixon et al)  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  3  and  AJ  (s  94B:
       Kairie  and  Byndloss  Questions)  Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  115  (IAC)
       (paragraphs [184]-[189]). The FTT then considered  the  difficulties
       faced by the appellant  in  instructing  his  legal  representatives
       (paragraphs [190]-[201]), as well as those encountered  in  securing
       expert reports and other professional  evidence  (paragraphs  [202]-
       [213]). The FTT also had regard to the absence  of  the  appellant's
       partner in the context of other possible witnesses (paragraphs [216]-
       [221]), before reviewing whether the process for the evidence  given
       by means of the video-link was satisfactory.  The  FTT  reached  the
       overall conclusion that the appellant had been able  to  participate
       effectively in the hearing and that being out of country and  giving
       evidence by video-link did  not  impinge  on  the  fairness  of  the
       proceedings (paragraphs [222]-[230]).


   65. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  under  this
       segment of Part B of the  application  are  a  medley  of  disparate
       complaints. The first ground is that the video-link in  the  present
       case was established in a technically sophisticated manner  (as  the
       FTT itself acknowledged at paragraph [223]) that would not always be
       replicated in other out of country appeals. This takes the appellant
       nowhere; as Mr Kovats observed, it is effectively an admission  that
       the video-link procedure  adopted  in  this  case  was  fair  whilst
       speculating that this may not be so for other cases.  However,  this
       is the appellant's appeal, not some other appeal. The other  grounds
       as  pleaded  and  directed  at  the  mechanics  of  the   video-link
       arrangements are likewise concerned  with  the  generality  of  such
       cases rather than the appellant's own case. The remaining grounds of
       appeal that attack the fairness of the procedure  adopted  (e.g.  as
       regard  the  appellant's   undoubted   practical   difficulties   in
       instructing  his  solicitors  and  the  absence  of  other   witness
       evidence) all come down to an attempt to re-argue the fairness issue
       on the facts. However, we  are  satisfied  that  the  FTT  correctly
       identified itself as to the relevant law and then grappled with  the
       realities of the situation, ultimately reaching sustainable findings
       on the evidence which demonstrate no error of law.




    The substantive challenge under human rights law


   66. Most of the argument before both the FTT and this  Tribunal  centred
       on the preliminary issue. So  far  as  the  substantive  appeal  was
       concerned, the appellant submitted his deportation  to  Jamaica  was
       unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as it breached
       his Article 8 ECHR right to respect for his family and private life.
       The legal framework for resolving such a claim is  well-established.
       Given the appellant's 3-year sentence of imprisonment, the Secretary
       of State was required by section 32 of the 2007 Act to deport him as
       a "foreign criminal" unless one of  the  exceptions  in  section  33
       applied.  The  appellant  relied  on  Exception   1,   namely   that
       deportation involved a breach  of  his  Convention  rights  (section
       33(2)(a)). That being so, Part 5A of the 2002  Act  applies  (namely
       sections 117A-117D, inserted by section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act
       2014). In the present  context  two  provisions  from  Part  5A  are
       particularly relevant.


   67. The first is that the appellant had been an  overstayer  in  the  UK
       since 26 June 2002. Section 117B(4) is relevant as it provides  that
       little weight should be given  to  a  person's  private  life  or  a
       relationship formed with a qualifying partner (and  it  was  not  in
       dispute that  the  appellant's  partner  met  that  definition:  see
       section 117D(1)) that is established  at  a  time  when  the  person
       concerned is in the UK unlawfully.


   68. The second is the statutory directive on  the  approach  to  foreign
       criminals as enshrined in section 117C, the material parts of  which
       read as follows:


         "Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
       criminals
         117C - (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the  public
      interest.
         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
            the greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
            criminal.
         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
            sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
            public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
            Exception 2 applies.
   4) Exception 1 [omitted as not relevant]
   5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with a qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the  effect   of   C's
      deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."


   69. In addition, paragraphs A398 to 399 of the Immigration Rules,  which
       deal further with consideration of deportation and Article  8  ECHR,
       also fell for consideration. Realistically the only live issue  here
       was whether it would be "unduly harsh" for the appellant's  daughter
       to remain in the UK without him (see paragraph 399(a)). Furthermore,
       as the FTT recognised, section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009 requires the Secretary of State to ensure  that
       her immigration functions are discharged having regard to  the  need
       to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the  UK,
       in which context the best interests of a British child are a primary
       consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2011] UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166).


   70. The FTT dealt with the substantive appeal in meticulous  detail.  It
       reviewed  the   appellant's   evidence   (paragraphs   [231]-[254]),
       summarised the parties' submissions  (paragraphs  [255]-[270]),  set
       out  the  legal  framework  with  copious  reference  to   statutory
       authority (paragraphs [271]-[274]) and then analysed the case  under
       the Immigration Rules (paragraphs [275]-[287]) and by  reference  to
       the strength of the public interest (paragraphs [288]-[297])  before
       addressing whether the effect of  the  appellant's  deportation  was
       unduly harsh on  his  daughter  (paragraphs  [298]-[306]).  The  FTT
       concluded that none of the exceptions under  the  Immigration  Rules
       applied, before also considering whether the appellant could benefit
       from any other Part 5A issues. In summary, the FTT  found  that  the
       strength of the public interest was very strong and  was  sufficient
       to outweigh the private and family life rights which were  adversely
       affected.


   71. The appellant's grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
       substantive human rights issues, as set out in the  application  for
       permission to appeal, are six-fold. They are that the FTT was  wrong
       to conclude that (i) the appellant's  fear  of  harm  from  Jamaican
       criminal gangs was irrelevant; (ii) the appellant's residence  as  a
       minor in the UK was a "neutral" factor; (iii) it  would  be  "unduly
       harsh" for the appellant's child to live in the UK without him; (iv)
       the public interest in the appellant's deportation remained  strong;
       (v) the appellant's deportation had not had an "unduly harsh" impact
       on his daughter; and (vi) contact  between  the  appellant  and  his
       daughter could be maintained by phone from Jamaica.


   72. The fundamental difficulty with all these grounds of appeal is  that
       they amount to a thinly disguised attempt to  re-argue  the  factual
       merits of the substantive human  rights  appeal  that  was  properly
       determined by the FTT.  It  is  axiomatic  that  the  weight  to  be
       attached to individual items of evidence is a question of  fact  for
       the first instance tribunal to determine.  The  only  one  of  these
       grounds which comes remotely close  to  a  potential  error  of  law
       argument is ground (iii), where it is said that  the  FTT  erred  in
       relying solely on the Court of Appeal's judgment in  MM  (Uganda)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  617  in
       determining whether the  appellant's  deportation  would  be  unduly
       harsh on his daughter. Instead, Mr de Mello  submits  that  the  FTT
       should  have  considered  R  (MA   (Pakistan)   v   Upper   Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705; [2016]  1  WLR
       5093). This argument is  unpersuasive,  not  least  as  MM  (Uganda)
       concerned deportation of a foreign criminal while R  (MA  (Pakistan)
       did not. In addition, the central issue  in  R  (MA  (Pakistan)  was
       whether it was reasonable to expect the child in question  to  leave
       the UK. In the  present  case,  on  the  other  hand,  the  FTT  had
       expressly rejected the respondent's argument that it was  reasonable
       to expect the appellant's  partner  and  daughter  to  join  him  in
       Jamaica (see paragraph [298]).


   73. We have not overlooked the fact that the case law on the meaning  of
       "unduly harsh" has moved on. In October 2018, and so after  the  FTT
       hearing, the Supreme Court delivered its judgment in KO (Nigeria) et
       al v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53;
       [2018] 1 WLR 5273. The Supreme Court, in effect clarifying  the  law
       with retrospective effect, held that the  statutory  test  does  not
       bring  into  consideration  the  seriousness  of   the   appellant's
       offending when considering whether the  effect  of  deportation  was
       unduly  harsh  on  his  child  (see  Lord  Carnwath's  judgment   at
       paragraphs [23] and [42]). However, notwithstanding the FTT  decided
       this appeal before KO (Nigeria), we are  satisfied  that  the  FTT's
       approach did not result in any material  error  of  law.  The  FTT's
       finding that the effect  of  the  appellant's  deportation  was  not
       unduly harsh on his daughter  was  plainly  based  on  a  close  and
       careful analysis of the facts of the case, quite independent of  any
       consideration of the seriousness of the appellant's  offending  (see
       paragraphs [299]-[305]). Mr de Mello undoubtedly  takes  issue  with
       both the details and the outcome of the FTT's analysis, but that  is
       at root a disagreement over the factual findings. In short, we agree
       with Mr Kovats's submission that the FTT was entitled  to  make  the
       findings of fact it  did  on  the  evidence  before  it  as  to  the
       substantive human rights issues.



    Decision


   74. We uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  set
       out above and dismiss the appellant's appeal. However, whilst  doing
       so it would be remiss of us not to put on  record  our  appreciation
       for the considerable assistance we received from Mr de Mello and  Mr
       Muman, and their instructing solicitors, acting pro bono.






       Signed




                  Upper Tribunal Judge Wikeley


                  8 March 2019
