
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   Dasdemir (1972 Rules - self-employment) Turkey [2013] UKUT 00121 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|20 February 2013                                |                           |
|                                                |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOOD

                                   Between

                              mr YUCEL DASDEMIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr D Blum instructed by Rahman & Co Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr D Hayes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


   1)  Self-employed  persons  were  eligible  for  leave  to  remain  under
      paragraph 21 of HC 510 if they made an investment in the provision  of
      services of their personal skill provided that they were not  engaging
      in disguised employment or would not have to supplement their business
      activities by taking employment for which a work permit was required.


   2) The distinction between employment and self-employment is  a  question
      of fact to be assessed in the light of the  evidence  as  a  whole.  A
      relevant and potentially decisive issue is whether the person to  whom
      services are provided controls the relationship.

   3) The UKBA May 2011 IDI accurately reflects the fact that a  person  may
      work part time for a number of employers and not be self employed.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a Turkish national born in 1981.  He arrived in the
       United Kingdom in January 2008 and was given leave to  remain  as  a
       student that was extended until 3 July 2010.  On  31  July  2010  he
       applied for leave  to  remain  to  establish  a  Mexican  restaurant
       business (El Pancho's) under  the  terms  of  the  Ankara  Agreement
       applicable to Turkish nationals. The Secretary of State granted  him
       leave to remain until 3 July 2013.


    2. On 21 January 2012 the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Secretary
       of State informing  her  that  the  appellant's  business  had  been
       unsuccessful  and  had  stopped  trading  the  previous  year.  They
       explained that he was providing services as a self-employed chef  to
       other businesses of a similar  nature.   The  respondent  asked  for
       further data in June 2012 and indicated that the curtailment of  his
       existing leave would follow in the absence of satisfactory  evidence
       of the new arrangements.


    3. The respondent was not satisfied by the evidence  submitted  by  the
       appellant and curtailed his leave to remain on  27  September  2012.
       On the same day she also took the decision to remove the  appellant.
       The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. His appeal was heard  by  Judge  Tipping  who  on  4  December  2012
       dismissed it. Like  the  Secretary  of  State,  the  judge  was  not
       persuaded  that  the  appellant's  activities  did  not  amount   to
       disguised employment.

    5. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
       from Judge Tipping's decision.  Essentially the questions before  us
       are:-


          i) Did Judge Tipping's decision involve the making of an error  of
             law?
         ii) If so was any error  material  to  the  outcome  and  therefore
             requiring us to re-make the decision?
        iii) If we were to re-make the decision on the basis of the material
             findings of fact by Judge Tipping and the evidence before  him,
             would we come to a different conclusion?



   The 1972 Rules


    6. It is well established that as a result  of  the  standstill  clause
       contained in Article 41 of the Additional Protocol  to  the  Turkish
       Association  Agreement  with  the  European  Community  (the  Ankara
       Agreement),  that  "the  Contracting  Party   shall   refrain   from
       introducing between themselves any new restrictions  on  freedom  of
       establishment and the freedom to provide services".


    7. The United Kingdom became bound by this obligation  when  it  joined
       the European Economic Community (as it then was)  in  January  1973.
       At that time the relevant rules were contained in HC 510 promulgated
       in 1972.  Rule 21 is headed "Businessmen and Self Employed Persons".
        It provides as follows:


        "People admitted as visitors may apply for consent of the Secretary
        of State to establishing themselves here for the purpose of setting
        up in business, whether on their own account or as  partners  in  a
        new or existing business.  Any such application is to be considered
        on the merits.  Permission will depend  on  a  number  of  factors,
        including evidence that the applicant will be  devoting  assets  of
        his own to the business proportional to his interest in it, that he
        will be able to bear his share of any liability  the  business  may
        incur and that the share of  his  profits  will  be  sufficient  to
        support him and any dependants.  The applicant's part in this  must
        not amount to disguised employment, and it must be  clear  that  he
        will not have to supplement his business activities  by  employment
        for which a work permit is required."


     There are other provisions relating to joining  established  businesses
      under terms on which leave to enter or remain should be granted.


    8. The Upper Tribunal has made clear in  its  decision  in  EK  (Ankara
       Agreement - 1972 Rules - Construction) Turkey [2010] UKUT 425  (IAC)
       that this is a broad rule to be interpreted  in  the  round  in  the
       light of all relevant evidence.  Further guidance was given by  this
       Tribunal as to how to assess business applications in  the  case  of
       Akinci (paragraph 21 HC 510 -  Correct  Approach)  [2012]  UKUT  266
       (IAC).


    9. As the title to rule 21 suggests, it is possible for those who  seek
       to remain in self -employment by providing services to  come  within
       the rule and it is not restricted to those who establish  companies.
       There is no minimum financial contribution  which  must  be  brought
       into the proposed activity and it would appear from the decision  of
       the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Stawczykowska [1972]  Imm  AR  at
       220 that the provision of personal skill (in that case dress making)
       was an asset within the contemplation of the rule.   It  is  equally
       clear, however, that  the  rule  contains  a  clear  prohibition  on
       employment for which a work permit is required and  the  applicant's
       part in the business must not amount to disguised  employment.   The
       Tribunal   noted  with  apparent  approval  the  submission  by  the
       advocate on behalf of the claimant in that case:-

        "The chief asset of a self-employed  person  is  his  skill...  The
        criterion is whether the person is his own master or whether he has
        to work according to his employer's rules and on a fixed salary."


   10. The distinction between working for oneself and working for  another
       is made in the current guidance on the  application  of  the  Ankara
       Agreement dated May 2011 and accessed 20 February 2013 on  the  UKBA
       website under the Immigration Directorate Instructions.


   11. Paragraph 4.2.3 of those instructions states as follows:-


        "In some circumstances it may be apparent that the  nature  of  the
        work being proposed is actually employment. Disguised employment in
        the context of the  1973  business  provisions  means  a  proactive
        attempt to present employment as self-establishment. For example, a
        claimed investment that amounts only to a transfer of money to  the
        business owner and  the  applicant  in  practice  is  managing  the
        business on behalf of the owner may amount to disguised employment.
        When disguised employment is identified the application  should  be
        refused.

        If some or all of the  following  criteria  apply,  this  indicates
        employment:
        Applicant;
        - works a set amount of hours;
        - is paid by the hour, week, or month;
        - will receive overtime pay or bonus payments;
        - is "part & parcel" of an organisation i.e. is an integral part of
        an  organisation;   receives   employee-type   benefits   from   an
        organisation e.g. pension, access to grievance procedures etc;
        - can at any time be told what to do e.g. where to carry  out  work
        or when and how to do work and can be moved from task to task.

        The fact that an individual provides services  for  more  than  one
        person does not automatically mean that they are not  employed.  If
        the above indicators apply to each service being provided then  the
        individual may still be an employee  but  with  multiple  employers
        rather than established in business.

        When an applicant is found to be seeking or actually in  employment
        it does not necessarily  mean  that  the  applicant  is  guilty  of
        disguised employment: the applicant may genuinely believe that what
        they are doing represents running their own business.  However,  it
        does mean that the application will fail. "


       Although this guidance was not referred to by the judge below or  in
       the submissions that we heard in this  appeal,  we  consider  it  is
       generally helpful in identifying the distinction between  employment
       and self-employment and can thus be employed as a legitimate aid  to
       the scope of application of the rule. Further  guidance  as  to  the
       distinction between employment and self-employment in the context of
       employment law can be found in Stringfellows  Restaurant  Limited  v
       Quashie [2012] EWCA Civ 1735 noting and  applying  the  judgment  of
       McKenna J in Ready Mix Concrete (South East England) v  Minister  of
       Pensions and National Insurance [1968] 1 QB 497 where the  'control'
       test is identified as a useful but not determinative pointer.

Curtailment of Leave


   12. What is before us is an appeal against a decision to  curtail  leave
       to remain.  It is common ground that in 1972 there was  a  statutory
       power to vary leave by restricting  its  duration  (Immigration  Act
       1971 s.3(2)). We have not been referred to  any  provisions  of  the
       1972 Immigration Rules concerned with curtailment, but Mr  Blum  has
       invited us to proceed on  the  basis  that  it  was  permissible  to
       curtail leave in 1972 if a change of circumstances removed the basis
       of the claim to remain.


   13. The judge proceeded on the basis that the  burden  of  proving  that
       there had been such a change of circumstances lay on the respondent.
        In principle we agree but it was accepted by Mr Blum on  behalf  of
       the appellant that the Secretary of State was able to  discharge  to
       the appropriate standard the burden of  showing  there  had  been  a
       change of circumstances in the present case since  the  granting  of
       the leave to remain. The appellant said as much when  informing  the
       respondent that his earlier Mexican food business  had  failed.   Mr
       Blum  further  accepted  that  in  those  circumstances,  where  the
       appellant was seeking to vary the activity for  which  he  had  been
       given leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,  that  the  burden  of
       demonstrating that  the  new  activity  was  indeed  self-employment
       within the meaning of rule 21 and that the basis  of  his  leave  to
       remain had  not  been  removed  fell  on  him.  We  agree  with  the
       contention of counsel.

   14. This is not a points based application,  and  it  was  open  to  the
       appellant to submit to the judge evidence of "any matter... relevant
       to the substance of the decision" even  if  that  material  was  not
       before the Secretary of State at  the  time  of  the  decision:  see
       s.85(4)  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002.
       However, new material will only be relevant to the substance of  the
       decision to curtail if it was either in existence at the date of the
       decision to curtail or came into being afterwards but relates  to  a
       question in issue at the time of the decision:  see DR  (ECO:  post-
       decision evidence)  Morocco*  [2005] UKIAT 00038 (IAC).

   The judge's decision

   15. In the light of the above, we conclude that it was for the judge  to
       make an overall assessment of all the evidence before him and decide
       whether the appellant had established that his changed circumstances
       met the requirements of rule 21 or failed to do so because (whatever
       he may have believed) in reality he was in  employment  rather  than
       self-employment.

   16.  The documentary evidence before the judge showed that the appellant
       provided  his  services  to  three  different   Mexican   restaurant
       businesses  where  he  supplemented  the  regular  work   force   on
       particularly busy days.

   17. The judge summarised the evidence before him at paragraphs 6  and  7
       of his decision in the following terms:-


        "6. The appellant's evidence is that, following the failure of  El-
        Pancho's he set  himself  up  as  a  self-employed  chef,  offering
        cooking  services  to  restaurant  owners.   The  three  supporting
        witnesses confirm that the appellant works or used to work for each
        of them on a set basis each week.  Mr Bilal, for example, owns  the
        Mexican & Cuban Ltd Cucarachas  in  Battersea,  and  the  appellant
        works for him there.  Mr Bilal states that  he  employs  two  other
        chefs, and  that  the  appellant  works  for  him  on  Fridays  and
        Saturdays when the restaurant is at its busiest.  The appellant has
        similar arrangements for working for Mr Yildirim on  Thursdays  and
        used until March 2012 to  work  on  Sundays  for  Mr  Arslan.   The
        appellant has produced certified accounts show a "net rental  (sic)
        income" of some �10,000 for the year to 5 April 2012, and a copy of
        his tax return for the year.


        7. In cross-examination, the appellant agreed that he had not  been
        required to make any investment into the businesses  for  which  he
        works, and that he does not share in profits.  He pays for his  own
        clothing and for his travel by underground to work.  The  appellant
        maintains no business bank account, and is paid by the day in  cash
        by the restaurant owners for whom he works.  Mr Bilal, Mr  Yildirim
        and Mr Arslan confirmed the detail of the working arrangement  they
        have or had with the appellant.  They are all old  friends  of  the
        appellants from Turkey. Mr Yildirim, for example, said that he  had
        known the appellant since 1996, when the  appellant  was  15.   The
        appellant works for him on Thursdays, for set hours.  He  works  to
        Mr Yildirim's instructions, including the dishes to be prepared and
        the required quantity.  Mr Bilal said at the hearing that  he  told
        the appellant where to work, when to come to work, and what to  do.
        Mr Arslan said that it  was  for  him  to  decide  what  hours  the
        appellant should work and what he should do."


   18. The appellant had produced a bundle of invoices issued  in  his  own
       name and home address for his services; he produced a certificate of
       public liability insurance policy  from  the  25  October  2011;  he
       produced certificates of Health and Safety Training Courses  he  had
       undertaken  in  September  2009,  personal  bank  statements  and  a
       business card.


   19. The respondent's  case at the hearing was set out by the Immigration
       Judge at paragraph 8 of his decision and may be summarised:-


        (i)    The appellant's work has none of the  characteristics  of  a
             business.
        (ii)    He has invested neither money nor physical  assets  in  any
             current
                    business and has no liability for them.
         iii) He has no business premises or business name,  and  does  not
              maintain a
                    business bank account.
          iv) He does not share in the profit for any of the businesses for
              which he now works.
           v) He is not  a  self  employed  businessman  but  a  part  time
              employee who seeks to disguise his employed status.
          vi) This conclusion is not affected  by  the  fact  that  he  has
              produced a business card, obtained a hygiene certificate, and
              provides his own work clothes.


   20. In the following paragraphs of his decision the Judge concluded:-


        "9. I have considered the appellant's circumstances with  care  and
        in the round.  I accept that the  appellant  has  submitted  a  tax
        return as a self-employed person, but there  is  no  evidence  that
        HMR&C have carried out any investigations into this tax status.  Mr
        Blum sought to persuade me that the appellant's  circumstances  are
        similar to those  of  a  barrister,  but  I  do  not  accept  that,
        typically, a barrister (other than one who is employed) works part-
        time solely for two employers for the same set  hours  every  week.
        By contrast to the appellant, a barrister in private practice  must
        provide himself with business premises in the form of chambers.


        10. For the above reasons, I am satisfied to the relevant  standard
        of proof that the appellant is a part-time employee and no longer a
        self-employed businessman.  It  follows  that  the  respondent  has
        established that  there  has  been  a  change  in  the  appellant's
        circumstances sufficient to remove the basis  for  the  appellant's
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom."

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   21. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on grounds lodged  on
       7 December 2012 in summary submitting that:-


          i) The judge approached the appeal with a list of factors in  mind
             that must be present in order for self-employment to exist.


         ii) There is no legal requirement for  a  self-employed  person  to
             invest his money or other assets in their chosen area  of  work
             or for them to have business premises or for  them  to  have  a
             business bank account.

        iii) The judge is obliged to approach each case on its own facts and
             take account  of  the  particular  nature  of  the  appellant's
             claimed business.

         iv) For this particular appellant there was  little  investment  he
             could practically make.  His business was  based  primarily  on
             his skill and knowledge as  a  chef  not  on  the  purchase  of
             expensive  equipment  or  the  significant  other   requirement
             outlay.

          v) He did not  need  to  have  business  premises  or  a  separate
             business bank account.

         vi) Contrary to the judge's  claim  that  barristers  must  provide
             themselves with business premises  in  the  form  of  chambers,
             there is no actual requirement for self employed barristers  to
             be in chambers (or for a separate work bank account).

        vii) The judge erred in failing to refer to the  appellant's  public
             liability insurance dated October 2011 or his business plan.

       viii) Whilst the appellant  did  work  set  hours  and  followed  the
             instruction of the owners of the restaurants in terms  of  what
             food he prepared, this  did  not  bring  the  appellant's  work
             within a relationship of subordination.


   Error of Law

   22.  We accept that as a matter of law, in the light of our analysis  of
       rule 21 and the learning relating to self-employment, that there are
       no minimum requirements that must always  be  met,  and  submissions
       (ii) to (v) in the appellant's grounds above are accurate.


   23. However, we do not accept that the judge erred in seeking to  impose
       a  set  of  minimum  requirements  about  the  application  and  any
       misapprehension as to how barristers can operate  as  self  employed
       persons is incidental to the decision; the judge was  engaging  with
       an analogy advanced by the appellant at the appeal  below  that  was
       unhelpful in the context of the issues to be decided.

   24.  The judge's decision and his recitation of the evidence demonstrate
       that he was alert to the central distinction between employment  and
       self employment. The absence of the features noted by the respondent
       was relevant to the overall assessment but none  was  conclusive  in
       itself.


   25. The critical issue was how far the evidence  of  how  the  appellant
       supplied his  services  to  the  three  businessmen  who  owned  the
       restaurants  in  question,  informed  as  to  the  reality  of   the
       relationship. The judge's recital of the evidence suggests that:

       (i)    The appellant's  actual  work  was  no  different  from  that
             undertaken  by  the  full-time  staff  of  the  restaurants  in
             question.


         ii) The appellant worked for the same three businesses and  at  the
             relevant time only worked for those businesses.


        iii) The appellant worked set days established regularly in  advance
             for the businesses. There  appeared  to  be  mutuality  of  the
             obligation to provide him with work and for him to  perform  it
             on those days during the duration of the relationship.

         iv) The appellant worked to the instructions of the business owners
             about what to prepare and where and when to prepare it.


   26.  In our judgement the factors  set  out  at  [25]  point  towards  a
       relationship  of  part-time  employment,  whatever   the   appellant
       intended the relationship to be.   We  observe  that  there  was  no
       evidence of advertising the  appellant's  services  to  the  general
       public or other businesses or  of  discharging  obligations  to  any
       business regularly worked for by providing  substitute  labour  with
       the appropriate skills.


   27. We accept that the appellant provided his own  clothes,  had  public
       liability insurance, received cash sums by way of gross remuneration
       on which he paid tax himself as a self-employed person and  that  he
       had skills as a chef of Mexican food.  We were also informed that he
       did not receive holiday pay.  Those are factors that point  to  some
       degree away from a  contract  of  service.  However,  they  are  not
       unusual features of modest part  time  employment  of  very  minimal
       hours with each employer and the tax status is not conclusive of the
       reality. In the circumstances they are not strong  pointers  to  the
       reality of the relationship.


   28.  The central submission for the appellant in this appeal  is  ground
       (viii) at [21] above. Relationship of subordination  is  taken  from
       the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Justice  in  Case  C-268/99   Van
       Roosmalen  [1986] ECR 3097; [1988] CMLR 471 and  Case  C-268/99 Jany
       [2001] ECR 1-8615.  The  grounds  assert  that  there  was  no  such
       relationship  in the present case, but  it  was  precisely  for  the
       judge to make an assessment of fact as to whether  the  relationship
       the appellant had with each business was one of  'subordination'  or
       'control'.  In our judgement, reading his decision fairly and  as  a
       whole, he found that they were. That was a conclusion that the judge
       was entitled to  reach  on  the  evidence  before  him.  It  is  the
       conclusion we would have drawn ourselves on the same material.

   29. There was therefore no error of law in the making of  this  decision
       and certainly no material error that would have led us  to  exercise
       the statutory discretion to re-make this appeal.   So  far  as  this
       appeal relates to the decision to curtail  leave  is  concerned,  we
       dismiss it.

   30.  However, we pointed out at  the  hearing  that  there  was  also  a
       decision to remove the appellant taken  at  the  same  time  as  the
       decision to curtail. Such simultaneous decision-making  appeared  to
       be inconsistent with the decision of the Tribunal  in  Adamally  and
       Jaferi (section 47 removal decisions:  Tribunal  Procedures)  [2012]
       UKUT 00414 (IAC) following and explaining the  earlier  decision  in
       Ahmadi (s. 47 decision: validity; Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 147 (IAC).

   31. Mr.  Blum asked permission to amend his  grounds  so  as  to  appeal
       against the removal decision. This was not opposed by Mr Hayes,  and
       nor did he oppose our allowing the appeal against this decision.


    Conclusions

   32. The appeal against the curtailment decision is dismissed.


   33.  Permission to appeal against the removal decision is  granted.  The
       appeal against this decision is allowed.

   34.  It is open to the Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  fresh  removal
       decision. If the appellant has any further information to  bring  to
       her attention as to the way he presently  operates  as  a  chef,  he
       should supply it promptly.






                                   The Hon Mr Justice Blake
                                        Chamber President


                                   25 February 2013





