
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

WA (Role and duties of judge) Egypt [2020] UKUT 00127 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decisions & Reasons sent out  |                              |
|                                              |on                            |                              |
|On 29 January 2020                            |                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|                              |
|                                              |.........                     |                              |


                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                    MR C. M. G. OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                  the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     WA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dixon, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors (Harrow)


   1. During the taking of evidence a judge's role is merely supervisory.

   2.   If something happens during a hearing that disrupts the normal
      course of taking evidence it is essential that the judge records what
      happened and why; who said what; and what decision the judge made and
      on what basis.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The respondent,  whom  we
    shall call "the claimant", is a national of Egypt who appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the refusal of his protection claim.   That
    claim was based on his assertion that, if returned to Egypt,  he  would
    be at risk as being, or being perceived  to  be,  a  supporter  of  the
    Muslim Brotherhood.  It has at all relevant stages been recognised that
    the claim stands or  falls  with  the  credibility  of  the  claimant's
    account of his past activities in Egypt.


 2. Substantial documentation was prepared for the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal, including the papers submitted to the Secretary of State
    and a record of the claimant's interview, other documents  relating  to
    his family members, supporting evidence from individuals who know  him,
    and country material, including a report by Dr Alan George.  The appeal
    was listed for hearing before Judge P J M Hollingworth  on  24  January
    2019.  The claimant was called, and began to give his evidence.  He was
    cross-examined by Mr Hogg, a Presenting Officer.  There was a series of
    questions about ill-treatment he had described in  his  oral  evidence,
    but which, Mr Hogg put to him, he had not previously detailed.  Mr Hogg
    then went on to ask the claimant questions about  his  connection  with
    the Muslim Brotherhood and the Freedom and Justice Party.  The claimant
    indicated that he had advocated civil disobedience, but was not in  any
    way linked to any political party.  He had  had  one  or  two  thousand
    leaflets printed.


 3. At  this  point  in  the  claimant's  cross-examination  there  was  an
    interruption.  The judge records in his decision as follows:


         "13.  At this point there was an  application  for  adjournment  by
         Learned Counsel to take a further statement for the  Appellant  and
         seek further evidence in relation to the issue of  the  Appellant's
         support for the opposition to the government  in  Egypt.   Mr  Hogg
         objected to this.  I made the following decision.  The scope of the
         case  had  significantly  altered  during   cross-examination   and
         unfairness arose to the Appellant in relation to the scope  of  the
         case as presented to the Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the  witness
         statement submitted.  The adjournment was granted to rectify this."


 4. Mr Dixon indicated to us that, save  possibly  in  some  wholly  formal
    sense, it was not right to say that he had asked  for  an  adjournment.
    The initiative had come from the judge.  Whether or not that is  right,
    the matters leading up to  it  are  wholly  unclear.   The  grounds  of
    appeal, drafted by a Presenting Officer  who  was  not  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing, assert that the claimant had claimed both to be
    a member and not to be a member of the Freedom of Justice Party and the
    Muslim Brotherhood.  It is far from clear to us that any claim to  have
    been a member of either of those bodies appears in the  claimant's  own
    account.  Given, however, his claimed association with both parties, we
    cannot see that there could have been any objection to Mr Hogg's asking
    him for clarification.  Unfortunately,  the  judge  did  not  take  the
    opportunity to set out either what the issue was  or  his  reasons  for
    resolving it in the way he did.


 5. The principal ground of appeal by the Secretary of State  is  that  the
    resulting decision, allowing the appeal,  after  a  series  of  further
    events which we shall set out in due course, was  unfair.   The  judge,
    without any  apparent  reason  for  doing  so,  gave  the  claimant  an
    opportunity to improve his case at a point where questions  and  cross-
    examination were getting difficult.  The claimant's response,  made  by
    Mr Dixon in writing and orally, is that the judge considered  that  the
    questions about the claimant's activity appeared to extend beyond  what
    was in his witness statement.  We do not think that that  is  right  or
    that it would give any good reason for granting the adjournment.


 6. During the course of taking evidence, a judge's role has to  be  merely
    supervisory.   In dealing with representatives, and in assessing  their
    submissions, the judge is entitled to take a  role  as  interventionist
    and active as he considers appropriate.  But while  evidence  is  being
    taken, he should limit himself to making  sure  that  the  evidence  is
    given as well as may be.  He should be alert to the witness's  welfare;
    he should check that there are no obvious problems with interpretation.
     He will ensure that there are no undue interventions  from  the  other
    side, reminding representatives, if necessary, that they will  have  an
    opportunity in due course to ask their questions.  When both sides have
    finished their examination, he may ask questions of his own by  way  of
    clarification; if he does, he should give both sides an opportunity  to
    ask any  further  questions  arising  from  his.    If  there  are  any
    questions which are manifestly unfair, he might simply direct that they
    be not asked, or if already asked, not answered.  It is  not,  however,
    easy to see how a relevant question about the claimant's own  life  and
    activities could be unfair.  If a new issue is raised and is thought to
    be of importance, it may possibly be necessary to  supplement  evidence
    by some means: but that in itself would not be a reason for  adjourning
    during the course of taking evidence.


 7. If something exceptional happens during a hearing, causing a disruption
    of the normal course of  events,  such  as  the  continuous  taking  of
    evidence, it is essential that the judge  should  record  exactly  what
    happened and why; who said what, and what decision the judge  made  and
    on what basis.  In that way any subsequent  challenge  to  the  judge's
    action on the grounds of fairness or appropriateness  can  be  properly
    dealt with.


 8. In this case we have no basis for saying that the judge acted  properly
    in taking the extraordinary step  of  granting,  possibly  of  his  own
    motion, an adjournment to allow the claimant to supplement his evidence
    during the course of a cross-examination challenging  his  credibility.
    Without an explanation or justification, his action has to be  seen  as
    an error of law in breaching procedural  expectations  and  inducing  a
    sense of unfairness.   To that  extent,  it  appears  to  us  that  his
    decision was affected by error of law.


 9. It is not at all clear what, if that error stood alone,  would  be  the
    appropriate remedy.  It is not now said that there were  other  matters
    which the Secretary of State would have wanted to put to the  claimant,
    but that an opportunity did not arise.  The damage, if it were  damage,
    had already been done by the granting of the adjournment, enabling  the
    claimant to put together what further material he chose, and cannot  be
    remedied.  It may, however be, that we should  have  decided  that,  in
    order to erase any sense of unfairness, the matter should be reheard.


10. As it happens, however, the error which we  have  identified  does  not
    stand alone.


11. The case resumed before the judge on 23 May 2019.  The claimant adopted
    a new witness statement, made on 15 April 2019, and Mr Hogg resumed his
    cross-examination.  The claimant was re-examined.  His wife was  called
    to give oral evidence and was cross-examined.   Submissions  were  then
    made.  At this point the judge's decision  throws  some  (very  little)
    light on what happened earlier. Mr Hogg is noted as  having  begun  his
    cross-examination by reference to a new witness statement from Dr  Maha
    Azzam, describing himself as Head of the Egyptian Revolutionary Council
    and noting that the claimant "was part of the setting up of the Freedom
    of Justice Party" and "was actively  involved  in  canvassing  for  the
    party".   Further  detail  in  the  judge's  description  of  the   re-
    examination of the claimant and the evidence of his wife suggests  that
    one of the questions was whether he was accurately described as one  of
    the founders of the Freedom of Justice Party.  If that  was  the  issue
    which the judge considered  so  important  that  it  was  necessary  to
    interrupt the claimant's evidence in order to obtain further  material,
    it is surprising that the judge appears to reach no conclusion  on  the
    evidence now before him on that issue.


12. What is much more to the point is that it is very difficult  indeed  to
    see what were the judge's conclusions and on  what  evidence  he  based
    those  conclusions.   Paragraphs  14-17  are,  for  the  most  part,  a
    narrative of the evidence given on 23 May 2019,  in  continuous  prose.
    There is no attempt anywhere in the decision to assemble evidence under
    a subject matter.  Instead, each question and answer is set out  simply
    as it was given.  A comparison with the judge's note seems to show that
    this part of the decision is simply a transcript of the notes the judge
    took during the hearing.


13. It appears that the reasons  for  the  judge's  decision  allowing  the
    appeal are to be derived largely from paragraphs 20 to 22.  Those three
    paragraphs extend over pages 10-17  of  the  decision.   Paragraph  20,
    which begins "In the refusal letter the Respondent  has  accepted  that
    the Appellant is a national  of  Egypt",  is  nearly  two  pages  long.
    Paragraph 21, which begins "The Appellant described the work  which  he
    did", is over a page long.  Paragraph 22, which begins "The  Respondent
    has set out an analysis of the Appellant's claims in  relation  to  his
    arrest and that which took place in Egypt" extends over more than  four
    pages, some 4,200 words in all,  with  no  structure.   Each  of  these
    paragraphs consists of a mix of references to  part  of  the  evidence,
    parts of the submissions, parts of the respondent's letter of  refusal,
    comments by the judge and, from time to time,  sentences  beginning  "I
    find".  Undoubtedly the end result is that  the  judge  concludes  that
    every point raised by the respondent as a  matter  of  credibility  has
    been sufficiently explained by the claimant.  What is difficult  is  to
    understand the extent to which, and the  reasons  why,  the  judge  has
    concluded that the explanations are satisfactory.  It would, we  think,
    be possible to draw support for  that  proposition  from  a  number  of
    places in the decision.  For simplicity, we will cite only the  closing
    passage of paragraph 22:


         "22. ... The Respondent applied Tanveer Ahmed in  relation  to  the
         documentation produced by the Appellant.  The Respondent considered
         the application of Section 8.  The Appellant arrived in the  UK  on
         26th July 2016.  Although, the Respondent continued, the  Appellant
         claimed he was  travelling  with  the  intention  of  escaping  his
         problems in Egypt and was in fear when he arrived  because  of  his
         problems there he did not claim asylum on arrival  because  he  did
         not know about asylum then.  The Respondent noted the Appellant had
         family in the UK i.e.  his  wife's  two  brothers  who  had  become
         naturalised British citizens and therefore had knowledge of the  UK
         immigration system.  The respondent  considered  it  reasonable  to
         expect the Appellant to have asked them for help  and  information.
         I find some  limited  damage  has  been  done  to  the  Appellant's
         credibility by his failure to claim asylum on arrival.  I take into
         account  the  Appellant's  explanations  in  this   context.    The
         Appellant has explained that when they came to the UK in July  2016
         his wife's brother advised them that they could not return to Egypt
         because it was not safe.  He told the Appellant that  he  would  be
         moving to Ireland for work and took them  with  him.   After  three
         months they came back to the UK because his work was not doing well
         and they went to see a solicitor in  London  who  advised  them  to
         apply under the EEA Regulation but  the  application  was  refused.
         The sister then told the Appellant he should leave the country  but
         the Appellant explained what had happened in Egypt  which  is  when
         the Appellant was advised to claim asylum."


14. The first  assertion  made  there  is  in  relation  to  Tanveer  Ahmed
    (documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 439.  That is
    the only reference to that case in the judge's decision.  It is notable
    that the judge  does  not  express  any  view  of  his  own  about  the
    application of Tanveer Ahmed to the documents in the case.   The  judge
    goes on to consider s.  8.   He  records  the  respondent's  view.   He
    records the explanations.  He does not indicate whether the accepts the
    explanations.  He says that "some limited damage has been done  to  the
    Appellant's credibility", but gives neither  here  nor  elsewhere,  any
    indication of the extent of that damage.  Indeed, elsewhere, he appears
    to indicate that the claimant's testimony is wholly credible.


15. Only after the narration of the  judge's  stream  of  consciousness  in
    paragraphs 20 to 22 does the judge record any thoughts about the report
    from Dr George.  The report had been the subject of  submissions  which
    the judge had recorded.  The report is evidently of importance  in  the
    context of this appeal.  A particular passage in it, to which  Mr  Hogg
    referred, is as follows:


         "113. Should the Tribunal determine that [the claimant's] testimony
         is credible, in my opinion he would be at grave risk in Egypt.


         114. I must express surprise, however, that [the claimant] was able
         to evade the  authorities  for  so  long  after  his  release  from
         detention in February 2015.  He testifies that he was  released  on
         condition that he report to the authorities with information  about
         the Muslim Brotherhood.  He failed  so  to  report,  and  relocated
         within Cairo.  In my view it is likely that the police  would  have
         responded to his defiance of their reporting instructions and would
         have been able to trace him to his new address.   I  note  in  this
         regard that in the period February 2015 - May 2016 he made separate
         trips to the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia,  travelling  on
         his own passport through Cairo  airport  without  encountering  any
         difficulties from the authorities (as  the  Home  Office  notes  at
         Paragraph 55 of its Asylum Decision Letter); and that  he  flew  to
         the UK without difficulty in July 2016 using his own  passport  and
         passing  through  Cairo  airport  (as  the  Home  Office  notes  at
         Paragraphs 59-60 of Asylum Decision Letter).  I note also  that  in
         February 2016 he was issued a new Egyptian passport without  facing
         any problems (as the Home Office  notes  at  Paragraph  56  of  its
         Asylum Decision Letter).  It is very likely that when applying  for
         this document he would have had to provide the authorities with his
         address.


         115. I would add  that  corruption  is  widespread  amongst  public
         officials in Egypt (see my Paragraph 101).  As a result,  it  would
         be plausible that a person wanted by  the  authorities  could  pass
         through an airport unhindered; and [the claimant] claims that  this
         explains why he was able to leave Egypt and  return  without  being
         stopped and detained.  He states that when he left Egypt for the UK
         he was assisted through Cairo airport by  the  police  general  ...
         who had also engineered his release  from  detention  in  2016  and
         whose son [the claimant] had assisted (Question 63  of  the  Asylum
         Interview Record).  Against the same background of  corruption,  it
         is not implausible - but it is surprising, in  my  opinion  -  that
         [the claimant] would have been  able  to  leave  Egypt  and  return
         unhindered twice in the 2015-2016 period, before coming to the  UK.
         To the best of my understanding, he has not explained this.


         116.  [The  claimant]  claims  that  in  January  2018  the  police
         formally summoned him to appear at a police station.  I agree  with
         the Home Office (Paragraph 61 of the Asylum Decision Letter),  that
         it is unclear why the police would have delayed for so long  before
         issuing such a summons."


16. As the judge noted, Dr George had reminded himself that the credibility
    of the claimant was a matter for the judge.  But, as the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal assert, other than because it is a matter for
    him, it is not at all easy to see how the judge deals with the  caveats
    expressed by Dr George.  In particular, there appears to be  no  proper
    assessment of the claimant's claim to be at risk if returned  now,  and
    his experiences both in Egypt and in travelling to and  from  Egypt  in
    the past.  We agree with the Secretary of State that this was a central
    matter in relation to the claimant's claimed fear of  ill-treatment  on
    return.  It needed a clear, reasoned response from the judge.   It  did
    not have one.   It  is  true  that,  somewhere  about  halfway  through
    paragraph 22, the judge refers to the  claimant's  movements  and  says
    that "I find the Respondent has overlooked the potential value  to  the
    authorities of acquiring information from the Appellant... in terms  of
    links between the Muslim Brotherhood and the countries visited  by  the
    Appellant", but that appears to be simply speculation by the judge:  it
    is a matter that had apparently not occurred to Dr George, and was  not
    advanced by Mr Dixon.


17. The final passage of the judge's decision is as follows:


         "24. ... I allow the appeal on the basis of accepting the  evidence
         of the Appellant and that of Dr George.  I have set out my reasons.
          I allow the appeal on a further and separate basis.  I accept  the
         evidence of the Appellant's wife in addition.  I allow  the  appeal
         on that basis.  I allow the appeal on a further and separate  basis
         to this.  In addition I accept the medical evidence which has  been
         provided.  I find the medical evidence corroborates the account  of
         the Appellant.  I allow the appeal on this third footing."


18. It is very difficult indeed to know what this means.  We  have  already
    noted that the judge appears to look at the evidence of Dr George after
    reaching a conclusion on the claimant's own evidence and the individual
    evidence supporting it.  We would  normally  be  slow  to  derive  such
    conclusions simply because of the order in which matters appear in  the
    decision: but this decision does simply appear to be a narrative of the
    judge's thought processes and so the criticism may be valid.  But there
    can be no conceivable basis  for  allowing  an  asylum  appeal  by  the
    claimant solely on the basis of his wife's evidence (thus,  presumably,
    even if his own evidence was a complete fabrication), or solely on  the
    medical evidence, which related to orthopaedic problems with  his  neck
    and back, and mental health problems which can be fairly summarised  as
    depression.  What, instead,  these  final  sentences  of  the  decision
    indicate is that the judge specifically did not consider  the  evidence
    as a whole in assessing  whether  the  claimant  was  credible  in  his
    account of the reasons for his fear of persecution on return to  Egypt.




19. We are sorry to say that as well as the  error  of  law  in  procedure,
    which we identified earlier  in  this  decision,  the  judge  erred  by
    failing to produce a decision which gave intelligible  and  sustainable
    reasons, based on the evidence as a whole, for his conclusions.


20. Before us, the representatives of both parties agreed that, if we found
    error of law in the decision, it ought to be set aside and remitted for
    a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  We agree.


21. The judge's decision involved errors of law.   We  set  it  aside.   We
    direct that the appeal be  heard  entirely  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the claimant is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the claimant and to the Secretary of State.  Failure to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


















                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 03 March 2020
