
YF (pre-commencement remittal - basis  of  reconsideration)  Eritrea  [2005]
UKAIT 00126





                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Bradford
On 15 June 2005
Determination promulgated: 6th September 2005

                                   Before:

                 Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)
                     Mr F Appleyard (Immigration Judge)

Between

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

           SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Guidance as to correct approach to findings of fact made previously when  an
appeal has been remitted to an adjudicator for  a  fresh  hearing  before  4
April 2005, but the rehearing has not taken place by that date


Representation:





For the appellant:     Mr A Rhys-Davies  of  counsel,  instructed  by  White
                       Ryland, solicitors


For the respondent:    Ms J Donnelly, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The respondent has appealed with permission against the  determination
    of an adjudicator (now an Immigration Judge), Miss D M Lambert, sitting
    in Bradford, in which she dismissed the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  a
    citizen of Eritrea, against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    leave to enter the United Kingdom after  refusing  an  application  for
    asylum made by him, but allowed his appeal  against  that  decision  on
    human rights grounds only.  By virtue of article 5(1)(a) of the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 (Commencement No
    5 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2005, the appeal now takes  effect
    as a reconsideration pursuant to an order under article  5(2)  of  that
    Order.

    Background

2.    The appellant arrived in United  Kingdom  on  3  September  2002.   He
    applied for asylum on arrival.  The grounds on which he did so  may  be
    stated shortly.  He said that although he had been born  in  Ethiopian,
    he was of Eritrean ethnicity.  He had been deported  by  the  Ethiopian
    authorities to Eritrea when he was 20 years  old.   He  had  then  been
    recognised by the Eritrean authorities  as  an  Eritrean  citizen.   He
    worked as a military driver in Eritrea between October  1998  and  June
    2000.

3.    However, in June 2000, he was injured badly when the Army lorry  which
    he was driving was hit by artillery fire.  He was in hospital for three
    months receiving treatment for an eye injury.  He then received further
    treatment as an outpatient for another three months.  He  was  required
    to return to military service in December 2000, but refused to do so.

4.    As a consequence of that refusal, he  was  detained  by  the  military
    authorities in January 2001, and was held in detention  at  a  camp  in
    Sawa until August 2002.  He  was  ill-treated  during  that  detention.
    However, in August 2002, he managed to  escape  from  military  custody
    with one of the other detainees.  They travelled together to Sudan.  He
    managed to make contact with one of his cousins in the  United  States.
    His cousin provided the funds which were used to pay an agent to  bring
    the appellant to the United  Kingdom  via  Zimbabwe.   He  applied  for
    asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom.

5.    The respondent rejected the appellant's account.  On 6 November  2002,
    the appellant was notified of the respondent's decision to  refuse  his
    asylum application, and five days later, the appellant was given notice
    of the respondent's decision to refuse him leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.

6.    The appellant exercised his right to appeal to an  adjudicator.   This
    is the appeal which came before Miss Lambert on 15  October  2003.   In
    her determination, which  was  promulgated  on  30  October  2003,  she
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.  However,  she  allowed  it  on
    human rights grounds only.

7.    The respondent then applied to the former Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
    for permission to appeal against the adjudicator's determination.  That
    application was determined by a Vice President (Mr G Warr) on 29  March
    2004.  He granted permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "The appeal appears to be in time being received on  the  last  day
         (17 November 2003) according to the Faxed  date.   The  grounds  of
         appeal appear to raise arguable issues.


         This application for permission to appeal is granted."

8.    The respondent's appeal was heard by the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    on 17 February 2005.  By its determination, which was  notified  on  25
    February 2005, the Tribunal allowed the appeal to the  extent  that  it
    was remitted for a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than  Miss
    Lambert.  This is the appeal which  is  now  before  us,  albeit  as  a
    reconsideration, rather than an appeal.

    Application to serve reply

9.    At the start of the hearing, Mr  Rhys-Davies,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, applied for permission to serve a reply under rule 30(1)  of
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  so  as  to
    enable the appellant to challenge the adjudicator's decision to dismiss
    his appeal on asylum grounds.  We drew his attention to the  provisions
    of rule 30(2) which read as follows:

         "The other party to the appeal [i.e. the appellant in  the  present
         instance] must file and serve a reply not later than 5 days  before
         the earliest date appointed for any hearing of or  in  relation  to
         the reconsideration of the appeal."

10.   Mr Rhys-Davies acknowledged that the appellant was  unable  to  comply
    with that time-limit.  He also confirmed that there was no provision in
    the Procedure Rules to which he could direct us which would  enable  us
    to extend the appellant's time for a filing and  serving  his  proposed
    reply.  In the circumstances, he conceded that it was no longer open to
    the appellant to challenge the adjudicator's decision  in  relation  to
    his asylum appeal.  He was right to do so.  The reconsideration  before
    us is therefore confined to the issue of the adjudicator's decision  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds only.

    Basis of reconsideration

11.   Both representatives invited us to make a ruling as to  the  basis  on
    which the reconsideration would take place.  Ms Donnelly, who  appeared
    for the respondent, submitted that the adjudicator's findings  of  fact
    should stand, and that the reconsideration should be conducted  on  the
    basis of those findings.  Mr Rhys-Davies submitted  that  the  contrary
    should apply, and that it would be incumbent upon us to arrive at fresh
    findings of fact on the basis of the evidence to be adduced before us.

12.   The adjudicator's findings of fact are set out at  paragraphs  9.1  to
    9.5  (inclusive)  of  her  determination.   For  present  purposes,  it
    suffices to set out the findings which appear at paragraph 9.5  in  the
    following terms:

         "My findings above lead me to reject as  credible  the  appellant's
         account of his detention, ill-treatment in  and  escape  from  Sawa
         camp and the means by which he arranged to  travel  to  the  United
         Kingdom."

    In essence,  the  adjudicator  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to the core elements of his account.



      Respondent's submissions

13.   We heard  submissions  first  from  Ms  Donnelly  in  support  of  her
    submission that those adverse credibility findings should  stand.   She
    stated that she was relying principally on the  reported  determination
    (now no longer reported) of this Tribunal in SA (old-style remittal  --
    reconsideration -- approach) Burundi [2005] UKIAT 00102,  which  relied
    in turn on the judgment of Sir Michael Harrison  sitting  in  the  High
    Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division, Administrative Court, in R  v
    Immigration Appeal  Tribunal,  ex  parte  Ghanbarpar  [2005]  EWHC  123
    (Admin).  She argued that ex parte Ghanbarpar  was  authority  for  the
    proposition set out at paragraph 29 of that judgment in  the  following
    terms:

         "I have already mentioned the passage in Symes and Jorro on  Asylum
         Law and Practice, to which I was referred, to the effect  that  the
         benefit of positive findings on credibility  is  not  something  of
         which an asylum seeker should be lightly deprived.  Whilst the case
         quoted in the footnote to that passage does not appear to be direct
         authority for the proposition, it  is  nevertheless  a  proposition
         with which I agree.  In this case the  claimant  is  not,  strictly
         speaking, being  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  the  adjudicator's
         positive credibility findings, but the benefit  of  those  positive
         credibility findings is being put at risk and that, in my view,  is
         not something that should be done lightly,  especially  bearing  in
         mind that the adjudicator heard and saw the  claimant  giving  oral
         evidence and being cross-examined."

14.   Ms Donnelly submitted that it was a  question  of  fairness  that  the
    principle referred to by Sir Michael Harrison should cut both ways.  He
    had held that an appellant  should  not  lightly  be  deprived  of  the
    benefit of positive credibility findings reached by an adjudicator  who
    had heard him give oral  evidence.   In  like  manner,  the  respondent
    should not lightly be deprived of the benefit  of  adverse  credibility
    findings reached by an adjudicator who had heard oral evidence.

15.   She referred us to paragraphs 7 and 8  of  the  determination  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal  remitting  the  appeal  in  the  following
    terms:

         "7.           We are satisfied that there are errors of law in  the
         determination.  In particular the adjudicator assessed the risk  on
         return incorrectly.  She should have asked  herself  whether  there
         was a reasonable likelihood or real risk that the  appellant  would
         be subjected to article 3 ill-treatment on return rather  than  the
         test she used in paragraph 9.8.


         8.       Accordingly we allow  the  appeal  to  the  extent  it  be
         remitted for a fresh hearing before an adjudicator other than  Miss
         D M Lambert."

16.   She argued that it was clear from the  Tribunal's  determination  that
    the problems with the adjudicator's determination did not relate to her
    findings of fact.  They related  to  her  assessment  of  the  risk  on
    return.  Her findings of fact should therefore be adopted as the  basis
    of our reconsideration.  We did not find it necessary to invite Mr Rhys-
    Davies to respond on behalf of the appellant.


      Conclusions

17.   In arriving at our conclusions on this issue, we have  not  found  the
    determination in SA of any real assistance.  The Tribunal  was  dealing
    in that case with a different situation from the one  which  is  before
    us.  This is clear from a number of the passages which  appear  in  the
    determination.  In particular, at paragraph 5, the Tribunal stated:

         "However, in exercising this jurisdiction that, I have to  bear  in
         mind the terms in which Vice President Mr Lane  granted  permission
         to appeal and then remitted the case.   Despite  ordering  a  fresh
         hearing, he plainly indicated that this should focus  on  just  one
         issue,  namely,  whether  in  view  of   her   generally   positive
         credibility findings, the Adjudicator had given legally sustainable
         reasons for not accepting the arrest warrants."

18.   At paragraph 6, the Tribunal stated inter alia:

         "With this in mind I sought the views of  the  parties  as  to  the
         basis on which the fresh hearing should proceed.  Both agreed  with
         me that it was appropriate in this case to  confine  the  issue  to
         that concerning the arrest warrant."

    At paragraph 7, the Tribunal stated inter alia:

         "The Tribunal who remitted this  case  clearly  intended  that  the
         issue should be confined."

    Finally, the Tribunal recorded at paragraph 10 inter alia:

         "Since it is agreed between the parties that we should  proceed  on
         the basis of Mrs Bird's positive credibility findings, it is useful
         to remind ourselves what these amounted to  and  in  what  way  she
         qualified them."

19.    There  was  no  such   agreement   between   the   parties   to   the
    reconsideration now before us.  In addition, we can see no  indication,
    either in the terms in which the Vice President granted  permission  to
    appeal or in the determination remitting the appeal for a fresh hearing
    that it  was  intended,  either  by  the  Vice  President  who  granted
    permission or by the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  when  remitting  the
    appeal, that the reconsideration now before us should be confined to  a
    particular issue or issues, or that it should be conducted on the basis
    of the findings of fact made by the adjudicator.

20.   Turning now to the judgment in ex parte Ghanbarpar, it is  clear  from
    paragraph 1 that it was a judgment made on an application for  judicial
    review to quash the determination of the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    remitting the appeal for a new hearing.  As such, the judgment  is  not
    one which is strictly binding on us.  Although the judge  endorsed  the
    proposition referred to at paragraph  29  of  his  judgment  that  "the
    benefit of positive findings on credibility is not something  of  which
    an asylum seeker should be lightly deprived", it is to be noted that he
    was not purporting  to  lay  down  any  binding  principle  of  general
    application.  In particular, he was not  seeking  to  assert  that  the
    contrary proposition should also apply, namely that  the  Secretary  of
    State should  not  lightly  be  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  adverse
    credibility findings made by an adjudicator or  immigration  judge  who
    has heard oral evidence.

21.    In  principle,  we  can  see  no  logical  reason  why  the  converse
    proposition should not apply  equally.   Fairness  requires  that  both
    parties should be faced with a level playing field.   If  an  appellant
    whose evidence has been believed by an adjudicator or immigration judge
    is not lightly to be deprived of the benefit of  positive  findings  of
    fact, we see no reason why the respondent should be deprived  any  more
    readily of the benefit of a finding rejecting an  appellant's  evidence
    in similar circumstances.  However,  in  the  absence  of  any  binding
    authority on the point, it is necessary for us to  arrive  at  our  own
    conclusion on this issue.

      Statutory provisions

22.   Our starting point for so doing  is  the  statutory  provisions  which
    appear in section 103A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.  However, they are of little  assistance  in  deciding
    the issue which is before us.  For present purposes, it will suffice to
    set out section 103A(1), which reads as follows:

         "A party to an appeal under section 82  or  83  may  apply  to  the
         appropriate court, on the grounds that the Tribunal made  an  error
         of law, for an order  requiring  the  Tribunal  to  reconsider  its
         decision on the appeal."

      Those provisions give no guidance as to the  basis  on  which  such  a
    reconsideration, if ordered, should then take place.

      Procedure Rules

23.   The  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  are
    likewise of limited assistance.  The only provisions which are arguably
    of any relevance are those which  appear  in  rules  27(2),  31(4)  and
    45(4)(f)(iv) in the following terms:

         "27(2)    Where  an  immigration   judge   makes   an   order   for
         reconsideration --
                  (a) his notice of decision must state the grounds on which
                  the Tribunal is ordered to reconsider its decision on  the
                  appeal; and
                  (b) he may give directions for the reconsideration of  the
                  decision on the appeal which may --
                       (i) provide for any of the matters set out  in  rule
                      45(4)  which  he  considers   appropriate   to   such
                      reconsideration; and
                       (ii) specify the number or class of members  of  the
                      Tribunal  to  whom  the  reconsideration   shall   be
                      allocated.


         31(4)    In carrying out the reconsideration, the Tribunal --
                  (a) may limit submissions  or  evidence  to  one  or  more
                  specified issues; and
                  (b) must have  regard  to  any  directions  given  by  the
                  immigration   judge   or   court   which    ordered    the
                  reconsideration.


         45(4)    Directions of the Tribunal may, in particular --
         ....
                  (f) limit -
                  ....
                       (iv) the issues which are  to  be  addressed  at  the
                  hearing..."

    Once again, those provisions are of limited  assistance  to  the  issue
    which is before us.


      Practice Directions

24.   Of more assistance are the Practice Directions made by  the  President
    of this Tribunal on 4 April 2005.  Those Directions were made  pursuant
    to the power conferred on him by  section  107  of  the  2002  Act  and
    paragraphs 7 of Schedule 4 to that Act.  At paragraph 13 is the section
    dealing with reviews.  The only  part  of  it  which  is  relevant  for
    present purposes is paragraph 13.9 which reads as follows:

         " The immigration judge who  has  decided  to  make  an  order  for
         reconsideration:


          a) must state the grounds on which the  Tribunal  is  ordered  to
             reconsider its decision (rule 27(2)(a));  and
          b) will (amongst other things) decide under rule 27(2)(b) whether
             to direct that a CMR [case management review] hearing be  held
             before the reconsideration hearing takes place and whether  to
             make a direction as to the  evidence  to  be  adduced  at  the
             hearing initially fixed for the reconsideration (as to  which,
             see paragraph 14)."

25.    Paragraph  14  deals  with  the  procedure  to  be  followed  on  the
    reconsideration.  It  is  necessary  to  set  out  the  whole  of  this
    paragraph as follows:

       "14.1      Subject to paragraph  14.12,  where  an  appeal  has  been
             ordered under section 103A  to be reconsidered,  then,  unless
             and to the  extent  that  they  are  directed  otherwise,  the
             parties to the appeal should assume  that  the  issues  to  be
             considered at the hearing fixed for the  reconsideration  will
             be whether the original Tribunal made a material error of  law
             (see rule 31(2)) and, if so, whether,  on  the  basis  of  the
             original Tribunal's findings of fact,  the  appeal  should  be
             allowed or dismissed.


       14.2 Where the Tribunal decides that the  original  Tribunal  made  a
             material error of law but that  the  Tribunal  cannot  proceed
             under rule 31(3) to substitute a fresh decision  to  allow  or
             dismiss the appeal because findings of fact are  needed  which
             the Tribunal is not in a position to make, the  Tribunal  will
             make arrangements for the adjournment of the  hearing  or  for
             the transfer of the proceedings under paragraph 12.3 so as  to
             enable evidence to be adduced for that purpose.


       14.3 Where the Tribunal acting  under  paragraph  14.2  adjourns  the
             hearing,  its  determination,  produced  after  the  adjourned
             hearing has taken place, will contain the  Tribunal's  reasons
             for finding that the original Tribunal made a  material  error
             of law.


       14.4 Where the Tribunal acting under  paragraph  14.2  transfers  the
             proceedings, it shall prepare written reasons for its  finding
             that the original Tribunal made a material error  of  law  and
             those written reasons shall be attached to, and form part  of,
             the determination of the Tribunal which  substitutes  a  fresh
             decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.


       14.5 The references  in  paragraph  14.1  to  14.4  to  the  original
             Tribunal include references to  an  adjudicator  in  any  case
             where, by virtue of article 6 of the Commencement  Order,  the
             order under section 103A is made in respect of the decision of
             an adjudicator.


       14.6 Under article 5 of the Commencement Order, any appeal  that  was
             pending before the IAT immediately before 4 April  2005  shall
             on and after that date be dealt with in the same manner as  if
             the  Tribunal  had  originally  decided  the  appeal  and  was
             reconsidering its decision.

       14.7 Rule 62(7) provides that, in the case of an appeal described  in
             paragraph 14.6, the reconsideration shall be  limited  to  the
             grounds upon which the IAT granted permission to  appeal.   In
             most cases, those grounds will require the Tribunal to  decide
             whether the adjudicator made a material error of law.

       14.8 Subject to paragraph 14.12, on and after 4 April  2005,  and  in
             the absence of any direction to the contrary, the  parties  to
             any appeal that  falls  to  be  dealt  with  as  described  in
             paragraph 14.6 should assume that the issues to be  considered
             at the hearing will be whether the adjudicator made a material
             error of law and,  if  so,  whether,  on  the  basis  of  that
             adjudicator's findings of fact, the appeal should  be  allowed
             or dismissed.

       14.9 Where the Tribunal decides that the adjudicator made a  material
             error of law but that the Tribunal cannot proceed  under  rule
             31(3) to substitute a fresh decision to allow or  dismiss  the
             appeal because findings of fact are needed which the  Tribunal
             is  not  in  a  position  to  make,  the  Tribunal  will  make
             arrangements for the adjournment of the  hearing  or  for  the
             transfer of the proceedings under  paragraph  12.3  so  as  to
             enable evidence to be adduced for that purpose.

       14.10      The provisions of paragraph 14.3 and 14.4 shall  apply  in
             relation to paragraph  14.9  as  they  apply  in  relation  to
             paragraph 14.2 but with the modification that  the  references
             to the original Tribunal shall be interpreted as referring  to
             the adjudicator.

       14.11      Where, immediately before 4  April  2005,  an  appeal  was
             pending before an adjudicator,  having  been  remitted  to  an
             adjudicator by a court or the IAT, it will already  have  been
             decided that the original adjudicator's  determination  cannot
             stand.  The Tribunal will accordingly proceed to  re-hear  the
             appeal.

       14.12      In the case of a reconsideration of a fast  track  appeal,
             the Tribunal reconsidering the appeal is required by  rule  23
             of the Fast Track Rules to  reconsider  its  decision  on  the
             appeal  at  the  reconsideration  hearing,  subject   to   the
             qualifications described in rule 23(1) of  those  Rules.   The
             Tribunal's power to adjourn a fast track appeal  that  remains
             as such is governed by rule 28 of those Rules.

       14.13      The parties to  any  fast  track  appeal  which  is  being
             reconsidered by the Tribunal on or after 4 April 2005 will  be
             expected to attend with all necessary witnesses  and  evidence
             that may be required if the Tribunal should decide that it  is
             necessary to re-hear the appeal.  It will be unusual  for  the
             Tribunal to adjourn the reconsideration  hearing  but,  if  it
             does so, paragraph 14.4 will, so far as appropriate, apply.

       14.14      The preceding provisions of this paragraph  and  paragraph
             13 are subject to article 9 of the Commencement Order  in  the
             case  of  certain  "old"  appeals,  where  the  issue  is  not
             restricted to whether the adjudicator made an error of law."

26.   The reconsideration before us is one which falls within the  ambit  of
    paragraph 14.11.  As will be seen, that paragraph states  baldly,  "The
    Tribunal will accordingly proceed to re-hear the appeal."  It gives  no
    express indication as to the basis on which that should  be  done.   In
    particular, there is no indication as to whether the previous  findings
    of fact are to be taken into account, and (if so) to what extent and in
    what circumstances.

27.   However, paragraph 14.1 sets out the general  provision  which  is  to
    apply when a reconsideration had been ordered under section  103A.   It
    states in terms that "unless and to the extent that they  are  directed
    otherwise", the parties should assume that the reconsideration is to be
    conducted "on the basis of the original Tribunal's findings  of  fact".
    The default position is therefore that, unless otherwise directed,  the
    previous findings of fact are to stand.

28.   Paragraph 14.2 covers the position when the previous findings of  fact
    are not sufficient to enable the Tribunal to arrive at a fresh decision
    on reconsideration.  This would apply, for example, where  findings  of
    fact are material issues had not been  made  at  all,  or  where  those
    findings cannot be regarded as reliable.

29.   Paragraph 14.8 contains provisions dealing with the position  when  an
    outstanding appeal before the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  immediately
    prior to the commencement date on  which  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal came into existence (i.e. 4 April 2005) is  to  be  deemed  to
    constitute an order for reconsideration.  Once again, it is  stipulated
    in terms in this paragraph that "in the absence of any direction to the
    contrary", the parties are to assume that the reconsideration  will  be
    carried out "on the basis of the adjudicator's findings of fact".

30.   Paragraph 14.9 contains provisions similar to those in paragraph  14.2
    dealing with the position when fresh findings  of  fact  are  necessary
    because those reached previously are inadequate or  defective  for  one
    reason or another.

31.   However, paragraph 14.11 contains no provision  in  terms  similar  to
    those contained in paragraphs 14.1 and 14.8.  It merely stipulates that
    "The Tribunal will accordingly proceed to re-hear the  appeal."   There
    is no express indication in paragraph 14.11 as to the  basis  on  which
    that re-hearing is to take place.

32.   Paragraph 14.13 provides some assistance in this regard,  albeit  only
    of an indirect nature.  It deals with the position when  the  Tribunal,
    on reconsideration of a fast track appeal,  has  decided  that  "it  is
    necessary  to  re-hear  the  appeal."   It   states   that   in   those
    circumstances, the  parties  "will  be  expected  to  attend  with  all
    necessary  witnesses  and   evidence".    It   is   therefore   clearly
    contemplated that a "re-hearing" will normally entail  the  hearing  of
    witnesses and evidence.  In those  circumstances,  the  Tribunal  would
    clearly substitute its own findings of fact based  on  those  witnesses
    and that evidence.  There would plainly be no purpose to be  served  by
    hearing fresh evidence if the previous findings of fact were to stand.

33.   In light of the assistance to be derived  from  paragraph  14.13,  and
    applying the established principle of  construction  enshrined  in  the
    Latin tag, "Inclusio unius est  exclusio  alterius",  we  regarded  the
    omission of any reference in paragraph 14.11 along the  lines  "on  the
    basis of the original Tribunal's findings of  fact"  as  a  significant
    one.  The President has stipulated  in  terms  that,  unless  otherwise
    directed, that is  the  basis  on  which  reconsiderations  are  to  be
    conducted in the circumstances covered by paragraphs 14.1 and 14.8.  If
    he had intended that the same should apply in the circumstances covered
    by paragraph 14.11, he would have said so.  He did not.  The conclusion
    is therefore that that was not his intention.

34.    We  see  nothing  in  terms  in  which  the  Vice  President  granted
    permission to appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  or  in  which
    that Tribunal remitted the appeal for rehearing to indicate that it was
    the intention of either of them that the reconsideration now before  us
    should be carried out  on  the  basis  of  the  adjudicator's  original
    findings of fact.  We see no grounds for inferring any  such  intention
    on the part of either of  them.   Accordingly,  we  conclude  that  the
    reconsideration is to be carried  out  on  the  basis  referred  to  in
    paragraph 14.11, namely that we are to "proceed to re-hear the appeal",
    and arrive at our own findings of fact on the  basis  on  the  evidence
    adduced before us.  We therefore ruled against the respondent  on  this
    issue.

    Documentary evidence

35.   There is a substantial  amount  of  documentary  evidence  before  us,
    filed on behalf  of  both  parties.   For  reasons  which  will  become
    apparent, we do not find it necessary to itemise that evidence,  or  to
    refer to it in any further detail.

    Oral evidence

36.   The only evidence adduced before us was that given  by  the  appellant
    himself.  He gave his evidence in Tigrinya via an official interpreter.
     It was clear to us that the appellant and the  interpreter  understood
    each other without difficulty, and this was  confirmed  to  us  by  the
    appellant at the start of his evidence.

37.   The appellant's evidence in chief was relatively  brief.   He  adopted
    the evidence contained in his original undated statement (pages  A1  to
    A5 of the appeal bundle) made at the time of  his  asylum  application,
    the replies given by him during his asylum interview (pages B1 to  B19)
    and his recent witness statement dated 23 May 2005.   It  will  suffice
    for present purposes to record that the appellant's evidence  in  chief
    was substantially in the terms in which it is summarised in  paragraphs
    2 to 4 (inclusive) of this determination.

38.   The appellant was cross-examined at considerable length and  in  great
    detail by Ms Donnelly.  We mean no disrespect to her when we  say  that
    her cross-examination revealed the dangers inherent  in  adopting  what
    may perhaps fairly be described as the "Micawber  approach"  to  cross-
    examination, namely challenging a witness on each and every  aspect  of
    his evidence in the hope that, eventually, "something  will  turn  up".
    Whilst  Ms  Donnelly's  cross-examination   disclosed   certain   minor
    discrepancies in the appellant's account, e.g. that the  medical  notes
    adduced by him in evidence suggested that the injury  to  his  eye  had
    occurred during the middle of or at the end of  2001,  rather  than  in
    June 2000 as claimed by him, and that the place where he said that  his
    injury had occurred was rather further from the border between Ethiopia
    and Eritrea than might be expected, nevertheless the  longer  that  his
    cross-examination  continued   without   disclosing   any   significant
    discrepancies in his evidence, the more firmly we became persuaded that
    his evidence was in fact true.

39.   In arriving at our assessment as to the credibility  or  otherwise  of
    the appellant's account, we have  of  course  applied  the  appropriate
    burden and standard of proof applicable to appeals of this nature.  For
    the avoidance of doubt on the point, we now record formally the  burden
    and standard which we applied in so doing in the following terms.

    Burden and standard of proof

40.   As regards  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,  it  is  for  the
    appellant to show that  his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would
    constitute an infringement of his rights under the European  Convention
    on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms ("Human  Rights  Convention").
    Where the right is not absolute but is subject to exceptions, it is for
    the respondent to show that there is  a  justification  for  any  prima
    facie breach.  In relation to Article 3, it is  for  the  appellant  to
    show that there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  he  would
    face a real risk of being subjected to  treatment  prohibited  by  that
    Article if he were to be removed from the United Kingdom.

    Findings and conclusions

41.   For the reasons stated above, by the time that the appellant's  cross-
    examination had been completed, we were left in no real doubt that  his
    account was true in  all  material  respects.   After  hearing  closing
    submissions from both representatives, we informed them to that effect.
     In particular, we informed  them  that  we  accepted  the  appellant's
    account of his detention following his  refusal  to  undertake  further
    military service, the  ill-treatment  which  he  received  during  that
    detention, and manner in which he and one of the  other  detainees  had
    escaped from military custody and made their way  to  Sudan.   We  than
    invited Ms Donnelly to indicate whether  she  would  still  oppose  the
    appellant's human rights claim in light of those findings of fact.

42.   At that point, Ms Donnelly stated that, having regard to  the  country
    guidance determination of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in IN  (draft
    evaders -- evidence of risk) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00106,  she  would
    no longer seek to do so.  She was plainly right to adopt that position.
     In light of the Tribunal's conclusions as summarised at  paragraph  44
    of that determination, it was clear there was  no  realistic  basis  on
    which Ms Donnelly would have been able to persuade us to the  contrary.
    In the circumstances, the adjudicator's decision  in  relation  to  the
    human rights claim was plainly right, albeit that the  route  by  which
    she arrived at that conclusion was not.






    Reporting


43.   It is intended this determination should be reported for what we  have
    to say in relation to the basis on which a  reconsideration  should  be
    carried out when an appeal has been remitted to an  adjudicator  for  a
    fresh hearing prior to 4 April 2005, but the rehearing  has  not  taken
    place by that date.




    Decision


44.   The appeal on asylum  grounds  is  dismissed.   The  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds is allowed.


Signed                                       Dated: 5 September 2005

L V Waumsley

Senior Immigration Judge


Approved for electronic distribution
