


                       ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


MS (Reconsideration - Discontinuance by Secretary of State) Sudan [2005]
UKAIT 00129

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House
On  25 August 2005
                                                   Determination Promulgated
                                                        14th September, 2005
                                      ......................................

                                   Before:

                 Mr H.J.E. Latter, Senior Immigration Judge
                 Mr Andrew Jordan, Senior Immigration Judge

Between:

                                                                   APPELLANT

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  RESPONDENT






For the Appellant:           Mr S. Chelvan, counsel, instructed by South
                       West Law. solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr M. Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to pursue a
     reconsideration of a  decision  made  by  an  Immigration  Judge.   On
     reflection,  the  Home  Office  properly   decided   to   pursue   the
     reconsideration  no  longer.   Under  the  scheme  that  governed  the
     procedure in the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the Secretary  of  State
     was permitted to  appeal  against  an  adverse  decision  made  by  an
     Adjudicator and, if granted leave to do so, was an appellant.  In that
     capacity, the Rules provided him a right to withdraw his appeal  where
     he chose to do so.  If there was sufficient time to do so  before  the
     hearing, this was a commendable means of avoiding unnecessary costs.
  2. Under the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, the Rules do not permit the
     Secretary  of  State  to  withdraw  once  reconsideration   has   been
     permitted.   This  is  the  effect  of  Rule  17  of  the  Asylum  and
     Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005:

           Withdrawal of appeal
            17 (1) An appellant may withdraw an appeal -

           (a) orally, at a hearing; or
           (b) at any time, by filing written notice with the Tribunal.



  3. An appellant is defined in Rule 2 as a person who has given notice  of
     appeal to the Tribunal against the  relevant  decision  in  accordance
     with the Rules.  The relevant  decision  is  that  of,  amongst  other
     people, the Secretary of State or an Entry Clearance  Officer;  it  is
     not the decision of an Immigration Judge.  No longer,  therefore,  can
     the Secretary of State feature as an appellant.  This is made clear by
     the definition of respondent which means the decision maker  specified
     in the notice of decision against which a notice of  appeal  has  been
     given.
  4. The position is made even clearer by the terms of Rule 17 (2):

           17 (2) An appeal shall be treated as withdrawn if the respondent
           notifies the Tribunal that the decision (or,  where  the  appeal
           relates to more than one decision,  all  of  the  decisions)  to
           which the appeal relates has been withdrawn.


      The respondent is here restricted to  the  person  who  has  made  the
      relevant immigration decision.  The Secretary of State may  decide  to
      withdraw the decision in which case the appellant's appeal  is  deemed
      to have been withdrawn.  There  will,  however,  be  cases  where  the
      Secretary  of  State  decides  not  to  withdraw  the  decision.    In
      particular, in cases where the withdrawal of the decision deprives  an
      appellant of his ability  to  reap  the  benefits  of  an  Immigration
      Judge's findings in his favour, it is possible that the High Court may
      not permit him to do so.   In  the  present  case,  Mr  Blundell,  who
      appears on behalf of the Secretary of State does not seek to  withdraw
      the decision but simply no longer wishes to pursue  his  challenge  to
      the Immigration Judge's decision, at  least  on  the  basis  on  which
      permission was granted.
  5. In the present reconsideration, there was insufficient time to prevent
     the hearing.  Mr Blundell has not sought  to  pursue  his  grounds  of
     application and, in the absence of any challenge  to  the  Immigration
     Judge's determination, the Tribunal is bound to find that the original
     Tribunal did not make  a  material  error  of  law  and  the  original
     determination of the appeal shall stand.  This is the decision that we
     make.
  6. Mr Blundell, however, sought guidance from  the  Tribunal  as  to  the
     procedure to be followed where the Secretary of State makes an earlier
     decision no longer to pursue the appeal but is unable  to  follow  the
     former practice of withdrawing his,  the  Secretary  of  State's,  the
     appeal.  It  is,  of  course,  highly  desirable  to  avoid  incurring
     unnecessary legal expenses.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  appropriate
     course is for the Home Office to write to the Tribunal at Field  House
     indicating that the Secretary of  State  will  no  longer  pursue  the
     reconsideration hearing.  A copy of the letter should be  served  upon
     the appellant or his representative in order to prevent further  costs
     being incurred and in order to alert them to the  proposed  course  of
     action.  This letter can then be placed before  a  Senior  Immigration
     Judge with the expectation that he will determine the appeal without a
     hearing in accordance with Rule 15 (2).  This permits the Tribunal  to
     do so where all the parties to the appeal consent. The Tribunal  will,
     of course, infer that the appellant consents to the Secretary of State
     no longer maintaining his challenge to the Judge's  decision  in  his,
     the appellant's,  favour.   This  will  not  avoid  the  necessity  of
     compliance with Rule 22 (1) which requires the Tribunal  to  serve  on
     every party a written determination containing its  decision  and  the
     reasons for it.  The determination, however, will  simply  recite  the
     letter from the Home Office containing the invitation by the Secretary
     of State to determine the appeal without a hearing by  a  decision  to
     the effect that the original Tribunal made no material  error  of  law
     and its determination shall, therefore, stand.

DECISION


The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the  original
determination of the appeal shall stand.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                    SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
