

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|HA (OLF members and sympathisers - risk) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT    |
|00136                                                             |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2005               |6 October 2005                  |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Miss B Mensah (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation
For the appellant: Mr G. Denholm of Counsel, instructed by  J.D.  Spicer  &
Co.
For the respondent : Mr J. Gulvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case is reported solely for what it says about risk to OLF members and
sympathisers on the basis of recent country reports.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is  a  national  of  Ethiopia.  She  appeals  against  a
      determination of the Immigration Judge, Mr P.H. Norris, notified on  5
      April 2005, dismissing her appeal against a decision refusing to grant
      asylum     and    refusing    to     grant     leave     to     enter.



2.    By virtue of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
      etc.) Act 2004 this appeal is to be treated as  a  reconsideration  in
      which the  initial issue is whether or not there was a material  error
      of law on the part of the Immigration Judge.
3.    The Immigration Judge accepted that the appellant came from  an  Oromo
      family, which was active in the affairs of the  Oromo  community,  but
      did not accept that her parents had been arrested  in  April  2001  or
      that  they subsequently disappeared, or that she was involved  then in
      the  OLF. However, he did accept that the appellant became an  "active
      supporter of the OLF" in December 2003 or early January 2004, that she
      was arrested in May 2004 at a time when she and others were engaged in
      a meeting of a small group of OLF members and that  she  was  detained
      for approximately three weeks during which time she was severely  ill-
      treated on account of her  activities   for   OLF  and  the  political
      opinions.  He further accepted that she was then released on condition
      that she report weekly, did not have contact with any  of  the  others
      arrested with her and she refrained from any involvement with  OLF. He
      found too that she observed the conditions on which she  was  released
      "until at least 20 July 2004".

4.    However, the Immigration Judge dismissed her appeal  because  she  had
      only been (at  the  time  of  her  arrest)  a  "modest  and  low-level
      supporter of OLF", that she had not been charged with any offence, had
      been allowed to leave the police station on conditions,  had  observed
      the conditions on which she was released until at least 20  July  2004
      and had not resumed her political activities  at  any  time  following
      her arrest.   He stated at paragraph 13:

             "I am unable to find that the circumstances in which  she  was
             living from 6 June onwards put her at  risk  of  further  ill-
             treatment. Whatever her activities  for the OLF had been prior
             to her  arrest  in  May  2004,  the  authorities   would  have
             discovered  what  they  were  but  it  is   clear   they   had
             nevertheless decided to release her without charge or trial. I
             find that the appellant had no continuing  commitment  to  the
             OLF following her arrest in May  2004,  and  that  accordingly
             she had no subjective fear of any continuing ill-treatment  at
             the hands of the police nor was any such fear justified on the
              basis of the objective evidence. Furthermore, I see no reason
             why the appellant, if she  felt  it  was  unsafe  for  her  to
             continue to live at the former family  home, should  not  have
             relocated to another part of Addis Ababa, and in particular to
             live with or near to her uncle and his family.'

5.    The  grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  Immigration  Judge  in
      assessing future  risk had failed to attach any  or adequate weight to
      past persecution; had failed, in assessing future  risk,  to  consider
      his findings in the context of the  relevant  country  material;   had
      failed to deal properly or at all with the implications  of  the  fact
      that   the  appellant   had  been  released  on  conditions;  and  had
      erroneously concluded that there was  internal  flight   open  to  the
      appellant.

6.    We consider these grounds  do  establish  a  material  error  of  law.
      Whilst the Immigration Judge did give consideration to  the  relevance
      of the fact that the appellant had been  released  on  conditions,  he
      erroneously confined this consideration  to the  question  of  whether
      she was "willing" to observe the conditions and whether the conditions
      were "reasonable" ("I find that the conditions  of  her  release  were
      entirely  reasonable having regard to the nature of  the  organisation
      of which she was avowedly a supporter"). Even putting to one side  the
      fact that  on the Immigration Judge's own findings the  appellant  had
      only  observed the conditions "until at least  20  July  2004",  there
      obviously came a point (either straight after 20 July 2004 or when she
      left Ethiopia in late September 2004) when she fell in breach  of  her
      conditions. The  crucial  questions  which  needed  to  be  addressed,
      therefore, were "What would be the reaction of the authorities to that
      breach and how would that affect how they would view her on return  to
      Ethiopia?". The Immigration Judge nowhere addressed  these  questions.
      The  closest he came to addressing them was in paragraph  13  when  he
      noted that:

             'I do not consider that she was at any real risk of arrest  at
             any time after her release from detention   on  6  June  2004,
             provided that she observed as  she  was  willing  to  do,  the
             conditions of her release'.

7.    If anything the wording of this passage (".. provided  that")  implies
      that he accepted that, if she fell in breach of  her  conditions,  she
      would  be at risk of arrest.

8.    The failure of the Immigration Judge to address these  crucial  issues
      was an error of law because both  were  central  to  the  question  of
      future risk. In paragraph 14, confining himself to  his  finding  that
      the appellant  would not  resume her OLF activities if she returned to
      Ethiopia, he found nothing to suggest the authorities were or would be
      interested in re-arresting her post-release. However, that  conclusion
      failed to take into account a  highly  material  and  relevant  factor
      because it flew in the face of the plain  fact  that  the  authorities
      would view her as a person who had breached her bail conditions.

9.    We are further satisfied that this was a material error  on  the  part
      of the Immigration Judge, since it affected  the  Immigration  Judge's
      decision  upon appeal.

10.   Both parties agreed that if we found there was  a  material  error  of
      law we should go on to the second  stage  of  reconsideration  on  the
      basis of the primary findings of fact made by the Immigration Judge.

11.   The decision we substitute for that of the  Immigration  Judge  is  to
      allow the appeal. The Immigration Judge gave a summary of the  OLF  in
      his determination.  But this was largely confined to an historical and
      political  analysis noting that this organisation continues  to  exist
      as a body committed to armed struggle.  It made no mention of  salient
      facts concerning the approach of the authorities to  the OLF,  despite
      the fact that  he had before him the  April  2004  CIPU  Report  which
      detailed in  paragraphs  5.50  -  6.1  the  arrest  and  detention  of
      thousands of OLF  members  or  sympathisers  and  the   commission  by
      security  forces  of  unlawful  killings  and  their  mistreatment  of
      detainees.   At paragraph 6.1 it stated:

             "The  government  continued  to  arrest  and  detain   persons
             arbitrarily, particularly those suspected of sympathising with
             or being members of the OLF.  Thousands of  suspects  remained
             in detention without charge."

12.   Had the Immigration Judge brought this specific evidence  to  bear  on
      the  crucial issue of the  reaction the  authorities  were  reasonably
      likely to make to the fact that the appellant  had fallen into  breach
      of her conditions of release,  we  consider  he  would  have  drawn  a
      different conclusion as  to  future  risk.  On  his  own  account  the
      appellant had experienced arrest and severe ill-treatment  on  account
      of her activities for the OLF and her political opinions.  That arrest
      and detention were  relatively recent: May-June 2004.   She  had  then
      breached her conditions, by failing to report weekly. It is reasonable
      to infer that  her failure to report would cause the  authorities   to
      suspect that she had breached the other  two  conditions  relating  to
      avoidance of contact with OLF politics and with  OLF  colleagues.  The
      fact that the appellant might have ceased being involved with OLF  and
      had no continuing commitment to this organisation  would be not at all
      determinative of how she would be perceived by the authorities. On the
      basis of the April 2004 CIPU Report  we  consider  it  was  reasonably
      likely that they would re-arrest and detain her and, in the course  of
      that detention, inflict further ill-treatment  upon her by  virtue  of
      her (perceived) political opinion.

13.   Even if we are wrong in the  assessment  we  have  made  of  what  the
      Immigration Judge would have concluded  had he addressed  the  crucial
      issues in the light of relevant background evidence which  was  before
      him, we (having found a material error of law) have  to  consider  the
      evidence  in this  case in the light of the up-to-date position  (R  &
      Others [2005]  EWCA Civ 982).   The appellant's  representatives  have
      now  adduced  a  Human  Rights  Watch  report  of  May  2005  entitled
      "Suppressing Dissent". It notes at paragraph 65 that police  officials
      in Oromia often subject individuals who are arrested on  suspicion  of
      OLF-related activities to torture and other forms of mistreatment.  At
      paragraph 67 it notes:

             "Many of the former  detainees  interviewed  by  Human  Rights
             Watch said that their eventual release from custody  was  only
             the beginning of their ordeal. In many cases police  officials
             harass and intimidate former detainees and their families  for
             years after their release".

14.   In our view the contents of this report  lend  additional  support  to
      the conclusions  we have drawn as to future risk to this appellant.

15.   Mr Gulvin ventured to suggest at  one  point  that  even  if  we  were
      satisfied that the authorities would take  an  adverse  view  of  this
      appellant if she came  to  their  attention  on  return,  it  was  not
      reasonably likely that she would come to their attention.  Neither  Mr
      Gulvin nor Mr Denholm were able to assist us with specific  background
      evidence  regarding   record-keeping   operated   by   the   Ethiopian
      authorities. However, it is in our view abundantly clear that  amongst
      the different opposition and dissident parties  and  groups  currently
      existing in Ethiopia, the authorities make a  particular  priority  of
      targeting  those  who  are   members  of  OLF  or    are   known   OLF
      sympathisers. The OLF is committed to  armed  struggle  and  does  not
      regard itself as willing to work within  the  existing  political  and
      parliamentary system. In  such  circumstances  it  would  be  entirely
      reasonable  to  assume  that  the   Ethiopian   authorities   maintain
      centralised records on persons suspected of OLF involvement.  The many
      instances highlighted in the CIPU and Human  Rights  Watch  report  of
      repressive  action  taken  against  the  suspected  OLF  members   and
      sympathisers  strongly  indicate  in  our  view  the  existence  of  a
      centralised and relatively  sophisticated  system  of  record-keeping.
      Whether at the point of return at  the  airport  in   Addis  Ababa  or
      subsequently, we consider it reasonably  likely  therefore  that  this
      appellant would come to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  as
      someone  who  had  been  previously   arrested  on  suspicion  of  OLF
      involvement and had breached conditions of her release.

16.   In such circumstances we do  not  consider  that  she  would  be  safe
      either in her  home area or in another part of Ethiopia or there would
      be a viable internal relocation alternative.

17.   As already noted, this case is being reported for what it  says  about
      risk to OLF members and sympathisers. In our view there is  a  current
      risk to   OLF  members  and  sympathisers  who  have  been  previously
      arrested and detained on suspicion of OLF involvement or  who  have  a
      significant history, known to the authorities, of  OLF  membership  or
      sympathy.  We have not considered that it is suitable for  designation
      as a Country Guideline case because we did not have sufficiently  full
      evidence or submissions. But equally it is right that we  should  make
      known, by reporting, the views we have reached on  the  basis  of  the
      latest available evidence as presented in this case. Our decision does
      not affect the continuing status as country guidance of  HB  (Ethiopia
      EDP/VEDP members Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00235.

18.   Accordingly we conclude that:

      - there was a material error of law;

      - The decision we substitute is to allow the appellant's appeal.




                               DR H.H. STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE








