

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|             EB (fresh evidence - fraud - directions) Ghana [2005]|
|UKAIT 00131                                                       |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  8 September 2005            |20 September 2005               |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr, Senior Immigration Judge                               |
|Mr T B Davey                                                      |
|Mrs S I Hewitt                                                    |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|Entry Clearance Officer - Accra                                   |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     None
For the respondent:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer.

Fresh evidence may be admitted in cases of fraud. Directions should not be
given unless needed to give effect to a determination.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    On 13 April 2004 an Adjudicator (Mr J F Pullig) allowed the appeal of
      a citizen of Ghana  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer to refuse his application for entry clearance as  a  student.
      The Adjudicator gave directions for an entry clearance to  be  issued
      forthwith.  Mr Deller submits that directions should not  have  been
      made and he is content  to  limit  the  appeal  to  the  question  of
      directions rather than the substantive appeal.

2.    The appellant was not represented before us.  His advisers, Afrifa  &
      Partners, wrote to the Tribunal on 5 August  2005  stating  that  the
      appellant would not be represented at  the  hearing  on  8  September
      2005.    Notice  of  the  proceedings  had  also  been  sent  to  the
      appellant's sponsor, the appellant's stepfather, who is a partner  in
      the firm representing the appellant.

3.    In the absence of any application to  adjourn  the  proceedings,  the
      Tribunal considered that notice  of  proceedings  had  been  properly
      served, and decided to proceed.

4.    The appellant had applied for an entry clearance  to  enable  him  to
      study at the Jeff Wooller College.  The application was  refused  for
      various reasons, the material one so far  as  these  proceedings  are
      concerned is as follows:

           "The cost of your tuition, maintenance and accommodation  is  to
           be borne by your father.  You have produced a bank statement  in
           his name to support your application. However, the evidence  you
           have submitted of  finances  is  unsatisfactory  and  I  am  not
           therefore satisfied that you or your sponsor  will  be  able  to
           meet the cost of your  education  or  of  your  maintenance  and
           accommodation  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Even  if  I  were  so
           satisfied funding  your  education  will  impose  an  additional
           financial burden upon them and I  am  not  satisfied  that  this
           increased financial outlay is commensurate with  their  economic
           circumstances and that such funds will actually be available  to
           you in the United Kingdom."

      Among the documents produced to the Adjudicator was a letter from the
      bank of the appellant's father dated 24 February 2004 enclosing  bank
      statements "showing a  somewhat  increased  amount  standing  to  the
      credit of his bank.   These  bank  statements  run  from  March  2003
      through to  February  2004  and  the  build  up  in  the  account  is
      consistent with  banking  transactions  shown  in  the  earlier  bank
      statement produced to the Entry Clearance Officer but also  shows  an
      increase in activity and the amount  of  money  passing  through  the
      account."

5.    The Adjudicator records in paragraph 10 of his determination that  he
      was satisfied "that within the family as  at  the  date  of  decision
      there was adequate, and indeed more than adequate, funds available to
      the appellant for the purposes of his studies."

6.    The Adjudicator, being satisfied that the appellant complied with all
      aspects of the immigration rules, allowed the  appeal  and  gave  the
      directions reconsideration of which is sought by the Entry  Clearance
      Officer.

7.    The Adjudicator expressed himself  in  fairly  strong  terms  in  the
      determination about the respondent and the decision  making  process.
      In the light of these comments the file  was  reviewed  at  a  senior
      level.   The grounds of application read in part as follows:

      "3.   The visa section at Accra constantly updates  itself  regarding
           the latest trends and changes in local conditions to  assist  in
           assessing visa applications.  It  is  a  fact  that  bogus  bank
           statements support a large number of applications for  visas  in
           Accra. The styles and methods of forgery used in bank statements
           are constantly evolving and improving and there is  sometimes  a
           delay before certain types of forgeries are finally  identified.
           In  addition,  different  banks  are  targeted  by  forgers   at
           different times. In a recent exercise, all the  bank  statements
           submitted on one day in support of  applications  (a  sample  of
           500) were referred to the relevant banks  for  verification.  No
           less than 38% were found to be forged. We work closely with  all
           the major banks in Ghana. They supply us with genuine samples of
           statements and verify  statements  for  us.   Our  knowledge  of
           forgery and our detection techniques evolves  and  improves  all
           the time.


      4.     In  recent  months,  forgers  have  focussed   on   statements
           purportedly from Rural Banks. For a considerable period  it  has
           proved  very  difficult  to  get  statements  from  such   banks
           verified.  When we did write  to  rural  banks  asking  them  to
           verify statements, we almost invariably received a reply to  the
           effect that  the  statement  was  genuine.   Since  38%  of  the
           statements for the major banks are declared to be  forgeries  by
           them,  it  did  not  seem  credible  that  100%  of  rural  bank
           statements should be genuine.  In addition, it was noted that  a
           very high proportion of visa  applicants  submitted  rural  bank
           statements in support of their applications.  Most of the  rural
           banks are very small operations with just one office and a small
           'catchment area'.  The number of customers they have is  limited
           yet the number of statements submitted from them was  on  a  par
           with the major high street  banks  like  Barclays  and  Standard
           Chartered.  The number of rural bank statements was out  of  all
           proportion to the number of persons who genuinely hold  accounts
           with rural banks. Most of the suspect forged statements had very
           high balances. It was not felt to be credible that  someone  who
           genuinely had the equivalent of thousands  of  pounds  in  Cedis
           would lodge them all with an obscure rural  bank  in  a  current
           account paying no interest.  In my experience, well-to-do people
           in Ghana invest in high  interest  bonds  and  foreign  currency
           accounts. Their current accounts are notable for having a fairly
           small balance in them - enough for day-to-day  purposes  and  no
           more. Similarly the balances in  these  rural  statements  which
           were being submitted were unfeasibly  high.  The  minimum  legal
           wage in Ghana is 11,000 Cedis (65p) per day. The  vast  majority
           of workers are not even paid that much.  The number of people in
           Ghana with hundreds of millions of Cedis in their  bank  account
           is very small, yet so many  visa  applicants  appeared  to  have
           someone willing to sponsor them with these  apparently  enormous
           amounts of money available to spend on sending them abroad.


      5.    As a result of the marked increase  in  rural  bank  statements
           seen, we instigated discussions with the Bank  of  Ghana,  which
           controls the activities of all banks in Ghana. They  shared  our
           concern and immediately began investigating a  number  of  rural
           banks.  Within one month, they had identified a corrupt official
           at one of the banks who had been issuing bogus  bank  statements
           on official paper for a fee and he was dismissed.  The number of
           applications bearing statements from that  particular  bank  has
           now fallen to almost zero.


      6.    Following our discussions with the Bank of Ghana, we now  refer
           rural bank statements to the  ARB  Apex  Bank  Ltd.  This  is  a
           clearing bank, which oversees the activities of  all  the  rural
           banks in Ghana. It in turn is under the control of the  Bank  of
           Ghana. ARB Apex Bank does not act as a  bank  itself.  It  is  a
           respected body, which also produces and prints paying  in  books
           and  chequebooks.  Since  we  have  begun  sending  rural   bank
           statements to ARB Apex for verification, we have found that over
           95% of rural  bank  statements  submitted  to  this  office  are
           forged.


      7.    On examining the file, I noted that the  rural  bank  statement
           submitted in the name of NB, said to be the appellant's  father,
           and purporting to have been issued by the  Atwima  Mponua  Rural
           Bank Ltd, Bantama appeared to be very similar  to  a  number  of
           statements which had been declared forged by ARB Apex.


      8.    In view of my doubts, I had the statement sent to ARB Apex Bank
           with the request that they examine  it  and  check  the  details
           given against their records.  A reply was received from the bank
           on 23 June 2004.  This states that the statement is a fake.


      9.    I submit that this new information, which neither the  ECO  nor
           the Adjudicator would have been aware of, indicates  that  issue
           of a visa to the appellant is not now appropriate. Not only am I
           not satisfied that the appellant has sufficient  funds  for  his
           proposed studies without working or recourse  to  public  funds,
           but his credibility is severely damaged by  having  submitted  a
           bogus document with his application. I am not  satisfied  as  to
           the true nature and purpose of his  application  and  I  am  not
           satisfied that he is a genuine student.


      10.   In view  of  the  directions  and  departmental  guidelines  in
           Diplomatic Service  Procedures  Volume  1  General  Instructions
           chapter 27.11.i the ECO is not able to consider the  application
           further. I considered that, had the Adjudicator known  that  the
           appellant had presented forged documentation regarding  finance,
           he would not have allowed the appeal and would not have directed
           that the visa be issued.


      11.   I respectfully request that the Tribunal consider  this  appeal
           out of time. I apologise for the delay in submitting the out  of
           time request but it was not apparent until recently  that  there
           were prima facie grounds for lodging such an appeal.


      12.   I submit that this appeal was  not  a  suitable  case  for  the
           Adjudicator to direct that the visa  be  issued.  The  appellant
           sought a visa to  commence  studies  in  August  2003,  but  the
           determination was promulgated 8  months  after  the  application
           date.   The  making  of  directions  prevented  the   ECO   from
           considering any changes in the appellant's circumstances or  any
           material deception, which had come to light since the  decision.
           We are unable even to ask the appellant to provide evidence that
           he is enrolled on a  course.   This  creates  difficulties  when
           trying to establish what period  of  validity  the  visa  should
           have, this being essential information now that visas  are  also
           leave to enter.


      13.   I respectfully request that this appeal for  consideration  out
           of time by the Tribunal be allowed. If  the  Tribunal  does  not
           consider it appropriate to allow the substance of the appeal,  I
           request  that  the  Tribunal  allows  my  appeal   against   the
           Adjudicator's directions, to enable the ECO to  satisfy  himself
           that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  are  met  with
           regard to the funds available for the studies."

8.    As we have made clear, all that Mr Deller sought was the  removal  of
      the directions rather than a reversal of the  Adjudicator's  decision
      as a whole.  Mr Deller submitted that directions were  in  any  event
      inappropriate given the passage of time. The decision  appealed  from
      was dated 24 July 2003: it would be necessary for the Entry Clearance
      Officer to have regard to any change of circumstances that might have
      taken place in the intervening  period.   Mr  Deller  submitted  that
      directions might be appropriate in certain  cases  where  the  issues
      were limited, for example  where  the  only  issue  was  whether  the
      parties were married or not and where an entry clearance  would  flow
      almost automatically from a decision.   He requested us to admit  the
      fresh evidence and to cancel the directions.  He referred us to  Cabo
      Verde [2004] EWCA Civ 1726 by way of an  example  of  facts  emerging
      after a decision.

9.    At the conclusion the submissions we reserved our decision.    It  is
      clear that a party may appeal  against  the  issuing  of  directions.
      Under Section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
      as amended by the 2004 Act it is provided (see Section 87(4)) that  a
      direction made "shall be treated as part of the  Tribunal's  decision
      on the appeal for purposes of section 103A".   The Tribunal held that
      the  parties  could  appeal  specifically  against  the  terms  of  a
      direction in  LS  (post-decision  evidence;direction;  appealability)
      Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085. This case concerned the appeal  provisions
      prior to their amendment by the 2004 Act but there would appear to be
      no  reason  to  reach  a  different  conclusion  in   reconsideration
      proceedings. Under Section 103A a party to an appeal  may  apply  "on
      the grounds that the Tribunal made an error  of  law,  for  an  order
      requiring the Tribunal to reconsider it decision on the appeal".   It
      is first necessary to identify a material error of  law  -  see  rule
      31(2) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.



10.   Mr Deller submits that the making of a direction in this case was  an
      error of law.   A direction should only be given for the  purpose  of
      giving effect to the decision under appeal - see Section 87(1) of the
      2002 Act, as amended. Circumstances  would  inevitably  have  changed
      since the date on which the Entry Clearance  Officer  had  considered
      the matter  and  that  was  of  course  the  relevant  date  for  the
      Adjudicator to consider - see Section 85(5) of the 2002  Act.    This
      point does not depend on the admission of fresh evidence.

11.   We agree with Mr Deller's submission that  it  was  inappropriate  to
      issue directions in this case. Directions should only  be  issued  to
      give effect to a determination: see MG (Visit appeal  -  directions.)
      Jamaica [2004] UKIAT 00140. We find that the making of directions was
      an error of law in the circumstances.

12.   Once an error of law has been  established  the  Tribunal  may  admit
      further evidence. The  admissibility  of  new  evidence  is  normally
      exercised subject  to  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles  "which  may  be
      departed from in exceptional  circumstances  where  the  interest  of
      justice requires" - see E & R v Secretary of State [2004] INLR 268 at
      paragraph 91.

13.   In this case the appellant's father wrote a letter on 10 July 2oo3 to
      the respondent in support of the application stating:

           "I am sponsoring the entire cost of his  education,  air  ticket
           and other logistic [sic] that will  make  his  stay  in  the  UK
           comfortable for his study period.  I entrust my confidence in my
           son to return to Ghana after his course of study.


           Please find attached my bank statement in support  of  his  visa
           application for your attention.  Thank you in advance  for  your
           kind assistance."


14.   On 21 June 2004 it was confirmed by the ARB Apex Bank Ltd. that  this
      statement was fake.   This document was received by the respondent on
      23 June 2004.  There has been no response from the representatives to
      the suggestion made in the grounds of appeal about the falsity of the
      document  -  notice  of  the  allegation  had  been   sent   to   the
      representatives as long ago as 18 November 2004.   In the premises we
      are satisfied that the allegation of forgery is  established  to  the
      required high standard.

15.   In the light of the material before it the Tribunal is satisfied that
      it has been established that a material deception  was  practiced  on
      the Entry Clearance Officer.   As the grounds of appeal made clear it
      is difficult to keep up with the evolving fraudulent  practices  that
      occur  in  applications  of  this  kind.    In  the  premises  it  is
      appropriate to accept this new evidence.    No  representations  have
      been made about its reception nor is it challenged in  any  way.   We
      are quite satisfied that the Adjudicator would not have found  as  he
      did had he had this material before him.  In particular, in paragraph
      7 of his determination, he would not have commented as he  did  about
      the bank statements submitted by the appellant's  father.  We  should
      perhaps mention that the adjudicator saw fit to  express  himself  in
      very strong language  about  what  he  saw  as  deficiencies  in  the
      overseas post concerned.  While  it  may  be  that  some  measure  of
      criticism is in some instances appropriate, this case highlights  the
      need for  caution.  Ideally  decision  makers  should  confine  their
      attentions to the facts and matters in issue and go no  further  than
      is strictly necessary when drawing attention to any shortcomings they
      may perceive in the way a case was handled. Further, while there  was
      no contradictor  in  this  case,  concerns  have  been  raised  about
      documentation presented (apparently not on an isolated basis)  by  or
      on behalf of applicants for entry clearances in Ghana. Where  appeals
      arise from refusals of these applications, immigration judges will of
      course need to consider each case on its merits, but careful scrutiny
      may  well  be  deemed  appropriate  (particularly  in  the  case   of
      documention purportedly  emanating  from  rural  banks)  until  these
      concerns are resolved.

16.   Although it is not necessary for us to reach a concluded view on this
      point, we should consider the question that might have arisen had the
      directions not been made and if we had been invited  to  reverse  the
      decision of the Adjudicator.  In E & R v Secretary  of  State  [2004]
      Q.B. 1044 [2004] INLR 268 at paragraph 71 it was submitted on  behalf
      of the Secretary of State that there were established  exceptions  to
      the Ladd v Marshall principles.  Reference was made to R v  Secretary
      of State for the Environment ex parte Powis [1981] 1  WLR  584.   The
      last of the three named exceptions was "evidence to  show  misconduct
      (such as bias or fraud)  by  the  Tribunal  or  parties  before  it".
      Although the appellant submitted that the approach in ex parte  Powis
      was too strict there is nothing to indicate any disagreement with the
      suggestion that evidence of misconduct would not be admissible.   The
      admission of such evidence is no doubt on the  principle  that  fraud
      unravels everything - see, for example, Al - Mehdawi  [1990]  1  A.C.
      876 at 895 [1990] Imm AR 140 at 144.  In Cabo Verde [2004]  EWCA  Civ
      1726 the Court of Appeal had to consider an asylum appeal where fresh
      evidence tended to show that the appellant was not  in  Angola  being
      detained and tortured as  he  claimed  but  engaged  in  robbery  and
      conspiracy to rob  in  Portugal.  The  Court  decided  to  admit  the
      evidence on the basis set out in E & R and remitted the matter to the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal stating at paragraph 19:

            "There is in this case material which shows  that  the  factual
           basis upon which the Tribunal proceeded was, through no fault of
           its own, simply wrong, in that the tribunal were unaware of  the
           involvement of the Portuguese authorities in  investigating  the
           affairs of Mr Cabo-Verde."

      The Court of Appeal emphasised that there was no  application  before
      it to reverse the Tribunal's decision on the ground of fraud. It  was
      submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  particulars  of  the
      fraud were not established by strict proof because they depended upon
      allegations. The Court of Appeal drew  a  distinction  between  cases
      where it was necessary  to  set  aside  a  decision  of  a  court  of
      collateral authority and appeals. In challenges  to  court  decisions
      the fraud itself had to be proved before the court could proceed.  In
      the appeal of Cabo Verde "all that has  to  be  established  is  that
      relevant evidence was not before the lower tribunal, as  in  E  &  R.
      That, in my view is plainly established. It would be a sorry  day  if
      it were not possible now to revisit the matter in the  light  of  the
      full facts and allegations as they are now known."

17.   It would be remarkable if the Tribunal could not  take  into  account
      the fresh evidence.  A party who conceals the truth and puts  forward
      a false case cannot be heard to complain if the falsity is discovered
      after the hearing.  Accordingly, if no directions had been  made,  we
      would not have been inhibited in admitting the new  evidence  on  the
      authority of E & R, it being established by this evidence (which  has
      not been the subject of any challenge by the  appellant)  that  fraud
      was practised and the adjudicator deceived. We would  apprehend  that
      in such circumstances the result  would  be  that  the  adjudicator's
      decision would be reversed given that the allegations  made  in  this
      case have not been rebutted. Although a theoretical  possibility,  we
      cannot  imagine  any  adjudicator  allowing  an   appeal   where   an
      uncontested fraud on a  matter  central  to  the  decision  has  been
      perpetrated. Where the facts were contested, the issue would have  to
      be resolved by a further hearing.

18.   We are not, however, invited to reverse the adjudicator's decision in
      this case. We hold, therefore, that the decision of  the  Adjudicator
      is vitiated (insofar as he made directions) by a  material  error  of
      law.  Accordingly, it is appropriate simply to order that the  appeal
      should be allowed without any directions.

19.   The following decision is accordingly substituted:  appeal allowed.




                                                                      G Warr
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge


                     approved for electronic distribution

