
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of PE) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
IJR [2015] UKUT 00139(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London

                                                            11 February 2015


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     P E
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Khubber, Counsel, instructed by  Turpin Miller Solicitors, appeared  on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr H Flanagan, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor, appeared on  behalf  of
the Respondent.



                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                    Delivered orally on 11 February 2015







JUDGE O'CONNOR:

 1. This is an application for judicial review brought with the  permission
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 10 December 2014.

 2. In its original form, as lodged on  27  March  2014,  this  application
    sought to bring challenge to the Respondent's  "failure  to  reconsider
    [the Respondent's] decision to impose a no recourse [to  public  funds]
    condition" on the leave granted to the Applicant.

 3. Putting this claim in context, on the 27 February 2013  the  Respondent
    made a decision to grant the  Applicant  30  months'  leave  to  remain
    pursuant to paragraph D-LTRPT 1.2 of the Immigration Rules,  ostensible
    because it had been established that she had  a  parental  relationship
    with "children who are under the age of 18, in the United  Kingdom  and
    are British Citizens". This decision puts the Applicant  on  a  10-year
    route to settlement. On the same  occasion  the  Respondent  imposed  a
    condition on the Applicant's leave prohibiting her recourse  to  public
    funds ("NRPF condition).

 4. A request was made for removal of the NRPF condition on 21 May 2013 and
    this was followed by further request, after interposing correspondence,
    on 5 February 2014 - this latter request being made  specifically  with
    reference to a policy maintained by the Respondent headed: "Request for
    a change of conditions of leave granted  on  the  basis  of  family  or
    private life" - such policy having been introduced on 20 January  2014.



 5. This request was refused by the Respondent in a decision  of  17  April
    2014, i.e. after the date on which this application for judicial review
    was lodged. In light of this change in the underlying circumstances the
    Applicant sought to amend her grounds of judicial review.

 6. Broadly speaking, whilst the application in its original  form  brought
    challenge to the Respondent's refusal to  reconsider  the  decision  to
    impose a NRPF condition on the Applicant's leave, the  amended  grounds
    brought challenge  both  to  the  original  decision  imposing  the  no
    recourse to  public  funds  condition  of  27  February  2013  and  the
    subsequent decision of 17 April 2014 refusing to remove that condition.

 7. When granting permission to  bring  these  proceedings  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kopieczek said as follows:

         "Further taking into account the amended  grounds,  in  respect  of
         which permission to rely on those amended grounds is granted, it is
         arguable that on the facts of this case the refusal to  remove  the
         condition prohibiting recourse  to  public  funds  is  unlawful  in
         failing to take into account  material  evidence.   Notwithstanding
         the decision in NS [2014] EWHC 1971, it is also arguable that  that
         the respondent's policy unlawfully fails to take into account  best
         interests considerations pursuant to Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  unlawfully  acts  as  a
         fetter on the respondent's discretion. Further, the condition of no
         recourse to public funds in terms of the applicable policy criteria
         arguably amounts to a breach of the applicant's Article 8 rights."

 8. Subsequent to this  grant  the  applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal observing that the case had also been pursued  on  Article  14
    ECHR grounds and that  they  assumed  that  permission  had  also  been
    granted in relation to such ground. The Tribunal has not  responded  to
    this  correspondence,  but  I  see  no  reason  to  disagree  with  the
    assumption identified therein given that the grant  of  permission  did
    not specifically restrict the terms upon which  the  application  could
    proceed.

 9. Although not a point taken by Mr Flanagan before me, I observe that the
    challenge to the decision of 23 February 2013 was brought substantially
    out of time and without, as far as I can see, there ever having been  a
    satisfactory explanation for the delay put forward. In case this matter
    ends up elsewhere I indicate at  this  stage  that  in  my  view  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek must have, by implication,  extended  time  in
    relation to the bringing of such a challenge when he granted permission
    to proceed in relation to it.

10. Moving on in the chronology, on 21 January 2015 the  Respondent  agreed
    to remove the NRPF condition imposed on the Applicant's  leave.  It  is
    agreed by the parties that this now leaves a situation whereby there is
    no live issue directly between them before  this  Tribunal.  There  is,
    however, a difference in view as to how this matter should now proceed.



11. The hearing of this application for judicial review was listed as  long
    ago as 15 December 2014 for a full days hearing  on  today's  date,  it
    having been expedited into this slot as a consequence of the  potential
    child welfare considerations that are in play in this case.

12. On 6 February I received a consent order signed by both parties stating
    inter alia that:

        "The  hearing  listed  for  11  February   2015   be   limited   to
        consideration  of  whether  the  case  should  proceed  after   the
        agreement to remove the NRPF condition."

13. I refused to sign this consent order because there had already  been  a
    full day set aside for the hearing of the application and it seemed  to
    me that to undertake the hearing in two parts, if that ended  up  being
    necessary, would cause a significant waste of Tribunal time and  public
    money. I sent out a  brief  response  to  the  parties  on  6  February
    indicating my refusal to sign the consent order. I am  told  that  this
    response was, for reasons which are wholly unclear, not received by the
    parties until yesterday, the 10 February.

14. During the hearing I enquired of both parties whether they  were  in  a
    position to immediately proceed with the  hearing  of  the  substantive
    judicial review should I accept Mr Khubber's submission that  it  would
    be appropriate to do so despite there now being no live issues  between
    the parties.

15. Mr Flanagan indicated he was not ready to proceed. Mr Khubber  reserved
    his position on this issue but with the rider that he was doing so only
    because he had been considerably hampered in his  preparation  of  this
    matter by the failure of the Respondent  to  comply  with  any  of  the
    directions of the Tribunal - including her failure to provide  Detailed
    Grounds of Defence or a Skeleton Argument relating to  the  substantive
    judicial review application. Although Mr Khubber was 'hampered' in  his
    ability to prepare the case, I should observe that the  Applicant  also
    failed to produce a skeleton argument relating to the substance of this
    judicial review.

16. It is not for the parties to determine how the Tribunal  will  allocate
    its time; that is a matter for judges. Given that the parties  did  not
    receive any indication  from  the  Tribunal  that  there  had  been  an
    agreement to their attempts to restrict the issues for consideration in
    today's hearing, it must have been palpably clear that they should have
    prepared for the substantive judicial review proceedings to the best of
    their ability so that, if necessary, the Tribunal could have  proceeded
    directly to consider the substance of this case, should that have  been
    required.

17. The failure of the parties to  properly  prepare  for  the  substantive
    hearing could have had serious consequences requiring this case  to  be
    relisted for a further day on a future  date,  thus  not  only  wasting
    precious and valuable court time, but also public funds in the form  of
    the Home Office budget and the Legal Aid Agency's budget.

18. I now turn to consider the preliminary issue - as it has turned out  to
    be; that being, given that the issue directly between the  parties  has
    now been  disposed  of  by  the  Respondent  having  removed  the  NRPF
    condition on the Applicant's leave, should the Tribunal nevertheless go
    on  and  determine  the  substantive  legal  issues   raised   in   the
    application.

19. My attention has been drawn to  a  significant  number  of  authorities
    relevant to such consideration: R v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  ex  parte  Salem  [1999]  1  AC  450;  R  v  BBC  ex  parte
    Quinatavelle [1998] 10 (Admin) LR 425; R (Omar) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 3448
    (Admin), Nigatu v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]
    EWHC 1806; R (Zoolife etc) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Environment
    [2007] EWHC 2995 (Admin), R (NK) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWHC 1896 and R (NK and TM) v SSHD [2010]  EWHC  1007
    (Admin).

20. I have carefully considered all of these authorities, however, it seems
    to me that I need only cite briefly from three of them.  The  first  is
    the decision of the House of Lords  in  Salem  and  in  particular  the
    opinion of Lord Slynn of Hadley in which he  opined  at  page  457A  as
    follows:

         "[17] The discretion to hear disputes, even in the area  of  public
         law, must however, be exercised with caution and appeals which  are
         academic between the parties should not be heard, unless there is a
         good reason in the public interest for doing  so,  as  for  example
         (but only by way of example) where a discrete  point  of  statutory
         construction arises which does not involve  detailed  consideration
         of facts and where a large number of similar  cases  exist  or  are
         anticipated so that the issue will most likely need to be  resolved
         in the near future."

21. The second decision I cite from is the Zoolife case in which Mr Justice
    Silber, having himself cited inter alia from the speech of  Lord  Slynn
    in Salem, said as follows at paragraph 36:

         "... In my view, these statements show clearly that academic issues
         cannot and should not be determined  by  courts  unless  there  are
         exceptional  circumstances,  such  as  where  two  conditions   are
         satisfied in the type of application  now  before  the  court.  The
         first condition is in the words of Lord  Slynn  in  Salem  that  'A
         large number of similar cases exist or are anticipated' or at least
         other similar cases  exist  or  are  anticipated,  and  the  second
         condition is that the decision in the academic case  wiill  not  be
         fact sensitive.  If the courts entertain academic disputes  in  the
         type of application now before which did not satisfy each of  these
         two conditions, the consequence would be  a  regrettable  waste  of
         valuable court time and the incurring by one  or  more  parties  of
         unnecessary cost."

22. I finally cite from the decision of Mr Justice Beatson, as he then was,
    in Omar in which he said in paragraphs 45 and 46:

         "[45] The concern I then expressed, however, remains. Is  it  right
          that issues raising important points of  principle  which  are  in
          dispute between the defendant and those  whose  position  in  this
          country is regulated by the defendant and  the  UK  Border  Agency
          under the legislation, the Regulations and the  defendant's  rules
          and policies should not be resolved because they are  continuously
          kicked into touch by individual decisions made  after  proceedings
          are instituted. It is said in these proceedings that the  decision
          dated 9 November 2011 granting the  claimant  discretionary  leave
          had nothing to do with these proceedings and, in  the  absence  of
          any other indication, I accept that this is so.

          [46] If, however, it appears that ad hoc decisions are being  made
          to preclude the determination of difficult questions  where  those
          advising the Secretary of State consider her position is difficult
          or because of the undoubted strains  and  stresses  to  which  the
          system administered by the  Secretary  of  State  through  the  UK
          Border Agency is subject, the court may have to think again  about
          the general policy. It cannot be an efficient use of resources  to
          create situations in which individuals are forced, often at public
          expense, to institute legal proceedings and take up the time of  a
          grossly overworked Administrative Court, only to find  at  a  late
          stage in the proceedings that the Secretary of State  has  made  a
          decision which arguably makes the issue moot."

23. In summary, Mr Khubber submits that  the  substantive  judicial  review
    should be heard because:

          i) the case raises important issues of law concerning the legality
             of the current policy as to when an NRPF  condition  should  be
             removed;

         ii) resolution of the legal  issues  in  the  instant  matter  will
             likely assist in the determination of future cases, this  being
             reflected in the amount of cases that are currently pending  in
             the Tribunal or High Court or which are likely to be subject to
             future litigation;

        iii) the case involves the approach of the Secretary of State to the
             removal  of  NRPF  conditions  and  its  interface   with   the
             application of the ECHR and is not limited  to  a  purely  fact
             sensitive evaluation;

         iv) the case concerns issues  relating  to  breaches  of  the  ECHR
             bought about by the maintenance of the NRPF condition;

          v) the facts of this case are not particularly difficult  and  are
             suited for resolution  of  the  underlying  legal  issues;  and
             finally

         vi) the Secretary of State is currently undertaking a review of her
             policies following the earlier decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
             Judge O'Connor in the case of Fakih [2014]  UKUT  513  and  the
             current Home Office review would  likely  be  assisted  by  the
             resolution of the extant issues in this case.

24. Having carefully considered the respective submissions and taken  fully
    into account the fact that in this case the underlying  issues  involve
    matters  of  welfare  and  human  rights,  and  having  looked  at  the
    circumstances of this case and the polices as a whole, I conclude  that
    it is not appropriate to proceed to hear this application for  judicial
    review substantively. I come to this conclusion for the  reasons  which
    follow.

25. First, it is important to identify exactly what the general issues  for
    consideration  in  this  application  are  said  to  be.   Mr   Khubber
    identified the following as being the subject of challenge:

          i) The  lawfulness  of  the  'no  recourse  public  funds'  policy
             relevant at the time the decision was made by the Respondent on
             27 February 2013, that being the date the  NRPF  condition  was
             first imposed in this case.

         ii) The lawfulness of the January 2014 policy headed "Request for a
             change of conditions of leave granted on the  basis  of  family
             and private life".

        iii) The lawfulness of the 'no recourse to public funds'  policy  in
             place as of  the  date  of  the  refusal  to  remove  the  NRPF
             condition in this case i.e. 17 April 2014.

26. The grounds of challenge in relation  to  each  of  the  aforementioned
    policies are, it is said, founded on the following, which  are  pleaded
    in significantly more detail in the grounds of application:

          i) The Respondent has failed to comply with her obligations  under
             Section 55 of the 2009 Act,

         ii) The policies breach Article 8 ECHR;

        iii) The policies are in breach Article 14 of the  ECHR,  when  read
             with Article 8.

27. Turning to the  decision  of  27  February  2013  to  impose  the  NRPF
    condition on the Applicant's leave, the relevant  policy  in  place  at
    that time did not include within it the possibility of  the  Respondent
    allowing  recourse  to  public  funds  where  there  are  "particularly
    compelling reasons relating to the welfare of the child of a parent  in
    receipt of a very low income".

28. This material change to the exceptions in the NRPF policy was not added
    until  5  March  2013  and,  consequently,  any  consideration  of  the
    lawfulness of the policy in place as of  27  February  2013  is  highly
    unlikely to be of any real  assistance  to  a  'significant  number  of
    cases', if indeed any cases at all. In such circumstances it would  not
    be appropriate, in my view, to consider the lawfulness of such a policy
    in the context of a case in which there are no live issues between  the
    parties.

29. As to the January 2014 policy, I can find no evidence  before  me  that
    demonstrates that any, let alone a large number of, similar cases exist
    bringing challenge to this policy.

30. Reference is made in paragraph 3.14 of the Applicant's "Amended Grounds
    of Challenge" to three  cases  which  were  due  to  be  heard  by  the
    Administrative  Court   substantively   but   which   were   eventually
    compromised upon the Respondent removing the  NRPF  conditions  on  the
    Applicants' leave. It appears from the information  I  have  before  me
    that each of these cases related to a challenge to  the  imposition  of
    the NPRF condition and not to a refusal by  the  Respondent  to  remove
    such condition upon a request being made pursuant to the  January  2014
    policy.  Nevertheless, I have taken the existence of these three cases,
    and the  circumstances  in  which  it  is  said  that  the  cases  were
    compromised, into account when coming to my conclusions.

31. I have also been provided with a statement authored  by  Miss  Kathleen
    Cosgrove dated 5 February 201; Miss Cosgrove  being  a  solicitor  with
    particular expertise and practical experience  in  cases  involving  no
    recourse to public funds decisions. It is  said  by  Ms  Cosgrove  that
    there are seven, possibly eight, cases in which she has been forced  to
    issue judicial review proceedings, two  of  those,  it  appears,  being
    included within the three cases referred to in this Applicant's Amended
    Grounds of Application.

32. From the terms of Miss Cosgrove's statement it can be seen that each of
    the aforementioned cases has been lodged as a consequence of the  delay
    in  the  Respondent  reconsidering  the  decision  to  impose  a   NRPF
    condition.  There is nothing in the witness statement which suggests to
    me that the legality of  the  January  2014  policy  was  itself  under
    challenge in those cases; indeed, having considered the dates on  which
    the Respondent removed the NRPF conditions it appears that in at  least
    some of these cases the Respondent has applied the January 2014  policy
    to the respective Applicant's benefit and removed the NRPF condition.

33. In paragraph three of her statement Miss Cosgrove also refers to  their
    being 15 ongoing cases in which the Secretary of State  has  failed  to
    consider whether to remove an NRPF condition placed on  an  Applicant's
    leave. In four of them a Pre-Action Protocol  letter  has  been  issued
    relating to the Respondent's failure to make such a decision. Again, it
    is not said that any of these fifteen cases involve issue  relating  to
    the lawfulness of the 2014 policy but rather they involve the intensely
    fact sensitive  circumstances  of  the  rationality  of  the  delay  in
    applying the terms of the policy in any given case.

34. There are other difficulties in relying upon Miss Cosgrove's  statement
    as an indicator that there are  comparator  cases  involving  the  same
    issues that are said to be pertinent to  the  instant  matter.  In  the
    instant case the children are British citizens; however, Ms  Cosgroves'
    statement does not identify how many of the cases referred to  therein,
    either in respect of those in which applications have been lodged  with
    the  Court  or  otherwise,  involve  British  citizen   children.   The
    considerations in cases involving British citizen children will, in  my
    view, inevitably be different to those  involving  non-British  citizen
    children.

35. As to the policy applicable on 17 April 2014, as far as I can ascertain
    this must have been the policy introduced on 8 October 2013; the policy
    not changing after that date until some time in July 2014.

36. I have already found in Fakih that the October 2013 policy is  unlawful
    for a number of reasons, including as a consequence of the  failure  of
    the Respondent to comply with her public equality duties. It  seems  to
    me as though there is little purpose in investigating whether this same
    policy is unlawful for other reasons, particularly in a case  in  which
    nothing turns on that point.

37. I have taken fully into account the fact that the Secretary of State is
    currently  undertaking  a  review  of  the  relevant  policies   as   a
    consequence of my decision in Fakih and that that review will be, it is
    said in a public statement on the Home Office website of today's  date,
    completed by the spring of 2015.  This in my  conclusion  is  a  matter
    which I should view as being entirely neutral to  my  consideration  of
    whether this case should proceed to substantive hearing. It  is  not  a
    matter,  as  Mr  Khubber  submits,  that  weighs  in  favour  of   this
    application proceeding further. The judiciary are not advisors  to  the
    State in its formulation of policy, but  rather  the  Courts  act  upon
    application  to  ensure  the  legality  of  such  policies,  and  their
    operation, once they have been formulated.

38. There are also further reasons why, in my conclusion, the challenges to
    the  October  2013  policy  should  not  proceed   to   be   determined
    substantively, given that there are no live issues between the parties.



39. First, it has not been demonstrated that there are a large  number,  or
    indeed any, similar cases that would benefit from  a  decision  on  the
    issues raised in this case, or that the Secretary of State has acted in
    a manner such as to try and prevent the issues raised herein from being
    litigated. Second, in my view the decision of Mr Justice Kenneth Parker
    in NS [2014] EWHC 1971 (Admin) is  a  decision  which  deals  with  and
    disposes of the Mr Khubber's  submissions  on  the  Section  55  issue.
    Although Mr Khubber made submissions as to why this was not  the  case,
    what he was asserting in reality was that Mr Justice  Kenneth  Parker's
    consideration of this issue was either wrong or  otherwise  inadequate.
    For my part I do not accept that to be the case, my preliminary view of
    the ground relying on section 55 being that it should be rejected as  a
    consequence.

40. As to the grounds relating to Article 8 and Article 14  ECHR,  I  agree
    with Mr Flanagan's submission that the challenges made in  this  regard
    are intensely fact sensitive. I  also  observe  that  in  the  skeleton
    argument drawn by Mr Khubber for the permission hearing, at least on my
    reading of it, the Article 14 submissions were  rooted  firmly  in  the
    facts of this particular Applicant's case.

41. For these reasons I conclude that the requirements  identified  in  the
    cases I have earlier cited have not  been  met  in  this  case,  and  I
    conclude that it is not appropriate to proceed  to  hear  the  Judicial
    Review substantively given that there are no live  issues  between  the
    parties.

42. Finally, I once again observe that this matter was listed today for the
    hearing of the substantive judicial  review  application.  However,  it
    would have impossible to proceed on today's date  because  the  parties
    were simply not ready to do so. It is clear from a number of the  cases
    cited to me that there is a growing practice in cases where the  issues
    between the parties have  become  academic  for  the  Courts  to  first
    determine whether there should be a substantive hearing of  the  issues
    and, even where it concludes there should not, to nevertheless consider
    such issues on a obiter basis in case the court is found to be wrong on
    the  issue  of  whether  the   case   should   proceed   substantively.
    Unfortunately, that is not a position I am able to  follow  given  that
    the parties are not ready to proceed today. In my view it would not  be
    a good use of judicial time or public money for this case to come  back
    for such issues to be determined on a purely obiter basis.

43. Whilst this is not a matter I paid regard to when  deciding  whether  I
    should proceed to determine the application substantively as  a  matter
    of law, I nevertheless observe that one of  the  overriding  objectives
    set down by the rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 is an obligation to avoid delay so far as is compatible  with  the
    proper consideration of the issues in play.

44. As a consequence of all that I have said above, and in  particular  the
    fact that there are no longer  any  live  issues  between  the  parties
    because the Applicant has obtained the  remedy  she  sought,  i.e.  the
    removal of the NRPF condition on her leave to remain, I conclude, as is
    inevitable, that I should refuse to exercise my discretion to grant the
    Applicant the relief she  seeks  because  to  do  so  would  be  purely
    academic.

45. I therefore dismiss this application for judicial review ~~~~0~~~~

