

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                       SJ (Knowledge of Kirundi) Burundi [2005]   |
|UKAIT 00134                                                       |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  22 September 2005           |3rd October 2005                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr, Senior Immigration Judge                               |
|Mr T B Davey                                                      |
|Mrs A J F Cross de Chavannes                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|And                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A O'Ryan of Counsel instructed by  Parker  Rhodes
                  Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr M Raj.

  This case deals with the question of the extent to which knowledge of the
  Kirundi language may be of relevance in determining Burundian nationality
       in the light of a letter from the British Embassy on the issue.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant claims to be a citizen of  Burundi.    On  8  September
      2004, an Adjudicator, Mr R D Crawford, dismissed her  appeal  against
      the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her application  for
      asylum.  An application for permission to appeal was launched  on  27
      September 2004.   That application for permission was granted  on  11
      January 2005 by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  By  virtue  of  the
      transitional provisions we are directed to reconsider the decision of
      the Adjudicator upon the grounds on which permission  to  appeal  was
      granted.

2.    The appellant claims to be of Hutu ethnicity.   She  claims  to  fear
      persecution at the hands of the Burundian Government because  of  her
      ethnicity, and her association with her husband who, it is  said,  is
      suspected of assisting Hutu rebel groups.  She also claims  to  be  a
      member of a particular social group, namely women in  Burundi.    She
      had been attacked, she  claimed,  and  raped  by  Tutsis  on  various
      occasions.  Her father and other  members  of  her  family  had  been
      killed.   The final occasion was on 6  April  2004  when  Tutsis  had
      attacked the appellant's house.  She had been raped.    Her  husband,
      who had managed to escape, subsequently returned, and arranged for an
      agent to take the appellant and her children out of the country.  She
      claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 April  2004.   She
      applied for asylum on the following day.

3.    Mr O'Ryan  represented  the  appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator He placed reliance on a letter from the  British  Embassy
      dated 14 July 2004 and submitted that in the light of that letter the
      Tribunal decision of AR [2004] UKIAT 00225 was  incorrectly  decided.
      The Adjudicator dealt with this submission and with the facts of  the
      case in the closing part of his determination as follows:

      "28   The IAT Determination in 2004 UKIAT 00225 considered  the  case
           of an asylum seeker who maintained that she  was  from  Burundi,
           but could not speak Kirundi. The Tribunal reviewed the  evidence
           in the CIPU. In the light of the objective evidence  before  the
           Tribunal, which clearly stated  that  Kirundi  is  the  official
           language of Burundi, which is  spoken  by  all  Burundians,  the
           Tribunal found  that  the  Appellant's  inability  to  speak  or
           understand Burundi meant that she was not a national of Burundi.
           That appellant had lived and worked for 7 years in Burundi.  The
           Tribunal found it to be incredible that in these  circumstances,
           she would not  be  able  to  speak  Kirundi.  I  have  carefully
           considered the letter from the British Embassy in  Kigali  dated
           14 July 2004. Mr O'Ryan argues that 2004 UKIAT  00225  has  been
           incorrectly  decided  in  the  light  of  that  letter.   In  my
           judgment, the following points from the letter are significant;


           (i)   Kirundi is the national language of Burundi and is  spoken
                 by native Burundians throughout the country;


           (ii)  The Burundian school curriculum is taught in Kirundi until
                 at least  the  fourth  year  in  primary  school.   It  is
                 therefore reasonable to expect every Burundian  child  who
                 attends school to understand and speak basic Kirundi;


           (iii) Most citizens of Buyenzi, where the appellant says she was
                 born, speak Kirundi;


           (iv)  Kirundi is taught at  secondary  school  level  throughout
                 Burundi;


           (v)   It is conceivable that some Burundians might not be fluent
                 Kirundi speakers;


           (vi)  A Burundian whose first language is Swahili should be able
                 to understand Kirundi;


           (vii) Swahili is the primary language within Buyenzi;


           (viii)      Swahili is still used in markets in Bujumbura.


      29.   I now assess what the appellant says about her time in Burundi.
           She has lived there for all of her  life.  She  attended  school
           from 1982 to 1986 (paragraph 3 of statement).  She  played  with
           the children of neighbours, who spoke Kirundi  (oral  evidence).
           She went to Koranic school where she said  Kirundi  was  spoken.
           She attended Koranic school with the same children of neighbours
           whom she played with in the street.  Having  carefully  reviewed
           the objective evidence, and considered Mr O'Ryan's  submissions,
           I find that if  the  appellant  has  lived  her  whole  life  in
           Burundi, she would have acquired a good working knowledge of the
           national language from various sources. These sources  would  be
           speaking to children in the  street,  being  taught  in  Kirundi
           during four years at primary school, being taught in Kirundi  at
           Koranic school and general acquisition of  the  language  during
           normal life over many years, even in an area where Swahili might
           have  been  the  predominant  language.  In  my  judgment,   the
           appellant's failure to speak Kirundi  as  distinct  from  having
           some  understanding  of  that  language,  severely  affects  her
           credibility. The appellant did display some  knowledge  of  some
           places in Burundi, pointed out by Mr O'Ryan in his  submissions.
           I have noted  this.   I  have  also  noted  that  she  knew  the
           Burundian  President,  and  the   National   Independence   Day.
           However, in my judgment, her overall knowledge of the  geography
           of Burundi is not of  a  standard  which  I  would  expect  from
           someone who has spent her whole life  in  Burundi.  I  recognise
           that the appellant says that she  comes  form  a  strict  Muslim
           background and the low standard of proof applicable in an asylum
           case. Nonetheless, I conclude that the  appellant  is  not  from
           Burundi.


      30.   It follows from my conclusion that the appellant  is  not  from
           Burundi that the events that she has described as  taking  place
           in Burundi did not take place. I  do  not  accept  that  various
           members of her family were killed by Tutsis nor do I accept that
           the appellant was raped by Tutsis on the various  occasions  she
           has described.   If  the  appellant  had  suffered  as  she  has
           described from 1994, in my judgment she would have left  Burundi
           earlier.  She married in 1997. Her husband was a fish trader.  I
           do not accept that she would  have  remained  in  Burundi  after
           being raped in 1996, beaten up in December 2003,  threatened  by
           Tutsis through her husband in 2002  and  raped  again  in  April
           2004. The money for the appellant  and  her  children  to  leave
           Burundi was raised, according to the appellant, by selling their
           house deeds. This could have been done at any  stage  after  the
           appellant married her husband in 1997.


      31.   I do not accept the appellant's account that with two  children
           she passed through United  Kingdom  immigration  on  a  passport
           which was fake and did not  contain  her  photograph  -  see  A3
           1.321.  In  my  judgement,  when  she  was  accompanied  by  two
           children, her passport would have been scrutinised to check  the
           inclusion of the children on the passport.


      32.   If the appellant was from Burundi and suffered in the  way  she
           has described, I find  that  she  could  have  taken  refuge  in
           Tanzania. The objective evidence shows that Tanzania  has  taken
           hundreds of thousands of Burundian refugees."


      33.   I do not accept the appellant's evidence that she was taught in
           Swahili at school. The objective evidence (page 12,  appellant's
           bundle) records the Burundian school curriculum being taught  in
           Kirundi. I do not accept that a lifelong  resident  of  Burundi,
           who went to two different schools there  and  mixed  with  other
           children, would not speak Kirundi.


      34.   It follows from my findings herein that  the  appellant  cannot
           have a well-founded fear of return to  Burundi  for  any  reason
           that engages the United Nations Convention.  In any event, it is
           not intended to return her to Burundi. The respondent will  make
           father enquiries into her background  and  serve  fresh  removal
           directions if they are deemed to be appropriate. Because I  find
           the appellant is not Burundian, it also follows that  her  human
           rights under Articles 2 and 3 would not be breached by returning
           her to Burundi."


4.    In the grounds of appeal Counsel acknowledged  that  the  Adjudicator
      had fairly summarised the Embassy letter save that, it was submitted,
      in sub-paragraph 28(vi) the Adjudicator should have added  that  some
      Burundians might not be fluent speakers.  In the light of this letter
      the Tribunal decision of AR was wrongly decided.   The  Adjudicator's
      finding was either irrational or he had failed properly to take  into
      account the British Embassy letter.  There was a reasonable degree of
      likelihood, therefore, that the  appellant  could  not  be  a  fluent
      Kirundi  speaker  and  still  be  a  Burundian  national.    In   the
      alternative the Adjudicator had erred in failing to  distinguish  the
      case of AR  where  the  Tribunal  had  found  it  relevant  that  the
      appellant could not speak or even understand  Kirundi  while  in  the
      instant  appeal  the  appellant  had  always  maintained   that   she
      understood Kirundi.

5.    Counsel acknowledged that this part of the grounds of appeal was  the
      more important  of  the  grounds.   For  the  sake  of  completeness,
      however, we should mention  grounds  2  and  3.    In  ground  2  the
      Adjudicator, it was said, erred in giving inadequate  weight  to  the
      many questions on the geography of Burundi which  the  appellant  had
      answered correctly and had failed to set out what  further  knowledge
      the appellant should have displayed.  In ground 3 the Adjudicator had
      been irrational to conclude  that  it  was  not  plausible  that  the
      appellant would have remained  in  Burundi  until  2004  if  she  had
      experienced the problems complained of.   The determination had  been
      inadequately reasoned on this point.

6.    In his submissions Counsel referred us to the decision of  the  Court
      of Appeal in AR [2005] EWCA Civ 407.   In  this  case  the  Court  of
      Appeal had overturned the decision of the Tribunal in AR.   This  had
      happened after the date  of  the  Adjudicator's  decision.    Counsel
      submitted that the Adjudicator had erred in relying on  the  case  of
      AR.  Furthermore, the appellant had stated at interview (see Question
      20) that she could understand the Burundian language but she did  not
      use it.   Reference was made to the Embassy letter.  Question 4 posed
      in the Embassy letter, "Would someone  living  within  Buyenzi  whose
      primary language spoken at home is Swahili, also be able to generally
      speak Kirundi?"  is answered as follows:

           "A Swahili-speaker born of Burundian parents should be  able  to
           understand Kirundi, even though differences in accent  and  tone
           can  be  found  in  Buyenzi.    It  is  conceivable  that   some
           Burundians might not be fluent Kirundi speakers."


7.    The Tribunal suggested to Counsel that the answer to Question  4  was
      or could be "yes".  Counsel submitted that the answer to  Question  4
      was not a clear "yes".  Persons in such a position should be able  to
      understand Kirundi.   This is what the appellant had said  she  could
      do at interview.  This was to be contrasted with the case of AR where
      the appellant could neither speak nor  understand  Kirundi.   It  was
      accepted, however, that the facts in the instant appeal differed from
      the facts in the case of AR because the Embassy letter had  not  been
      available in that case.   While the strongest  ground  was  ground  1
      Counsel made brief submissions in support of grounds 2 and 3.  At the
      conclusion of his submissions we did not trouble Mr Raj and  reserved
      our determination.

8.    We have carefully considered all the  material  before  us.    It  is
      first necessary to determine whether the Adjudicator's  determination
      was flawed by any material error of law.  Counsel submitted that  the
      Adjudicator had erred in relying on the Tribunal  case  of  AR.    In
      principle he relied on his submission  made  before  the  Adjudicator
      that the case of AR was wrongly decided in the light of  the  Embassy
      letter.  He acknowledges that the Embassy letter  was  for  the  most
      part correctly summarised by the Adjudicator.   It appears to us that
      the Adjudicator considered all the material before him including  the
      Tribunal decision of AR.   He gave full and  satisfactory  weight  to
      the Embassy letter.  We have already  set  out  paragraph  4  of  the
      Embassy letter which the Adjudicator briefly summarises at  paragraph
      28(v).  Paragraph 5 of the Embassy letter reads as follows:

           "Would someone who is born in Burundi but whose  first  language
           is Swahili also be fluent in spoken Kirundi?


           [Answer] "A Burundian whose first language is Swahili should  be
           able to understand Kirundi, although some might  not  be  fluent
           speakers.  Burundians who grew up outside  Burundi  may  not  be
           fluent Kirundi speakers."


9.    We see no evidence that  the  Adjudicator  misconstrued  the  Embassy
      letter.  It appears to us that he took it fully on board  and  fairly
      summarised it.    The  Adjudicator  also  considered  other  relevant
      matters and was not in  our  judgment  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant's failure to speak Kirundi "as distinct from someone having
      some  understanding  of   that   language,   severely   affects   her
      credibility."  We do not see  that  the  Adjudicator's  findings  are
      inconsistent with the Embassy letter.    The  Adjudicator  gave  full
      weight to the question of  the  appellant's  geographical  knowledge.
      His approach was  both  fair  and  balanced.    The  Adjudicator  for
      example reminded himself that the appellant claimed to  come  from  a
      strict Muslim background and he further noted  the  low  standard  of
      proof applicable in asylum appeals - see the penultimate sentence  of
      paragraph 29.   We  remind  ourselves  that  the  Tribunal  can  only
      interfere with the Adjudicator's decision if it was wrong in law - if
      it was perverse, for example.   In the case of AR the appellant could
      not even understand the language and Counsel  accordingly  draws  our
      attention to the difference in the instant case.  It was submitted by
      counsel in the Court of Appeal on behalf of AR (see paragraph  17  of
      the judgment of the Court of Appeal), that the statement in the  Home
      Office Country Information Report "that all Burundians  know  Kirundi
      does not seem to be vouchsafed by any primary source  that  has  been
      identified."   Lord Justice  Laws  commented  "In  my  judgment,  the
      Adjudicator's conclusions on the language and nationality issue, as I
      may call it, though possibly surprising,  cannot  be  categorised  as
      perverse."

10.   Lord Justice Auld, at paragraph 25 of the judgment, stated,

           "On the main issue, whether the Adjudicator  erred  or  arguably
           erred in law in concluding that it did not follow from the  fact
           that the appellant  spoke  only  Swahili  that  she  was  not  a
           Burundian, his decision on the evidence before  him  might  seem
           surprising to some.   But that  does  not  necessarily  make  it
           perverse so as to amount  to  an  error  of  law  entitling  the
           Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  to  intervene.   Nor,  given  the
           incompletely sourced objective evidence before the  Adjudicator,
           the uncertainty of the  application  of  such  evidence  to  the
           circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  her  otherwise  entirely
           credible account, the Tribunal should not have concluded, as  it
           did, implicitly, that the Adjudicator's decision was perverse."




 11.  In this case, of course, it is for the appellant to  show  that  the
      Adjudicator's decision was perverse.  We have to say we  do  not  see
      that it could be categorised as perverse in any way.  The Adjudicator
      reminded himself that the appellant had lived in Burundi all her life
      and had attended school between 1982 and 1986 and had played with the
      children of neighbours who spoke Kirundi.  She had  gone  to  Koranic
      school where Kirundi was spoken.   She had attended that school  with
      the children of neighbours with whom she played in the  street.   The
      Adjudicator was amply entitled to conclude that the  appellant  would
      have acquired a good working knowledge of the national language  from
      various sources as he states in paragraph 29  of  the  determination.
      The Adjudicator balanced his findings with other factors in favour of
      the appellant such as her knowledge of geography and so on.    It  is
      not demonstrated that he failed to have regard to any material factor
      or misdirected himself.   We do not find that the  Adjudicator  erred
      in concluding that the events relied on had not taken  place  in  the
      light of the fact that the appellant was  not  from  Burundi  as  she
      claimed and that there was an  implausibility  in  her  remaining  in
      Burundi after the events described by her.  The account of  departure
      was not accepted - see paragraph 31.   There was the  possibility  of
      refuge being taken  in  Tanzania  had  she  suffered  in  the  manner
      complained of - see  paragraph  32.    A  further  reference  to  the
      language issue appears in paragraph 33.

12.   We reject Counsel's submissions about the Adjudicator's  approach  to
      the evidence criticised in grounds 2 and 3 of the grounds of  appeal.
       Even if the Adjudicator's  reasoning  might  appear  "surprising  to
      some" as was stated by the Court of Appeal, that  does  not  indicate
      that it was wrong in law.   Counsel submits that the Adjudicator gave
      manifestly inadequate weight to the positive aspects of  the  case  -
      the appellant's knowledge of geography, for  example.    We  find  no
      evidence that the Adjudicator erred in failing  to  give  appropriate
      weight to all matters.   Questions of what weight is to be  given  to
      any particular part of the evidence were a matter for the Adjudicator
      to resolve.   We see no evidence of any error of law in his approach.



13.   We do not consider that the Adjudicator's reference to  AR  indicates
      an error of law in his approach in the circumstances  of  this  case.
      He took into account all  the  evidence  before  him,  including  the
      letter from the British Embassy, as we have stated.  He was  entitled
      to draw the conclusions which he did from the  evidence  before  him.
      As we see no evidence of any error of law this is not an  appropriate
      case to give country guidance. However, insofar as the Embassy letter
      is relied on to undermine the Tribunal's decision in AR, we  are  not
      with Counsel in the inference he seeks to draw from it. It should  be
      noted that this letter was relied upon and introduced in evidence  by
      the appellant,  not  by  the  respondent.  The  letter  supports  the
      proposition that Burundians speak Kirundi albeit with varying degrees
      of fluency and that it is not the first language for  some.  It  does
      not support the proposition that persons claiming  to  be  Burundians
      who speak no Kirundi are Burundian. It may be that the conclusions of
      the Tribunal in AR were expressed somewhat too baldly in the light of
      the evidence before it.  The  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's
      inability to speak or even understand Kirundi meant that she was  not
      a national of Kirundi.   Given  the  material  before  us,  we  would
      suggest the evidence about the language issue is tested  against  the
      following propositions:

      (a) while some Burundians may be more  comfortable  speaking  Kirundi
      than others, the  inability  to  speak  Kirundi  at  all  is  not  an
      irrelevant factor.
      (b) fluency in Kirundi is not to be expected of all Burundians.
      (c) where an appellant's ability to speak and understand  Kirundi  is
      limited or non existent it is open to a fact finder to consider  this
      in the light of the evidence as a  whole  when  deciding  whether  an
      appellant is Burundian.
      (d) where nationality is disputed, inability to speak Kirundi may, in
      appropriate cases,  make  it  more  difficult  for  an  appellant  to
      establish his case to the required standard.


14.   The Adjudicator's decision contains no material  error  of  law.   We
      direct that the decision of the Adjudicator shall stand.


                                                                      G Warr
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
                    approved for electronic distribution

