
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

R (on the application of  Robinson)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (paragraph 353 - Waqar applied) IJR [2016] UKUT 00133(IAC)

                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                            16 February 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                          Jamar Christoff robinson
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                            First Respondent
                                     and

                           THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL
                                                           Second Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE southern

                               - - - - - - - -

Ms C Robinson, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors appeared on behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr T Fisher, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the first Respondent.  There was no representative on behalf of
the second Respondent.

   1. Notwithstanding the amendments brought about by  the  Immigration  Act
      2014  to  the  types  of  decisions  appealable   under  s82  of   the
      Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  para  353  of  HC395
      continues to perform a gateway function in  respect  of  access  to  a
      right of appeal. Arguments to the contrary, founded upon dicta  in  BA
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2009] UKSC 7, are misconceived because, as explained
      in  ZA  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  926,  in  BA  (Nigeria)
      immigration decisions (of a type that no longer give rise to  a  right
      of appeal) had been made so that there was, on that account,  a  right
      of appeal.




   2. The argument now advanced, which  was  not  considered  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal in R (Waqar) v SSHD  (statutory  appeals/paragraph  353)  IJR
      [2015] 00169 (IAC), founded upon the amendment to the definition of "a
      human rights claim" found at s113 of the 2002 Act, provided for by the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 but not yet  implemented,
      is no basis for doubting that Waqar is correctly decided.







   3.  Where the respondent rejects  further  submissions  and  goes  on  to
      conclude that they do not amount to a fresh claim for the purposes  of
      para 353 of HC 395, it is not implicit that the respondent has made  a
      decision to refuse a human  rights  claim.  Properly  understood,  the
      respondent has done precisely the opposite and has declined to make  a
      decision at all. To the extent that the respondent has  embarked  upon
      an examination of the merits of the further submissions,  she  is  not
      making a decision but doing no more than equipping herself  to  follow
      the para 353 process.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE southern:


1.   The applicant has been granted permission to bring  a  judicial  review
    against decisions of the first respondent made on 23 June 2015  and  31
    July  2015  to  refuse  to  treat  further  submissions  made  by   the
    applicant's solicitors on 13 May 2015 and by the applicant  himself  on
    28 July 2015 as amounting to fresh claims such as to  give  rise  to  a
    fresh right of appeal and also  against  the  decision  of  the  second
    respondent made on 7 August 2015 to refuse to accept that the applicant
    had a right of appeal against a  fresh  refusal  of  his  human  rights
    claim.


2.   The applicant, who is a  citizen  of  Jamaica  born  on  14  May  1991,
    arrived in the United Kingdom in October 1998, then aged just  7  years
    old.  He was admitted as a visitor and having overstayed that leave has
    remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom ever since.   He  is  now  24
    years old.   Unfortunately,  he  has  committed  a  number  of  serious
    criminal offences in respect of which, as the  respondent  has  pointed
    out, he has been sentenced to custodial sentences of a  combined  total
    of about seven years.


3.   In April 2011 he was sentenced to a term of  eighteen  months  for  two
    counts of robbery and, in August 2011, 56 months  for  theft  from  the
    person and two further counts of robbery.  On that occasion he was also
    made subject to an antisocial behaviour order  for  a  period  of  five
    years.  While serving that sentence he received a consecutive  term  of
    twelve months' custody  for  violent  disorder,  an  offence  committed
    whilst detained.


4.   The applicant's appeal against the deportation order  that  was  signed
    in July 2013 was dismissed following a hearing on 17 October 2014 by  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  19  November  2015.
    In that appeal the applicant relied upon a human rights  claim  founded
    upon his right to respect  for  private  life  due  to  his  length  of
    residence in the United Kingdom, it being accepted at  that  time  that
    there was no protected family life in play.


5.   The decision letter of 23 June 2015 is a response to a letter dated  13
    May 2015 sent by the applicant's solicitors.  In that letter  they  ask
    the respondent to grant the applicant temporary admission  so  that  he
    could support his partner who was imminently due to give  birth.   This
    was a short letter making no other request but the respondent  took  it
    to be implicit from what was said that the applicant was now  advancing
    a claim that he had established family life with his partner, Ms Tyrena
    Godson-Charles who is said to be pregnant with his child. The  response
    from the Secretary of State dated 23 June 2015 was a detailed one  from
    which it can be seen that the respondent recognised that the  applicant
    was in fact asserting that he now had a claim to advance on that basis.
     However, for the reasons set out in that letter, the respondent saw no
    basis to revisit the deportation decision but did go on to carry out  a
    full assessment of whether what had been said amounted to a fresh claim
    for the purposes of paragraph 353 of HC 395 but concluded it  did  not,
    saying at paragraph 55 of that letter "as your client's submissions  do
    not create a realistic prospect of success before an Immigration  Judge
    they do not amount to a fresh claim".


6.   Shortly afterwards the applicant himself submitted further  submissions
    on 28 July 2015, this time informing the respondent that  his  son  had
    now been born.  Once again the first respondent refused to accept  that
    to amount to a fresh claim.  We do not have a copy of that  letter  but
    it can be seen from the response it generated from the respondent  that
    the same documents as accompanied the letter  previously  sent  by  his
    solicitors evidencing the arrival of the child  were  included  and  so
    discussed.


7.   Although these two decisions were drawn up as refusals to  accept  that
    the further submissions amounted to a fresh claim for the  purposes  of
    paragraph 353,  the  applicant  categorises  these  decisions  also  as
    decisions to refuse to revoke the deportation order that had been  made
    in respect of him.  In both decisions the respondent said that she  saw
    no grounds on which to revoke  the  deportation  order.   I  shall  say
    something more about that a little later but it might be observed that,
    in the context of the revised framework of Section 82 of the 2002  Act,
    whether or not there  had  been  a  decision  to  refuse  to  revoke  a
    deportation order did not have the same significance that it previously
    did have.


8.   These proceedings were first brought in challenge to the two  decisions
    of the first respondent but  the  applicant  was  subsequently  granted
    leave to expand the scope of his claim to include a  challenge  to  the
    refusal of the second respondent to accept his appeal.  It is, however,
    today common ground and agreed between  the  parties  that  it  is  not
    necessary to address the claim that  relates  to  both  the  first  and
    second respondent separately because the outcome will be the  same  for
    both whether the claim succeeds or falls.


9.   There are in effect two grounds upon which the  applicant  now  relies.
    The first of those has been neatly  summarised  by  Mr  Fisher  in  his
    skeleton argument and I do not  see  that  Ms  Robinson  expresses  any
    disagreement with how he puts it.  In the statutory scheme, as  amended
    by the Immigration Act 2014, does  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
    Rules continue to perform a gateway function to  accessing  the  appeal
    rights now provided by Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Put another way, do further human rights  submissions
    have to meet the threshold set out in paragraph 353 in order to  amount
    to a human rights claim for the purpose  of  Section  82  or  will  any
    further human rights submissions be sufficient to  amount  to  a  human
    rights claim for the purpose of Section 82  and  therefore  generate  a
    right of appeal.


10.  The second ground is that on the basis of the  information  before  the
    first respondent the refusal to accept  that  the  further  submissions
    made amounted to a fresh claim was irrational and so unlawful.  I shall
    deal with those grounds in turn.


11.  Before addressing the first ground it might be  observed  that  it  can
    succeed only if Ms Robinson persuades me to do that which the Court  of
    Appeal was not prepared to do, that being to  find  that  the  reported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (Waqar) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (statutory appeals/paragraph 353) IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00169 (IAC) was wrongly decided.  That may  be  thought  not  to  be  a
    promising position from which to  bring  an  application  for  judicial
    review before the Upper Tribunal but  I  shall  examine  the  arguments
    advanced by the parties to see where they lead.  I should add  that  Ms
    Robinson offers one line of argument that was  not  considered  in  the
    litigation  concerning  Waqar.   That  concerning   the   revised   but
    unimplemented version of Section 113 of the 2002 Act brought  about  by
    Section 12 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  I move
    on to consider the legal framework with which we are concerned in  this
    claim.


12.  Section 82 of the 2002 Act as originally enacted provided for  a  right
    of appeal against any of the immigration decisions described in Section
    82(2).  One of those described  in  Section  82(2)(k)  was  refusal  to
    revoke a deportation order.


13.  Section 94 of the 2002 Act provides that an  appeal  under  Section  82
    where the appellant has made an asylum or human rights claim cannot  be
    brought from within the  United  Kingdom  if  the  Secretary  of  State
    certifies that the claim is clearly unfounded.


14.  Section 96 of the 2002 Act provides that an appeal  cannot  be  brought
    at all if the claim could have been raised at an earlier appeal  or  in
    response to an earlier Section 120 notice and there is no  satisfactory
    reason for it not having been raised.


15.  There is a definition of what is a human rights claim found at  section
    113 of the 2002 Act.




           "human rights claim" means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to act contrary to
           Convention) as being incompatible with his Convention rights".


    As I have mentioned, the 2006 Act provided for  an  amendment  to  that
    definition but there has been  no  commencement  order  to  bring  that
    amendment into force.  The amended version so far as  is  relevant  for
    present purposes adds a subparagraph (b) saying that the definition  of
    a human rights claim does not include a claim which, having regard to a
    former claims, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of this part in
    accordance with the Immigration  Rules.   The  amended  version  is  as
    follows, so far as is relevant:


           "human rights claim"
              a) Means a claim made by a person that to remove him  from  or
                 require him to leave the United Kingdom would  be  unlawful
                 under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public
                 authority not to  act  contrary  to  Convention)  as  being
                 incompatible with his Convention rights, but
              b) Does not include a claim which, having regard to  a  former
                 claim, falls to be disregarded for  the  purposes  of  this
                 Part in accordance with immigration rules,"




16.  Section 82 of the 2002 Act has been amended by the  2014  Act  so  that
    the familiar concept  of  the  somewhat  lengthy  list  of  immigration
    decisions has gone and  has  been  replaced  by  a  new  Section  82(2)
    providing for just three types of decision that  can  give  rise  to  a
    right of appeal.  In its amended form Section 82 provides so far as  is
    relevant for present purposes as follows:


           "Right of appeal to the Tribunal:


           (1)    a person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where -


              (b) the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                 rights claim made by P."


     The vocabulary of Sections 92, 94 and 96  of  the  2002  Act  has  been
    amended to reflect the refreshed access to the right of appeal provided
    by Section 82.

17.  Para 353 of the Immigration Rules provides:


           "Fresh Claims

              353. When a human rights or asylum claim has been refused  or
              withdrawn or treated as withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of
              these Rules and any appeal  relating  to  that  claim  is  no
              longer pending, the decision maker will consider any  further
              submissions and, if rejected,  will  then  determine  whether
              they amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount  to
              a fresh claim if they are significantly  different  from  the
              material that has previously been considered. The submissions
              will only be significantly different if the content:
                    (i) had not already been considered; and
                    (ii) taken together with the previously considered
                    material, created a realistic prospect of success,
                    notwithstanding its rejection. This paragraph does not
                    apply to claims made overseas."

     And, finally, it is helpful to reproduce here  paras  398-399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules which deal with deportation and claims under  article
    8 of the ECHR:


       "Deportation and Article 8

          A398. These rules apply where:
          (a) a foreign criminal liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
          deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
          under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
          (b) a foreign criminal  applies  for  a  deportation  order  made
          against him to be revoked.
          398. Where a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
          contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human
          Rights Convention, and
          (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
          (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of less than  4  years  but  at  least  12
          months; or
          (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest because, in  the  view  of
          the Secretary of State, their offending has caused  serious  harm
          or  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
          disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in  assessing  that
          claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if
          it does not, the public interest  in  deportation  will  only  be
          outweighed by other  factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
          circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs  399
          and 399A.
          399. This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
          applies if -
          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
                (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
                the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the   date   of   the
                immigration decision; and in either case
                (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live  in  the
                country to which the person is to be deported; and
                (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the
                UK without the person who is to be deported; or
          (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
          partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or  settled  in
          the UK, and
                (i) the relationship was formed at a time  when  the  person
                (deportee) was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
                status was not precarious; and
                (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  live  in
                the country to which the person is to be  deported,  because
                of compelling circumstances over and above  those  described
                in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
                (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in
                the UK without the person who is to be deported.
          399A. This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
          applies if -
          (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of
          his life; and
          (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
          into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."




18.  The applicant contends that refusal of a human rights claim and  indeed
    refusal of a protection claim regardless of whether it is a fresh claim
    or not  must  give  rise  to  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  unless
    certified.  That is because there is no requirement to be found  within
    Section 82 that the human rights or protection claim be a fresh  claim.
    The applicant places reliance upon BA (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] UKSC 7 pointing in  particular  to  what
    was said at paragraphs 29 and 32 by Lord Hope discussing the new scheme
    of certification powers introduced by the 2002 Act.  He said this:


         "The new  system  contains  a  range  of  powers  that  enable  the
         Secretary of State or as the case may be an Immigration Officer  to
         deal with the problem of repeat claims.  The Secretary  of  State's
         power in Section 94(2) of the 2002 Act to certify that a  claim  is
         clearly unfounded, if exercised has the effect that the person  may
         not bring his appeal in-country in reliance on Section 92(4).   The
         power  in  Section  96  enables  the  Secretary  of  State  or   an
         Immigration Officer to certify that a person who is  subject  to  a
         new immigration decision has raised an issue which has  been  dealt
         with or ought to have been dealt with in an earlier appeal  against
         a previous immigration decision  which  has  the  effect  that  the
         person will have no right of appeal against the new  decision.   It
         is common ground that the present cases are not  certifiable  under
         either of these two sections.  Why then should they be subjected to
         a further requirement which is not mentioned anywhere in  the  2002
         Act.  It can only be read into the Act by, as Lord  Justice  Sedley
         in the Court of Appeal put it, glossing the meaning of the words 'a
         claim' so as to exclude a further claim which  has  not  been  held
         under Rule 353 to be a fresh claim.  The court had to do this in ex
         parte Onibiyo but there is no need to do it now"


    and a little later

         "The Immigration Appeals system must not be burdened with worthless
         repeat claims.  On the other hand procedures that are put in  place
         to  address  this  problem  must  respect  the   United   Kingdom's
         international obligations.  That is  what  the  legislative  scheme
         does, when Section 95 is read  together  with  Section  94(9).   It
         preserves the right to maintain an out-of-country appeal  that  the
         decision in question has  breached  international  obligations.   I
         would hold that claims which are not certified under Section 94  or
         excluded under Section  96,  if  rejected,  should  be  allowed  to
         proceed to appeal in-country under Sections 82 and 92,  whether  or
         not they are accepted by the Secretary of State as fresh claims.


19.   The  difficulty  facing  the  applicant  in  this  case  is  that  the
    submission founded upon those comments is an  argument  that  has  been
    advanced before the Upper Tribunal previously but  has  been  rejected.
    In Waqar the guidance given was summarised in the head note as follows:

         "1.  The current statutory appeal regime requires a decision to  be
             made on a human rights claim. Without a claim  and  without  a
             decision there is no appeal.


         2.   Where a claim has already been  determined,  submissions  made
             subsequent to that require  a  decision  as  to  whether  they
             amount to a claim.  Paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             provides the mechanism to determine whether they amount  to  a
             claim the refusal of which enables a right of appeal."

20.  It is plain  that  the  conclusions  reached  in  Waqar  have  survived
    challenges  similar  to  those  being  advanced  in  this  claim   when
    considered by the Court of Appeal.  In refusing permission to appeal on
    the papers Lord Justice Underhill said this:


         "I consider that this appeal has no realistic prospect  of  success
         for the reasons set out in the respondent's skeleton argument below
         and adopted by the UT.  In short -


         1.   ZA (Nigeria) confirmed that under the pre-2014 regime Rule 353
             permitted the Secretary of State to decide  that  a  purported
             human rights claim was not in fact such a  claim  but  was  no
             more than an attempt to revive a previous  unsuccessful  claim
             (see para 27) and that if she did so there was no  immigration
             decision within the meaning of Section 82 (see paragraph  21).
             It also decided,  though  I  am  not  sure  this  is  directly
             material to the particular argument now raised, that in such a
             case there would be no human rights claim for the  purpose  of
             Section 94 with the result that there was no  overlap  between
             the operation  of  the  two  provisions  (see  para  30).   ZA
             (Nigeria)  adopted  a  narrow  reading  of  the  ratio  in  BA
             (Nigeria) on which the applicant relies and  that  reading  is
             binding on this court.


         2.   Nothing in the changes introduced by the 2014  Act  undermines
             that reasoning.  If the rejection of a claim  under  rule  353
             did not constitute an immigration decision for the purposes of
             the old section 82 there is no reason why it should constitute
             a decision for the purposes of the  new  rule.   In  fact  the
             relevant word is 'decided' not 'decision' but the use  of  the
             verb rather than the noun  is  obviously  immaterial.   It  is
             suggested that it makes a difference that the old  section  82
             used the label 'immigration decision' which was  then  defined
             to cover a number of specific kinds of refusal  etc.,  whereas
             the new section refers simply to a decision  to  refuse;  that
             that is just a matter of drafting technique  and  connotes  no
             difference of substance."


21.  That reasoning was specifically approved by Lord Justice Beatson  after
    he had heard argument  at  an  oral  renewal  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  See: HW  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1351.  Lord  Justice  Beatson  examined  the
    submission that BA (Nigeria) was authority  for  the  proposition  that
    there was a right of appeal even  where  the  respondent  decided  that
    further submissions did not amount to a fresh claim for the purposes of
    paragraph 353 and explained why that was misconceived.  BA (Nigeria) is
    distinguishable because in that case there was an immigration  decision
    or, more accurately, there were immigration decisions, under the former
    version of section 82, that  being  refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order.  Thus a right of appeal had arisen and the question was  whether
    the appeal could be brought from within the United Kingdom.


22.  Referring to ZA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2010] EWCA Civ 926 he continued at paragraph 18:


         "The importance of ZA (Nigeria)  was  that  it  was  held  that  BA
         (Nigeria) only applied where there was an  appealable  decision  so
         that one was within the statutory framework.  It was  clearly  held
         in ZA (Nigeria) that the Secretary of State is not required to make
         a further appealable  decision  whenever  further  submissions  are
         made."


     In rejecting the arguments advanced to the contrary, he observed:


         "It is not legitimate to take isolated statements from BA (Nigeria)
         out of context.  In that case the context was a situation which, by
         Section 82(2)(k) a decision  not  to  revoke  a  deportation  order
         generated a right to an in-country appeal unless it  was  certified
         under Section 94.  Accordingly, it was in issue that there  was  an
         appealable decision, only the locus of the appeal.   The  right  to
         that  appeal  existed  whether  or  not  it  was  repetitious.   BA
         (Nigeria) was not concerned with whether a right of  appeal  should
         arise at all, that was what ZA (Nigeria) was concerned with.   This
         court, in a  judgment  given  by  the  Master  of  the  Rolls  Lord
         Neuberger, held that BA (Nigeria) did not require the Secretary  of
         State to issue an appealable decision whenever further  submissions
         were made.  He gave  BA  (Nigeria)  a  narrow  reading:  (see  Lord
         Neuberger at [21]);


             'The Secretary of State can decide that  it  is  not  a  fresh
             claim and then decide to make a decision on whether or not  to
             refuse leave to enter etc.  In that event there  would  be  no
             decision which could give rise to  a  right  of  appeal  under
             Section 82'."


    and after that he gave a number of further reasons that reinforced  his
    analysis as to that outcome.


23.  At this point I must address Ms Robinson's submissions  concerning  the
    amendment to Section 113 of the 2002 Act.  In short she argues that  it
    is implicit in the fact that  the  new  unimplemented  version  of  the
    definition of what is a human rights claim specifically  excludes  from
    that definition a claim that fails to meet the  fresh  claims  test  of
    paragraph 353 that the original version did not do so, otherwise  there
    would have been no reason to provide  for  the  exclusion  in  the  new
    version.


24.  Mr Fisher contends that that is not correct.   In  his  submission  the
    new version of the definition does no more than to clarify the position
    that pertained before.  For  reasons  that  will  be  clear  from  this
    judgment, I do not accept the analysis urged upon me by Ms Robinson.  I
    have no doubt at all that I should follow the approach to  Waqar  taken
    by Lord Justices Underhill and Beatson.  I cannot  say  that  Waqar  is
    wrongly decided and in fact I am confident that it is correctly decided
    and so will follow it in determining this application.  In  any  event,
    as Mr Fisher has submitted, I am bound by the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in ZA (Nigeria) and so must accept the  narrow  reading  of  the
    ratio in BA (Nigeria).


25.  In this  case  the  Secretary  of  State  has  looked  at  the  further
    submissions but has concluded that they did not amount to a fresh claim
    and so declined to treat them as a claim at all.  That meant that there
    was no decision taken and so it cannot be said in the language  of  the
    amended Section 82 that the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse
    the applicant's human rights claim.  What has occurred is precisely the
    opposite of that.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  refused  to  make  a
    decision because, applying the paragraph 353 test,  she  has  concluded
    that the further submissions did not amount to a fresh claim so that no
    decision on the human rights claim was required.  To  the  extent  that
    the Secretary of State embarked upon an examination of  the  merits  of
    the submissions and explained why the earlier decision was  maintained,
    that was not a decision on a human rights claim but  the  operation  of
    the  process  engaged  by  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Similarly where the respondent said in both decisions that having fully
    considered all that had been said there were no  grounds  on  which  to
    revoke the deportation order.  That was not, as has been  submitted  on
    behalf of the applicant a decision not to revoke the deportation  order
    but an explanation that there was no need to make such a decision.


26.   In  discussions  this  morning,  Ms  Robinson  accepted  that  if  her
    submission were correct, where the respondent did  not  accept  further
    submissions and so did not grant a  period  of  leave,  any  assessment
    carried out as to whether or not submissions constituted a fresh  claim
    must necessarily involve reaching a decision to refuse a  human  rights
    claim.  That of course would mean that paragraph 353 of the Rules would
    be otiose and the best that could be achieved to deal  with  repeat  or
    abusive claims would be to certify them.  However, unless such a  claim
    could be certified under Section 96 which plainly not all repeat claims
    devoid of merit could be,  there  would  always  be  an  out-of-country
    appeal even for the most hopeless claims that simply repeated what  had
    been said in a recently rejected claim.   That cannot be correct  given
    that  paragraph  353  has  survived  not  just  the  arrival   of   the
    certification process with the 2002 Act but the frequent and  continual
    amendments  to  the  legislative  framework  that  we   see   in   this
    jurisdiction (including more than 100 amendments  to  HC395  since  the
    arrival of powers of certification) but which have left  paragraph  353
    intact plainly indicating that it continues to have  a  role  to  play.
    That in my judgment is sufficient to dispose of the ground that relates
    to the right of appeal.


27.  I next address the second ground being pursued which  is  that  on  the
    fact advanced in the further submissions, as a matter  of  rationality,
    the Secretary of State should have accepted that a fresh claim had been
    made out such as to require a fresh decision on the  applicant's  human
    rights claim.  In short,  the  applicant  says  that  it  was  properly
    considered a fresh claim because the  previous  refusal  of  his  claim
    under Article 8 of the ECHR was based only on private life whereas  the
    further submissions were concerned with family  life,  first  with  his
    pregnant partner, Ms Godson-Charles and then with both  her  and  their
    newly born son.  That means, in  Ms  Robinson's  submission,  that  the
    human rights claim being  advanced  was  of  a  different  nature  than
    previously relied  upon  and  so  it  was  legally  incorrect  for  the
    respondent to refuse  to  consider  it  and  to  refuse  to  produce  a
    decision.  In support of that submission she took me to ZH (Tanzania) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in support  of
    the proposition that the best interests of the child were to be treated
    as a primary consideration, to ZB (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 834 to illustrate the positive duty
    to show respect for family life and to Paradeep Singh v Entry Clearance
    Officer (New Delhi) [2004] EWCA Civ 1075 as authority for the  need  to
    recognise that family life between father and son necessarily arises at
    birth something we enforced in EM (Lebanon) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2008] UKHL 64.


28.  The legal tests in play are, I think, uncontroversial.  If, as was  the
    case  here,  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  the  further
    representations and so declines for that reason to grant  a  period  of
    leave she must consider whether they constitute a fresh claim.  I  have
    already set out what is  said  about  that  by  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Court of Appeal in  WN  (DRC)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495 made clear that  the
    Secretary of State must treat further submissions as a fresh  claim  if
    there is a realistic prospect of success in an  application  before  an
    Immigration Judge but no more than that referring to this as a somewhat
    modest test.  The Tribunal's function is one of review of the  decision
    of the Secretary of State  but  the  Tribunal  will  intervene  if  the
    Secretary of State has not demonstrated the anxious  scrutiny  demanded
    of her in reaching her decision or has committed some other public  law
    error such as failing to take into account relevant considerations.


29.  I am  unable  to  accept  the  submission  that  the  two  fresh  claim
    decisions are unlawful because the respondent asked herself  the  wrong
    questions,  predicating  her  conclusions  impermissibly  on  her   own
    assessment rather than  her  assessment  of  how  the  claim  would  be
    assessed by a hypothetical Immigration Judge.  That is because,  as  Mr
    Fisher has pointed out, the two letters  are  carefully  structured  so
    that the respondent first  reached  her  own  view  and  then  directed
    herself in terms at paragraph 353 and specifically addressed the  quite
    separate question, and the correct question, of  whether  there  was  a
    realistic prospect of success before an  Immigration  Judge.   In  that
    respect the approach of the respondent cannot be faulted.


30.  That takes us to the second limb of the challenge pursued  against  the
    fresh claim decisions that it was not rationally open to the respondent
    to refuse to accept that a fresh claim had been made out.  Ms  Robinson
    puts it thus, in her skeleton argument which she adopts today:


         "The applicant is entitled to succeed in his Article 8 claim if  he
         establishes any one of the following.  First,  that  he  meets  the
         family life child requirements of paragraph 239A of the Immigration
         Rules; second, that he meets the family life  partner  requirements
         of paragraph 399B of the Rules,  or,  third,  that  notwithstanding
         that he cannot do so there are very compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."


31.  This means, in Ms Robinson's submission, that in order  to  defeat  the
    applicant's challenge the respondent must show not only  that  she  has
    rationally and lawfully rejected the applicant's claim on each of these
    bases set out above but also  that  she  has  rationally  and  lawfully
    concluded that there  was  no  realistic  prospect  that  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge would reach a different conclusion from her  on  any  of
    the three bases on which the applicant could succeed.  The gist of  the
    respondent's reasoning in this regard is encapsulated  in  the  extract
    from the second  refusal  letter  reproduced  by  Ms  Robinson  in  her
    skeleton argument:


         "As outlined in the paragraphs above  you  have  not  provided  any
         details or documentary evidence either to this department or during
         the appeal process to  support  your  claim  that  you  were  in  a
         relationship with  Miss  Tyrena  Godson-Charles  or  that  she  was
         pregnant  with  your  child.   You  have  not  produced   a   birth
         certificate of the child showing parentage or any other documentary
         evidence which confirms that you are the father of the  child.   In
         addition, prior to your detention on 1 July 2015, and  the  child's
         birth on 26 July 2015 you and Tyrena Godson-Charles were not living
         at the same address.  Although the birth of your son is a change of
         circumstances, they do not amount to a fresh claim because they are
         not significantly different from material which has been previously
         considered."


32.  Ms Robinson draws together the factors that in  her  submission  should
    have driven the respondent to the conclusion that  a  fresh  claim  had
    been established:


    (1)  The applicant now has a British partner;


    (2)  the applicant now has a British son;


    (3)  there needed to be a proper assessment pursuant to Section  55  of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 of the son's best
         interests;


    (4)  similarly, an assessment was required under the UN  Convention  on
         the Rights of the Child, and


    (5)  attention is required to the positive obligation to  give  respect
         to family life and the potential development of it.


    It might also be observed, although this was  not  a  matter  discussed
    this morning, that the assessment of the applicant's Article 8 claim by
    an Immigration Judge would of course  be  informed  by  application  of
    Section 117 of the 2002 Act.


33.  For the respondent Mr Fisher points out that there was  nothing  before
    the decision-maker to indicate that  the  child  and  his  mother  were
    British citizens or settled although it is  now  clear  that  both  are
    indeed British citizens.  However, being a foreign criminal  liable  to
    deportation especially  in  view  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  his
    offending, the applicant  faced  a  formidable  obstacle  in  terms  of
    proportionality.  The judge who dismissed the appeal had said this:


         "The appellant is a recidivist who is of medium risk of reoffending
         and of medium risk to the public as highlighted in the NOMS  Report
         and who is of particular risk to young vulnerable people and  young
         vulnerable women who he has robbed in the past.  The social  worker
         points out that the risk is heightened when  the  applicant  is  in
         financial need.  I note that the applicant has never worked in  the
         United Kingdom despite the fact he left school at the age of 16 and
         he is now 23.  The main difficulty facing the applicant  in  making
         out this aspect of his  challenge  is  that  the  only  information
         before  the  respondent  when  considering  whether   the   further
         submissions taken together with  everything  previously  considered
         created a realistic prospect of success before an Immigration Judge
         was the fact that a child had been born of which the applicant  had
         confirmed he was the father."


34.  As Mr Fisher has pointed out, in the  context  of  a  foreign  criminal
    facing deportation that would not in itself be a  sufficient  basis  to
    meet the requirements of paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and so
    it could not possibly be enough in itself to  demand  as  a  matter  of
    rationality an acceptance  that  there  was  a  realistic  prospect  of
    success before a  judge,  but  there  was  no  more  than  that  to  be
    considered.  Therefore, in my judgment, it is impossible  to  see  what
    more could reasonably be expected of the respondent in discharging  her
    duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act in respect of the welfare or  the
    best interests of this child about whom so little was known.   Although
    making  no  concession  to  this  effect  Ms   Robinson   realistically
    recognised that there was no realistic prospect of the claim succeeding
    on the basis of the applicant's relationship with his partner either.


35.  Given the paucity of information before the  decision-maker  about  the
    family life  now  being  asserted,  in  my  judgment  the  outcome  was
    inevitably that which resulted.   The  asserted  relationship  with  Ms
    Godson-Charles had been entered into  relatively  recently  at  a  time
    when, on any view the applicant's immigration  status  was  precarious.
    That much appears to have been recognised by Ms Godson-Charles  herself
    as she has said in a brief statement that  they  have  decided  not  to
    marry while this  was  uncertain.   There  was  no  evidence  of  prior
    cohabitation, there was no prospect at  all  of  the  Article  8  claim
    succeeding on the basis of the relationship.  The conclusion  that  the
    applicant did not meet the requirements of 399A or 399B was  plainly  a
    rational one and even  now  there  is  nothing  to  identify  the  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those required to succeed under
    those provisions such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal convicted with a history of offending
    as is in play in this application, especially as the  probation  report
    of June 2014 spoke of the applicant representing a medium risk  of  re-
    offending.  The decisions under challenge  were  plainly  rational  and
    lawful ones.  It is impossible to see on  the  evidence  now  available
    that the outcome before a judge of the First-tier Tribunal could be any
    different and for these reasons the application for judicial review  is
    refused. ~~~~0~~~~

