

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|AA (unaccompanied minors - reception on return) Afghanistan [2005]|
|UKAIT 00143                                                       |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2005            |12th October 2005               |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|His Honour D Holden                                               |
|Rt. Hon. Countess of Mar                                          |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation
For the appellant: Ms R Akther of Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
For the respondent : Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

The Home Office policy is not to remove unaccompanied minors  unless  there
are adequate reception arrangements in place. Where it is reasonably likely
that members  of  the  child's  immediate  or  extended  family  will  make
appropriate arrangements for his or her reception on return the removal  of
the child does not breach the  policy  and  does  not  infringe  his  human
rights.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. He  seeks  reconsideration
      of a determination by Adjudicator Mr A.J. Martin notified on 6 January
      2004 dismissing his appeal against a decision refusing to grant asylum
      and refusing him leave to enter.

2.    The appellant claimed that he would be  targeted  by  the  authorities
      because his father was a military officer working for the intelligence
      department of the communist government. He  also  expressed  fears  of
      serious harm at the hands of the Taliban and fears  arising  from  his
      tribal identify as a Tajik.  He believed too that  as  a  national  of
      Afghanistan under the age of eighteen  he  should  have  been  granted
      Exceptional Leave to  Remain in the UK. In this regard he relied on:

             'Unaccompanied asylum  seeking children who have no  claim  to
             stay in the UK and who would, had they been adults  have  been
             refused outright, should continue to be dealt with under  UASC
             policy and given ELR to age 18 or    for four years for  those
             under 14, unless there are adequate reception arrangements  in
             place' [Home Office Operational  Guidance Note  Afghanistan  -
             February 2003]


             In July 2003  UNHCR  advised  that  persons   in  particularly
             vulnerable circumstances  should not be required to return  to
             Afghanistan. These include - unaccompanied  minors'  [Page  7,
             para 6.224 - CIPU - October 2003].

3.    The  Adjudicator  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  a  national  of
      Afghanistan, and that  his  father  was  a  colonel  working  for  the
      Communist Party who had been killed in 1995.  Although not prepared to
      accept much else the Adjudicator did proceed to consider whether, even
      taking the appellant's evidence as to other matters at its highest, he
      would be at risk currently. He concluded that  the  Northern  Alliance
      regime would not have an adverse interest in him  on  account  of  his
      father's past activities.  He did  not  consider  that  the  appellant
      would be at risk from remnants of the Taliban or that he would  be  at
      risk because he was a Tajik. At paragraph 98 he stated:

             'My understanding is that, if the appellant  is  returned,  it
             will be to Kabul. Security there has considerably improved and
             life there is slowly returning to some kind of normality. I am
             satisfied that the authorities would be able  and  willing  to
             give him  effective protection. I from [sic] e.g. the Northern
             Alliance or any  other group who might wish to attack  him  on
             political or ethnic grounds.   No protection can of course  be
             absolute or guaranteed.'

4.    At paragraph 100 he stated:

             'Regarding human rights and again having regard  to  my  above
             comments and findings I am satisfied that there would  not  be
             substantial grounds for believing he would be at real risk  of
             a breach of any of his human rights  under  the  ECHR.   I  am
             aware that Article 3 is absolute, has  a  high  threshold  and
             that a minimum level of severity must be shown.   With  regard
             to Article 8 he has  family  in   Afghanistan  and  I  do  not
             consider  that  leaving  his  claimed   relatives  here  would
             constitute a breach of that Article.  In  any  event,  in  the
             circumstances, his return would not be  disproportionate.  The
             standard of proof in these matters is on  the  lower  standard
             i.e. the same as in asylum cases, the onus being on him.

      However, he did accept at paragraph 97 that he was the age he  claimed
      (i.e. d.o.b. 25 October 1986).

5.    The  grounds  of  appeal  contended  firstly  that  in  assessing  the
      appellant's claims under Articles 3 and 8 the Adjudicator  had  failed
      to take into account real risk arising from the fact  that  he  was  a
      minor.  Secondly they submitted that the  Adjudicator  had  failed  to
      make findings of fact on  whether  the  appellant  had  established  a
      family  life in the UK and had failed to approach the question of  the
      proportionality  of  the  interference  with  his  Article  8   rights
      correctly.   It  was  wrong  to  consider  the   appellant's   removal
      proportionate when under the Secretary of State's  own  policy  minors
      were not to be removed.

6.    Dealing first with the grounds raising Article 8, we do  not  consider
      that the Adjudicator materially erred in law. We would agree  with  Ms
      Akhtar that the Adjudicator's reasoning on  the  issue  of  family  or
      private life as set out in paragraph 100 was cursory  and  inadequate.
      Nevertheless, since he did address proportionality,  he  must  clearly
      have  been prepared to proceed on the basis that the appellant's  ties
      with relatives in the UK constituted a protected right  under  Article
      8(1).     Furthermore,  whilst  he  failed   to   set   out   relevant
      considerations he took into account when assessing proportionality, it
      is  not  seriously  arguable  in  our  view   that   the   appellant's
      circumstances brought him into the category  of  a  truly  exceptional
      case. He had only arrived in the UK on  January  2003,  he  has  known
      since arrival that this immigration status was  precarious,  his  only
      family in the UK was with a cousin and the  preponderance of his close
      family ties were in  Afghanistan. His father may have been killed, but
      he had a mother and siblings, as well as a maternal uncle with a house
      in Kabul.  The appellant confirmed before  the  Adjudicator  that  his
      mother wrote to him every so often and that  she  had  sent  her  last
      letter (containing  his father's ID papers) one-and-a-half months ago.



7.    Ms Akhtar pointed out that in evidence the appellant had also said  he
      did not know the whereabouts of his family in  Afghanistan and that he
      had not had a reply to his latest letter. However, it  was  reasonably
      open the Adjudicator to infer from the fact of correspondence that the
      appellant would be able to maintain or resume contact with his  family
      on return to  Afghanistan.

   8. Ms Akhtar pointed out that the appellant's family home was  in  Logar,
      not in Kabul and on the appellant's own evidence his immediate  family
      were still having difficulties. She reminded us that in paragraph  101
      the Adjudicator had found that he could not relocate outside Kabul 'in
      the  current  circumstances'.  However,  the   Adjudicator's   primary
      findings on the appellant's risk on return arising  out  of  his  past
      experiences were that he would not  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the
      Northern Alliance or be at real risk from Taliban  remnants  or  anti-
      Tajik elements. In the light of those findings  there  was  no  proper
      basis for assuming that a return  of  the  appellant  to  Kabul  would
      prevent him from enjoying some sort of family life. Even  if  it  were
      considered unsafe for the appellant to rejoin his family in  his  home
      area, his uncle had a house in Kabul as well as a friend there and the
      appellant had spent seven months in Kabul in their care.   It was  not
      reasonably likely therefore that the appellant would  face  having  to
      arrive in Kabul without adequate reception arrangements being made  by
      his extended family. They had taken active steps to ensure his care in
      Kabul in the past and there was no reason to  ensure  that  would  not
      take similar steps in the future.

9.    These conclusions have a direct impact  on  the  appellant's  argument
      that the Adjudicator, like the Secretary  of  State,  wrongly  treated
      Article 8(2) considerations regarding effective immigration control as
      weighing heavily in this case in view of his own policy not to  remove
      minors. As can be seen from the wording to that policy as recorded  by
      the Adjudicator at paragraph 72, the policy does not apply where there
      are adequate reception arrangements in place. The  policy  is  plainly
      confined to 'unaccompanied' minors, not to minors who  can  reasonably
      be expected to be met and received by family members  on  return.  (We
      note that this is made even clearer by the wording of  at  least  some
      other Home Office policy statements  on  UASCs  (Unaccompanied  Asylum
      Seeking  Children): which, as we understand it, more expressly confine
      their scope to minors who have  no  family  to  return  to  and  where
      adequate reception arrangements cannot be established).

10.   The same general point applies to the UNHCR advice. It is  unfortunate
      that the latter does not spell out that  by 'unaccompanied minor' here
      they do not simply mean anyone still a minor in the receiving  country
      who arrived unaccompanied, but  rather  mean  a  minor  who  would  be
      returning to a situation in which  he or she would not  have  adequate
      reception or family support. But this  advice would not make sense  if
      taken to apply to anyone who  arrived  in  a  receiving  state  as  an
      unaccompanied minor, irrespective of the reception or  family  support
      arrangements  likely on return.

  11. This same point is fatal to the appellant's Article 3  arguments.   On
      the unchallenged findings of fact made by the Adjudicator in this case
      the appellant had  family in  Afghanistan.  Although  the  Adjudicator
      can be criticised for not specifically  addressing  the  unaccompanied
      minor points  which  were  clearly  put  to  him  by  the  appellant's
      representatives (see paragraph 72), there was no material error of law
      involved here, since on return  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  his
      family members in  Afghanistan would be  in  communication  and  would
      ensure that the appellant would be looked  after  by  members  of  his
      extended family.

12.   For the above reasons, the determination of the Adjudicator,  although
      flawed in limited respects, does not disclose a material error of law.

13.   Accordingly, the decision of the Adjudicator to dismiss the appeal  on
      human rights as well as asylum grounds must stand.




                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
