
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           Campbell (exclusion; Zambrano) [2013] UKUT 00147 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                               DELROY CAMPBELL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON

                                                                  Respondent

1.   Exclusion decisions are not be confused with exclusion orders.

2.   It is settled law that the Secretary of State has the power to make  an
    exclusion decision: see R (on the application of Naik) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 14 and there  is  nothing
    unlawful in such a decision being made after  a  claimant  has  made  a
    voluntary departure from the UK.

3.   There is no reason in principle why  Zambrano  principles  (Zambrano  v
    Office National de l'Emploi (ONEm) [2011] All ER (EC)  4)  cannot  have
    application in entry clearance cases: in both  in-country  and  out-of-
    country cases the Member State must ensure that any "refusal  does  not
    lead, for the Union citizen concerned, to the  denial  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  by  virtue  of  his
    status  as  a  citizen  of  the  Union":  Dereci  &  Others   (European
    citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-256/11, 15 November 2011, para 74.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Chirico, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  On 3 September 2010  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge B  A  Morris  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    decision made by the respondent  on  3  February  2010  to  refuse  his
    application for entry clearance to join  his  spouse,  (Susan  Campbell
    whom he had married in Jamaica on 19 September  2008)  in  the  UK  for
    settlement. The sole ground of refusal was stated to be that, by virtue
    of the fact that the appellant was "subject to an exclusion order where
    the Secretary of State on 18th September 2008 had  personally  directed
    that his exclusion was conducive to the public good", he  stood  to  be
    refused under paragraph 320(6) of the Immigration  Rules  which  states
    that entry clearance is to be refused "where the Secretary of State has
    personally directed that the exclusion of  a  person  from  the  United
    Kingdom is conducive to the public good". It is as well to  clarify  at
    this point that the reference in the  ECO  decision  to  an  "exclusion
    order" was incorrect. As is made clear in the UKBA document  "Exclusion
    decisions and exclusion orders" v1.0 valid from 5 July 2012, "exclusion
    orders" refer to  decisions  made  under  regulation  21(5)(c)  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006,   whereas
    "exclusion decisions" are made by the Secretary of State  against  non-
    EEA nationals in the exercise of her extra-statutory power preserved by
    s.33(5) of the  Immigration  Act  1971  (we  leave  aside  her  special
    provisions for persons coming from  the  Common  Travel  Area).  It  is
    settled law that the Secretary of  State  has  the  power  to  make  an
    exclusion decision: see R (on the application of Naik) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  14.  Exclusion  is  also
    one of the "...grounds of  public  good"  identified  in  s.98  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

2.   The background to the appellant's application for entry  clearance  was
    that he had  previously  been  in  the  UK,  having  first  entered  in
    September 2001 on a visit visa.  From 25 September 2001  he  became  an
    overstayer.  On 27 March 2008 he was arrested on suspicion of  using  a
    false document and on 20 May 2008 he was charged with possession  of  a
    false identity with intent, contrary to s25(1) of  the  Identity  Cards
    Act 2006.  He  pleaded  guilty  and  was  sentenced  to  seven  months'
    imprisonment, the sentencing judge recommending that he be deported and
    the respondent set in train proceedings to deport him.  Having signed a
    form on 12 July 2008 waiving his appeal rights against deportation,  he
    was considered for a "Facilitated Return". On 23 July 2008 the  section
    of the Criminal Case Directorate dealing with the  Facilitated  Returns
    Scheme wrote to him  to say that it had been decided to  allow  him  to
    return to Jamaica under this scheme. This letter noted that "[y]ou will
    not be deported but the Home Office will consider whether you should be
    excluded from the UK. Should you be excluded from returning to  the  UK
    you can apply to have this revoked [at] any time". On 1 September  2008
    the appellant made a voluntary departure.  Subsequently (when  back  in
    Jamaica) he learnt that the Secretary of State had personally  directed
    that he should be excluded from the UK on the ground that his  presence
    would not be conducive to the public good for reasons  of  criminality,
    specifically his criminal conviction for being  knowingly  involved  in
    possession and use of a false instrument and that as a  consequence  he
    should not attempt to enter the UK. It is not entirely clear  when  the
    appellant was first notified of this, but from the letter sent  by  his
    then representatives, IAS, dated 2 October 2010 it is  at  least  clear
    that  he had been informed of it by January 2009 when he  had  been  in
    contact with ECO, Kingston; this  accords  with  his  own  evidence  of
    having received a refusal of entry clearance prior  to  the  one  under
    appeal.

3.   Following a grant of permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  an
    Upper Tribunal panel (Mr  Justice  Coulson  and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey) decided that the FtT had materially erred in law, and set aside
    its decision: see Annex for this decision  in  full.   In  essence  the
    errors identified related to the judge's failure, when considering  the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances,  (i)  to  make  an  assessment  of
    whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant's wife and  daughter,
    K, to go and live with him in Jamaica; (ii) to make a proper assessment
    of the best interests of the children with whom the appellant had  some
    involvement;  and  (iii)  to  assess  and  weigh  in  the  balance  the
    likelihood that the appellant would re-offend.

4.   We should note that in the course of its  error  of  law  decision  the
    Upper Tribunal panel rejected an attempt by the appellant's Counsel  on
    that occasion (Ms Hooper) to persuade it that the FtT had also erred in
    law in failing to consider whether the prior decision of  the  SSHD  to
    exclude the appellant from the UK was  "in  accordance  with  the  law"
    because of the circumstances in which he left the UK.  We set out  here
    what the Upper Tribunal panel said about this matter at paras 8-9:

         "8.   Having heard both parties' submissions we are satisfied for a
             number of reasons that  the  scope  of  this  appeal  must  be
             confined to Article 8. In the first place, the  appellant  has
             had ample opportunity since 26  August  2008  -  when  he  was
             served with a letter informing him  in  writing  by  the  Home
             Office that the Home Secretary had personally directed that he
             should be excluded - to challenge  that  decision  by  way  of
             judicial review. He failed to do  so.  Secondly,  the  grounds
             appear to rely in part on a misunderstanding of the status  of
             an exclusion decision. They refer to the lack of  evidence  of
             the Secretary of State having made an 'exclusion  order',  but
             to  our  understanding  exclusion  is  a  non-statutory  power
             exercised by the Home Secretary acting in person  to  prohibit
             entry to the UK in respect of certain  categories  of  person,
             including foreign national prisoners who  have  taken  up  the
             offer of assistance as part of the facilitated returns scheme.
             Such a decision does not need to be made in  the  form  of  an
             order; it can be made simply by way of a letter, as  was  done
             in this case. Thirdly, the grounds appear to consider that the
             exclusion decision was unlawful because,  having  been  warned
             that  he  might  be  deported,  the  appellant  in  fact  left
             voluntarily. Leaving aside  that  it  would  appear  that  the
             appellant's departure was not wholly  voluntary  (Mr  Melvin's
             skeleton argument describes it  as  having  been  an  escorted
             departure), it is  apparent  that  exclusion  is  a  different
             process from deportation and that leaving  voluntarily  is  no
             bar to an exclusion decision.


         9.   Thirdly, now that we have a fuller picture of the  appellant's
             immigration history, we see no proper basis for considering  a
             ground of appeal that the appellant himself, after  his  legal
             representative  had  been  granted  a  brief  adjournment   to
             consider the matter, no longer wished to  advance  before  the
             FTT (it was not a ground, in any event, that  formed  part  of
             the written grounds of appeal to the  FTT).  Fourthly,  it  is
             entirely clear that the appellant was aware of the threat,  if
             not the fact, of an exclusion decision, when he signed  a form
             dated 12 July 2008 stating that he intended to  leave  the  UK
             and did not wish to exercise any rights of appeal.  Ms  Hooper
             did not suggest that it was not the appellant's  signature  on
             this form. It is true that this pro forma form made  reference
             to withdrawal of a right of appeal against 'deportation',  but
             he cannot have been in any doubt that he was waiving rights of
             statutory appeal against any aspect of the removal process. It
             is also true that he did not tick the further box which stated
             'I understand that I may be excluded from the  United  Kingdom
             following my departure', but it remains the fact that the form
             contained this warning and the fact that he did not tick  this
             box does not alter the fact that he must have read the letter.
             Further and in any event, (and this  brings  us  back  to  our
             first point) he did not have any right of  appeal  against  an
             exclusion decision although, as he was  subsequently  informed
             of that prior to his removal  (on  26  August  2008),  he  was
             clearly in  a  position  prior  to  departure  to  exercise  a
             judicial review challenge."


Evidence

5.   Mr Chirico said that he did not intend to call any witnesses but  would
    rely on the further witness statements from both the appellant and  his
    wife and, in relation to the issue of the exclusion decision,  the  DPU
    file produced by  the  respondent  in  response  to  a  subject  access
    application from the appellant's representatives.  The  previous  Upper
    Tribunal panel dealing with error of law had stated that  the  FtT  had
    recorded the oral evidence given before it and noted recent  statements
    bringing the appellant and his family's circumstances up to  date.   It
    was not a case where  there  was  any  significant  dispute  about  the
    factual circumstances.

SUBMISSIONS

The exclusion decision

6.   At the hearing Mr Chirico acknowledged that  the  terms  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's error of law decision made it difficult for him to  re-argue
    that the respondent's exclusion decision was "not  in  accordance  with
    the law".  However, he maintained that this remained a live  issue  and
    it was at least necessary, in order for the  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    Article  8  decision,  to  have  a   correct   understanding   of   the
    circumstances in which the appellant had come to be excluded  from  the
    UK.  In this context he said that the Upper Tribunal has been  mistaken
    in considering that the respondent made an exclusion  decision  against
    the appellant on 28 August 2008.  The correct  date  was  18  September
    2008, by which time the appellant  had  left  the  UK  (he  left  on  1
    September 2008).  The significance  of  the  fact  that  the  exclusion
    decision was not taken prior to departure was that the appellant  never
    knew about it.  It was also critical that the appellant had  chosen  to
    leave voluntarily so he could improve his prospects of regularising his
    position in the UK by way of applying for entry clearance.

7.     Mr Melvin submitted that even  though  the  Tribunal  may  have  been
    misled by a letter wrongly dated 28 August 2008 by the respondent,  the
    Tribunal should not  re-visit  the  issue  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
    exclusion decision in any shape or form as the previous Upper  Tribunal
    panel had not accepted it was a ground that could be argued and it  was
    not until some ten months later, without proper notice, that Mr Chirico
    was seeking to re-open it.

Article 8

8.   Both parties accepted that as this was  an  out-of-country  appeal  the
    focus had to be on the facts as they stood at the date of  decision  in
    February 2010, even though that was nearly three years ago.

9.   Mr Chirico said that it was important to note  the  failure  of  either
    the Secretary of State before the appellant's departure from the UK  or
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer  afterwards  to  address  his  Article  8
    circumstances.  There had simply been no Article 8  inquiry  until  the
    hearing before the FtT.

10.  Mr Chirico submitted that the evidence showed that  the  appellant  had
    strong family life ties in the UK.  He had been in a relationship  with
    Susan Campbell, a British citizen,  since  2004.   They  had  cohabited
    since then up until the date of his departure from  the  UK.   She  had
    gone out to Jamaica to marry him.  The appellant's departure  from  the
    UK had had an adverse impact on her: she suffered from  depression  and
    had a drinking problem.

11.  The appellant had a close relationship with K, who is his child.  K  is
    a British citizen.  It was to be recalled that according to  Strasbourg
    case law there was presumptive family life  between  a  child  and  her
    natural father.  Prior to his departure and since K's birth he had been
    her primary carer as his wife had gone back to work.  When she had gone
    to Jamaica to marry, K had gone with her and indeed had stayed with the
    appellant for a period, albeit short, when she had gone back to the  UK
    before returning to pick up her daughter.

12.  In addition, the appellant played a stepfather role in relation to  his
    wife's two children by a previous relationship, C and A.  C, born on 14
    September 1992 and so 17 at the date of decision, was a teenage boy who
    needed a father figure in his life. A, born on  14  June  1995,  was  3
    years younger.

13.   A  further  factor  in  favour  of   the   appellant   concerned   the
    circumstances of his departure from the UK.  It was to his credit  that
    he had chosen to leave voluntarily.  Further, as already observed,  the
    fact that the exclusion decision was only made after  he  left  the  UK
    meant he never had the chance to challenge it.  The first he knew of it
    was in October 2009  when  he  received  his  first  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

14.  Asked by us to address the possible relevance to the  appellant's  case
    of Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'Emploi (ONEm) [2011]  All  E  R
    (EC) 4 and other Court of Justice cases dealing with Article 20 of  the
    Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), Mr Chirico said
    that it reinforced the appellant's Article 8 argument  because  clearly
    his wife could not be expected to relocate to  Jamaica  as  this  would
    entail depriving her British citizen child,  K,  of  enjoyment  of  her
    rights as a Union citizen.

15.  Whilst Mr Chirico accepted there were factors weighing  in  the  scales
    against the appellant, including the fact that he  had  not  sought  to
    regularise his stay whilst living in the UK  unlawfully,  his  criminal
    sentence (7 months) was less than  twelve  months  and  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks confirmed there was no previous criminal history.   The
    offence did not involve violence, sexual misconduct or drugs.   It  was
    his only offence.  He was undoubtedly at a low risk of re-offending.

16.   Asked  by  the  panel  whether  he  thought  that  in  assessing   the
    proportionality of the entry clearance refusal  decision  the  Tribunal
    should ask itself what would be a reasonable length of time  to  expect
    someone excluded from the UK to stay outside the UK,  Mr  Chirico  said
    that the period of time  between  the  appellant's  departure  and  his
    refusal decision was seventeen months and where there were family  life
    considerations there should be no fixed periods.  For  the  appellant's
    child K, seventeen months was seventeen  months  too  long  and  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 the  Supreme  Court  had  said  that  children
    should not be punished for the wrongdoings of their parents.

17.  Mr Chirico said that  as  a  consequence  of  leaving  voluntarily  the
    appellant was  not  subject  to  a  preliminary  procedure  within  the
    Immigration Rules such as applied to those against whom  a  deportation
    order had been made and who wished to re-enter.  They were required  to
    apply for and obtain revocation before they  could  be  considered  for
    entry clearance.  This difference reinforced his  view  that  no  fixed
    period of  time  prior  to  applying  for  entry  clearance  should  be
    considered as relevant in the instant case.

18.  With reference to a written  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Melvin  submitted
    that the appellant's case was on all fours with the appeal made by  the
    appellant in the case of  Latif  (s.120  -  revocation  of  deportation
    order) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 78 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal held that
    an individual who is the subject of a deportation order must apply  for
    revocation  of  the  order  before  making  an  application  for  entry
    clearance if he or she is not to be the subject to a mandatory  refusal
    under para 320(2).  Where there was a  two-stage  procedure  under  the
    Rules an applicant was expected to apply first for revocation and  then
    for entry clearance.  If he did not follow this then, in the  words  of
    the Tribunal in Latif, "it is hard to envisage circumstances  in  which
    it would  be  proportionate  to  allow  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    circumvented by relying on Article 8".

19.  In oral submissions, Mr Melvin argued that even if  Latif  was  not  on
    all fours  (because  Immigration  Rules  did  not  impose  a  two-stage
    procedure in exclusion cases),  the  case  was  persuasive  by  analogy
    because in both cases the Entry Clearance Officer had  applied  general
    grounds of refusal (para 320(2) in Latif's case;  para  320(6)  in  the
    appellant's case) and Article 8 consideration had to take full  account
    of that.  It was of relevance here that despite knowing for four  years
    that he was subject to an exclusion decision neither the appellant  nor
    his advisers made any attempt to get this decision revoked by way of an
    application for judicial review.

20.  As regards Article 8, Mr Melvin said that no medical evidence had  been
    submitted to support the claims that the appellant's wife suffered from
    depression and drink problems.  She had knowingly aided  the  appellant
    in his remaining  in  the  UK  illegally  since  2005,  yet  she  still
    continued her relationship with him and went on to have  a  child  with
    him knowing that he could be removed at any date.

21.  As regards K, at the date of decision she was only 4 year old and  both
    before and after the appellant's departure she had  always  lived  with
    her mother.  There was a dearth of actual medical evidence showing  she
    had  suffered  behavioural  problems  as  a  result  of  her   father's
    departure.  After the appellant left, her mother had given up  work  in
    January 2009 to look after her.  Given the lack of independent evidence
    to corroborate the appellant's and  his  sponsor's  evidence  that  the
    appellant had been K's primary carer whilst he was still in the UK, the
    respondent did not accept he was the primary carer for  any  length  of
    time after her birth.  There was no evidence outside his  own  and  his
    wife's statements to show that during the short time K was  in  Jamaica
    she was cared for by the appellant rather than by female members of his
    family.  When he left the UK, K was 2 years old.  There was no evidence
    outside the family statements that  K  suffered  as  a  result  of  his
    departure.  There was no Social Services' involvement.

22.  In relation to the other step/grandchildren, there was no  evidence  up
    to the date of decision of their having any contact other than  by  way
    of telephone calls with the appellant since he was arrested in 2008.

23.  Similar difficulties arose in relation to the application to the  facts
    of this case of Zambrano principles.  It was clear from  the  Court  of
    Appeal judgment in Damian Harrison (Jamaica) AB (Morocco)  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 1736 that this principle only applies in exceptional  circumstances
    where the Union citizen would be forced to leave the territory  of  the
    EU.  That was not the case here.  Neither K  nor  the  British  citizen
    stepchildren, C and A, were being required or expected to leave the  UK
    and it was not argued  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's wife to relocate to Jamaica.

24.  As  regards  the  appellant's  risk  of  re-offending,  whilst  it  was
    accepted there was no evidence to suggest he had  been  in  trouble  in
    Jamaica, almost his entire history in the UK was one of  unlawful  stay
    and failure to make contact with the authorities (even after he  had  a
    child).  His criminal  purchase  of  a  British  passport  he  was  not
    entitled to had to be seen in that context.  His wife had  known  about
    his unlawful stay.

25.  Accordingly, argued Mr Melvin, the circumstances of his  departure  did
    not  weigh  in  his  favour.   He  knew  he  had  been  subject  to   a
    recommendation for deportation.  The fact that he chose the  option  of
    avoiding a deportation decision by asking for  Facilitated  Return  (at
    taxpayers' expense) did not mean he had  a  legitimate  expectation  he
    could return.  If he had chosen to stay he would  have  been  deported.
    After he left he made no attempt to challenge the  exclusion  decision,
    even assuming he did not know of it until October 2009.  It was  up  to
    him to take professional advice.

OUR ASSESSMENT

26.  The decision in this case being a refusal of entry  clearance,  we  are
    confined to considering the circumstances as they stood at the date  of
    decision in February 2010, looking to subsequent evidence only for what
    light it sheds on such circumstances.

The exclusion issue

27.  The Upper Tribunal panel who decided to set aside the decision  of  the
    FtT said that they were not prepared to accede to the request  made  by
    the appellant's representatives  to  vary  the  grounds  to  include  a
    challenge to the legality of the exclusion decision. Mr Chirico accepts
    that he has not given proper notice of the appellant's wish to  re-open
    this matter. Ordinarily such circumstances would cause us to refuse the
    application to re-open it. However there are two complications in  this
    case. One is that the previous  Upper  Tribunal  panel  was  misled  by
    UKBA's incorrect dating of correspondence  into  considering  that  the
    exclusion decision was made against the appellant before he left the UK
    voluntarily on 1 September 2008; in fact that decision  was  only  made
    after he had left the UK. The other is that we cannot in any event shut
    Mr Chirico out from submitting  that  the  true  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's departure from  the  UK  and  the  subsequent  decision  to
    exclude him have a bearing on the Article 8(2)  issues  of  "accordance
    with the law" and the  proportionality  the  decision.  Accordingly  we
    consider that we should examine again whether  the  exclusion  decision
    was lawful.

28.  On the basis of further evidence adduced before us (in the form of  the
    appellant's immigration file)  we  are  prepared  to  accept  that  the
    previous panel was mistaken on the question of  whether  the  appellant
    was notified of the decision to exclude him before he left (it  is  now
    clear that a letter addressed to the appellant dated 28 August 2008 was
    incorrectly dated and that the exclusion decision was not made until 18
    September 2008, i.e. 17 days after he had left the UK). However, we  do
    not consider that this is sufficient  to  establish  anything  unlawful
    about that decision or about its surrounding circumstances.  It remains
    the case that:

      i) the sentencing judge recommended the appellant for deportation  and
         the appellant was plainly aware that proceedings were in  train  to
         deport him;


     ii) on 12 July 2008 he signed a waiver form withdrawing  his  right  of
         appeal against his deportation.  Although  not  ticked,  this  form
         contained a box stating "I understand that I may be  excluded  from
         the United Kingdom following my departure";

    iii) on 23 July 2008 he was informed by the UKBA section of the Criminal
         Casework Directorate dealing with Facilitated Returns  that  "[y]ou
         will not be deported but the Home Office will consider whether  you
         should be excluded from the United Kingdom. Should you be  excluded
         from returning to UK, you can apply to have this revoked [sic]  any
         time ";

     iv) in response the appellant chose to leave the UK  voluntarily  under
         the Facilitated Return Programme;


      v) after the appellant had made a voluntary  departure  from  the  UK,
         i.e. on 1 September 2008, the Secretary of State, on  18  September
         2008, made a decision to exclude him;


     vi) as already noted, the Secretary of State has extra-statutory  power
         (preserved by the 1971 Act) to exclude persons on the grounds  that
         their presence is not conducive to the public good: see R  (on  the
         application of Naik) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2011] EWCA Civ para 14;


    vii) there is nothing unlawful about the Secretary of State deciding  to
         make a decision to exclude a person from the UK after he  has  left
         and in fact that appellant was informed in the form he signed on 12
         July 2008 and by the letter sent to him on 23 July  2008  that  the
         Secretary of State might decide to take such a step;


   viii) even if (as appears likely) the eventual exclusion decision as such
         was not served on the appellant in Jamaica, where he had been since
         arriving back there on or shortly after 1 September 2008,  there is
         no requirement for personal service and he clearly knew of it by 21
         January 2009 when he received a refusal of  his  first  application
         for (or inquiry about)  entry clearance;


     ix) despite becoming aware of it on that  date  (if  not  before),  the
         appellant took no steps to challenge it either by  writing  to  the
         immigration authorities or seeking judicial review.

29.  In such  circumstances  we  are  quite  satisfied  that  the  exclusion
    decision was lawful and that as a consequence para 320(6) was  properly
    applied against the  appellant.   Mr  Chirico's  submissions  that  the
    circumstances of his departure are relevant to the consideration of his
    Article 8 grounds have to be considered in the light of the foregoing.


Zambrano principles

30.  We see no reason in  principle  why  Zambrano  principles  cannot  have
    application in entry clearance cases: in both  in-country  and  out-of-
    country cases the Member State must ensure that any "refusal  does  not
    lead, for the Union citizen concerned, to the  denial  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  by  virtue  of  his
    status  as  a  citizen  of  the  Union":  Dereci  &  Others   (European
    citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-256/11, 15 November 2011, para  74.  Indeed
    the ruling of the Grand Chamber of the Court of Justice  in  this  case
    encompassed not just the cases of those  applicants  who  were  already
    living in the host Member State (Austria) but Mrs Stevic who resided in
    Serbia: see paras 26, 35, 74.

31.      So far as concerns the relevance of  Zambrano  principles  to  this
    case, we consider that both in relation to K and to a lesser but  still
    significant extent in relation  to  C  and  A,  the  appellant  can  be
    considered to have performed a parent/carer role. We noted  as  regards
    his role as a stepfather to C and A  that  the  Court  of  Justice  has
    considered that  (where  applicable)  such  persons  can  benefit  from
    Zambrano  principles  as  well  as  natural  parents:  see  O  &  S   v
    Maahanmuuttovirasto v L  [2012]  EUECJ  C-356/11  (06  December  2012).
    However, we do not find that the key principles set out in Zambrano and
    subsequent cases (including O & S) assist the  appellant's  case.   The
    appellant has had limited contact with his British citizen child C  and
    it is clear that both before, during and  since  the  period  when  the
    appellant lived in the same household A and  K  have  continued  to  be
    cared for and brought up by their  mother, Mrs Campbell. The  continued
    exclusion of the appellant from the United Kingdom could not be said to
    prevent  them  from  continuing  to  exercise  in  the  United  Kingdom
    substantive enjoyment of their rights as Union citizens.

32.  In respect of K, the appellant's wife  found  it  necessary,  upon  his
    departure, to cease work in order to care for her, which may well  have
    been an economic detriment (to be added  to  the  detriment  of  K  not
    having her father present in her life), but as the Court of Justice has
    observed in several  post-Zambrano  cases,  economic  disadvantage  and
    family  unity  are  insufficient  factors  to  constitute   exceptional
    circumstances that would require either K or his stepchildren, C and A,
    to  leave  the  territory  of  the  Union.  Very   pertinent   to   the
    circumstances of this case are the words of the Court of Justice in O &
    S:
         "50.     When making that assessment, it must be taken into account
             that  the  mothers  of  the  Union  citizens  hold   permanent
             residence permits in the Member State in question, so that, in
             law, there is no obligation either for them or for  the  Union
             citizens dependent on them to  leave  the  territory  of  that
             Member State or of the European Union as a whole.
         51.      For the purpose of examining whether  the  Union  citizens
             concerned would be unable, in fact, to exercise the  substance
             of the rights conferred by their status, the question  of  the
             custody of the  sponsors'  children  and  the  fact  that  the
             children are part of reconstituted families are also relevant.
             First, since Ms S and Ms L have  sole  custody  of  the  Union
             citizens concerned who are minors, a decision by them to leave
             the territory of the Member State of which those children  are
             nationals, in order to preserve the family  unit,  would  have
             the effect of depriving those Union citizens  of  all  contact
             with their biological fathers, should such contact  have  been
             maintained up to the present. Secondly, any decision  to  stay
             in the territory of that Member State in order to preserve the
             relationship, if any, of the Union  citizens  who  are  minors
             with their biological fathers would have the effect of harming
             the relationship of the other children, who are third  country
             nationals, with their biological fathers.
         52.      However, the mere fact that it might appear desirable, for
             economic reasons or in order to preserve the  family  unit  in
             the territory of the Union, for members of a family consisting
             of third country nationals and a Union citizen who is a  minor
             to be able to reside with that citizen in the territory of the
             Union in the Member State of which he is  a  national  is  not
             sufficient in itself  to  support  the  view  that  the  Union
             citizen would be forced to leave the territory of the Union if
             such a right of residence  were  not  granted  (see,  to  that
             effect, Dereci and Others, paragraph 68).
         53.      In connection with the assessment, mentioned in  paragraph
             49 above, which it is for the referring court  to  carry  out,
             that court must examine all the circumstances of the  case  in
             order to determine whether, in fact,  the  decisions  refusing
             residence permits at issue in the main proceedings are  liable
             to  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  the  Union  citizenship
             enjoyed by the Union citizens concerned.
         54.      Whether the person for whom a right of residence is sought
             on the basis of family reunification lives together  with  the
             sponsor and the other family members is not decisive  in  that
             assessment, since it cannot be  ruled  out  that  some  family
             members who are the  subject  of  an  application  for  family
             reunification  may  arrive  in  the  Member  State   concerned
             separately from the rest of the family.
         55.      It should also be noted that, contrary to the  submissions
             of the German and Italian Governments,  while  the  principles
             stated in the Ruiz Zambrano judgment apply only in exceptional
             circumstances, it does not follow from  the  Court's  case-law
             that their application is  confined  to  situations  in  which
             there is  a  blood  relationship  between  the  third  country
             national for whom a right of residence is sought and the Union
             citizen who is a minor from whom that right of residence might
             be derived.
         56.      On the other hand, both the permanent right  of  residence
             of the mothers of the Union citizens concerned who are  minors
             and the fact that the third country nationals for whom a right
             of residence is sought are not persons on whom those  citizens
             are legally, financially  or  emotionally  dependent  must  be
             taken into consideration when examining the question  whether,
             as a result of the refusal of  a  right  of  residence,  those
             citizens would be unable to  exercise  the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred by their  status.  As  the  Advocate  General
             observes in point 44 of his Opinion, it is the relationship of
             dependency between the Union citizen who is a  minor  and  the
             third country national who is refused  a  right  of  residence
             that is  liable  to  jeopardise  the  effectiveness  of  Union
             citizenship, since it is that dependency that  would  lead  to
             the Union citizen being obliged, in fact, to  leave  not  only
             the territory of the Member State of which he  is  a  national
             but also  that  of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole,  as  a
             consequence of such a refusal (see Ruiz  Zambrano,  paragraphs
             43 and 45, and Dereci and Others, paragraphs 65 to 67).
         57.      Subject to the verification which it is for the  referring
             court to carry out, the information  available  to  the  Court
             appears to suggest that there might be no such  dependency  in
             the cases in the main proceedings.
         58.      In the light of the foregoing,  it  must  be  stated  that
             Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as not precluding a Member
             State from refusing  to  grant  a  third  country  national  a
             residence permit on the basis of  family  reunification  where
             that national seeks to reside with his spouse, who is  also  a
             third country national and resides  lawfully  in  that  Member
             State and is the mother of a child from  a  previous  marriage
             who is a Union citizen,  and  with  the  child  of  their  own
             marriage, who is also a third country national, provided  that
             such  a  refusal  does  not  entail,  for  the  Union  citizen
             concerned,  the  denial  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of   the
             substance of the rights conferred by the status of citizen  of
             the Union, that being for the referring court to ascertain. "
33.  In the same case  the  Court  made  clear  in  para  59  that  even  if
    applicants could not benefit  from  Zambrano  principles,  it  remained
    that:

             "... that would be without prejudice to the question  whether,
        on the basis of other criteria, inter alia by virtue of  the  right
        to the protection of family life, Mr  O  and  Mr  M  could  not  be
        refused a right of residence. That question must  be  addressed  in
        the framework of the provisions on the  protection  of  fundamental
        rights which are applicable in each case (see  Dereci  and  Others,
        paragraph 69)."


Article 8

34.  Turning, therefore,  to  Article  8,  Mr  Chirico  rightly  points  out
    deficiencies in the respondent's decision-making  in  respect  of  this
    case, in particular that the Entry Clearance Officer failed to consider
    the appellant's Article  8  circumstances  at  all.   Nevertheless,  in
    consequence of the grounds of appeal available to the  appellant  under
    s.84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, he  was  able
    to have his Article 8 circumstances  considered  by  the  FtT  and,  by
    virtue of the set aside, he is now able to have  us  consider  them  as
    well.

35.  It is manifest that the appellant has family life ties in the  UK  with
    his wife, his child K and also with his wife's oldest children, by  her
    previous relationship.

Mrs Campbell

36.  We accept that the couple had been in  a  relationship  together  since
    2004, that they then cohabited up until the time he left the  UK  on  1
    September 2008, that the presence of the appellant  in  Mrs  Campbell's
    life until he left had a positive effect on her own well-being and kept
    her own difficulties with a drinking problem to a  minimum,  that  they
    have had a child together (K) and that since the appellant left the  UK
    the couple married in Jamaica and have maintained  close  contact  with
    each other by telephone.  Nevertheless, we consider  it  relevant  that
    both parties knew when  they  commenced  their  relationship  that  the
    appellant was in the UK unlawfully with no expectation of being able to
    obtain lawful residence.

Ties with C and A

37.  Dealing first with the appellant's ties with his other children, C  and
    A, whilst the evidence does indicate that from some time in 2004  until
    his departure from the UK in September 2008, the appellant  was  living
    with their mother in the same  household  both  of  them  continued  to
    receive the love and care of their mother, as  they  had  for  all  the
    years of their life beforehand. In the case of  C,  it  is  clear  that
    although he had benefited from having the appellant as a father  figure
    between 2004-2008, during  this  time  he  was  developing  independent
    interests outside the home and at the date of decision  he  was  nearly
    18. When giving oral evidence to the FtT he said he could not  remember
    the last time he saw the appellant.

38.  As regards A, the evidence (which  includes  her  most  recent  witness
    statement of  14 January 2013) demonstrates that  since  the  appellant
    began living with her mother, A came relatively soon to regard  him  as
    her stepfather.  At the same time, her evidence does not  suggest  that
    prior to or since the appellant coming to live with her mother she  has
    ever been without the love and care of  her  mother  and  there  is  no
    medical or welfare evidence to suggest that problems caused to her  and
    her family  by  the  appellant's  departure  have  prevented  her  from
    pursuing studies. She made clear in her most recent statement that  she
    feels that such problems have set back her  efforts  to  obtain  higher
    qualifications, but she had clearly persisted (and she noted  that  she
    was now studying for a BTEC Diploma in Business).

Ties with K

39.  In relation to K, it is a premise in this case that neither K  nor  her
    mother is being expected to relocate to Jamaica, so the issue  of  what
    is in her best interests is confined to the extent to  which  her  best
    interests are  damaged  by  having  her  father  prevented  from  being
    permitted to return to live with her and her mother  and  half-siblings
    in the UK.  We think Mr Melvin goes too far in stating that there is no
    reliable evidence that she has suffered any detrimental  effects  as  a
    result of the appellant's departure from the UK.  We see no  reason  to
    doubt the family statements describing how she missed her  father  when
    he left and would be happier if she had  two  parents  caring  for  her
    rather than one; nor do we see any reason to question  A's  description
    of her as a "stressed child".  At the same time, she was only 2 when he
    left and there is certainly no medical or welfare evidence to show that
    her mother has not been able to ensure she is being  brought  up  in  a
    loving, caring environment. Whilst it may have been in her (and  C  and
    A's) best interests to have the appellant living with  her  again,  his
    absence had not significantly impaired her welfare or interests.

Financial support

40.  When considering the appellant's family life ties  with  his  wife  and
    her two children, it is to be noted that there is no  evidence  of  the
    appellant ever having provided financial support to them, either before
    he left the UK  or  since  back  in  Jamaica.   They  have  never  been
    economically dependent on him.

Private life

41.  In relation to the appellant's private  life  ties  formed  in  the  UK
    (e.g. through friendships, work etc.) he has submitted little  evidence
    of any such ties and in any event such ties have been  developed  at  a
    time when he knew his immigration status was precarious.

42.      From our earlier analysis of the issue of  the  lawfulness  of  the
    exclusion decision, it follows that we are satisfied that the  decision
    was in accordance with the law within the meaning of Article 8(2  )  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

43.  As to the issue  of  the  proportionality  of  the  decision,  we  have
    already given consideration to the  main  factors  in  the  appellant's
    favour. Turning to the  weight  to  be  attached  to  factors  counting
    against the appellant, we do not have any independent  evidence  as  to
    the likelihood that the appellant will re-offend, but we  are  prepared
    to accept that at the date of the decision the  chances  of  that  were
    low.  There is no evidence that he has been involved  in  any  criminal
    activities since he committed his offence in May 2008, either before he
    left the UK in September that  year  or  since  he  has  been  back  in
    Jamaica.

44.  That is not to say, however, that  his  immigration  history  has  been
    exemplary; quite the opposite.  Not only did he overstay his visit visa
    and remain in the UK without lawful permission for an extended  period,
    but he made no effort to regularise his position prior to his  criminal
    offence.  Mr Chirico has argued that when the appellant left in 2008 he
    was entitled to think that he would be free to return  as  soon  as  he
    could in the normal way.  Back then, he pointed out, there were no  re-
    entry laws for persons who left voluntarily.  We reject his submission.
     Three matters concerning the circumstances in which the appellant left
    are of particular importance. We have mentioned each  before  but  they
    need re-emphasising.  First, he was plainly aware from the fact that he
    was recommended for deportation, that the authorities were  considering
    whether to deport him.  Second, at least by July 2008 he  was  informed
    that choosing voluntary departure (as he  did)  would  not  necessarily
    mean he would avoid being excluded  after  he  left.   Third,  he  left
    voluntarily.  It follows that he cannot have been  under  any  illusion
    that if he sought to come back his previous immigration  history  would
    prove an obstacle.

45.  And so it  proved.   He  was  refused,  without  consideration  of  his
    ability to meet substantive  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    under para 320(6) which is a requirement mandating refusal of a  person
    who is currently the subject of an exclusion decision.

46.  The appellant made no  attempt  to  challenge  the  exclusion  decision
    itself prior to his refusal decision, even though he knew about  it  at
    least by January 2009.  Further, in his appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, he did not pursue a challenge to it on that occasion.

47.  We agree with the parties that in assessing the  proportionality  of  a
    refusal of re-entry to a person who is subject to an exclusion decision
    after leaving voluntarily, it would be wrong to impose any time  period
    during which he or she should not expect to be granted entry  clearance
    to return.  We note that even though  the  UKBA  document  referred  to
    earlier, "Exclusion decisions and exclusion orders", refers to  a  non-
    statutory process of  "revocation  of  exclusion  decisions",  no  time
    limits are attached to this and, indeed, in the letter to the appellant
    of 23 July 2008 he was informed that should he be excluded from the UK,
    "you can apply to have this revoked [at] any time". It might be thought
    that (under immigration rules in force before 9  July  2012)  paragraph
    320(7A) and (7B) offer some guidelines by analogy, but  they  are  both
    subject to the proviso in paragraph (7C) (inserted from  30  June  2008
    and deleted from 9 July 2012) for persons who are close family members,
    spouses in particular, and in respect of whom there are no  fixed  time
    limits either.

48.      At the same time, it will of course be important to  consider  what
    effect the passage of time has had on the circumstances of a person who
    seeks to return to the UK notwithstanding that there  is  an  exclusion
    decision in place against him. It  is  apparent  that  even  though  in
    respect of such a person there is no two  stage  process  such  as  one
    finds under the Immigration Rules in respect of persons who  have  been
    made the subject of a deportation order (first applying for revocation;
    second, applying for entry clearance)  the respondent's own letters  to
    affected persons does refer to  there  being  an  analogous  two  stage
    process on an extra-statutory basis,  such  that  those  affected  must
    first  apply  for  revocation  of  the  exclusion  decision   (as   the
    appellant's then representatives, IAS,  did after the date of decision,
     in October 2010).  In general terms, a person who has chosen to  leave
    voluntarily might be expected to be in a better position than a  person
    who has been the subject of a deportation order who is required by  the
    Immigration Rules even if both are subject in this way to a  two  stage
    process. Equally, the existence of an exclusion decision reflects  that
    the Secretary of State considers there is a weighty public interest  in
    the person not being able to re-enter the UK  in  the  normal  way.  As
    regards a person's personal and family circumstances, the effect of the
    passage of time will be very fact-specific; in some cases it  may  show
    that family ties are now stronger, in other cases  that  they  are  now
    weaker, including for extraneous reasons (e.g. divorce).  In  terms  of
    the public interest side of the balancing exercise, however, in general
    terms it might be felt that the longer  the  time,  the  less  powerful
    become the State's interest in continuing to exclude.

49.  So far as concerns the appellant, we do not seek  to  specify  what  we
    think would be a  reasonable  period  of  time  before  his  Article  8
    circumstances might  justify  the  respondent  revoking  his  exclusion
    decision and considering any application by him for entry clearance  in
    the normal way, save to note the obvious fact that three years have now
    elapsed since the date of decision under appeal in this case.  Some  of
    the evidence adduced before  us  deals  with  the  ways  in  which  the
    appellant has kept in contact with Mrs Campbell, their daughter and her
    stepchildren since the date of decision, but it has not  been  part  of
    our task to assess that.   We  are  confident,  however,  that  in  the
    circumstances of his case the period of only seventeen  months  between
    his departure from the UK in September 2008 and the date of refusal  of
    entry clearance in February 2010, was significantly short of  a  period
    of time that rendered refusal of his case disproportionate.

50.  For the above reasons:

     The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  and  its  decision  is
    set aside.

     We re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

