

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|MA (Operational Guidance - prison conditions - significance) Sudan|
|[2005] UKAIT 00149                                                |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2005            |21st October 2005               |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Mr C P Mather (Senior Immigration Judge)                          |
|Ms S E Singer                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Representation
For the appellant : Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sheikh & Co.
For the respondent : Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer

So long as the IND Operational Guidance Note on  Sudan  continues  to  view
prison conditions in Sudan as  being   "likely  to  reach  the   Article  3
threshold", the Tribunal will expect the Home  Office  to  concede  in  all
appeals based on Article 3 where it is  accepted  that  the  appellant  has
demonstrated a real risk of imprisonment on return to Sudan.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Sudan. On 23 July 2002 a  decision  was
      made by the Secretary of State to refuse to grant  leave to enter  and
      to refuse to grant asylum.  The appeal made by the  appellant  against
      this decision was dismissed by an  Adjudicator,  Mr  L.  North,  in  a
      determination notified on 10 January 2003.   Permission to appeal that
      determination was then granted by Mr  S.L.  Batiste,  Vice  President,
      limited to the issue of whether any penalty likely to be imposed  upon
      the appellant would be in breach of his Article  3  rights  given  the
      Adjudicator's findings that the appellant  had  left  Sudan  to  avoid
      facing a military  Tribunal or being sent to  take  part  in  military
      activity in the south of the country.   In a  decision  of  9  October
      2003 the Tribunal chaired by Mr A. Jordan,  Vice President,  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal.

2.    An appeal  was  then  made  to  the   Court  of  Appeal.  The  grounds
      questioned the decision  of  the  Tribunal  to  dismiss   the  appeal,
      despite accepting that the  appellant  would  face  prison  conditions
      which were 'life threatening'. On 7 May  2004  Laws  LJ  allowed  this
      appeal in the following terms:

             'It is with consent but without determining the merits of  the
             appeal ordered that the appeal be allowed to the  extent  only
             that the said decision of the  court  below  dated  9  October
             2003 be varied so as to provide:


             '1) that this matter should be  remitted  to  the  Immigration
             Appeal Tribunal for the issue of whether the prison conditions
             in Sudan will potentially breach  the  appellant's/applicant's
             Article 3 ECR rights  to  be  reconsidered  by  a  differently
             constituted Tribunal.'

3.    When the matter came back before a differently  constituted  Tribunal,
      chaired by Ms D. Gill, Vice President, on  2  November  2004,  it  was
      adjourned to enable the respondent more time to consider  the  further
      materials and expert report from a Dr Johnson which had  been  adduced
      by the appellant's representatives.  The  Home  Office  representative
      stated that she needed to seek advice from CIPU  (Country  Information
      and Policy Unit) on the expert report.  In deciding to adjourn Ms Gill
      emphasised that this case was being treated  as  a  Country  Guideline
      case.  Presumably in order to further ensure that the  respondent  had
      the benefit of an up-to-date report, Ms Gill issued  directions  which
      went out on 23 November 2004 stating that within twenty-one  days  the
      appellant was to serve on the Secretary of  State  a  revised   report
      from  Dr Johnson, giving the sources for his comments.

4.    There was then a For Mention hearing on 12  July  2005  before  myself
      (Dr Storey).  It was confirmed that this case was being treated  as  a
      Country Guideline case. Both parties  indicated  they  were  ready  to
      proceed. I directed that the issues the parties were to address at the
      full hearing were: the issue already identified by Laws, LJ  -  prison
      conditions; together with the issue of  risk  to  persons  liable  for
      military service.  I bore in mind that as this had been  listed  as  a
      Country Guideline case and the case  concerned an appellant  found  to
      have left Sudan to avoid facing a military tribunal or being  sent  to
      take part in military activity in the south of  the  country,  it  was
      appropriate that the issue of military service should  also  be  dealt
      with,  particularly  given  that   there   was   a   reported   Tribal
      determination  by  a Tribunal chaired by Mr  M.  Rapinet  UKIAT  00335
      [2004] on the latter issue which  was  possibly  at  odds  with  other
      Tribunal decisions.

5.    We gather from Mr Deller that shortly after the 12 July  2005  hearing
      he decided to instruct  Treasury  Solicitors  so  that  Counsel  might
      represent the respondent.  There was  subsequent  correspondence  from
      Treasury Solicitors dated 8 September 2005 which led to reconfirmation
      by me in a Memorandum sent to the parties on 14  September  2005  that
      submissions were expected  on  both  issues.   On  22  September  2005
      permission was given for the appellant's representatives to call their
      expert witness to give oral evidence.

6.    As to what happened next, it is best  that  we  set  out  Mr  Deller's
      account as given in his letter of 27 September 2005  written  the  day
      before the hearing,  which  he  prefaced  by  an  admission  that  the
      situation which resulted was 'wholly unhelpful to the  proper  running
      of the system'.

             'Following notification at a mention hearing on 12  July  that
             this was to be listed for  Country  Guidance,  we  decided  to
             instruct  the  Treasury   Solicitors  so  that  counsel  might
             represent the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  hearing.   After
             initial concern about the scope of the issues identified as at
             large (which did not appear to be within the limited basis  on
             which the Court of Appeal  had remitted the  matter),  counsel
             advised on 13 September that the case should  not  be  fought.
             After internal discussion, delayed by other commitments  -  we
             decided to take this  advice as the  circumstances disclosed a
             real risk of a breach of Article 3.


             Accordingly, I wrote to the  IAT  and  the  solicitors  on  23
             September indicating concession on Article  3.   In  response,
             the solicitors opined that it remained  highly  arguable  that
             their client had a claim to refugee  status  on  what  can  be
             termed the Krotov point.  They therefore indicated a  wish  to
             proceed, but in a letter of 23 September indicated  that  they
             would withdraw their appeal if the Secretary of  State  agreed
             to refugee status.


             I was in court on Monday, but in view of the shortness of time
             I asked Mr Ouseley [a fellow  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
             Officer] to notify the solicitors that on  further  reflection
             we were prepared to granted refugee status. It was   therefore
             somewhat surprising that the solicitors still indicated a wish
             to proceed as noted in  a  letter  of  26  September  (clearly
             misdated 23 September as it referred to a later letter).


             Now  we  have  been  informed  that  attendance  is   required
             tomorrow, I shall be in court to offer personal apologies  for
             the problems caused. For avoidance of any  doubt,  however,  I
             will be indicating that refugee status is to be granted to  Mr
             Ali on acceptance of a real risk of ill-treatment    amounting
             to persecution and a breach of Article 3.  I will not be in  a
             position to argue the matter substantively.


             I am copying this letter to Mr Sachdev of  Sheikh  &  Co.,  to
             whom I have just spoken.'

7.    The slightly earlier Home  Office  letter  of  23  September  from  Mr
      Deller to which he makes reference above  explained  to  the  Tribunal
      that the Presenting Officer's Unit had now taken back  the  case  from
      Treasury Solicitors and that he wished to inform us that :-

             'after  further  consideration  the  Secretary  of  State  has
             decided not to pursue this matter as he is satisfied that  the
             circumstances demonstrate a real risk of a breach  of  Article
             3.  I shall shortly be sending our file for the implementation
             of this decision and have written to Messrs Sheikh  &  Co.  to
             seek their views on the disposal of the appeal.    It  may  be
             that they are instructed to withdraw the  appeal  but  in  the
             event that this is not so I would request that the hearing  on
             Wednesday be reclassified as For Mention Only.'

8.    Then followed the letter of 26 September  (to  which  Mr  Deller's  27
      September makes reference). Addressed to Sheikh & Co.,  with a copy to
      the Tribunal, its relevant parts read:

             'You spoke to my colleague Mr Deller and  agreed  to  withdraw
             your appeal if we recognised your client as a refugee.


             The Home Office has reviewed  the  file  and  is  prepared  to
             recognise your client as a refugee. He will  be  granted  five
             years Refugee Leave.'

9.    We should mention at this point that although the two  letters  of  23
      and 26 September referred to above were received at Field House on the
      same day, they were not  brought to  the  attention  of  the  Tribunal
      Chairman (Dr Storey) until the morning of 27 September, the day before
      the hearing.

The Hearing
10.   At the hearing Mr Deller reiterated his apology for  the  lateness  of
      the Home Office reconsideration  of  the  appellant's  position.    He
      agreed that it had resulted in a great deal of wasted time and  effort
      on all sides.

11.   We then turned to the procedural issues.  Mr  Deller  agreed  with  us
      that until such time as the appellant  was  formally  granted  refugee
      leave, the statutory abandonment provisions of the  Immigration  Acts,
      either s.58(9) of the  1999 Immigration and Asylum Act or s.104(4)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  did  not  apply.
      They state:

           s.58(9) of the  1999 Act:
             'A pending appeal under any provision other than s.69(3) is to
             be treated as abandoned If the appellant is granted  leave  to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom'


           s.104(4) the 2000 Act:
             'An appeal under s.82(1) shall be treated as abandoned if  the
             appellant -


             (a)  is granted  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom, or


             (b)  leaves the United Kingdom.'

12.   Given the date of decision in this case (23 July 2002) it  would  seem
      that  the relevant abandonment provision is s.58(9) of the  1999  Act:
      see ZA (s.58(9) - Abandonment - date of grant) Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT
      00241.  But whichever provision is considered, no abandonment has  yet
      taken place in this case.

13.   We asked Mr Collins to clarify whether he was instructed  to  withdraw
      the appeal, bearing in mind an  apparent  indication  to  that  effect
      being  given  in  correspondence  with  the  Home  Office   Presenting
      Officer's Unit.  He clarified that he was not instructed  to  withdraw
      except at the point where the  appellant  had  formally  been  granted
      refugee leave to remain.

14.   Having considered the position we decided it would not be  appropriate
      to  adjourn  this  case.  Since  there  had  been  no  withdrawal   or
      abandonment of the appeal, we asked  the  parties  to  address  us  on
      whether the decision we should substitute for that of the  Adjudicator
      should be to allow or dismiss the appeal.

15.   Mr Collins asked us to allow the appeal.    Mr  Deller  said  that  in
      view of what had transpired he could not in fairness ask the  Tribunal
      to dismiss the appeal.

16.   We asked Mr Deller to clarify the basis  on  which  the  23  September
      2005 decision that the appellant's circumstances 'demonstrated a  real
      risk of a breach of Article 3' had been taken. He  said  that  it  was
      based on the appellant's position when considered in the light of  the
      Home Office IND CIPU Operational  Guidance  Note:  Sudan,  June  2005.
      The latter states that it is to be read in conjunction with  the  CIPU
      Sudan Country Report of April 2005 and any CIPU  Sudan  bulletins.  As
      regards prison conditions it states as follows:



        '3.9 Prison conditions
          1. Applicants may claim that they cannot return to Sudan  due  to
             the  fact that there is a  serious  risk  that  they  will  be
             imprisoned on return and that prison conditions in  Sudan  are
             so poor as to  amount  to  torture  or  inhuman  treatment  or
             punishment.


             3.9.2 Treatment  Prison  conditions  have  been  described  as
             harsh, life-threatening and lacking   basic  health  and  care
             facilities.  At Freedom House [FH]  a  report  entitled   "The
             Worst of the  Worst: The  World's  Most  Repressive  Societies
             2004" stated that "Prison conditions do not meet international
             standards."  FH's report also claimed that "Secret police have
             operated 'ghost  houses - detention  and  torture  centres  in
             several cities.'


          2.  No  independent  domestic  or  international   human   rights
             observers  have  been  allowed  to  regularly  visit  prisons.
             Sudan did  have  in  place  a  Human  Rights  Committee  whose
             responsibilities included the condition of prisons. The  Inter-
             Parliamentary Union  (IPU) website that recorded the existence
             of the  Committee made  no  comment  on  its  independence  or
             effectiveness.  Consequently,  as  there  is  no   independent
             monitoring  of  Sudan's  prisons  by  international  or   non-
             governmental organisations, very little information concerning
             the treatment and living conditions of ordinary  prisoners  is
             available.


             3.9.4 Case law
             IAT determination: UKIAT 00335 [2004] on draft evasion.     As
             a result of the appellant being of Nuban ethnicity and a draft
             evader he will  be  imprisoned  and  that  the  conditions  of
             imprisonment will reach the threshold of Article 3.


             3.9.5 Conclusion.  Prison conditions in Sudan are  severe  and
             taking into account  life  threatening  conditions,   lack  of
             basic facilities and a virtually complete absence of  external
             monitoring, conditions in prisons and detention facilities  in
             [sic] are likely to reach the Article 3 threshold. Therefore a
             grant of HP will  be appropriate  where  individual  claimants
             are able to demonstrate a real risk of imprisonment on  return
             to Sudan. Where the real risk of imprisonment  is  related  to
             one of the five Refugee Convention grounds a grant  of  asylum
             will be appropriate.'


Decision
17.    By  reason  of  the  fact  that  the  case  was  pending  before  the
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 4 April 2005 we are  required  to  deal
      with the appeal in the same manner as if we had originally decided the
      appeal and we were reconsidering our decision (Article  5  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004  (Commencement  No.
      5 and Transitional Provisions) Order 2005.

 18.  We have been made aware of  a  decision  taken  by  Mr  Deller  on  26
      September 2005 that the respondent  was  'prepared  to  grant  refugee
      status' and that he 'will be granted five years Refugee  Leave'.    Mr
      Deller confirmed that  the  basis  for  that  decision  was  that  the
      appellant's situation fell squarely within the terms of the IND's June
      2005 Operational Guidance Note regarding persons able to demonstrate a
      real risk of imprisonment on return to  Sudan. It was not  in  dispute
      in this case that the appellant had been able to demonstrate   such  a
      risk.    Accordingly he  was  entitled  to  succeed  under  Article  3
      because (to quote from paragraph 3.9.5 of the OGN)  '... conditions in
      prisons and detention facilities in (sic)  are  likely  to  reach  the
      Article 3 threshold'.     Mr Deller further confirmed that it was  now
      accepted, on the facts  of  this  case,  that  the  ill-treatment  the
      appellant would face would also amount to serious harm for  a  Refugee
      Convention  reason,  namely  that   of   political   opinion.     (The
      appellant's representatives had submitted in correspondence  with  the
      HOPO Unit that the guidance given by the Court  of  Appeal  in  Krotov
      [2004] EWCA Civ 69 strongly  indicated  that  serving  a  sentence  of
      imprisonment by a military tribunal following desertion would lead  to
      serious harm in respect of which a political opinion would be  imputed
      to the person concerned).

19.   In the light of the above we have no  hesitation  in  concluding  that
      the appellant's appeal should be allowed. The respondent  now  accepts
      that the appellant qualifies as a refugee and he no longer  wishes  to
      defend the determination of the Adjudicator.

20.   In view of the late reconsideration of  the  appellant's  position  by
      the respondent, we did not see fit to continue with this appeal  as  a
      Country Guideline case.  Although we have a very considerable body  of
      materials before us, we have not heard submissions regarding them, nor
      have we had an opportunity to examine the expert witness due  to  give
      oral testimony.

21.   Equally, however, it would be quite  wrong of us not to issue this  as
      a reported decision of the Tribunal  and  to  make  plain  in  it  the
      following:

22.   It is clear that the current Operational Guidance of the  Home  Office
      relating to the  Sudan considers prison conditions in that country  to
      breach the Article 3 threshold.

23.   So long as that executive guidance remains essentially  the  same,  we
      take the view  that at the judicial level it should be expected   that
      the Home Office will likewise  concede  on  Article  3  grounds    all
      appeals in which it is accepted that the appellant has  been  able  to
      demonstrate a real risk of  imprisonment on return to Sudan.     Where
      such  risk  is                related  to  one  of  the  five  Refugee
      Convention grounds, it will also be expected that the Home Office will
      normally concede on asylum grounds.  In  order  to  avoid  unnecessary
      waste of judicial time and resources, any concessions made should  not
      be left to the last minute.

24.   We have  not been able  to  address  the  further  issue  of  risk  to
      persons whose breach of Sudanese military law, arising  through  draft
      evasion  or  desertion,  might  expose  them  to  a  risk  of  adverse
      consequences other than imprisonment - e.g. being required to  perform
      military service in the context of  conflicts  in  the  south  of  the
      country.

25.   Before concluding we should make clear our very great concern  at  the
      way the Home Office has handled this case.

26.   It has been known to  the Home Office since 26 March  2004,  when  the
      Court of Appeal remitted the case to the Tribunal  expressly  to  deal
      with the issue of prison conditions in Sudan,  that  this  was  to  be
      treated as an important country guidance case. In the  course  of  For
      Mention hearings in November 2004 and July 2005 the  Home  Office  was
      kept aware that the case was being  readied  for country guidance. The
      date for the hearing of this reconsideration as  a  country   guidance
      case was notified to the parties on 19 July  2005.    They  were  also
      informed that a day had been set aside for hearing. It is  clear  from
      the concerns expressed by the HOPO at the November 2004 hearing  about
      wishing to take steps to ensure the expert report was examined by CIPU
      and from the decision of Mr Deller in July 2005 to instruct   Treasury
      Solicitors, that  the  Home  Office  have  been  fully  aware  of  the
      potential importance of this case for some time.

27.   In principle, of course, it is entirely a matter for the  Home  Office
      to decide at any stage of the appeal  process  whether  it  wishes  to
      reconsider its position and make a grant of  some  sort  of  leave  to
      remain. Nor is this something into which the judiciary can  or  should
      intrude.  Equally,  however, the Home Office  is  well  aware  of  the
      importance attached by the courts and the Tribunal to the creation  of
      county guidance.    It is also well aware that the  setting  up  of  a
      case as a  country  guidance  case  can  involve  the  Tribunal  in  a
      considerable amount of preparatory work, through For Mention  hearings
      and the like, so as to ensure  that  the  issues  have  been  properly
      identified and that it has before it adequate materials and sources of
      evidence.    As the body responsible for  primary  decision-making  on
      asylum and asylum-related appeals, the Home Office must  be  taken  to
      share the concern of the judiciary that like cases are  treated  alike
      and decisions are taken that are consistent. As  representatives  they
      also owe a duty to assist the Court.

28.   It is obvious that if cases notified in advance as  important  Country
      Guideline cases are the subject of last-minute Home Office  concession
      or reconsideration, the Tribunal country guidance system  risks  being
      undermined. There is also a risk (although we do not wish  to  suggest
      it arose in this case) of the executive being seen as seeking to evade
      a judicial decision on important country issues.
29.   Mr Deller fully accepted that last-minute Home Office  reconsideration
      threatened the integrity of the Tribunal's country guidance system and
      that it was   highly undesirable that it should happen in the  way  it
      did in this case.    Practically speaking, therefore, it is imperative
      that so far as possible any  question  of  reconsideration  should  be
      addressed by the Home Office well before the date fixed for  the  full
      hearing.   We can see no good reason why this should not be  possible.



30.   In the event we only learnt of the Home  Office  decision  to  set  in
      train arrangement for the grant to the appellant of refugee leave  the
      day before the  hearing.   Even if we had been shown the letters of 23
      and 26 September 2005 instantly, the decision was still notified  very
      late in the day.

31.   We are encouraged by Mr Deller's assurance that he would do  his  best
      to ensure a system  was  put  in  place  which  would  prevent  future
      problems of this sort.

32.   For the above reasons the decision  we  substitute  for  that  of  the
      Adjudicator is to allow the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.






                                DR H H STOREY
                          SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE





