
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Buama (inter-country adoption - competent court) [2012] UKUT 00146 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 March 2012                              |On 29 March 2012             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SELINA AKOSUA BUAMA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khushi (Bedfords Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

Paragraph 310(vi) of the immigration rules does not  appear  to  contemplate
the respondent questioning the order of a competent court which is valid  on
its face



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a child, born in Ghana  on  9  September  2001.    The
    sponsors are a married couple,  Mr  and  Mrs  Yeboah.   They  are  both
    Ghanaian and settled in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant's mother died on 27 December 2003 when the appellant  was
    2.  The appellant has no siblings.  The appellant  had  also  lost  her
    grandmother.

3.   After the death of the appellant's  mother  the  appellant  was  looked
    after for a time by her father but the arrangements were unsatisfactory
    so the sponsors arranged for her to go stay with her aunt Veronica Kumi
    and the sponsors  supported  her  financially.    They  have  regularly
    visited Ghana and the appellant stayed with  them  when  they  did  so.
    They were in regular contact  with  her  from  the  United  Kingdom  by
    telephone and sent her Christmas and birthday presents.

4.   In or about 2008 they became concerned about Veronica's  care  for  the
    children and contacted Ghanaian social  services  to  seek  advice  and
    subsequently instructed a Ghanaian Counsel  and  adoption  arrangements
    were made.  Following a visit by Ghanaian social services there  was  a
    court hearing and an adoption order was granted for  the  appellant  as
    well as two other children called R and K.  These two children are  not
    the subject of any current application for entry clearance.

5.   The appellant was unhappy living with  Veronica  so  arrangements  were
    made for her to move to the male  sponsor's  niece,  Abena  Acheampong.
    She resides there with nine other children.  The sponsor's  application
    for an entry clearance for the appellant to join  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom as their adopted child was considered under paragraph 310 of HC
    395 by the Entry Clearance Officer and in a decision dated  14  January
    2011  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  application.    The
    respondent was satisfied that the adoption order had been issued  by  a
    competent administrative authority in Ghana but referred to an  extract
    from section 67 of the Ghanaian 1998 Children's Act which  stated  that
    "An adoption order shall not be made for a child unless the  child  has
    been continuously in the care and possession of the  applicant  for  at
    least three consecutive months immediately preceding the  date  of  the
    order."  The respondent was not satisfied that the sponsors could  meet
    the  requirements  of  that  particular  provision.   Accordingly   the
    adoption order did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  set  down  in  the
    legislation and was not a valid adoption order.

6.   There was further no evidence that  the  appellant  had  ever  met  the
    sponsors - photographs of them together had not been  produced.   There
    was no evidence that Veronica Kumi was no longer able to care for  her.
    Accordingly the respondent was not satisfied there had been  a  genuine
    transfer of parental responsibility to the appellant's adoptive parents
    and was also of the opinion that this adoption was one  of  convenience
    arranged to facilitate her admission to the United Kingdom.

7.   The appellant appealed and her appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Walker on 12 July 2011.  The appeal was dismissed.  However, there was
    an application for permission to appeal.  On 4 August  2011  permission
    to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf.   Among  the  points
    made was that the judge had found the adoption  order  of  18  November
    2010 invalid as at the date of the respondent's decision because it had
    been revoked on 13 June 2011.   Judge  Shaerf  commented  that  if  the
    adoption order had been revoked on 13 June 2011 it would appear to have
    been validly made otherwise it could  not  have  been  revoked  by  the
    subsequent order.  The judge appeared not to have considered  that  the
    letter from the Ghanaian Circuit Court had explained  that  the  second
    adoption order was effective from 18 November 2010.  The judge did  not
    appear to have given adequate consideration to the documentation before
    him or to the submissions made.  On 22  August  2011  the  respondent's
    representative wrote stating that the respondent  did  not  oppose  the
    appellant's application and  invited  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
    appeal with a fresh oral hearing to  consider  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.  There was a hearing  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 3 February 2012 where the  issues  to  be
    determined were agreed in light of the fact that the respondent did not
    oppose the  appeal.   There  was  the  issue  of  the  adoption  order,
    paragraph 297 of the rules and Article 8.  Before me  it  was  accepted
    that the issues were as previously identified and that I should  rehear
    the matter as  the  judge's  decision  was  flawed  in  law.  Rule  310
    provides:

         310. The requirements to be met in the  case  of  a  child  seeking
         indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the  adopted  child
         of a parent or parents present and settled or  being  admitted  for
         settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
         (i) is seeking leave to enter to  accompany  or  join  an  adoptive
         parent or parents in one of the following circumstances;
         (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or
         (b) both parents are  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
         settlement; or
         (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or
         (d) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  the  other
         parent is dead; or
         (e) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
         (f) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  there  are
         serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
         exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable  arrangements  have
         been made for the child's care; or
         (g) in the case of a de facto adoption one parent has  a  right  of
         abode in the United Kingdom or indefinite leave to enter or  remain
         in the United Kingdom  and  is  seeking  admission  to  the  United
         Kingdom on the same occasion for the purposes of settlement; and
         (ii) is under the age of 18; and
         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and
         (iv) can, and  will,  be  accommodated  and  maintained  adequately
         without  recourse  to  public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
         adoptive parent or parents own or occupy exclusively; and
         (v) DELETED
         (vi) (a) was adopted in accordance with a  decision  taken  by  the
         competent administrative authority  or  court  in  his  country  of
         origin or the country in which he  is  resident,  being  a  country
         whose adoption orders are recognised by the United Kingdom; or
         (b) is the subject of a de facto adoption; and
         (vii) was adopted at a time when:
         (a) both adoptive parents were resident together abroad; or
         (b) either or both adoptive parents  were  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom; and
         (viii) has the same rights and obligations as any  other  child  of
         the adoptive parent's or parents' family; and
         (ix) was adopted due to the inability of the original parent(s)  or
         current carer(s) to care for him  and  there  has  been  a  genuine
         transfer of parental responsibility to the adoptive parents; and
         (x) has lost or broken his ties with his family of origin; and
         (xi) was adopted, but  the  adoption  is  not  one  of  convenience
         arranged to facilitate his admission to or remaining in the  United
         Kingdom; and
         (xii) holds a valid United Kingdom entry  clearance  for  entry  in
         this capacity; and
         (xiii) does not have one or more  unspent  convictions  within  the
         meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.

       It  was  agreed  that  the  relevant  parts  of  paragraph  310  were
    subparagraphs (vi) the adoption order point, (ix) - that the  appellant
    had been adopted due to the inability of the original parents or carers
    to care of him and that there had been a genuine transfer  of  parental
    responsibility to the adoptive parents and (xi) -  the  adoption  being
    one of convenience.  As an alternative  I  was  referred  to  paragraph
    297(1)(f).   The appellant would be  joining  a  relative  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom "and there  are  serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements had been  made  for  the  child's
    care ... ".

8.   I heard evidence from Mr Yeboah.  He had confirmed that he had  adopted
    three children but he could only bring the appellant because one of the
    other children had become sick.  The other children  were  sisters  and
    they could not take one at a time.   Also  K's  passport  was  missing.
    The appellant had not been particularly happy with her  various  carers
    but she had been asked to exercise patience.   The  appellant's  father
    had not been able to take proper care of her due to the general poverty
    in that part of Ghana where there  was  no  school.    Accordingly  the
    sponsors had sent remittances for the benefit of the appellant and  had
    contacted social services in 2007.  They  were  advised  to  adopt  the
    appellant.

9.   The appellant's father had taken no interest in her and  the  appellant
    considered that the sponsor was her father.

10.  The appellant was currently living with Abena who the sponsor  referred
    to as a niece as they came from the same  region  and  he  had  been  a
    police  officer  and  had  lived  with  Abena's  sister  and   in   the
    circumstances they had become like a family.    Abena  lived  with  her
    husband and nine children and her husband  was  becoming  unhappy  with
    having the appellant living there.  Mrs Yeboah had appointed  Veronica,
    who was her sister, to be the appellant's parent and guardian  although
    the appellant was living with Abena.  The money transfers had been sent
    to Veronica for the benefit of the three children.   Veronica  had  the
    necessary ID to collect the money.  Money had also been sent to another
    individual to give to Abena as appeared from the evidence bundle.

11.  To get the adoption organised there had been  an  adoption  application
    form and their lawyer had assisted the couple  with  it.   The  initial
    order had not been correct as the child's date of birth  had  not  been
    set out on it.  Social services had made  a  full  report  following  a
    visit to the sponsor's home in Ghana.  The couple had attended a  court
    hearing with the appellant.  The appellant believed  that  the  sponsor
    was her father and would always follow him when he was in  Ghana.   She
    knew her parents were in London.  They had had to act in  2010  because
    people were not prepared to continue to take  care  of  the  appellant.
    She could no longer live with Abena because of the position of  Abena's
    husband and this was not adoption of convenience.

12.  Mrs Yeboah confirmed that the appellant was her niece  -  her  sister's
    daughter.  Her sister had died in 2001 and she had supported the family
    even when her sister was alive.  She had then asked her  junior  sister
    Veronica to look after her which she had done for three or four  years.
    There was a point when Mrs Yeboah became dissatisfied  with  Veronica's
    care and the appellant herself was not happy with the  arrangement  and
    so she had  taken  the  appellant  to  stay  with  Abena.   Mrs  Yeboah
    supported her husband's evidence  about  the  adoption  procedures  and
    again denied it was an adoption of convenience.

13.  At the conclusion of the evidence I  heard  submissions.   Ms  Saunders
    relied on the refusal notice and submitted the adoption was not  valid.
    It had not been demonstrated that the appellant could not live  with  a
    relative and on the face of it this was an adoption of convenience.  In
    relation to paragraph 297(f) it  was  clear  the  appellant  was  being
    looked after by Abena and was clothed and fed and was  not  being  ill-
    treated despite the accommodation being cramped.  The decision  of  the
    respondent  should  be  maintained.   In  relation  to  Article  8  the
    relationship between the sponsors and  the  appellant  was  by  way  of
    telephone calls and visits and the appellant had a biological parent in
    Ghana and was being  looked  after  by  relatives.   The  decision  was
    proportionate and it was not shown that it was not in her best interest
    to remain where she was.

14.  Mr Khushi submitted that the adoption order was valid  and  the  social
    services' report which was  included  in  the  appellant's  bundle  was
    important in a number of respects.

15.  In relation to the point of the adoption being one  of  convenience  he
    referred to VB v Entry Clearance Officer Ghana [2002] UKIAT 01323 where
    it was pointed out that most overseas adoptions took place in order  to
    facilitate entry into the United Kingdom and that by itself  would  not
    make it an adoption of convenience.  The Tribunal approved the approach
    of an Adjudicator who had directed himself as follows:

         "An adoption of convenience, rather like a marriage of convenience,
         is one that exists purely for a particular  purpose,  there  is  no
         real substance to it, save in relation to that purpose".


    I should note that I was provided with this case in hard copy;  it  was
    chaired by the President, Collins J. although I have not been  able  to
    locate it on the database of reported decisions.


    The  appellant's  mother  had  died  and  the  appellant's  father  had
    effectively abandoned her and so the  adoption  had  been  due  to  the
    inability of the original parents to care for the appellant and  I  was
    referred to MF (Immigration - adoption - genuine transfer  of  parental
    responsibility ) Philippines [2004] UKIAT 00094 [2004] UKAIT  00094  at
    paragraph 15:


         "The rule requires the adoption to have been due to  the  inability
         of the natural parents to care for the  respondent.   There  is  no
         evidence that is the case, although, arguably, if the  respondent's
         mother died and  her  father  abandoned  her,  that  could  be  the
         situation."


      In relation to paragraph 297 one of the  relevant  matters  had  been
    that for a long time it had been thought that the  appellant  would  be
    adopted by the sponsors -  see  paragraph  39  of  SK  ("Adoption"  not
    recognised in UK) India [2006] UKAIT 00068.   There  was  also  a  long
    history of visits.  In relation to Article 8 there was  plainly  family
    life and ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State [2011] UKSC4 made it  clear
    that the best interests of the child should be a primary consideration.


16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.


17.  In relation to the order of the Ghanaian Court it is  on  the  face  of
    the order valid.  The immigration rules do not appear to contemplate  a
    refusal to accept the validity of  the  order  of  a  competent  court.
    Further, any challenge to the validity of the order had to be by expert
    evidence in my view.  Simply setting out the provisions of a statute is
    not sufficient.  In any  event  the  Court  itself  has  confirmed  the
    validity of the order in a letter dated 13  June  2011.   As  the  High
    Court Registrar explains in  that  letter  the  date  of  the  adoption
    remains as stated in the previous order dated 18 November 2010 and  the
    effect of the subsequent order is simply to  correct  it.   Insofar  as
    there was any burden on the appellant in this matter I find that it has
    been discharged.   As at the date of decision there was and is a  valid
    court order.

18.  That of course is not by any means the end of the matter.  However,  in
    connection with the  remaining  issues  under  the  rules  relating  to
    adoptions the material presented to the court by social services is  of
    interest.  That confirms the  history  of  the  case  and  in  addition
    confirms that the  appellant's  father  could  not  take  care  of  the
    appellant and the fact that there have been unsatisfactory arrangements
    since then.  The important point is made  that  the  appellant  is  not
    aware of the death of her mother and that she knows the sponsors as her
    biological parents.  The report notes that sixteen people reside in the
    accommodation where the appellant resides,  there  are  four  bedrooms.
    Social services record that the sponsors have been  solely  responsible
    for the upkeep of the appellant for  the  previous  eight  and  a  half
    years.

19.  It is clear that the court was acting on  appropriate  material  having
    made the necessary enquiries.

20.  This appears to me to be a proper arrangement made in  accordance  with
    the local culture and practice following the death of  the  appellant's
    mother and the sponsors have acted in accordance with the practice  and
    have taken it upon themselves to provide for the appellant.   They  had
    made various arrangements for the appellant but these have  not  proved
    satisfactory.

21.  It is an important feature of the case that the appellant  regards  her
    adoptive parents as her natural parents.

22.  I am satisfied on the  evidence  that  subparagraph  (ix)  is  complied
    with.  The appellant's mother is dead and  her  father  has  played  no
    significant part in her life and on  the  evidence  before  the  social
    services, is not able to look after her.   The sponsors have  exhausted
    the alternative options about the appellant's care and I  am  satisfied
    that they have done what they could but the care arrangements have  not
    proved satisfactory and the appellant  has  been  unhappy  and  is  now
    living in very difficult conditions.  In the circumstances of this case
    there has plainly been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility to
    the sponsors - as I say the appellant herself  regards  them  as  their
    natural parents.

23.  I do not see  how  this  adoption  can  be  considered  to  be  one  of
    convenience in the particular circumstances of this case.  It is  based
    on proper and appropriate applications made by the sponsors following a
    long period of trying to do their best for the appellant and they  took
    the  decision  having  taken  advice  to  apply  for  adoption  of  the
    appellant.  I reach this conclusion independently of what is said in VB
    v Entry Clearance Officer (Ghana) which I have referred to above.

24.  Accordingly I find that the appellant does  make  out  her  case  under
    paragraph 310.

25.  It is not necessary in the circumstances to  consider  the  appellant's
    case under paragraph 297(f).  However, for the reasons I  have  already
    given there would appear to be serious and compelling family  or  other
    considerations which  make  exclusion  of  the  appellant  undesirable.
    Firstly, she regards the sponsors as her natural parents as well as her
    adoptive parents and  the  circumstances  in  which  she  is  currently
    residing are temporary and unsatisfactory and what is said in paragraph
    39 of SK (India) is apposite in this case.  Not only has the  appellant
    considered that she would be joining the sponsors as  adoptive  parents
    she considers that they are her natural parents.  There has been a long
    history of visits as well.   Accordingly,  if  the  appeal  had  failed
    under paragraph 310 in my view it would have succeeded under  paragraph
    297.  It is not necessary, therefore, to go into Article 8  but  it  is
    plainly in the best interests of the appellant to be with the  sponsors
    whom she regards as her natural parents and who are in  a  position  to
    give her the care she needs.

26.  It has been agreed in this case that the decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge was flawed in law.  I accordingly remake it.   The  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules is allowed under paragraph 310 and I  direct  the
    production of an appropriate entry clearance.



Signed                                  Date 29 March 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
