
YZ and LX (effect of section 85(4) - 2002 Act) China [2005] UKAIT 00157


|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at:  Field House          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  1 November 2005             |                                |
|                                |...15 November                  |
|                                |2005...............             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|The Honourable Mr Justice Hodge, OBE, President                   |
|Mr L V Waumsley (Senior Immigration Judge)                        |
|Professor A Grubb (Senior Immigration Judge)                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellants                                                        |
|And                                                               |
|Secretary of State for the Home Department                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |


Further guidance as to the effect on  section  85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in relation  to  changes  of  circumstances
occurring after the date of the Secretary of State's decision but prior  to
the date of hearing before an Immigration  Judge.   Appellants  seeking  to
rely upon a different  sub-paragraph  within  the  same  paragraph  of  the
Immigration Rules.  LS (post-decision evidence; directions;  appealability)
Gambia [2005] UKIAT 00085 applied

Representation:

For the appellants:    No appearance
For the respondent:    Mr A Blundell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants, who are both citizens of  the  People's  Republic  of
      China, have appealed with permission against the determination of  an
      Immigration Judge (Mr W Scobbie), sitting in  Glasgow,  in  which  he
      dismissed their respective appeals  on  both  immigration  and  human
      rights grounds against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  their
      applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  dependant
      relatives of their daughter.   By  virtue  of  Article  5(1)  of  the
      Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004
      (Commencement No. 5 and  Transitional  Provisions)  Order  2005,  the
      appeal now takes effect as a reconsideration pursuant to Article 5(2)
      of that Order.

      Hearing in absence of appellants

2.    The appellants did not appear at the hearing  before  us,  either  in
      person or by their representative.  We have read a copy of the notice
      of hearing which was sent to the appellants and their  solicitors  on
      24 August 2005.   It complies with the requirements of rule 46(1)  of
      the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.    No
      explanation having been furnished by the appellants for their failure
      to appear before us, we proceeded with the hearing in  their  absence
      in accordance with rule 19(1) of those rules.

      Background

3.    The appellants, who are husband and wife, both arrived in the  United
      Kingdom on 5 August 2003 when they were granted  leave  to  enter  as
      visitors for a period of six  months.    On  4  February  2004,  they
      applied to the respondent  for  leave  to  remain  as  the  dependent
      parents of their daughter, who was present and settled in the  United
      Kingdom, and is now  a  British  citizen.   Their  applications  were
      refused by the respondent on 19 February 2004.

4.    The appellants then exercised the right to appeal to  an  Adjudicator
      against the respondent's decision.   This is the  appeal  which  came
      before Mr W Scobbie on 29  November  2004.    In  his  determination,
      which was promulgated on 14 December 2004, he dismissed the appeal on
      both immigration and human rights grounds.

      Permission to appeal

5.    The appellants  then  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  former
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal.   They applied to do so on a  number  of
      grounds.   Their application for permission to appeal was  determined
      by a Vice President (Mr P  King)  on  21  March  2005.    He  granted
      permission to appeal on one ground only, which he  described  in  his
      grant of permission as the "age issue", namely the fact (which is not
      in dispute between the parties) that at the date of the  respondent's
      decision to refuse the appellants' applications, both appellants were
      under the age of 65.  However, by the date of the hearing before  the
      Adjudicator, the first appellant was over 65.

      Issues for reconsideration

6.    It is not  in  dispute  between  the  parties  that  both  appellants
      satisfied, and still satisfy,  all  the  requirements  for  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom as dependent relatives  as  set  out  in
      paragraph 317 of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules  (HC
      395) as amended, apart from  sub-paragraph  (i)  of  that  paragraph.
      The only issue before us is therefore whether the appellants were, or
      are, also in a position to satisfy the requirements of  sub-paragraph
      (i) at the material date, whatever that date is.    It  is  therefore
      necessary to set out the relevant part of paragraph 317 as follows:

           "317. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  parent,
           grandparent or other dependent relative of a person present  and
           settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:
           (i)   is related to a person present and settled in  the  United
                 Kingdom in one of the following ways:
                 (a)   mother or grandmother who is a widow aged  65  years
                       or over;  or
                 (b)   father or grandfather who is a widower aged 65 years
                       or over; or
                 (c)   parents or grandparents travelling together of  whom
                       at least one is aged 65 or over; or
                 (d)   a parent or grandparent  aged  65  or  over  who  is
                       remarried but cannot look to the spouse  or  children
                       of the second marriage  for  financial  support;  and
                       where the person settled in  the  United  Kingdom  is
                       able  and  willing  to   maintain   the   parent   or
                       grandparent and any spouse or  child  of  the  second
                       marriage who would be admissible as a dependant; or
                 (e)   a parent or grandparent  under  the  age  of  65  if
                       living alone outside the United Kingdom in  the  most
                       exceptional compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly
                       dependent financially on  relatives  settled  in  the
                       United Kingdom; or
                 (f)   the son, daughter, sister, brother,  uncle  or  aunt
                       over the age of 18 if living alone outside the United
                       Kingdom  in  the   most   exceptional   compassionate
                       circumstances and  mainly  dependent  financially  on
                       relatives settled in the United Kingdom."


7.    It is not in dispute between the parties that,  as  at  the  date  of
      decision, both appellants were under the age of  65,  albeit  in  the
      first appellant's case by less than two weeks.   Likewise, it is  not
      in dispute that, at the date of the hearing before  the  Adjudicator,
      the first appellant was over 65.   The issue before us  is  therefore
      whether the appellants are entitled to succeed  on  the  basis  that,
      although they were unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph
      317 at the date of decision, nevertheless they were able to do so  at
      the date of the hearing.    This  is  an  issue  which  falls  to  be
      considered in light of the provisions of Sections 85(4)  and  (5)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  which
      read as follows:

      "85(4)      On an appeal  under  Section  82(1)  or  83(2)  against  a
            decision the Tribunal may consider evidence  about  any  matter
            which it thinks relevant to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
            including evidence which concerns a matter  arising  after  the
            date of decision.


            (5)   But in relation to an appeal under Section  82(1)  against
            refusal of entry clearance  or  refusal  of  a  certificate  of
            entitlement under Section 10 -
            (a)  sub-section (4) shall not apply, and
            (b)   the  Tribunal  may  consider   only   the   circumstances
                   appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."


8.    The applications made by the appellants for leave to remain were both
       in-country applications, after they had been granted leave to  enter
       as visitors, not entry clearance applications.  They therefore  fall
       within the ambit of Section 85(4), not Section 85(5).

      Respondent's submissions

9.    In the absence of the appellants or their  representative,  the  only
       submissions before us were those advanced  by  Mr  Blundell  on  the
       respondent's behalf.  He argued that, on the  only  issue  on  which
       permission to appeal to the former Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  had
       been granted, the Adjudicator's decision was  entirely  right.    At
       paragraph 20 of his determination, the Adjudicator  had  noted  that
       the first appellant was under the age of  65  at  the  date  of  the
       respondent's decision, albeit by less than two weeks.   It had  been
       argued on the appellant's behalf  before  the  Adjudicator  that  he
       should "look at the first appellant's appeal as  if  it  involved  a
       person who is, at the material time (i.e.  the  hearing)  over  65".
       The Adjudicator concluded in response to that submission:

           "I did not accept this line of argument.  The rule is absolutely
           clear.  The appellant is either 65 or not 65  at  the  date  the
           decision was taken.  This is not an issue which might  or  might
           not happen after the decision is taken. It  is  inevitable  that
           the appellant would be 65 shortly after the decision was  taken.
           The fact that he was  makes  absolutely  no  difference  to  the
           decision and is not something which I am required to  take  into
           account.  I  regarded  this  matter  as  quite  straightforward.
           Neither appellant was 65 when the application was  made  or  the
           decision  taken.   Accordingly,  paragraph  317(i)(c)   is   not
           complied with and the only possible sub-paragraph  of  paragraph
           317(i) which could apply in this case is (e)".


10.   Mr Blundell submitted that the Adjudicator was entirely right  in  so
      concluding.   The first appellant was not 65 at the date of decision.
       There was no arguable basis for allowing the appeal on  the  grounds
      that he would have attained that age within about  two  weeks.    The
      Adjudicator's decision should therefore be upheld.

11.   We invited Mr Blundell to address us  in  relation  to  the  reported
      determination  of  this  Tribunal  in  LS  (post-decision   evidence;
      directions; appealability) Gambia [2005] UKIAT  00085.   Mr  Blundell
      accepted that the fact that the first appellant had attained the  age
      of 65 between the date of decision and the date of the hearing before
      the  Adjudicator  was  a  "matter  arising  after  the  date  of  the
      decision".   However, he argued that it was not  a  matter  that  was
      "relevant to the substance of the decision".   In his submission, the
      substance of the decision was that the appellants  had  both  applied
      for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph  317(i)(e),
      i.e. on the basis that they were parents under the age of  65  living
      alone  outside  the  United   Kingdom   in   the   most   exceptional
      compassionate  circumstances  and  mainly  dependent  financially  on
      relatives settled in the United Kingdom.  They had not applied  under
      paragraph 317(i)(c), i.e. as parents travelling together of  whom  at
      least one is aged 65 or over.

12.   He argued that it was not open to an appellant who  had  applied  for
      leave to remain under the Immigration Rules on one basis, and who had
      failed to satisfy the requirements for leave to remain on that  basis
      as at the date  of  decision,  to  switch  his  reliance  to  another
      category on hearing of his appeal merely  because  by  that  time  he
      happened  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  another  part  of   the
      Immigration  Rules.    He  submitted  that  the  "substance"  of  the
      respondent's decision remained the fact that the original application
      had failed to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      relating to the application actually made by him as at  the  date  of
      decision, and still failed to do so at the date of hearing.  The fact
      that, by the date of the hearing, the appellant happened to  be  able
      to satisfy the requirements of another part of the Immigration Rules,
      albeit in the case of the appellants before us one contained  in  the
      same paragraph, indeed the same  sub-paragraph,  of  the  Immigration
      Rules was immaterial.  It was not a "matter" which was  "relevant  to
      the substance of the decision", i.e.  the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse the application as originally formulated by him.

13.   Mr Blundell argued that Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act was intended to
      cover the situation where an appellant, whose application had  failed
      at the date of decision because, for example, he  could  not  satisfy
      the maintenance or accommodation requirements for leave to remain  at
      that date, was able to show that the position had changed by the date
      of  hearing,  and  that  he  was  then  able  to  satisfy  the   same
      requirement.   The distinction which he sought to draw  was  between,
      on the one hand, a case in which, at the  date  of  the  hearing,  an
      appellant was able to satisfy the requirements for  leave  to  remain
      under precisely the same provisions in the Immigration Rules on which
      he had based his application originally  (when  Section  85(4)  could
      properly be prayed in aid),  and, on the other hand, a case in which,
      at the date of the hearing, an appellant was seeking  to  rely  on  a
      different part of the Immigration Rules which he  was  then  able  to
      satisfy, even though he had not been able to do so  at  the  date  of
      decision (when Section 85(4) was not applicable).

14.   We acknowledge the ingenious  nature  of  the  argument  advanced  by
      Mr Blundell  on  the  respondent's  behalf.   However,  we  are  not
      persuaded by it.   Mr Blundell is seeking to introduce a  distinction
      for which we see no justification, either in the wording  of  Section
      85(4), or in the Immigration Rules themselves.

15.   The appellants applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
      dependent relatives under paragraph 317  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      They still seek leave to remain as dependent relatives under the same
      paragraph.   The fact  that,  as  at  the  date  of  decision,  their
      applications fell to be rejected under paragraph 317(i)(e),  but  now
      fall within the ambit of paragraph 317(i)(c) of the  same  paragraph,
      does not change the substance of their application, which remains one
      for leave to remain as dependent relatives.

16.   The appellants' reliance on paragraph 317(i)(c),  because  the  first
      appellant is now over 65, rather than paragraph 317(i)(e),  does  not
      constitute an attempt by an appellant who has  applied,  and  failed,
      under one category in the Immigration Rules, e.g. as  a  student,  to
      succeed on appeal under an entirely different  category,  e.g.  as  a
      spouse, merely because by the latter date he happens to  be  able  to
      satisfy the requirements for leave to remain on an entirely different
      basis. That is not an issue which is before us, and is therefore  not
      one on which we consider it appropriate to express an opinion in  the
      absence of full argument on both sides.

17.   The central fact in the case of the appeals before  us  is  that  the
      appellants applied for leave to remain as dependent relatives.   They
      were refused on that basis.  By  the  date  of  the  hearing  by  the
      Adjudicator, the circumstances of the first  appellant  had  changed,
      albeit only as a consequence of the inevitable effect of the  passage
      of time upon his age, and the appellants were then  able  to  satisfy
      the requirements for leave to remain on the same  basis  as  that  on
      which they had applied originally,  namely  as  dependent  relatives.
      Under Section 85(4), they are entitled to rely upon  that  change  as
      constituting a "matter" which was "relevant to the substance  of  the
      decision" and which had arisen "after the date of the decision".

18.   We are therefore satisfied that the Adjudicator made a material error
      of law in failing to give proper effect to the provisions of  Section
      85(4).   In consequence, it now falls to us  to  substitute  our  own
      decision based on the undisputed facts of the appeals before us.

19.   Mr Blundell did not seek to argue that the appellants were  not  able
      to satisfy all the requirements of  paragraph  317  by  reference  to
      paragraph 317(i)(c)  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  the
      Adjudicator, or at the date of the hearing before us.  He was plainly
      right to do so.   In the circumstances, both appellants are  entitled
      to succeed.

      Reporting

20.   It is intended that this decision should be reported for what we  say
      in relation to the  effect  of  Section  85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in the circumstances  of  the  appeal
      before us.   In that regard, we are aware that this decision may have
      wider implications which go well beyond the scope of  the  individual
      appeals before us.  However, the  provisions  of  Section  85(4)  are
      clear in their intention, and it falls to us to give effect  to  that
      intention.  It is not for us to have regard to, still  less  to  pass
      comment upon,  the  merits  or  otherwise  of  the  statutory  change
      effected by Parliament when  enacting  Section  85(4).    That  is  a
      matter for Parliament alone.

      Decision

21.   The original Tribunal made a material error  of  law.   The  following
    decision is accordingly substituted:

    The appeals of both appellants in respect of the Immigration Rules  are
    allowed.






                                                                L V Waumsley
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
