
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


                                 LK (AA applied) Zimbabwe [2005] UKAIT 00159


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Field House                   Date of Hearing:  8 November 2005


                                   Before:

               The Honourable Mr Justice Hodge OBE (President)
                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                  Dr H H Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr K Kuranchie of Refugee Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

Neither the decision of the Court of Appeal in GH v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
1182 nor the suspension of removals to Zimbabwe  affects  the  force  of  AA
[2005] UKAIT 00144, which remains current country guidance.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   She  came  to  the  United
     Kingdom on 11 November 1999 and was granted six months leave to enter.
      Following the expiry of that leave on 11 May 2000, she did not  leave
     the United Kingdom but overstayed.  No action was taken  against  her.
     On 7 July 2004, she was still in the United  Kingdom  and  decided  to
     claim asylum.  On 20 August 2004, she was notified of the Respondent's
     decision to refuse her asylum and to remove her as an overstayer.  She
     appealed.  Her appeal was heard by an Adjudicator, Miss D  M  Lambert,
     and allowed in a determination sent out  on  15  November  2004.   The
     Respondent applied for and was granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
     Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.   Following  the  commencement  of  the
     appeals provisions of the 2004 Act,  the  grant  of  permission  takes
     effect as an order for reconsideration by this Tribunal.

  2. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that, as a homosexual, she fears
     persecution in Zimbabwe.  Although she attempted to be discreet  about
     her sexual orientation, she suffered persecution  for  it  before  she
     left Zimbabwe and fears that she would  do  so  again.   Further,  the
     persecution took the form of a (heterosexual)  rape  as  a  result  of
     which she now has an advanced HIV condition.  This has become apparent
     only since her asylum claim was made:   as  a  result,  she  has  also
     claimed that her removal would breach her rights under Articles 3  and
     8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, because  she  would  not
     have sufficient access to medical treatment if she  were  returned  to
     Zimbabwe.

  3. Since coming to the United Kingdom, she has given birth to a baby,  as
     a result of casual sex following the break up of her relationship with
     her partner.

  4. The Adjudicator accepted  the  Appellant's  story  as  credible.   She
     accepted also the Appellant's explanation for her failure to apply for
     asylum either on arrival or soon afterwards.  She found  that  despite
     the existence of well-organised pressure  groups  for  homosexuals  in
     Zimbabwe the Appellant herself would be at risk  if  she  returned  to
     Zimbabwe, and that there was no reason to suppose that future attempts
     to be discreet would be any more successful  than  past  attempts  had
     been.  For this reason, she declined to follow the conclusions of  the
     Tribunal in JD [2004] UKIAT 00259.  She indicated that she would  have
     been inclined to apply the decision of the High Court of Australia  in
     S  [2003]  HCA  71:   but,  given  her   factual   findings   on   the
     ineffectiveness of discretion, that view was not in the  end  material
     to the decision she made.

  5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that, given that the
     Appellant  had  no  intention  of  broadcasting  her  sexuality,   the
     Adjudicator  ought  to  have  followed  JD  rather  than   any   other
     authorities referring to the situation where a person  might,  against
     their will, be required to hide their sexuality.  He argues  that  the
     Adjudicator's failure to make a clear finding of fact as  to  who  was
     responsible for the rape following the discovery  of  the  Appellant's
     sexual orientation invalidates her decision and that the fact that she
     would now be returned with a baby further reduces any risk that  there
     would be any adverse reaction to her as a homosexual.   The  existence
     of a group called Gays and Lesbians in Zimbabwe  (GALZ)  demonstrates,
     in the Secretary of State's view, that the  Adjudicator  overestimated
     the risk to the Appellant.  The  Secretary  of  State  adds  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in counting the fact that her cousin was murdered in
     Harare as further increasing the Appellant's fear  of  harm.   Lastly,
     the Secretary of State argues that the Adjudicator was wrong to  reach
     the conclusion that the appeal ought to be  allowed  under  Article  8
     simply on the basis that  it  was  being  allowed  under  the  Refugee
     Convention and Article 3.

  6. So far as the Secretary of State's  specific  grounds  of  appeal  are
     concerned, we are satisfied  that  only  the  last-mentioned  has  any
     merit.  In our view, it is entirely right to say that the  Adjudicator
     should not have allowed the appeal separately under Article 8  without
     reaching any view on whether the rights protected by Article  8  would
     be breached by the Appellant's removal.  There is nothing  in  any  of
     the other grounds.  It was the Adjudicator's job to decide whether the
     Appellant was to be believed, and to assess all  the  evidence  before
     her before reaching a conclusion on the facts.  She was amply entitled
     to decide that, in the  light  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  of  her
     history, which she accepted, the Appellant would be at risk on return.
      That assessment was properly made on an individual basis.  It is  not
     suggested that it ran counter to any applicable country guidance.   JD
     is not a country guidance decision.  The Adjudicator appears to us  to
     have taken proper account of its conclusions in reaching  her  own  on
     the rather different facts of this appeal.

  7. As the Adjudicator remarked, the Appellant's illness  does  not  bring
     her within the band of exceptional severe cases whose removal from the
     United Kingdom would cause a breach of Article 3 or  Article  8.   But
     given her conclusions on the facts, we can see no error of law in  her
     finding that the Appellant was at such risk of ill-treatment  for  her
     sexual orientation as to bring her within the definition of a  refugee
     and also show that her removal  would  expose  her  to  risk  of  ill-
     treatment proscribed by Article 3.  She was thus entitled to allow the
     appeal on refugee and human rights grounds.

  8. There is, of course, now a shorter route to the  conclusion  that  the
     Appellant is entitled to refugee status in the United Kingdom.  As the
     Secretary of State recognised, the decision of  this  Tribunal  in  AA
     [2005] UKAIT 00144,  which  is  a  country  guidance  case,  might  be
     regarded as leading to the conclusion that the Appellant should in any
     event be regarded as a refugee.  The  present  reconsideration  is  by
     Rule 62(7) limited to the grounds of appeal upon which the Immigration
     Appeal Tribunal granted permission, but those grounds do  as  we  read
     them  permit  us  to  look  generally  at  the  question  whether  the
     Adjudicator materially erred in law in allowing the Appellant's appeal
     on refugee grounds.  In this appeal as, we understand, in others,  the
     Secretary of State now argues that the country guidance of  AA  should
     not be followed.  This appeal therefore provides  an  opportunity  for
     the Tribunal as presently constituted to give an authoritative view on
     the arguments being adduced by the Secretary of State.

  9. The appeal of AA was heard with a view to giving country  guidance  on
     returns to Zimbabwe.  A great deal of evidence, both  documentary  and
     oral, was considered.   The  Tribunal  found,  on  the  basis  of  the
     evidence before it, that a citizen of Zimbabwe involuntarily  returned
     there from the United Kingdom had a well-founded fear  of  persecution
     for a Convention reason.  The basis for that fear is the way in  which
     those returned involuntarily  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  Zimbabwe
     appear to be treated at Harare Airport.  Following the decision of the
     Court of Appeal in Mbanza v SSHD [1996] Imm AR 136, upholding R v  IAT
     ex parte Senga (unreported, 9 March 1994), that is sufficient to  give
     the individual in question status as  a  refugee.   For  this  reason,
     there was no full investigation in AA of the risk  to  those  returned
     after they have passed through the airport (if they are allowed to  do
     so);   and, as the Tribunal  noted  in  AA,  the  Secretary  of  State
     conceded in that case that any ill-treatment received on return  would
     be "for a Convention reason".

 10. The decision in AA was communicated orally  in  court  on  14  October
     2005.   As  the  Tribunal  remarked  on  that  occasion,   that   oral
     communication was not the judgment.  Under rule 23 of  2005  Procedure
     Rules, notification of the determination of the Tribunal in an  asylum
     case is to be done in writing to the  Secretary  of  State,  following
     which it is his task to serve it on the Appellant.  We understand that
     that  rule  was  specifically  sought  by  the  Secretary  of   State:
     certainly he is fully aware of it.

 11. The matter is of some importance in the light of one of the  arguments
     adduced before us.  The Secretary of  State  points  out  that  on  14
     October, the day on which the Tribunal gave oral notification  of  its
     decision, he announced that returns to Zimbabwe  had  been  suspended.
     He now submits that the suspension of returns to Zimbabwe is an  event
     which took place after the judgment in AA and thus  casts  doubt  upon
     its continued force.  That, in our judgment,  is  simply  wrong.   The
     position on 14 October was that the Tribunal had given a view but  had
     not yet given its determination.  If the Secretary of State thought on
     14 October that his suspension of returns to Zimbabwe  undermined  the
     country guidance about to be given in  the  judgment  in  AA,  it  was
     obviously open to him to ask the Tribunal  to  hear  further  argument
     before it gave its  determination  under  the  Rules.   As  a  result,
     looking at the matter not only technically, it cannot be said that the
     suspension of  returns  was  an  event  which  took  place  after  the
     determination.  It did not:   it  took  place  four  days  before  the
     determination was sent to the Secretary of State on 18 October.

 12. In any event, reliance on  the  Secretary  of  State's  suspension  of
     returns on 14 October hardly tells the whole story.  As we  understand
     the position, returns to Zimbabwe were suspended in the summer of this
     year as part of the arrangements made for the adjournment of a  number
     of Judicial Review cases before Collins J and the selecting of AA as a
     test case to be heard by this Tribunal.  The fact that returns had for
     the moment been suspended  was  part  of  the  context  in  which  the
     Tribunal heard the case of AA.   None  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
     arguments before the Tribunal in AA suggested that the  suspension  of
     returns made any difference to the status of  the  appellant  in  that
     case as he stood before the Tribunal.

 13. There is, however, a much more general difficulty in the Secretary  of
     State's argument that a person who would otherwise be entitled to  the
     status of a refugee is not entitled to that status if removal  is  not
     threatened.  If that were a good argument, there would  never  be  any
     refugees because  the  Convention  requires  (broadly  speaking)  that
     refugees are not removed, and the United Kingdom  Government's  policy
     is certainly not to remove them (except  where  "safe  third  country"
     arrangements of various sorts apply).  A refugee's status as a refugee
     does not depend on the risk that he will be removed:  it is  a  status
     that he has while he is in the country in which he has sought  refuge.
     It is easy to lose sight of the fact, but  almost  the  whole  of  the
     Refugee Convention is concerned precisely with the incidents  of  that
     status whilst he remains in the country which ex hypothesei is not the
     country of his nationality.  Reinforcement of that view, if  required,
     can be found throughout the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Saad,
     Diriye and Osorio v SSHD [2002] INLR 34, to which we shall  return  in
     some detail shortly.

 14. It is this feature of status that a  refugee  has  that  in  principle
     distinguishes refugee claims from claims arising  under  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights.  A claimant under  the  latter  Convention
     typically (perhaps always in this Tribunal's jurisdiction) claims that
     the Secretary of State's removal of  him  will  be  a  breach  of  the
     European Convention on Human Rights.   He  has  no  particular  status
     while he remains here, save that he has a right  not  to  be  removed.
     But the person who claims that his removal would  breach  the  Refugee
     Convention is saying something more.   He  says  not  merely  that  he
     cannot be removed, but also that while he remains he  is  entitled  to
     all the benefits of the Convention which is,  appropriately,  entitled
     the "United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees".

 15. The final substantive argument raised by the  Secretary  of  State  is
     based on the recent decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  GH  v  SSHD
     [2005] EWCA Civ 1182.   It  is  submitted  that  the  effect  of  that
     decision is that a claim under the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  the
     Refugee Convention cannot now  succeed  in  the  absence  of  a  clear
     indication of the intention to remove  and  the  process  of  removal.
     This is, broadly speaking, because the 2002 Act gives only a right  of
     appeal against the  decision  to  remove  an  illegal  entrant  or  an
     overstayer, whereas its predecessors gave a right  of  appeal  against
     the removal directions.  There are, however, a number of  reasons  for
     concluding that the decision of the Court of Appeal in  GH  cannot  be
     intended to have this general effect.

 16. The first reason is that, as the Tribunal noted in  KF  (Iran)  [2005]
     UKIAT 00109, Article 5 of the Immigration (Notices)  Regulations  2003
     (SI  2003/658),  which  reflects  the  wording  of  its  predecessors,
     requires notices of decisions to refuse leave to enter, to  remove  or
     to deport an individual to state the country or territory to which  it
     is proposed to remove him.  Without such an indication, the notice  is
     not a valid notice of an appealable decision.  Thus  the  denomination
     of  the  country  provides  the  essential  context  for  the  appeal.
     Secondly, the Court of Appeal has itself indicated (we need refer only
     to AE and FE v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1022, [2003] Imm AR 609  at  [67])
     that it is necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  claim  under  the
     Refugee Convention and the claim  under  the  European  Convention  on
     Human Rights:  but in GH the Court of Appeal found itself able to deal
     with both issues in identical terms.

 17. Thirdly, it seems to us that GH cannot have been intended to undermine
     Saad, Diriye and Osorio, which it does not cite.  It is at this  point
     necessary to look at the latter case a little more  closely.   Of  the
     three claimants before the Court of  Appeal  there,  Osorio  had  been
     refused  leave  to  enter  but  Saad   and   Diriye   had,   following
     consideration of their  claims,  been  granted  exceptional  leave  to
     remain in the United Kingdom for four  years.   Their  appeal  to  the
     Appellate Authorities lay only under s8(2) of the  1993  Act  "on  the
     ground that it would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
     under the Convention for [them] to be required  to  leave  the  United
     Kingdom after the time limited by the leave".  The Immigration  Appeal
     Tribunal had dismissed their appeals because  there  was  no  evidence
     available to show that, in four years time, when their leave  expired,
     their removal would breach the Convention.  The Court of  Appeal  held
     that, despite the wording of the statute, that approach was  wrong  in
     principle.  The United Kingdom, as a party to the Refugee  Convention,
     is bound to afford Convention rights to anyone who is a  refugee.   It
     is to be inferred that the United Kingdom does not  intend  to  breach
     its  international  obligations.   The  right  of  appeal   given   to
     unsuccessful claimants, and the  duty  of  Adjudicators  to  allow  an
     appeal if the decision was not in accordance with the law,  should  be
     taken together to give those who claimed to be  refugees  a  right  of
     appeal on the ground that their status had not been recognised  as  it
     should have been.  As the Court noted in paragraph [72] (vii):

           "Refugee status will necessarily be in issue when an  appeal  is
           brought  under  section  8  in  circumstances  where  there   is
           apprehension of refoulement.  It would  be  both  illogical  and
           impractical to require challenges of  decisions  as  to  refugee
           status to be brought by judicial review where refoulement is not
           intended."

 18. It follows that the essence of a refugee appeal by a person who is  in
     the United Kingdom is his assertion  of  his  entitlement  to  refugee
     status while he remains here.

 19. As the Court noted at [73], s69 of the 1999 Act introduced a right  of
     appeal specifically for the benefit of  those  who  had  been  refused
     refugee status but granted  leave  to  remain.   There  is  a  similar
     provision in s83 of the 2002 Act, under which both GH and this  appeal
     were decided.  But that right is limited to  a  person  who  has  been
     granted leave to remain for a period  exceeding  twelve  months.   The
     general ground of appeal for present purposes is that in s84(1)(g)  of
     the 2002 Act, which is in the following terms:

           "That the removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  in
           consequence of the immigration decision would breach the  United
           Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or  would  be
           unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  as  being
           incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

 20. There is no doubt that that wording might encourage a court to look at
     the two Conventions together.  But the issues  are  in  reality  quite
     different.   The  removal  of  a  person  cannot  breach  the  Refugee
     Convention  unless  he  is  a  refugee:   that  is  to  say,   unless,
     independently of any proposal to remove him, he has the  status  of  a
     refugee.  The Refugee Convention simply has nothing to say about those
     who do not have  that  status.   The  claim  under  the  Human  Rights
     Convention, however, is a claim which depends primarily on the  threat
     of removal.  It is a claim that, although the individual  in  question
     has no status or entitlement to  status  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he
     cannot lawfully be subjected to the  removal  that  the  Secretary  of
     State proposes.  It is a claim that if the claimant is removed he will
     be a victim of a breach of the Human Rights Convention.  It  would  no
     doubt be possible to make observations about whether  it  is  entirely
     appropriate for the statute to use the same form  of  words  for  both
     types of claim:  but it does not matter, because of Saad,  Diriye  and
     Osorio.  Despite the reformulations in more  recent  legislation,  the
     ground of appeal in s84(1)(g) and the task of the Tribunal  in  s86(3)
     are the same as those that were examined by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
     Saad,  Diriye  and  Osorio.   If  anything,  the   importance   of   a
     determination of status in refugee cases is underlined  by  s86(2)(a),
     which requires the Tribunal to  "determine  any  matter  raised  as  a
     ground of appeal".  Saad, Diriye  and  Osorio  still  applies  to  the
     determination of refugee  grounds  of  appeal  under  s84(1)(g):   the
     Tribunal needs to determine whether the appellant has the status of  a
     refugee, and cannot look simply at the risks that would arise from his
     removal.

 21. Those are the reasons why we think it is simply  impossible  that  the
     decision of the Court of Appeal in GH was intended to have the  effect
     on refugee claims that selective citation of  some  of  the  sentences
     contained in the judgments might suggest.  The truth of the matter  is
     that in GH the Court was dealing with a  very  specific  question,  to
     which it gave a very specific answer.

 22. In GH, the appellant was not entitled to refugee status. He had failed
     to establish a well-founded fear of persecution in his own  home  area
     of Northern Iraq.  He  claimed  only  that  he  would  be  exposed  to
     persecution if he were returned to Iraq by being removed  to  Baghdad.
     The position is that there may well be ways of removing him that would
     not expose him to risk.  In those circumstances, he is not entitled to
     assume that the Secretary of State would breach his  human  rights  by
     removing him in a way that would endanger him.  Nothing in the Court's
     judgments suggests that  they  were  invited  to  reconsider  whether,
     independently of removal, GH had the right to refugee status.

 23. It is no doubt the particular circumstances  of  GH  that  caused  the
     Court not only to find no need to cite Saad, Diriye  and  Osorio,  but
     also to refer at some length to the judgment of Keene LJ  in  Gardi  v
     SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 750, [2002] 1 WLR 2755,  a  case  also  concerned
     with a Kurd from Northern Iraq, although that decision itself is of no
     authority, having been revoked  by  the  Court  as  having  been  made
     without jurisdiction:  Gardi v SSHD (No  2)  (note)  [2002]  EWCA  Civ
     1560, [2002] 1 WLR 3282.  It is also the particular  circumstances  of
     the case that enabled Scott Baker LJ to describe as "wholly  academic"
     the question whether removal directions  would,  if  set,  breach  the
     Refugee Convention.  It is also no doubt that which allowed  Keene  LJ
     to describe the absence  of  removal  directions  as  "of  fundamental
     importance in this case".

 24. Enough has been said, we trust, to establish that GH has  no  specific
     bearing on the question whether a  particular  individual  is,  as  he
     stands before the Tribunal in the United Kingdom, entitled  to  status
     as a refugee.  AA, on the other hand, is a case about refugee  status.
     It decides that, because of  the  circumstances  in  Zimbabwe  at  the
     present  time,  a  Zimbabwean  citizen  who  would  not  return  there
     willingly has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
     reason and is accordingly entitled to the status of refugee  while  he
     remains here.  Although the reasoning depends, through  the  decisions
     of the Court of Appeal in Danian v SSHD [1998] Imm AR 462  and  Mbanza
     on the projected removal, it is a decision  about  status,  not  about
     removeability.  It follows that the reasoning of the Court  of  Appeal
     in GH has no perceptible application to  the  circumstances  of  those
     returned involuntarily to Zimbabwe.

 25. As the Tribunal recognised in AA, the present state of the law  cannot
     be regarded as satisfactory.  Both the principles of procedure and the
     interpretation of international Conventions have developed  in  a  way
     which is unusually piecemeal because it has been based on a constantly
     changing background of the statutory jurisdiction of  the  Immigration
     Appellate Authorities  and  the  occasional  interaction  of  Judicial
     Review as well as appeals to the higher courts.  It might well be that
     a number of the earlier decisions on refugee status such as Danian and
     Mbanza would today be formulated rather differently.  A  comprehensive
     review of the meaning of the Refugee Convention and the  Human  Rights
     Convention as they apply to status and removal, and of the process  by
     which decisions of the Secretary of State can  be  challenged  in  the
     High Court or in this Tribunal, is no doubt extremely desirable.   For
     the present, however, the position is that the decisions of the  Court
     of Appeal to which we have referred bind the Tribunal, following which
     it has issued country guidance in the form of AA, which it will follow
     in Zimbabwean cases.

 26. That is a further reason for concluding that any error of law  by  the
     Adjudicator was not material in the present case.  The Appellant is  a
     refugee.

 27.  For  the  foregoing  reasons,  we  order   that   the   Adjudicator's
     determination shall stand.



                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date: 16 Nov
                                                   2005

