
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal | |
|                                                                            |
|TN and others (BDK members - not at risk) Democratic Republic of Congo      |
|[2005] UKAIT 00152                                                          |
|                                        |                |                  |
|                                        |                |                  |
|                                        |                |                  |
|                                        |                |                  |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|           |                            |                                   |
|Heard at   |Field House                 |Determination promulgated:         |
|On         |29 September 2005           |                |04 November 2005  |
|                                                                            |
|Before:                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Dr. H. H. Storey (Senior Immigration Judge)                                 |
|Ms. D. K. Gill (Senior Immigration Judge)                                   |
|Mr. M. E. A. Innes                                                          |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                               |                |
|           |Between                                        |                |
|           |                                               |                |
|           |                                               |First Appellant |
|           |                                               |                |
|           |                                               |Second Appellant|
|           |                                               |                |
|           |                                               |Third Appellant |
|                                                                            |
|           |                                                |              |
|           |And                                             |              |
|           |                                                |              |
|           |                                                |              |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department  |Respondent    |
|                                                                          |

|Whilst active members of the BDK (Bunda Dia Kongo) are reasonably likely to |
|experience some problems in Bas Congo, these are not such as to amount to   |
|persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3. Nor is there any real risk |
|that active members of the BDK would be persecuted or would suffer Article 3|
|ill-treatment in Kinshasa. Those who are not members of the BDK but who are |
|associated with it are not at greater risk than active members of the BDK.  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Revindran, of the Refugee Legal Centre  (RLC).


For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  A.  Sheikh,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                 Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1.    This is a reconsideration of  the  Determination  (promulgated  on  21
     June 2004, following a hearing on 4 June 2004)  of  Ms  C  E  Pugh  (an
     Adjudicator as at the date of the hearing), who dismissed  the  appeals
     of  the  Appellants  which  were  brought  under  section  82  of   the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) on asylum and
     human rights  grounds  against  the  decisions  of  the  Respondent  of
     (respectively) 26 January 2004, 23 January 2004 and 27 January 2004  to
     refuse them leave to enter the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellants are nationals of the Democratic Republic of  the  Congo
     (DRC). They arrived in the United Kingdom on 2  December  2003,  having
     travelled from the DRC via Angola and Zambia. Their dates of birth  are
     (respectively) 10 May 1968, 1 January 1944 and 25  December  1982.  The
     First Appellant  and  the  Third  Appellant  are  sisters.  The  Second
     Appellant is their mother. The First Appellant's daughter claims  as  a
     dependant in her claim.

3.    This appeal came before the Tribunal on 12 July 2005,  at  which  time
     Mr.  P.  Deller  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer   for   the
     Respondent) conceded that there was a material  error  of  law  in  the
     Adjudicator's Determination, in that,  the Adjudicator  had  failed  to
     treat past persecution on political and religious grounds (paragraph 63
     of the Determination) as indicative of future risk. At the  hearing  on
     12 July 2005 (when the Appellants were represented by  Mr.  Revindran),
     the parties agreed that there was no  need  for  oral  evidence  to  be
     heard, and that the second-stage of the reconsideration  would  proceed
     by way of submissions only, on the following issues which  the  parties
     also agreed were the issues before the Tribunal at the second stage  of
     the reconsideration:

      (a)   the current risk  to  members  of  the  BDK  or  those  who  are
           associated with the BDK (Bunda Dia Kongo);

      (b)   the scope and viability of the political profile risk  category.



      Before us, the parties confirmed the above.

4.    At the earlier hearing on 12 July  2005,  the  parties  were  informed
     that this would be a country guidance case.  However,  the  documentary
     evidence before us is fairly limited and, in the event, we did not have
     the benefit of submissions from the parties. For this reason,  we  have
     decided not  to  designate  this  case  as  a  country  guidance  case.
     Nevertheless, this case is being reported because, notwithstanding  the
     limited evidence before us, we  deal  with  the  general  risk  to  BDK
     members and those associated with the BDK, and it  is  right  that  our
     findings on this evidence should be made known.

5.    At the commencement of the hearing before us,  Mr.  Revindran  renewed
     the request to adjourn the hearing which was made by way  of  a  letter
     dated 28 September 2005. In this letter, Mr.  Revindran  explained  the
     difficulties he had had in locating an expert who could  assist.  On  9
     September 2005, an expert was located but he was currently  located  in
     the DRC. His report was only sent to the RLC  on  Monday  26  September
     2005. It was immediately sent for translation.  There  were  then  some
     difficulties in transmission of the report, the  result  of  which  was
     that, as at the time of writing the  letter,  the  translation  of  the
     report had not been received. Before us, Mr. Revindran informed us that
     the report had been faxed to the RLC's office at the hearing centre but
     some of the pages were missing.  We adjourned the hearing for about  an
     hour to allow Mr. Revindran time to arrange for the report to  e-mailed
     to him at the hearing  centre  and  for  Mr.  Sheikh  to  consider  his
     position in relation to the report.

6.    When the hearing resumed, Mr. Sheikh lodged a copy of the CIPU  report
     on the DRC dated April  2005.  Mr.  Revindran  confirmed  that  he  had
     received the  Appellants'  expert  report.  However,  he  informed  us,
     initially , that he was not going to  submit  the  report  in  evidence
     because (inter alia) the expert had not addressed the question posed to
     him as to the likelihood of the Appellants being detained for 5  months
     without their details being taken.  Furthermore,  the  expert  did  not
     reach a firm conclusion about the risk of future persecution. Secondly,
     Mr.  Revindran  informed  us  that  he  was  in  difficulty,  and   was
     withdrawing representation.

7.    We informed the parties that,  whilst  it  was  regrettable  that  Mr.
     Revindran felt compelled to withdraw representation, we were proceeding
     with the hearing. However, we indicated that, in the circumstances,  it
     may be inappropriate for Mr. Sheikh to  make  any  submissions  at  any
     length. Mr. Sheikh did not object to the Tribunal deciding  the  appeal
     on the documents before us, which (as we advised the parties before us)
     are as set out in paragraph 9 below.

8.    Mr. Revindran then informed us of two things. Firstly, the  First  and
     Third Appellants (who were present at the hearing) had  told  him  they
     wished to submit the report after  all.  Secondly  ,  although  he  had
     withdrawn representation, the First and Third Appellants had  requested
     him to pass on a request to the Tribunal  to  adjourn  the  hearing  to
     enable the Second Appellant to attend the hearing, in case  she  wished
     to say anything to the Tribunal.  We  were  informed  that  the  Second
     Appellant was currently an  in-patient  at  a  hospital  in  Leeds.  We
     refused to adjourn the hearing on  that  ground.  Our  reasons  are  as
     follows:

      (a)   clear directions had been given at the previous  reconsideration
           hearing that there would be no further oral  evidence  from  the
           Appellants, only submissions. No application had been made prior
           to the date  of  the  hearing  to  vary  that  and  permit  oral
           testimony;

      (b)   the risk  of  future  persecution  is  one  which  falls  to  be
           determined  largely  on  the  basis  of  an  assessment  of  the
           objective evidence. We had the benefit of  a  report  which  had
           been specially commissioned on the Appellants' behalf.

      (c)   Rule 21(2) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
           Rules 2005 provides that the Tribunal must not adjourn a hearing
           unless satisfied that the  appeal  cannot  otherwise  he  justly
           determined.  For  the  reasons  given  above,  we  were  not  so
           satisfied.

9.    Documents: Before  concluding  the  hearing,  we  clarified  with  the
     parties what documents we had  before  us  and  would  be  taking  into
     account, in addition to those already served. These were:

                 (served on behalf of the Respondent)
      (i)   the CIPU report dated April 2005;

            (served on behalf of the Appellants)
      (ii)  the report of Mr. Alex Kabinda  Ngoy,  a  lawyer  and  barrister
           before Lubumbashi, under reference: LRDC / AKN / 2005, entitled:
           Report on the situation  of  Bundu  Dia  Kongo  religious  group
           members;

            (obtained by the Tribunal but referred to  in  the  letter  from
           the RLC dated 28 September 2005)
      (iii) the US State Department (USSD) International  Religious  Freedom
           Report 2004 in the DRC;

            (obtained by the Tribunal)
      (iv)  the USSD Report on the DRC for 2004 dated 28 February 2005.

      We have also referred to the report dated 12 December  2003  from  the
     Belgian General Commission for Refugees and Stateless Persons  (CEDOCA)
     entitled: "Report on the Bundu Dia Kongo (the  Democratic  Republic  of
     the Congo)" (the Belgian CEDOCA Report). This  report  was  before  the
     Adjudicator and she considered it in some detail. It describes the  BDK
     movement/sect in detail, including its creation, philosophy, structure,
     leadership, the conditions and training for new  members,  its  emblem,
     membership cards and statutes, as well as the events of July  2002  and
     subsequently.

      We were told by Mr.  Revindran  (before  he  withdrew  representation)
     that he had just received a newspaper article in French, which had  not
     been translated. However, he also informed us that, although  he  could
     not say what the contents of the article were, he was not intending  to
     place reliance on it.

10.   The basis  of  the  Appellants'  claims:   In  brief,  the  Appellants
     claimed that they had been persecuted on account of  their  association
     with, and activities with, the BDK. The First Appellant became a member
     of the BDK in about 1982 / 1983.  In 1987, she married  a  BDK  pastor,
     and moved with him to Bas Congo where he was the pastor.  Subsequently,
     the Second Appellant, and later the Third Appellant, went to live  with
     the First Appellant in Bas Congo. On 26 June 2003, the Appellants  were
     preparing for the 40th anniversary of their church which was  also  the
     40th anniversary of the death of Kasa-Vubu, the former president of the
     DRC. A lorry full of soldiers turned up at the church. Some women  were
     shot; the Appellants and the daughter of the First Appellant were taken
     by the soldiers to their house, where the First Appellant's husband and
     the women were beaten. The women were also subjected to multiple  rape.
     The First Appellant and the Third Appellant were taken to  prison,  the
     Second Appellant and the First Appellant's husband  being  too  unwell.
     The First Appellant's husband died from his injuries. Subsequently, the
     Second Appellant was taken to prison. The women stayed in prison for  5
     months in difficult  conditions.  They  were  beaten  and  raped.  They
     escaped with the assistance of a guard, who was paid  a  bribe  of  US$
     2,000.  On the night of 6th to 7th November 2003, the  guard  let  them
     out. There was a van waiting  to take them to  a  Kimbanguiste  Church.
     However, as the pastor there was too afraid to keep them overnight,  he
     immediately took them to the ocean.

11.   The Adjudicator's Determination: In a carefully reasoned and  detailed
     Determination,  the  Adjudicator  assessed  the  credibility   of   the
     Appellants'  accounts.  Whilst  making  several   adverse   credibility
     findings, she also referred to evidence which "could work in favour  of
     the Appellants". She accepted that the  Appellants  had  suffered  some
     traumatic event. It is plain from the Adjudicator's reasoning that  she
     decided to place considerable weight on a particular newspaper article.
     The particular newspaper article on which  the  Adjudicator  relied  is
     dated 5 March 2004. Given the weight she placed on it, it is  important
     for this Tribunal, when assessing the risk on return, to  take  account
     of contents of the article.  This is what the  Adjudicator  says  about
     this article at paragraph 51 of the Determination:

      51.   This article says that the followers  of  BDK  are  still  being
           pursued for reason of religious affiliation. It  speaks  of  the
           events in Bas Congo "last  year".  It  says  the  followers  are
           hounded and prevented from practising. This is not mentioned  in
           the CIPU, but by itself this would simply be one more  piece  of
           background material. However, the article goes on  to  refer  to
           the "arrests last June" and then names the  First  Appellant  as
           "wife of the leader of the movement", names  her  daughter,  and
           goes on to name the Third Appellant as being in  charge  of  the
           young choir members and the Second Appellant as the gardener  of
           the church. I note that in the translation,  and  again  in  the
           second translation the name of the Second Appellant  was  missed
           out. I do in fact read French, but I do not need  to  do  so  in
           order to spot the name in the article. It is  clearly  there.  I
           note in passing that it is odd that the Second Appellant  should
           be gardener at the church, given the problems that she had  with
           her back from 1998. The Article says nothing about their further
           imprisonment and escape. The article continues  by  saying  that
           the paper covered  the  affair  "in  its  various  publications,
           denouncing the abuses of so-called justice". They went on to say
           that followers of the BDK were not rebelling against the central
           power but wanting to celebrate the  40th  anniversary  of  their
           church and the rehabilitation of the late President Kasa-Vubu.

      (our emphasis)

      The fact that the Appellants and the First Appellant's  daughter  were
     named in an article which the Adjudicator clearly accepted  and  placed
     heavy reliance on is relevant to our determination of the issues before
     us. Similarly, the fact  that  the  article  suggests  that  they  were
     arrested is also relevant.

12.   At first sight, it is  not  entirely  clear  whether  the  Adjudicator
     accepted the Appellants' accounts  as  to  the  manner  in  which  they
     escaped - or were  released  -  from  detention.  Towards  the  end  of
     paragraph 61 of the Determination,  the  Adjudicator  referred  to  the
     cross-examination of the Home Office Presenting Officer and stated:

            I believe that the questions were meant  to  show  that  if  the
           Appellants had been imprisoned, which the Home Office Presenting
           Officer was not at that point accepting but which I will accept,
           then  they  had  been  let  out  as  no  further  interest.  The
           background material shows that BDK members who  were  imprisoned
           after the events of 2002 often managed to bribe their way out or
           were simply released. The story is generally in accord with  the
           background material.

13.   However, given that the Appellants did not seem to be well  acquainted
     with their own religion, the Adjudicator concluded that  they  had  not
     come to the church through a burning conviction but had done so through
     the marriage of one of the  family  members.  She  concluded  that  the
     marriage must have been seen as a provision of security  (paragraph  58
     of the Determination).  She therefore accepted that the Appellants were
     "associated" with the church through  marriage of one of them  but  for
     reasons of security rather than conviction, that they  were  imprisoned
     and  therefore  persecuted  for  their  religion  and  their  political
     opinion, that political opinion may well  have  been  imputed  to  them
     simply because they were members of the particular church.

14.   At the commencement of the hearing (and before Mr. Revindran  withdrew
     from representation), we asked the parties to address us on whether the
     Adjudicator's finding as to the claims of the Appellants that they  had
     escaped from prison was sufficiently clear and,  if  not,  whether  the
     Tribunal  ought  to  hear  oral  evidence  on   this   limited   point,
     notwithstanding the concession at the hearing on 12 July 2005 that oral
     evidence was not necessary. Mr.  Sheikh  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
     should distinguish between a person who escapes  from  prison  by,  for
     example, breaking out of the prison and scaling a wall and a person who
     secures their release by paying someone  a  bribe.    In  Mr.  Sheikh's
     submission, there is no reason to suppose that a person in  the  latter
     category would be treated or regarded as an escapee or would be wanted,
     as a  person  in  the  former  category  might  be.   Furthermore,  the
     Adjudicator stated at  paragraph  71  of  the  Determination  that  the
     Appellants would be safe in Kinshasa. This means  that  she  must  have
     found that no charges were brought against the Appellants. In response,
     Mr. Revindran informed us that, in his view, no useful purpose would be
     served by hearing oral evidence, because the Appellants have given oral
     evidence and there is nothing further they can add to their accounts of
     their escape. It was for the  Tribunal  to  draw  inferences  from  the
     evidence they had already given. The Appellants regarded themselves  as
     having escaped from prison. We noted the Second Appellant's answers  to
     questions 89 to 91 of her interview (page C16 of the  statutory  appeal
     bundle lodged in her case), which read:

      89.   Question:  Did you walk out of prison?
            Answer:    A lorry was waiting for us  outside  the  prison.  We
                 walked to the lorry to the church.

      90.   Question:  Were there guards when walking to the lorry?
            Answer:    Just one guard

      91.   Question:  His name?
            Answer:    I don't know him my daughter knows.

15.   We reserved our determination.

      DETERMINATION

16.   We deal first with the Appellants' accounts  of  their  "escape"  from
     prison.  Mr. Sheikh sought to rely on the Tribunal's  Determination  in
     Tharmakulaseelan [2002] UKIAT 03444. That was a case which was  decided
     with regard to the country situation in Sri Lanka. In  that  case,  the
     Tribunal found that  the  objective  evidence  shows  that  bribery  is
     widespread in Sri Lanka, that bribery related releases  would  not,  in
     the absence of some special  and  credible  reason,  be  likely  to  be
     treated as escapes, and would  not  result  in  the  inclusion  of  the
     individuals involved on a wanted list. Indeed, the Tribunal  considered
     itself able to go further and to state that, although  the  Sri  Lankan
     government was trying to control  bribery,  such  was  the  culture  of
     bribery that the mere fact that a bribe was paid  does  not  in  itself
     imply that the bribe is procuring action which would not  otherwise  in
     time be taken. Nor does it necessarily imply  that  the  person  bribed
     would be willing to take a  serious  personal  risk  by,  for  example,
     releasing a  suspected  terrorist.  The  Tribunal  in  Tharmakulaseelan
     emphasised that each case has to be decided on its own facts and  there
     may well be examples of cases where bribery has  procured  an  assisted
     escape.

17.   In our view, it  would  be  wrong  for  this  Tribunal  to  adopt  the
     conclusions of the Tribunal in Tharmakulaseelan because  that  Tribunal
     considered the objective evidence in another country. What we  have  to
     do is to consider the objective evidence with regard  to  the  DRC  and
     decide the significance of the payment of bribes  securing  a  person's
     release from prison. Paragraph  5.37  of  the  CIPU  report  refers  to
     bribery being ubiquitous in the DRC. This is  attributed  to  a  report
     from the United Nations Special Rapporteur for the DRC of  March  2004.
     Section 1c of  the  USSD  Report  for  2004  refers  to  prison  guards
     frequently requiring bribes from family members and NGOs  to  visit  or
     provide detainees with food and other necessities.  Paragraph  5.65  of
     the CIPU report states that, during the course of a "country of  origin
     information seminar" in June 2002 sponsored by UNHCR  and  ACCORD  (the
     Austrian  Centre  for  Country  of  Origin  and  Asylum  Research   and
     Documentation), it was stated that it was generally possible  to  bribe
     one's way out of custody, including military custody, although it would
     be more difficult to do so in the case of  a  high  security  category.
     The USSD Report on Human Rights Practices for 2004 states as follows:

             Most  citizens  were  engaged  in  subsistence  agriculture  or
           commerce outside the formal wage sector. The  average  wage  did
           not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family,
           and most workers relied on extended family and informal economic
           activity to survive. Minimum wage laws continued to be suspended
           at year's end. Civil servant salaries remained very low, ranging
           between $4 and $20 per month, and salary arrears continued to be
           a problem  (see  Section  6.b.).  However,  depending  on  their
           position,  civil  servants,  including  police   and   soldiers,
           frequently supplemented their incomes through extracting  bribes
           and various other practices of corruption.
      (first paragraph of section 6e. (Acceptable Conditions of Work))
      (our emphasis)

18.   It is therefore abundantly clear from the background  material  before
     us that corruption amongst public officials and security officials is a
     major problem in the DRC.  We are satisfied, given that bribery in  the
     DRC is  not  only  widespread  but  ubiquitous,  that  bribery  related
     releases would not, in the absence of some special and credible reason,
     be likely to be treated  as  escapes,  and  would  not  result  in  the
     inclusion of the individuals involved on a wanted list. Indeed,  as  is
     the case with Sri Lanka, such is the culture of bribery in the DRC that
     the mere fact that a bribe was paid does not in itself imply  that  the
     bribe is procuring action which would not otherwise in time  be  taken.
     Nor does it necessarily imply that the person bribed would  be  willing
     to take a serious personal risk by, for example, releasing a  suspected
     terrorist. However, each case has to be decided on its own facts. There
     may well be examples of cases where bribery has  procured  an  assisted
     escape. We stress that we have reached these conclusions on  the  basis
     of the objective evidence in the DRC.

19.   We must look at the circumstances relating to  the  detention  of  the
     Appellants and their "escape" together with the objective  evidence  in
     order to  determine  whether  their  "escape"  was  a  bribery-assisted
     release (in which case they were  no longer of interest at the time  of
     their release)  or  a  bribery-assisted  escape.   The  fact  that  the
     Appellants regarded themselves as having escaped is a  relevant  factor
     (and we take it into account) but it is not determinative.    The  fact
     that the Appellants  were  persecuted  in  detention  is  an  important
     factor. This is particularly so in this case  because,  notwithstanding
     the fact that the  background material shows that detainees  are  often
     abused, the Adjudicator made a specific  finding  that  the  Appellants
     were  persecuted  for  their  religion  and  their  political   opinion
     (paragraph 63). It is the finding that they  were  persecuted  for  the
     religion and their political opinion which reduces the likelihood  that
     the bribe secured their release and increases the likelihood  that  the
     bribe secured an assisted escape. The amount paid by way of a bribe  is
     also relevant. The Appellants paid a large bribe (US$2,000) but (again)
     this is not determinative.

20.   In order to determine whether the bribe paid  by  the  Appellants  was
     nothing more than a bribery-related  release  or  whether  it  procured
     their escape, it is necessary for us to consider whether the background
     evidence shows that it is reasonably likely that the authorities  would
     have continued to have an adverse interest in  the  Appellants  at  the
     time of their release / escape.

21.   We therefore turn to the background evidence with regard to  the  BDK.
     The USSD International Religious Freedom Report 2004 describes the  BDK
     as "an ethnically based spiritual and political  movement  that  called
     for the overthrow  of  the  Government  and  the  establishment  of  an
     "ethnically pure" kingdom from the Bakongo  tribe".   This  is  a  very
     succinct description of the group. The IRIN (United Nations  Integrated
     Regional Information Networks) report dated 26 July 2002 described  the
     BDK as a nationalist politico-religious group centred in the Bas  Congo
     province (west of Kinshasa) which has campaigned for  the  independence
     of the Bas Congo region from the rest of the DRC (see  paragraph  6.216
     of the CIPU report). The same IRIN  report states that the BDK  demands
     that its adherents renounce western and eastern  religions".  It  seeks
     the restoration of the ancient Kongo kingdom  within  its  pre-colonial
     boundaries. An information response by  the  Canadian  Immigration  and
     Refugee Board (IRB) dated 15 October 2003 refers to a source describing
     it as a "hodge-podge of  ideas"  covering  religion,  philosophy,  pure
     science, history, geography and politics and which is tailored  to  the
     Bakongo who are described as "the chosen people of the world-wide Black
     race" (paragraph 6.218 of the CIPU Report).  The  headquarters  of  the
     BDK are in Kinshasa.

22.   The basic philosophy of the BDK is to promote  the  positive  side  of
     the Kongo ancestral tradition through research  and  education  and  to
     apply the scientific principle of the Kongo  ancestral  tradition.  The
     three pillars of the movement are  science,  religion  and  politics  -
     which are symbolised (respectively) by their  ancestors  Mpanzu,  Nsaku
     and Nzinga from whom Bakongos are descended.

23.   According to the Belgian CEDOCA Report (pages 38 to 39),  on  22  July
     2002,  in  Kinzao-Mvute,  about  a  hundred  BDK  members,  wishing  to
     commemorate the 40th anniversary of the creation of Bas-Congo Province,
     started to walk from their old temple to a new one, which was  about  1
     km away. On the way, they were  stopped  by  the  security  forces  and
     prevented from continuing their  journey.  Some  of  the  members  were
     arrested and badly beaten by the security  forces.  Also,  on  22  July
     2002, a meeting held in a temple in Tshela by BDK members was disrupted
     by units of the Congolese armed forces. Soldiers surrounded the  temple
     and asked the 55 men, women and children in the temple  to  go  outside
     and climb into military vehicles located outside the temple. As soon as
     all the BDK members had left the temple, it was burnt down. The  report
     goes on to state that all 55 members of the group were interrogated  by
     the security forces but, by 26 July 2002, all had  been  released  from
     the Tshela central prison, apart from Ne Mbambi  Mbumba  and  Ne  Nandi
     Kandi. Page 42 of the  Belgian CEDOCA report goes on to state:

            NB. Many members of BDK were arrested during the events of  July
           2002 in the Bas-Congo. Of these, only 40  people  ........  were
           transferred to  Kinshasa  and  put  on  trial.  All  the  others
           arrested were released  a week or two  after  their  arrest,  by
           paying a sum of money or  by  bribing  police  officers.  Others
           managed to escape. All the women were freed (so, no  women  were
           put on trial).

24.   It is clear from page  42  that,  of  the  40  people  transferred  to
     Kinshasa, 25 were placed on trial, which began on 12 December 2002. The
     Court of State Security had not convicted or acquitted any of  them  by
     the time President Kabila granted an amnesty  to  them  in  April  2003
     (page 45 of the Belgian CEDOCA Report). The remaining  15  were  to  be
     tried by military court but this trial has never taken place  (page  44
     of the Belgian CEDOCA  Report).  Those  who  were  released  under  the
     amnesty were able to return to  their  village  in  Bas  Congo  without
     problems within 3 days (page 46 of  the  Belgian  CEDOCA  Report).  The
     Appellants' expert (Mr. Ngoy) states that Parliament has not signed the
     amnesty (paragraph 20 of the report). However, whilst he may be correct
     in stating this, the fact is that the de facto position for  those  who
     were put on trial is that they  have  not  been  proceeded  against  in
     court; they were allowed to return to their village  and  there  is  no
     evidence before us that they have subsequently faced  any  difficulties
     on account of the amnesty not having been  signed  by  Parliament.   We
     therefore conclude that, even if the amnesty has  not  been  signed  by
     Parliament, the amnesty is in fact being applied.

25.   Paragraphs 1 to 9 of Mr. Ngoy's  report  provides  general  background
     information about the BDK which is consistent with the remainder of the
     background material before us.

26.   Drawing these strands together,  it  would  seem  that  22  July  2002
     marked the beginning of a  period  during  which  the  BDK  experienced
     problems at the hands of the authorities, both  in  Bas  Congo  and  in
     Kinshasa. Although there had been some problems prior to that (in  July
     2000- see paragraph 6.224 of the CIPU report), it  is  clear  that  the
     main problems began in July 2002.

27.   The Belgian CEDOCA report (pages 46 and 47) goes on to state that  the
     situation has improved for the BDK. It draws a distinction between  the
     situation in Kinshasa and Bas Congo. In Kinshasa, religious  activities
     were allowed to resume in July 2003 and tolerated by  the  authorities.
     No problems were reported.  However, in Bas Congo, the Governor refuses
     to lift the ban against the BDK. There are still problems  between  the
     BDK and the local authorities, the following being mentioned by way  of
     examples:

            the arrest of a BDK  official  in  late  August/early  September
           2003; he was released after a few days in detention;

            the arrest of a  member  whilst  followers  were  attempting  to
           organise a service;

            the BDK premises  in  Muanda  are  surrounded  every  Sunday  to
           prevent the followers from meeting.

28.   The Appellants were arrested on 26 June 2003. They  were  held  for  5
     months and were released or escaped on 6 / 7  November  2003.  By  this
     time, the President had granted an amnesty to the 25  BDK  members  who
     had been placed on trial following their arrest in July  2002  and  who
     had been able to return to their village in Bas Congo without problems.
     An official arrested in Bas Congo in late August / early September  was
     detained for two days and then  released.  The  CGRA  mission  reported
     (following its mission in July, August and September 2003)  that  there
     were no BDK members in prison (page 46 of the Belgian  CEDOCA  report).
     We note that, on the Adjudicator's findings,  the  Appellants  were  in
     prison at the time.

29.   We return to the issue of whether this means that the  Appellants,  at
     the time of their release / escape (see paragraph 19  above),  were  of
     adverse interest to  the  authorities  even  though  others  were  not.
     However, we are satisfied, even bearing in mind  the  low  standard  of
     proof, that it is not reasonably likely that  the  Appellants  were  of
     adverse interest. The evidence is that the Appellants simply walked out
     of prison to a waiting van. There is no indication that the  guard  who
     assisted them attempted to conceal their exit. There is no evidence  of
     the DRC authorities seeking  the  Appellants  since  their  release  or
     escape.  There is no indication that any charges were  brought  against
     them whilst in detention, which is in contrast to the fact that charges
     were brought against 25 BDK members after their arrests a year earlier.
     There is no indication that any charges have been brought against  them
     since their release / escape. Mr. Ngoy is a lawyer in the DRC. It would
     have been a simple matter for him to ascertain whether any charges have
     been brought against the Appellants. In all of  the  circumstances,  we
     are satisfied that the  Appellants  merely  secured  their  release  by
     paying a bribe. Notwithstanding the fact that they were  persecuted  on
     account of their religion and  their  political  opinion  during  their
     detention, they were not of adverse interest to the authorities in  Bas
     Congo at the time of their release. If  there  were  records  of  their
     detention, then it is a reasonable inference that  they  were  released
     with the appropriate paperwork in order.

30.   Since the release of the Appellants, the situation in the DRC for  BDK
     members and those who (like the Appellants) are  only  associated  with
     the BDK without being members of it  has  improved  further.  The  USSD
     International Religious Freedom Report 2004  states  that,  unlike  the
     previous reporting period, there were no reports that  members  of  the
     BDK were arrested.  Section 2.b of the  USSD  Report  on  Human  Rights
     Practices 2004 mentions that the authorities in Bas Congo arrested  and
     detained for several days four students who were protesting  what  they
     considered to be excessive school fees. However, whilst there was  some
     reference to the BDK in the second paragraph of Section 2.c  there  was
     no mention of any BDK members or those associated with  the  BDK  being
     arrested or having experienced any problems in 2004.

31.   Mr. Ngoy also deals with the  current  risk.  However,  in  the  first
     place, it is clear  from  paragraph  10  of  his  report  that  he  was
     considering the risk faced by persons  who  have  been  prosecuted  and
     whose  legal  cases  have  "no  outcome,   whatsoever   by   a    final
     determination". We are of the view that he must be referring to the  25
     BDK members who were placed on trial, who  were  neither  convicted  or
     acquitted but who were allowed to return to their  villages  after  the
     Presidential  granted  them  an  amnesty,  or  persons  in  a   similar
     situation. There is no evidence that the Appellants were in  a  similar
     situation. However, even if we are wrong about this, Mr. Ngoy's opinion
     at paragraphs 18 to 20 is simply inconclusive. At paragraph 18, he says
     that "it is very difficult to predict the real risk". At paragraph  19,
     he states that "the legal  expert  will  be  in  a  difficult  position
     because this does not make the  concerned  person  feel  assured  about
     whether she/he will really benefit from the amnesty decree or not".  At
     paragraph 20, he states that "we can only come  to  a  total  uncertain
     conclusion in their cases". Although we note that he then  goes  on  to
     state that the Appellants are "naturally considered as persons who  got
     away with criminal proceedings" and that "there exist some  real  risks
     that if they are located, they will  be  once  more  subject  to  legal
     action", the fact is that the Appellants  were  never  subject  to  any
     legal action. The fact  that  the  Appellants  were  mentioned  in  the
     newspaper article of 5 March 2004 on which  the  Adjudicator  placed  a
     great deal of weight may in some respects be seen  as  something  which
     somewhat increases the risk. However,  it  is  inconceivable  that  the
     press would not have similarly reported on the progress  of  the  legal
     proceedings against the 25 BDK members who were placed on trial.   Yet,
     they were released and granted an amnesty. The newspaper  article  does
     not refer to any proceedings pending against the Appellants.

32.   The conclusion we come to after a review of  the  background  material
      before us is that, whilst active members of  the  BDK  are  reasonably
      likely to experience some problems in Bas Congo, these are not such as
      to amount to persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3.  Nor  is
      there real risk that active members of the BDK would be persecuted  or
      would suffer Article 3 ill-treatment in Kinshasa.  We  make  it  clear
      that this is the position whether or not the person concerned  carries
      out his/her activities out of a sense of conviction or  (as  found  by
      the Adjudicator in this case) for reasons of security.

33.   As for those who are not members of the BDK  but  who  are  associated
      with it, we consider that they are not at  greater  risk  than  active
      members of the BDK.

34.   As we have stated above,  Mr. Deller  conceded  that  the  Adjudicator
     had materially erred in law in failing to  treat  past  persecution  on
     political and religious grounds as indicative of future risk.  In  this
     regard, we are aware of the Court of Appeal's  judgement  in  Demirkaya
     (23 June 1999) - in particular, we are mindful of paragraphs 20, 21 and
     22 of the judgement in that case. In this case, we are satisfied  that,
     although  the  Appellants  were  persecuted  for  their  religion   and
     political opinion whilst in detention (as found  by  the  Adjudicator),
     there has in fact been a significant change in the objective  situation
     since then such that there is no longer a real risk that they would now
     be subjected to persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 in  Bas
     Congo. Since they come from Bas Congo, this means that internal  flight
     is not relevant in this case.

35.   Although it was intended to deal in greater detail with the  political
     profile category (see sub-paragraph (a) and (b) of paragraph 3  above),
     in the result, we consider it appropriate only to address the  position
     of the BDK members and those associated with  the BDK.

36.   The original Tribunal did make  a  material  error  of  law.  However,
     having considered the evidence for ourselves and  for  the  reasons  we
     have given, the appeals of each  of  the  Appellants  is  dismissed  on
     asylum and human rights grounds.





                 Ms. D. K. Gill                    Date: 2 November 2005
                             Senior Immigration Judge




Approved for electronic distribution




ANNEX OF BACKGROUND MATERIALS DOCUMENTS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

1.    The CIPU report dated April 2005.

2.    The report of Mr. Alex Kabinda Ngoy, a  lawyer  and  barrister  before
     Lubumbashi, under reference: LRDC / AKN / 2005, entitled: Report on the
     situation of Bundu Dia Kongo religious group members.

3.    The US State Department (USSD) International Religious Freedom  Report
     2004 in the DRC.

4.    The USSD Report on the DRC for 2004 dated 28 February 2005.

5.    The report dated 12 December 2003 from the Belgian General  Commission
     for Refugees and Stateless Persons (CEDOCA) entitled:  "Report  on  the
     Bundu Dia Kongo (the Democratic Republic of the Congo)".





