

|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Asylum and Immigration Tribunal                                   |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|Heard at Field House                                              |
|Heard on: 6 October 2005   |        |Determination issued:       |
|Prepared : 10 October 2005 |        |7 November 2005             |
|Before:                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|Ms C Jarvis                                                       |
|Senior Immigration Judge                                          |
|Mr G Jones QC                                                     |
|                                                                  |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|                           |        |                            |
|                                                                  |
|The Secretary of State for the Home Department                    |
|Respondent                                                        |

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon of Counsel instructed by Makanda and
                 Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

This case is reported for what we say about the consideration and
assessment of evidence and the approach to the assessment of credibility.
Evidence which is not probative of any matter that is in issue is evidence
which is not relevant. It is not arguable that an Adjudicator or
Immigration Judge errs in law in deciding not to give weight to evidence
that is irrelevant. [This case was decided before the publication of AA
(Involuntary returns to Zimbabwe) Zimbabwe [2005] UKIAT 00144 CG].

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant appeals against the determination of an Adjudicator,  as
      he then was, and now Immigration Judge (Mr  J  J  Neyman),  who  in  a
      determination issued on  22  April  2005,  dismissed  the  Appellant's
      appeal against the Respondent's decision made on 18  January  2005  to
      give directions for removal from the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  following
      refusal to grant leave to enter as a refugee or on other human  rights
      grounds.


   2. The Appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe, whose date of birth is given  as
      13 July 1977, is said to have arrived in the UK on 15 April  2001,  or
      16 September 2001, ( there are two versions),  by  air,  to  join  her
      husband [      ], who had come  to  the  UK  on  15  April  2001.  The
      Appellant has a UK born child. The  Appellant's  husband  returned  to
      Zimbabwe in March 2004 and died in  hospital  on  8  April  2004.  The
      Appellant then claimed asylum in the UK on 22 November 2004, with  her
      daughter, [      ], born on 1 January 2004, as her dependant.

   3. She  lodged  a  written  statement  of  claim,  and  was  subsequently
      interviewed about the claim on 5 January 2005. The Respondent set  out
      his reasons for refusing the application in a letter dated 14  January
      2005.

   4. Before the Adjudicator, the Appellant claimed to have  a  well-founded
      fear of being persecuted at the hands of the authorities, and  at  the
      hands of groups or individuals within Zimbabwean  society,  from  whom
      the authorities would not protect her. She  claimed  that  she  was  a
      refugee sur place following the killing of her husband, who had been a
      member of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC). She herself was  a
      supporter of the MDC and they had become involved with  the  party  in
      2000. Her husband had returned to Zimbabwe in March 2004, she said, in
      order  to  assess  the  situation.  He  then   helped   the   MDC   in
      electioneering, and it was in the course  of  violence  instigated  by
      ZANU-PF members who had attacked her husband, that he was said to have
      been injured and  to  have  subsequently  died  from  those  injuries.
      Fearing for her safety as the wife of her late husband, who is herself
      a supporter of the MDC, the Appellant then claimed asylum in  November
      2004.


Summary of the Adjudicator's Findings


   5. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,
      whose date of birth is given as13 July 1977. He  came  to  an  adverse
      finding as to the credibility of the Appellant and her claim. He  sets
      out his reasons for that and his findings of fact, at paragraph  7  of
      the determination. He noted that the Appellant had arrived in  the  UK
      in either April or September 2001. The Adjudicator held  that  it  was
      common knowledge that those  who  are  significantly  opposed  to  the
      government in Zimbabwe risk ill-treatment there.  He  noted  that  the
      Appellant's husband had made two applications to vary leave  to  enter
      or remain in the UK. These were an application for  leave  to  receive
      private medical treatment, which was granted, and an  application  for
      leave to enter or remain as  an  investor,  which  was  refused  on  9
      January 2003. The Adjudicator did not believe  the  Appellant's  claim
      that her husband did not receive notice of the decision to refuse that
      second  application,  there  being  no  evidence   to   support   that
      contention, and took the view that they  had  deliberately  overstayed
      their leave, the husband not leaving the UK until 1 March 2004.


   6. The Adjudicator held against the Appellant that she  and  her  husband
      did not claim asylum earlier. He held against the Appellant  that  she
      delayed in lodging her claim to asylum until seven  months  after  her
      husband was killed in April 2004. She explained the delay in so  doing
      by stating that she had been collecting evidence to support her  claim
      during the intervening period between the death of her husband and  22
      November 2004. The Adjudicator did not accept her explanation for  the
      delay because he took the view that someone who genuinely feared being
      persecuted would apply for  asylum  reasonably  soon  after  the  fear
      arose, but the Appellant did not do so.

   7. The Adjudicator formed the view that the Appellant and her husband had
      intended to remain in the  UK  on  a  long  term  basis  for  economic
      reasons. He did not find it  credible  that  the  Appellant's  husband
      would have returned to Zimbabwe to assess the situation  as  this  was
      well known from information easily available in the public domain, and
      they would both have known that it was potentially dangerous  for  him
      to return as an MDC member. He took the view that the  fact  that  the
      Appellant's husband returned showed that he was not in  fear  for  his
      safety at all and his actions undermined the Appellant's late claim to
      be in fear herself.


   8. The Adjudicator noted that the Appellant gave  contradictory  accounts
      concerning the return of her husband to Zimbabwe in that she had  said
      on the one hand that he went without a passport  using  Eurostar,  and
      that she does not know how he got from  France  to  Zimbabwe.  On  the
      other hand, later, at the hearing, she stated that he had obtained  an
      emergency travel document from the Zimbabwean Embassy in  London.  The
      Adjudicator held against  the  Appellant  that  she  had  changed  her
      account and did not accept that the Appellant's husband had obtained a
      travel document from the Zimbabwean authorities. In  the  alternative,
      if he had obtained such a document, it showed that he was not in  fear
      of the authorities. It was  not  said  that  the  Appellant's  husband
      encountered any  difficulties  with  the  authorities  on  arrival  in
      Zimbabwe. However these matters were looked at, doubt  was  cast  upon
      the credibility of the Appellant.

   9. The Adjudicator found that the Appellant's account  that  her  husband
      had been unable to recover his passport from his legal adviser to lack
      credibility and that the husband could easily have visited  the  legal
      adviser to recover the  document.  He  found  that  there  were  links
      between the legal adviser used by the Appellant and her  husband,  and
      that a Dunny Derera and a Danny Moyo were one and the same person.  He
      took the view that the Appellant's husband had  returned  to  Zimbabwe
      using his own passport and that the Appellant also had access  to  her
      own properly issued Zimbabwean passport.


  10. The Appellant claimed that on  the  same  day  that  her  husband  was
      attacked, and in the same incident, "Francis Zimhunya, who was a  high
      profile activist in the MDC was shot dead"  by  a  ZANU-PF  member  of
      Parliament. Documentary evidence produced, and said to be  in  support
      of this aspect of the claim showed that  a  Francis  Chinozvina    was
      killed and not a  Francis  Zimhunya.  At  the  hearing  the  Appellant
      explained the difference by stating that she had "made an error in the
      second name". The Adjudicator formed the view that the  Appellant  had
      in fact failed to memorize correctly a significant detail of an untrue
      story, and that this further damaged her credibility.  He  found  that
      the Appellant had failed to show that the death of Francis  Chinozvina
      and the article produced  at  F1  regarding  the  killing  of  Francis
      Chinozvina had any relevance to the death of her  husband  or  to  her
      claim.

  11. In the light of all the matters referred to, the Adjudicator found the
      Appellant's claim to lack credibility. He found that even if her story
      were true, which he found not  to  be  the  case,  she  had  not  been
      persecuted in the past and that she  is  not  and  never  was  of  any
      adverse interest to the authorities or anyone else in Zimbabwe.

  12. The Adjudicator then turned to consider documentary evidence  said  to
      be personal to the Appellant, as opposed to  more  general  background
      evidence. He found that a newspaper article showed no more  than  that
      the Appellant and her husband were in the UK  at  the  time  when  the
      article was written. This fact was not in issue and the article  added
      nothing to the claim.

  13. The Appellant produced a letter said to be from  a  Mr  [       ],  of
      Zengeza, Chitungwiza, dated 25 November 2004. It is addressed "to whom
      it may concern", and is headed: "Testimony for the late [      ]". The
      letter states that the writer is a 28 year  old  MDC  member  who  was
      injured during an attack on 26 March 2004  when  a  group  of  ZANU-PF
      militia attacked a group of MDC members and supporters at the house of
      MDC candidate for Zengeza constituency.

  14. Mr [      ] goes on to state that he first met Mr [      ] on 10 March
      2004, and that Mr [      ] was said to have returned to Zimbabwe  from
      the UK specifically for the by-election. He states that this surprised
      him and others but that it made them respect Mr [      ]. He says that
      he and others campaigned with Mr  [       ]  in  the  run  up  to  the
      elections on 27/28 March.  It  was  dangerous  to  campaign  but  they
      encouraged each other that the MDC would win. He explains that he  was
      then hospitalized following the incident on 26 March, and when he came
      out of hospital on 2 April, he heard that Mr [      ] was himself in a
      Harare hospital after having been  abducted  on  27  March  and  later
      dumped on the roadside on 28 March, when  a  passer  by  took  him  to
      hospital. It is said that Mr [      ] then died in hospital on 8 April
      2004.

  15. The Adjudicator finds that the letter does not show that Mr  [       ]
      actually witnessed anything of what was said to have happened to Mr  [
          ] and that the letter could have been written by anyone. He  notes
      that there is no independent evidence of the standing of Mr  [       ]
      or confirmation that he is a reliable witness. Further, the letter has
      been lodged by the Appellant and she  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a
      credible witness herself.

  16. A letter from Dr Uchena of the hospital in Harare  states  that  Mr  [
       ] was brought to the hospital on 28 March 2004, by  people  who  said
      that they were passers by who had  found  him  on  the  roadside.  The
      doctor reports that these people 'allegedly' said  that  Mr  [       ]
      told them that he had been assaulted by a notorious ZANU-PF group. The
      doctor confirms that Mr [      ] was no longer giving a  comprehensive
      account on arrival at hospital as his condition was deteriorating.  It
      is confirmed that the cause of death was a sub-arachnoid  haemorrhage,
      and the death certificate shows that to be the case.

  17. Neither the doctor's letter nor the death certificate shows  how  that
      haemorrhage was caused. The Adjudicator finds that the doctor's letter
      merely reflects what the  people  who  brought  Mr  [       ]  to  the
      hospital allegedly  stated.  The  Adjudicator  found  that  there  was
      nothing to link the cause of the death of Mr [      ] with his claimed
      opposition to the Zimbabwe government.

  18. The Adjudicator went on to find that even if the  Appellant's  account
      were to be regarded as true, she had failed to show that her  complete
      lack of involvement with the party, albeit that she called  herself  a
      supporter, and her late husband's relatively low level of involvement,
      would make her of any adverse interest to the authorities.  He  relied
      upon N (Zimbabwe) [2003] UKIAT 0086, and  C  (Zimbabwe)  [2003]  UKIAT
      00015, to support his findings. It  was  noted  that  the  Appellant's
      parents and her parents-in-law all continued to reside in Zimbabwe and
      it was found that the Appellant, who would not be of adverse  interest
      as a failed asylum seeker given that she had no profile  of  any  kind
      with the authorities, and her daughter,  could  return  to  live  with
      family members there.

The Grounds of Appeal

  19.  In summary, the main thrust of the grounds of appeal  is  by  way  of
      challenge to the Adjudicator's adverse credibility findings.

  20. The Senior Immigration Judge, when making an order for reconsideration
      on 10 May 2005, stated that it was arguable that the Adjudicator  had,
      in placing significant weight upon the fact that the Appellant and her
      husband did  not  claim  asylum  prior  to  April  2004,  ignored  the
      Appellant's account that neither was of  interest  to  the  Zimbabwean
      authorities at that time and that the Appellant only became a  refugee
      sur place following the death of her husband  in  April  2004.  It  is
      further indicated that the Adjudicator has not assessed  the  evidence
      of the involvement of the Appellant's husband in the MDC in the UK.


  21. The Senior Immigration  Judge  further  found  it  arguable  that  the
      Adjudicator had erred in his approach  to  the  documentary  evidence,
      contrary to Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002]  UKIAT  439,  because  he  had
      found that the letter from Mr [       ]  had  been  submitted  by  the
      Appellant who was not herself a credible witness. He had also  ignored
      the independent reference to Mr [      ] in the background evidence.


Submissions

  22. Mr Solomon adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that  they  did
      accurately reflect the situation and the case as it  was  put  to  the
      Adjudicator. He submitted that the Appellant based her case  upon  her
      husband's political activities UK  and  his  political  activities  in
      Zimbabwe. However, he did not seek to equate the activities in the  UK
      with  those  in  Zimbabwe  as  the  latter  were   of   the   greatest
      significance. The main thrust of the Appellant's case was  that  as  a
      result of what happened to her husband in Zimbabwe, the Appellant  was
      now at risk on return. We enquired of Mr Solomon whether he was saying
      that it was at the stage when he husband  died  that  the  Appellant's
      fears might be said to have crystallized. Mr Solomon agreed that  this
      was correct. The husband's activities in Zimbabwe were key and what he
      did when in the UK was background.


  23. Ms Brown submitted that there was no material error of law on the part
      of  the  Adjudicator,  that  the  grounds  of   appeal   were   simply
      disagreements with the findings and  did  not  disclose  any  material
      error of law. It was clear that so far as  delay  was  concerned,  the
      Adjudicator relied in the main  on  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the
      Appellant in claiming asylum following the death of  her  husband.  It
      was a seven month period and it was open to him to find  that  it  was
      not credible that she would delay so long were she genuinely  in  fear
      for her safety. It had plainly been in the  Adjudicator's  mind  as  a
      secondary position that the Appellant's fear was said to be because of
      her own and her husband's activities, as per her  first  statement  to
      which the Adjudicator had had  regard.

  24. The couple were said to have joined/become supporters of  the  MDC  in
      2000 and the UK based activities clearly formed a part of the case. It
      was open to the Adjudicator to find that there were not  good  reasons
      shown for the couple's not making a claim  earlier,  and  the  further
      delay  by  the  Appellant  after  the  death  of  her  husband  merely
      strengthens the Adjudicator's position.  It  was  fully  open  to  the
      Adjudicator to find it not credible that the Appellant's husband would
      have returned to Zimbabwe to campaign for the MDC  in  the  elections,
      knowing the danger in which that might place him. He was also entitled
      to find that it was not credible that the husband would have  returned
      to assess the situation when the dangers  and  hardships  were  common
      knowledge in the UK. Any such errors as there  might  have  been  were
      minor, did not undermine the  determination,  and  certainly  did  not
      amount to perversity on the part of the Adjudicator which was the test
      that must be passed.


  25. At the conclusion of the hearing, after deliberation, we dismissed the
      Appellant's appeal and we now give the reasons for our decision.

Consideration and Findings

  26.  We  remind  ourselves  that  when  hearing   a   case   by   way   of
      reconsideration, the Tribunal must first decide  whether  or  not  the
      determination discloses a material error of law. It is only where that
      question is answered in  the  affirmative  that  it  is  open  to  the
      Tribunal to go on to consider what relief, if any, should be  granted,
      and whether or not fresh evidence, if any, should be admitted.

  27. We also remind ourselves of, and apply as appropriate, the  provisions
      of Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
      etc) Act 2004 (the 2004 Act),  which  was  brought  into  force  on  1
      January 2005. The section is mandatory. It does not require disbelief,
      but it does require the conduct therein mentioned  to  be  taken  into
      account.


  28. We have before us all the evidence that was  before  the  Adjudicator,
      including  the  Home  Office  Bundle  and  the  Appellant's   bundles,
      including a bundle of  case  law  as  well  as  bundles  of  evidence,
      together with a background report from the Home Office, (CIPU  October
      2004).

  29. We remind ourselves that the burden of proof normally  rests  with  an
      Appellant and that the standard in a case such as this is normally the
      lower standard of a real risk, or a reasonable degree of likelihood.

  30. We find that the Adjudicator has set out in some  detail  his  reasons
      for doubting the  plausibility  and  reliability  of  the  Appellant's
      account,  from  paragraph  7  (a)  to  7(u),   pages   6-11   of   the
      determination. We have summarized his findings and reasons quite fully
      above. For our part, we have concluded that there is no reason to take
      issue with the approach to the evidence, the  credibility  assessment,
      or the findings, which were open to the Adjudicator  on  the  evidence
      that he received. We find that any error that there may  be  does  not
      amount to an error, whether viewed separately or cumulatively,  so  as
      to constitute a material error. We remind ourselves that it is for the
      Appellant to show that the assessment, reasoning and findings  of  the
      Adjudicator are such that no reasonable Adjudicator applying  the  law
      correctly could have reached them. In other words, it  must  be  shown
      that they were perverse. The test is a high one. It is not for  us  to
      interfere with the determination merely because had  we  been  hearing
      and deciding the case ourselves, we may have taken a different view as
      to the facts.


  31. We prefer the submissions of Ms Brown, in finding that it was open  to
      the Adjudicator to accord some negative weight to the fact that  there
      was no claim for asylum made by the couple when both were in  the  UK.
      It is clear that the case of the Appellant  was  based,  albeit  to  a
      lesser degree than the post late March  2004  events,  upon  UK  based
      events, and the claim that the couple had become involved with the MDC
      in Zimbabwe in 2000. It was open to the Adjudicator to find  that  the
      explanation given was not satisfactory. We are satisfied  that  it  is
      not the case that he accorded too much weight to this  aspect.  It  is
      clear from a careful reading of 7(a)-(c) in particular, that the  main
      focus of the negative weight here was placed upon the failure  of  the
      Appellant to lodge her claim within a reasonable time after the  death
      of her husband. It was fully open to the Adjudicator to find that  the
      Appellant had not given a credible, reliable explanation for  delaying
      some seven months after the death of her husband before claiming.

  32. Likewise, for our part, we are unable to see that it is arguable  that
      it was perverse of the Adjudicator to find it not  credible  that  the
      Appellant's husband would return to Zimbabwe  'because  he  wanted  to
      assess the situation.' It is not arguable  that  the  Adjudicator  was
      wrong to find that there is a great deal of information in the  public
      domain regarding the situation, albeit that there could be  more  that
      does not reach the public due to deliberate acts on the  part  of  the
      Zimbabwean regime. Nor is it arguable that it is not common  knowledge
      that those linked to the MDC may well find themselves in difficulties.
      The October 2004 Country Assessment supports such conclusions.

  33. The matter of the route allegedly taken by  the  Appellant's  husband,
      and the question  whether  he  went  with  his  passport  or  with  an
      emergency travel document, are further points that the Adjudicator was
      entitled to take against the Appellant, based upon the  evidence  that
      was before him. He found that  it  was  likely  that  the  Appellant's
      husband returned to  Zimbabwe  travelling  on  his  own  passport.  No
      evidence was produced  to  support  the  Appellant's  claims  in  this
      regard. If it were the case that her late husband  used  an  emergency
      travel document obtained from the Zimbabwean  authorities  in  London,
      then it was open to the Adjudicator to find that this showed or tended
      to  show  that  he  was  not  a  person  in  fear  of  the  Zimbabwean
      authorities.

  34. The question whether the passports of the Appellant  and  her  husband
      were returned to them or not,  whether  by  the  Home  Office  or  the
      advisers, is one that the Adjudicator was entitled  to  answer  as  he
      did. He found that both were in possession of their passports.  Whilst
      he may have  been  mistaken  in  finding  that  the  evidence  of  the
      Appellant showed or tended to show a link  between  various  advisers,
      this, if it occurred, is not an error that suffices  to  constitute  a
      material error of law. The compliments slip, or receipt,  said  to  be
      from Surrey Police, endorsed with a reference number,  and  the  words
      'lost property', is not probative of the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
      lost her passport and to have reported that loss to the police.

  35. The Appellant argues that her husband did not receive  the  notice  of
      refusal to vary limited leave dated 9 January 2003 informing him  that
      his application for limited leave to remain as an  investor  had  been
      refused. The burden of proof rests with her and  it  is  not  arguable
      that the Adjudicator materially erred in law in finding  that  it  had
      not been discharged.

  36. In relation to the evidence concerning Francis Chinozvina, Mr  Solomon
      argues that this incident was not part of the core of the  Appellant's
      claim  and  that  the  Adjudicator  placed  too  much  weight  on  the
      inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence regarding his correct  name.
      We remind ourselves that the Adjudicator, at paragraph  7  (l),  found
      that the Appellant had made a mistake  over  the  man's  correct  name
      because she had misremembered a significant detail of an untrue story.
      It is unclear why mention should be made of the incident at all if  it
      were not regarded as of significance within the claim. The incident as
      recounted might be regarded as seeking to link  the  Appellant's  late
      husband with a high profile activist in the  MDC,  thereby  increasing
      the risk to him and in turn the level of risk  to  the  Appellant.  We
      find that  it  was  open  to  the  Adjudicator  to  find  against  the
      Appellant, in relation to credibility, for the reasons given,  and  to
      find, as a consequence, that it had not been shown that the killing of
      this man was in any way linked to the Appellant's late husband.

  37. It is next alleged that the Adjudicator has fallen into error  because
      he fails to consider  and  assess  all  the  evidence  in  the  round,
      including the documentary evidence; instead assessing that separately,
      at 7 (n)-(p), contrary to the guidance  of  the  Tribunal  in  Tanveer
      Ahmed. At first blush it appears that this submission  by  Mr  Solomon
      may have something in it. At 7(n), having found, in the light  of  all
      the points going to credibility already referred to, at  7  (m),  that
      the Appellant and her claim are not to be regarded as  credible;  that
      even on her own account she has not experienced  being  persecuted  in
      the past, and that she was and is of no adverse  interest  to  anyone;
      the Adjudicator then states that he  turns  to  the  written  evidence
      submitted by the Appellant (as opposed to the background  reports  and
      articles).  However,  closer   examination   of   the   consideration,
      assessment and reasoning that follows, shows, we are  satisfied,  that
      the Adjudicator's approach was correct and that there is no  error  of
      law here.

  38. The evidence is to be considered in the round, and  weight  is  to  be
      accorded to all of it, to varying degrees, save that to  which  it  is
      not possible to attach any weight at  all,  as  per  the  guidance  in
      Tanveer Ahmed (see also e.g. Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] INLR  122,  CA,
      and in R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469  and
      MT (Credibility assessment flawed - Virjon  B  applied)  Syria  [2004]
      UKIAT 00307).

  39. Nevertheless, it is necessary for an Adjudicator or Immigration  Judge
      to physically set out references to the evidence and deal with each of
      them, usually chronologically, but certainly in a fashion whereby  one
      point must inevitably follow another, in written form,  on  the  page.
      That is the first point.

  40. Second, and very importantly, it is to  be  noted  that  the  evidence
      referred to at 7(n) - (p) is evidence to which the  Adjudicator  finds
      he is unable to attach weight because it lacks probative value.

  41. The Adjudicator finds  that  an  article  tending  to  show  that  the
      Appellant and her husband were in the UK at the time when the  article
      was written adds nothing as it is not in issue that they  were  indeed
      in the UK at the time in question.

  42. The Appellant produced a letter said to be from a  Mr  [        ],  of
      Zengeza, Chitungwiza, dated 25 November 2004.   We  have  set  out  in
      detail above what the Adjudicator had to say about this  evidence  and
      his reasons for rejecting it. The Adjudicator finds  that  the  letter
      does not show that Mr [      ] actually witnessed anything of what was
      said to have happened to Mr [      ] and that the  letter  could  have
      been written by anyone. We note that he provides no detail as  to  how
      he is said to have come  to  know  of  the  fate  of  the  Appellant's
      husband. The Adjudicator notes that there is no  independent  evidence
      of the standing of Mr [      ], nor confirmation that he is a reliable
      witness. We can find no  fault  with  the  assessment,  reasoning  and
      conclusions of the Adjudicator.

  43. Mr Solomon submits that there is independent evidence to confirm  that
      Mr [      ] is a reliable witness. This is  a  reference  to  the  MDC
      report of 2004 on political violence, at G5 in the Home Office bundle.
      A person of the same name as the  person  who  purportedly  wrote  the
      letter of 25 November 2004 is referred to in the course of  the  entry
      for 26 March 2004, where he is described  as  an  MDC  youth  who  was
      injured following an attack by ZANU-PF militia.

  44. We must disagree with Mr Solomon's submission that this entry  in  the
      report  constitutes  independent  evidence  of  the  content  of   the
      statement that has been produced and of the position of  Mr  [       ]
      within the MDC. We find that the fact  that  there  is  mention  of  a
      person of that name within the background evidence,  in  these  terms,
      does not, without more, go to show his  independence  or  reliability.
      Nor can it be said, on any reading, to constitute independent evidence
      of the content of his statement in  this  appeal.  We  find  that  the
      evidence of Mr [      ] is not probative and therefore not relevant.

  45. In the light of what we have already said, given that the letter  from
      Mr [      ] is not to be regarded as probative on any matter in issue,
      it was, we find, fully open to the  Adjudicator  to  draw  an  adverse
      inference from the fact  that  the  letter  has  been  lodged  by  the
      Appellant, who is not to be regarded as a  credible  witness  herself.
      The opposite would equally be true, in that had the Adjudicator  found
      the Appellant to be otherwise a reliable and credible witness, then he
      would have been entitled to give weight, in that  positive  light,  to
      probative evidence lodged in support.

  46. A letter from Dr Uchena of the hospital in Harare  states  that  Mr  [
       ] was brought to the hospital on 28 March 2004, by  people  who  said
      that they were passers by who had found him on  the  roadside.  It  is
      confirmed that the cause of death was a sub-arachnoid haemorrhage, and
      the death certificate shows that to be the case. Neither the  doctor's
      letter nor the  death  certificate  shows  how  that  haemorrhage  was
      caused.

  47. The Adjudicator finds that the doctor's letter  merely  reflects  what
      the people who brought Mr [      ] to the hospital  allegedly  stated.
      The Adjudicator found that there was nothing to link the cause of  the
      death of Mr [      ] with  his  claimed  opposition  to  the  Zimbabwe
      government. Again, we find this  to  be  a  correct  analysis  of  the
      content of the letter. We find that the  Adjudicator  was  correct  to
      take the view that this is not probative evidence and  therefore  that
      it is not relevant evidence. It is not arguable that  the  Adjudicator
      fell into error of law in assessing this evidence in isolation as  was
      submitted.

  48. Having examined the Adjudicator's reasoning and conclusions,  we  find
      that he was correct in finding that none of the evidence  referred  to
      in the sub-paragraphs 7(n)-(p) is to be regarded as probative  of  the
      issues before him, for the reasons which he clearly sets out in  those
      sub-paragraphs, and which were open to him, based upon  the  evidence,
      for the reasons which he there gives.

  49. Evidence which is not probative is not relevant evidence.  It  follows
      that it is not arguable that the Adjudicator erred in law in  deciding
      not to take  into  account  and  give  weight  to  evidence  that  was
      irrelevant.


  50. Mr Solomon next raised a challenge to the findings of the  Adjudicator
      relating to risk  on  return  and  to  the  availability  of  internal
      relocation.  Having  found  that  the  grounds  of   appeal  and   the
      submissions of  Mr  Solomon  raise  no  successful  challenge  to  the
      Adjudicators' findings as to credibility and as to fact, we are unable
      to see that there can, in the circumstances of this  particular  case,
      be any successful challenge to these findings either. The  Adjudicator
      correctly went on to consider and  dealt  with  the  position  of  the
      Appellant both on the assumption that her account were to be  regarded
      as true, and on the assumption that she  were  to  be  returned  as  a
      failed asylum seeker (7(q) - (t)). Mr Solomon's challenge was  on  the
      basis that the authorities would  take  an  adverse  interest  in  the
      Appellant by reason of her relationship to her late  husband,  because
      he was a known low level MDC activist.


  51. We recall that the Adjudicator went  on  to  find  that  even  if  the
      Appellant's account were to be regarded as true,  she  had  failed  to
      show that her complete lack of involvement with the party, albeit that
      she called herself a supporter, and her late husband's relatively  low
      level of involvement, would make her of any adverse  interest  to  the
      authorities. We recall that it is not the Appellant's  case  that  her
      late husband encountered any difficulties at all with the  authorities
      when he re-entered Zimbabwe in late March 2004. The Adjudicator relied
      upon N (Zimbabwe) [2003] UKIAT 0086, and  C  (Zimbabwe)  [2003]  UKIAT
      00015, to support his findings. It  was  noted  that  the  Appellant's
      parents and her parents-in-law all continued to reside in Zimbabwe and
      it was found that the Appellant, who would not be of adverse  interest
      as a failed asylum seeker given that she had no profile  of  any  kind
      with the authorities, and her daughter,  could  return  to  live  with
      family members there. He found that if she were of  adverse  interest,
      which he did not accept, that  she  could  go  to  live  elsewhere  in
      Zimbabwe. It was for her  to  show  that  this  alternative  would  be
      unreasonable, and open to the Adjudicator to find  that  she  had  not
      discharged the burden of proof that was upon her.


  52.   In our deliberations and in reaching our conclusions, we  have  been
      assisted by the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case of  R  and
      Others (CA) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 27 July 2005, in which their Lordships
      gave guidance as to the principles to be applied  by  the  Immigration
      Appeal Tribunal, and now this Tribunal,  when  hearing  appeals  on  a
      point of law.

  53. Making perverse or irrational findings on a  matter  or  matters  that
      were material to the outcome, and  failing  to  give  reasons  or  any
      adequate reasons for findings on material matters, are both  cited  as
      examples of relevant errors of law.  As to perversity and the  failure
      to give reasons, the Court of Appeal said this:
      "Part 4 Perversity, the failure to give reasons, and proportionality
   1. It may be helpful to comment quite briefly on three matters first of
      all. It is well known that "perversity" represents a very high hurdle.
      In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 481, the whole court agreed that the
      word meant what it said: it was a demanding concept. The majority of
      the court (Keene and Maurice Kay LJJ) said that it embraced decisions
      that were irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense (even if
      there was no wilful or conscious departure from the rational), but it
      also included a finding of fact that was wholly unsupported by the
      evidence, provided always that this was a finding as to a material
      matter.
   1. We mention this because far too often practitioners use the word
      "irrational" or "perverse" when these epithets are completely
      inappropriate. If there is no chance that an appellate tribunal will
      categorise the matter of which they make complaint as irrational or
      perverse, they are simply wasting time - and, all too often, the
      taxpayer's resources - by suggesting that it was.
   1. The second preliminary matter is this. Adjudicators were under an
      obligation to give reasons for their decisions (see reg 53 of the
      Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Regulations 2003), so that
      a breach of that obligation may amount to an error of law. However,
      unjustified complaints by practitioners that are based on an alleged
      failure to give reasons, or adequate reasons, are seen far too often.
      The leading decisions of this court on this topic are now Eagil Trust
      Co Ltd v Pigott-Brown [1985] 3 All ER 119 and English v Emery Reimbold
      & Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1 WLR 2409. We will adapt
      what was said in those two cases for the purposes of illustrating the
      relationship between an adjudicator and the IAT. In the former
      Griffiths LJ said at p 122:
      "[An adjudicator] should give his reasons in sufficient detail to show
      the [IAT] the principles on which he has acted and the reasons that
      have led him to his decision. They need not be elaborate. I cannot
      stress too strongly that there is no duty on [an adjudicator], in
      giving his reasons, to deal with every argument presented by [an
      advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient if what he says
      shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT], the basis on which he
      has acted, and if it be that the [adjudicator] has not dealt with some
      particular argument but it can be seen that there are grounds on which
      he would have been entitled to reject it, [the IAT] should assume that
      he acted on those grounds unless the appellant can point to convincing
      reasons leading to a contrary conclusion."
   1. In English Lord Phillips MR said at para 19:
      "[I]f the appellate process is to work satisfactorily, the judgment
      must enable the [IAT] to understand why the [adjudicator] reached his
      decision. This does not mean that every factor which weighed with the
      [adjudicator] in his appraisal of the evidence has to be identified
      and explained. But the issues the resolution of which were vital to
      the [adjudicator]'s conclusion should be identified and the manner in
      which he resolved them explained. It is not possible to provide a
      template for this process. It need not involve a lengthy judgment. It
      does require the [adjudicator] to identify and record those matters
      which were critical to his decision. If the critical issue was one of
      fact, it may be enough to say that one witness was preferred to
      another because the one manifestly had a clearer recollection of the
      material facts or the other gave answers which demonstrated that his
      recollection could not be relied upon."
   1. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used the words "vital"
      and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material" which we have used
      above. The whole of his judgment warrants attention, because it
      reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn a judgment
      at first instance unless it really cannot understand the original
      judge's thought processes when he/she was making material findings.
   1. What we have said does not absolve an adjudicator of his/her duty of
      devoting the intense scrutiny to the appellant's case that is required
      of a decision of such importance. What we wish to make clear, however,
      is that the practice of bringing appeals because the adjudicator or
      immigration judge has not made reasoned findings on matters of
      peripheral importance must now come to an end. "

  54. For our part, we are unable to see that the Adjudicator fell into  any
      material error of  law  in  his  approach,  assessment,  findings  and
      conclusions. For all the above reasons, it  is  not  for  us,  in  the
      circumstances of  this  case,  to  interfere  with  the  Adjudicator's
      findings in this regard. Nor, we find, has  it  been  shown  that  the
      Adjudicator fell into material error in  providing  no  or  inadequate
      reasons to support his findings, in a way that could  be  regarded  as
      sufficing to vitiate the reasoning, conclusions, or  to  undermine  in
      any way the final decision


  55. It follows, for all the foregoing reasons, that whilst the grounds  of
      appeal were arguable, the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  the
      Adjudicator fell into any material error of law. In the  circumstances
      we are not entitled to go on to consider what if any relief should  be
      granted. The grounds of appeal remain arguable, but no more than that.
      The Appellant has not shown that there is any  basis  upon  which  the
      Tribunal may interfere with the Adjudicator's determination.

  56. In the absence of a sustainable challenge by the  Appellant,  we  find
      that the  Adjudicator  has  done  enough  to  support  his  reasoning,
      findings and conclusions, which were open to him. We are not  able  to
      identify any material mistake of fact leading to unfairness.


   Decision

  57. It has not been shown that the original Tribunal made a material error
      of law. For all the reasons set out above, we uphold the determination
      of the Adjudicator, as  he  then  was,  and  dismiss  the  Appellant's
      appeal.






Catriona Jarvis
Senior Immigration Judge

Date: 10 October 2005






