
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL


MA (Statelessness;  Removal;  KF applied)  Stateless       [2005] UKAIT
00161
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Glasgow Hearing Centre             Date of Hearing:  28 October
2005


                                   Before:

                    Mr C M G Ockelton (Deputy President)
                     Ms A C McGavin (Immigration Judge)


                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Brown of Drummond Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr B Craven, Home Office Presenting Officer

In the case of a person found to be stateless, the principles expounded in
KF (Iran) [2005] UKIAT apply.  The context of the appeal is given by the
country specified in the notice of decision and the claimant's case must be
made by reference to that country.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. The Appellant was born in Saudi Arabia of a Somali father and a Yemeni
     mother.  He lived in Saudi Arabia until he came to the United  Kingdom
     on 10 August 2001, by which time he was aged nineteen.  His mother had
     died in December 2000;  he had not seen his father for many years.

  2. He claimed asylum in the United Kingdom soon after his arrival.  After
     allowing the claim to mature for nearly three years, the Secretary  of
     State refused it and on 5 July 2004 made  a  decision  to  remove  the
     Appellant as an illegal entrant,  nominating  Yemen  as  the  proposed
     removal destination.  The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard by
     an Adjudicator, Mr W P Scobbie, who dismissed it  in  a  determination
     sent out on 7 December  2004.   The  Appellant  applied  for  and  was
     granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal.
     Following the commencement of the appeal provisions of the  2004  Act,
     that grant of permission operates as an order for  reconsideration  by
     this Tribunal, limited to the grounds upon which permission was given:
      see Rule 62(7) of the 2005 Procedure Rules.  It is fair to  say  that
     Mr Brown, who appeared for  the  Appellant,  had  some  difficulty  in
     associating the submissions he wished to make with  the  grounds  upon
     which the Appellant had obtained leave.   In  the  circumstances,  and
     particularly because of the terms of the grant of permission  and  the
     somewhat cryptic way in which the grounds were  drafted,  we  did  our
     best to interpret the latter in the widest way properly possible.

  3. The Adjudicator made a number of findings and assertions of fact, none
     of which is the subject of any challenge now.  So far as concerns  the
     Appellant's citizenship, he asserted  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a
     citizen of Saudi Arabia;  he found on the basis of evidence before him
     that it was "most unlikely that the Appellant would ever  be  able  to
     obtain citizenship of Yemen".   The  Appellant  said  in  one  of  his
     witness statements that he regarded himself as a  citizen  of  Somalia
     but it was accepted before us that there was no reason to suppose that
     he is Somali or entitled to Somali citizenship,  and  the  Adjudicator
     does not appear to have treated him as so entitled.   The  Adjudicator
     also found that the Appellant's  evidence  as  to  his  parentage  and
     upbringing was  accurate  and  credible.   The  Adjudicator  rejected,
     however, the Appellant's claim to have  been  arrested  by  the  Saudi
     police following the death of his mother and only released following a
     payment by his aunt.  The Adjudicator's conclusions on the Appellant's
     status are in paragraph 31 of his determination:

           "I had to decide whether the appellant was a refugee and whether
           he had a well-founded fear of persecution.  I  decided  that  he
           had not.  All that had happened to the  appellant  was  that  he
           left Saudi Arabia because he was worried that  the  police  were
           looking for him.   As  indicated  above,  I  had  dismissed  his
           evidence that he had been arrested by the police.  The fact that
           the appellant left because he was  frightened  that  the  police
           would arrest him falls very short of amounting to persecution."

  4. The first ground of appeal pursued on the  reconsideration  before  us
     was that the Adjudicator had failed to make a  clear  decision  as  to
     whether the Appellant was  stateless,  and  to  analyse  the  evidence
     before him of the consequence of statelessness.  It  is  fair  to  say
     that the determination contains no clear finding that the Appellant is
     to be regarded as stateless.  But it  is  important  to  consider  the
     context of the claim of  statelessness.   Statelessness  is  of  great
     importance in asylum law, because a person who has a  nationality  has
     to have his status as a refugee or not determined by reference to  his
     nationality;  but a person who  is  stateless  has  his  status  as  a
     refugee determined by reference to  his  country  of  former  habitual
     residence.  In the present case, there can  be  no  conceivable  doubt
     that the Appellant's country of former  habitual  residence  is  Saudi
     Arabia.  The Adjudicator asserted that the Appellant is not a  citizen
     of Saudi Arabia and it has not been suggested that he was wrong to  do
     so.  We think  that,  in  reality,  the  Adjudicator  did  regard  the
     Appellant as stateless, because he had ruled out or  ignored  all  the
     countries of nationality that had been suggested.  But whether or  not
     that is so, there is no  doubt  that  the  Adjudicator  evaluated  the
     Appellant's asylum claim by reference to the risk of  his  persecution
     as a non-national in Saudi Arabia.

  5. In making that evaluation, he considered the Appellant's past  history
     and made his findings, which we  have  set  out  above.   Given  those
     findings, the only  basis  upon  which  it  could  be  said  that  the
     Adjudicator erred in law in not  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a
     refugee would be material before the Adjudicator which should have led
     him to  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
     persecution at the time of the  determination,  despite  his  lack  of
     experience of persecution (as the  Adjudicator  found)  in  the  past.
     There was no such evidence before the Adjudicator.

  6. From this it follows that, whether or not the Adjudicator erred in his
     treatment  of  the  issue  of  statelessness,  it  can  have  made  no
     difference to his decision.  The  substance  of  the  claim  based  on
     statelessness is precisely  the  substance  of  the  claim  which  the
     Adjudicator considered.

  7. The second principal ground of appeal was that the Adjudicator  failed
     to deal properly with the consequences of the  Appellant's  return  to
     Yemen, as proposed in the notice of decision.  He wrote this:

           "There was no evidence put before me that on arrival at Yemen he
           would be subject to any treatment which could be  in  breach  of
           Article 2 or Article 3 of the 1950  Convention.   Certainly,  it
           might well be a possibility that Yemen might  refuse  to  accept
           him and he might be sent back to the United  Kingdom.   However,
           that is a matter which is outwith my jurisdiction."

  8. The grounds took particular  exception  to  that  last  sentence.   It
     appears to us that it is right to  say  that,  in  an  appeal  raising
     asylum and human rights grounds, the Adjudicator was indeed obliged to
     consider whether the course of action proposed by the  Respondent  was
     one  which  would  infringe  the  Appellant's   human   rights.    The
     practicability of return is no doubt something which  the  Adjudicator
     could not consider:  but the effect on the Appellant of  the  proposed
     return if it could take place  was  something  which  he  should  have
     considered.  The Adjudicator's reference to Articles 2 and 3 no  doubt
     amounts to some consideration  of  that  issue,  but  we  allowed  and
     encouraged Mr Brown and Mr Craven to explore it before us.

  9.  Mr  Craven  asserted  that,  despite  any  confusion  caused  to  the
     Adjudicator by other statements  by  other  Presenting  Officers,  the
     removal directions were indeed for Yemen.  No  doubt  in  making  that
     assertion he had in mind the provisions  of  Regulation  5(1)  of  the
     Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003  (SI  2003/658)  which  provide
     that a notice of a decision to remove as an  illegal  entrant  has  to
     state the country or territory to which it is proposed to  remove  the
     person.  The original notice, against which  this  Appellant  appeals,
     gave Yemen as the proposed  destination;   it  appears  that  any  new
     destination would have to be given in writing and arguably would  need
     to be part of a new notice of decision which would create a new  right
     of appeal:  see KF (Iran) [2005] UKIAT 00109 at  paragraph  77.   Thus
     there can be no doubt that removal to Yemen  is  the  context  of  the
     present appeal.  As is also clear from KF, the Appellant has no  right
     of appeal on the ground that the country proposed for removal  is  one
     which in his case does not fall within the provisions of  paragraph  8
     of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act.  That is because his appeal is  against
     the decision to remove him, not against the  removal  directions.   On
     the other hand, however, he clearly does have a right of appeal on the
     ground that the projected removal would breach his human rights.

 10. Mr Craven suggested in a number of his submissions that the  truth  of
     the matter  was  that  the  Appellant  would  be  entitled  to  Yemeni
     citizenship.  We  entirely  disregard  those  submissions:   they  are
     evidently contrary to  the  Adjudicator's  findings  of  fact  in  the
     determination which would have to be the basis of any  lawful  removal
     of the Appellant.  The question then is what would be the  consequence
     of the Appellant's removal to Yemen, given  that  he  is  not  and  is
     unlikely ever to be a citizen of Yemen?

 11. Although the Appellant has no right of appeal based on paragraph 8  of
     Schedule 2, nothing that we have heard suggests that the Secretary  of
     State would be minded to do anything unlawful in the Appellant's case.
      We must therefore regard the removal as one which, if it took  place,
     would take place in accordance with the provisions of paragraph  8  of
     Schedule 2.  Looking at that paragraph (the provisions  of  which  are
     well known), we note that in the present case the Appellant is  not  a
     national of Yemen, he has not been given a travel document  by  Yemen,
     and he did not embark in Yemen.  It follows that he could  be  removed
     to Yemen only on the basis that there is reason  to  suppose  that  he
     will be admitted there.  Mr Craven told us that there would have to be
     negotiations with the Yemeni Embassy before any removal to Yemen could
     take place.  That appears to us to be a proper interpretation  of  the
     limit on the Secretary of State's powers under paragraph 8 of Schedule
     2.  In any event, it provides a suitable context for us  to  determine
     whether the Appellant  can  show  that  his  removal  to  Yemen  would
     infringe his human rights.

 12. That context must therefore be that of a non-Yemeni  national  removed
     to Yemen under arrangements made with the Yemeni Embassy in the United
     Kingdom.  Mr Brown put before us a number of materials which had  also
     been before the Adjudicator which tend to show that nationals of other
     countries resident in Yemen are liable to deportation to  those  other
     countries.  He readily accepted, however, that  there  is  nothing  to
     show that people resident in Yemen that have no nationality are liable
     to any similar treatment.  It appears to us, having considered all the
     arguments put to us, that there is no basis for saying that  a  person
     in respect of whom the Secretary of State had  made  arrangements  for
     admission to Yemen would be treated there contrary to his rights under
     Article 3 as a consequence of his removal to Yemen.  There is no other
     basis upon which a claim based on this ground could properly  succeed.
     Although we have dealt with it at greater length,  that  is  precisely
     the conclusion reached by the Adjudicator  in  the  passage  from  his
     determination which we cited.

 13. It may well be the case, as Mr Brown suggested, that removal to  Yemen
     will turn out to  be  impracticable.   That  is  a  matter  which  the
     Adjudicator also dealt with.  We agree that practicability  is  not  a
     matter to be considered in this appeal.  If the Respondent finds  that
     he cannot remove the Appellant, no doubt he will not  do  so:   if  he
     seeks to remove the Appellant to a different destination, he will need
     to cite that destination in a new notice of decision.

 14. For the foregoing reasons, we find that there was no material error of
     law in the Adjudicator's determination, which we accordingly affirm.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON
                                                            DEPUTY PRESIDENT


                                                             Date:  14 Nov
                                                   2005




