
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  Singh (paragraph 320 (7A) - IS151A forms - proof) [2012] UKUT 00162(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 January 2012                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C N LANE

                                   Between

                               HARINDER SINGH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman of AR Immigration Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



   1) In an  appeal  arising  from  the  refusal  of  an  application  under
      paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, the  burden  of  proof  is
      upon the respondent to establish on a balance  of  probabilities  that
      the requirements of that paragraph are made out.  Consequently,  where
      the refusal concerns the alleged service of Forms IS151A, IS151A  Part
      2 or IS151B upon an appellant, the respondent must  prove  service  of
      the particular form(s). That evidence may comprise copies of the forms
      served, records of service made by immigration officers or a statement
      by the person who served the form(s). A bare  assertion  by  an  Entry
      Clearance Officer is unlikely to be sufficient.


   2) Form IS151A does not  require  the  recipient  "to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom." Such a requirement is made, for  example,  by  Form  IS151B.
      Where  a  subsequent  refusal  of  an  application  alleges  that  the
      applicant has made a false statement as to whether he or she has  been
      required to leave the United Kingdom in the past,  it  is,  therefore,
      very important for the Tribunal to know exactly which forms have  been
      served.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Harinder Singh, was born on 29 November 1976  and  is  a
    male citizen of India.  The appellant had applied for  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom as a domestic  worker  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 159 of HC 395.  His application  was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) New Delhi on 5 January 2011.   He  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which, in a determination which was promulgated
    on 21 June 2011, dismissed  his  appeal.   The  appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was initially  refused
    (Immigration  Judge  Kopieczek)  but  granted  upon   renewal   (Senior
    Immigration Judge Warr).  The initial hearing took place at Field House
    on 20 January 2012 when Mr Rehman appeared for  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Avery, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  appeared  for  the
    respondent.  There is no United  Kingdom  sponsor.   Having  heard  the
    submissions of both representatives, I reserved my determination.

 2. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom on 23 September 2006 on  a
    working holidaymaker visa which expired on 29 August 2008.  During  the
    currency of that visa, the appellant made an in-country application  as
    a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.   That  application  was  refused  and  his
    appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  was  dismissed  on  10
    November 2008.  The appellant did not seek permission to challenge that
    determination but he remained in the United Kingdom  from  10  November
    2008 until 25 April 2009 when he returned to India.

 3. The appellant applied on 15 December 2010 for a domestic  worker  visa.
    His application was refused under paragraph 320(7A)  of  HC  395  which
    provides as follows:

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application."

 4. The refusal notice prepared by the ECO appears to have  been  completed
    in haste  and  with  a  general  lack  of  care.   Having  refused  the
    application under paragraph 320(7A), the ECO goes on to note  that  the
    appellant's "failure to disclose material facts"  seriously  undermined
    his credibility.  Reference is then made to paragraph  41(i)  and  (ii)
    which have nothing whatsoever to do with  this  application.   The  ECO
    also noted that it was necessary to  assess  the  application  "against
    paragraph 320(7B)".  That paragraph provides as follows:
         "Subject to paragraph 320(7C), where the applicant  has  previously
         breached the UK's immigration laws by:
             (a)       Overstaying,
             (b)       breaching a condition attached to his leave,
             (c)       being an Illegal Entrant,
             (d) using Deception in an  application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain (whether successful or not),
             unless the applicant:
             (i)       Overstayed for 28 days  or  less  and  left  the  UK
                  voluntarily, not at the expense (directly  or  indirectly)
                  of the Secretary of State;
             (ii)      used Deception in an application for entry clearance
                  more than 10 years ago;
             (iii)      left  the  UK  voluntarily,  not  at  the   expense
                  (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary of  State,  more
                  than 12 months ago;
             (iv)      left the UK voluntarily, at the expense (directly or
                  indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than  2  years
                  ago; and the date the person left the UK was no more  than
                  6 months after the date on  which  the  person  was  given
                  notice of the removal decision, or no more than  6  months
                  after the date on which the person no longer had a pending
                  appeal; whichever is the later;
             (v)       left the UK voluntarily, at the expense (directly or
                  indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than  5  years
                  ago; or
             (vi)      was removed or deported from the  UK  more  than  10
                  years ago.
         Where more than  one  breach  of  the  UK's  immigration  laws  has
         occurred, only the breach which leads  to  the  longest  period  of
         absence from the UK will be relevant under this paragraph."

 5. The ECO concluded by stating that:

         "You were issued with an IS151A form and  an  admin  removal  (sic)
         from the United  Kingdom.   I  am  therefore  refusing  your  entry
         clearance under paragraph 320(7B) of the  Immigration  Rules.   Any
         future applications will also be automatically refused for the same
         reason under that paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules  until
         25 April 2019."

 6. In his determination promulgated on 21 June 2011, Immigration Judge I F
    Taylor found in favour of the appellant in respect of  the  refusal  of
    his application under paragraph 159A.  He found that paragraph  320(7B)
    did not apply to the appellant because he had "left the UK  voluntarily
    not at the expense (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary  of  State
    more than twelve months ago."  He found, however, that the  application
    was properly refused by the ECO under paragraph 320(7A).   In  relation
    to paragraph 159A, the Immigration Judge wrote:

         "With regard to the substantive paragraph 159A it is not  necessary
         to deal with this at great length because  of  my  findings  above.
         However, the concern of the Entry Clearance Manager  [who  reviewed
         the refusal on 24 March 2011] was with regard to  159A(ii)  and  in
         all circumstances of the case and in particular with regard to  the
         appellant's employer's witness statement I am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has been employed as a domestic worker for  one  year  or
         more immediately prior to his application for entry clearance under
         the same roof as his employer or in a household that  the  employer
         uses for himself on a regular basis and  where  there  is  evidence
         that there is a connection between the employer and employee.   The
         appellant does not have to establish, as is suggested by the  Entry
         Clearance Manager, that his employer resided under the same roof as
         the appellant for a period of twelve months only that he used those
         premises on a regular basis and there is a connection  between  the
         employer and employee.  As indicated above, I am satisfied that  if
         this matter was material it should be determined in favour  of  the
         appellant."

 7. Neither at the initial hearing nor in any response to  the  grounds  of
    permission, has the respondent  challenged  that  finding.   I  see  no
    reason  to  interfere  with  it.   Likewise,  the  respondent  has  not
    challenged the Immigration Judge's  finding  in  respect  of  paragraph
    320(7B).  At  paragraph  7  of  the  determination,  I  note  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  recorded  that,  "Although  [the  appellant]   left
    voluntarily, which is not disputed, at the airport he was  served  with
    the papers IS151A as an overstayer ..." [my emphasis].

 8. It follows, therefore, that  the  only  issue  in  the  appeal  is  the
    Immigration Judge's decision to  uphold  the  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(7A).

 9. At paragraphs 12-16 of his determination, the Immigration Judge set out
    his reasons for dismissing the appeal:

         "12.     At question 6.3 [of the Visa Application Form (VAF)], [the
             appellant] is asked 'Have you ever been refused a visa for any
             country including the UK.'  To this he marks the box 'No.'  Of
             course the fact is that he had been refused a visa for the UK,
             namely his in-country application as a Tier  1  Migrant  which
             was refused by the Secretary of State on 1 September 2008  and
             then dismissed at appeal on 10 November 2008.   Subsequent  to
             that the appellant's case is that he came to realise  that  no
             application for permission to appeal this  decision  had  been
             made.   It  must  have  then  been  abundantly  clear  to  the
             appellant even some twenty  months  later  that  he  had  been
             refused a visa for the UK.  The only explanation  provided  by
             the appellant in relation to this is a reference to his 'error
             and misunderstanding' which I find in all the circumstances to
             be an inadequate explanation.

         13.      At question 6.6, he is asked if he has ever been deported,
             removed or otherwise required to leave any  country  including
             the UK in the last ten years to which he marks the  box  'No'.
             I accept the appellant did leave the United Kingdom  in  April
             2009 voluntarily, however, there is no dispute that whilst  at
             the airport he was served papers indicating  that  he  was  an
             overstayer and was required to leave the United  Kingdom.   In
             those circumstances it  is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  the
             appellant to make some reference  to  this  in  his  reply  to
             question 6.6 albeit that his explanation may include  that  he
             was misled by his former solicitors.

         14.      At question 6.7 he is asked if he has made an  application
             to the Home Office to remain in the UK in the last  ten  years
             to which he ticks the box 'Yes'.  He states that  he  made  an
             application to remain in the UK on 28 June  2008  which  would
             have been in relation to his in-country application as a  Tier
             1 Migrant.  He is then asked, 'If yes, please provide details'
             to which he gives what appears to be a Home  Office  reference
             number.  It is Mr Ali's case [the  appellant's  representative
             before the First-tier Tribunal] on  behalf  of  the  appellant
             that in  quoting  this  number  the  respondent  could  easily
             discover the appellant's immigration history and thus in doing
             so the appellant cannot be described as being dishonest.

         15.      I accept if the number is indeed a Home  Office  reference
             number and it is accurate that if enquiries were undertaken it
             would probably lead to  the  appellant's  immigration  history
             being revealed.  However, the appellant is required to provide
             details and in  the  circumstances  a  Home  Office  reference
             number is insufficient.  The details provided by the appellant
             do not include the fact that his application was  unsuccessful
             and that for whatever reason he overstayed  his  visa  in  the
             United Kingdom.

         16.      Looking at the totality of the appellant's answers to 6.3,
             6.6  and  6.7  I  am  satisfied  that  he   has   made   false
             representations and omissions and that the purpose of doing so
             was to deceive the Entry Clearance Officer  particularly  with
             regard to having been refused a Tier 1 Migrant visa and  being
             regarded as an overstayer."

10. There is some difficulty in reconciling the wording of the VAF and  the
    terminology used in the  Immigration  Rules.  As  regards  the  judge's
    comments concerning question 6.3 of the VAF, the appellant submits that
    he was never refused a "visa" for the United Kingdom;  rather,  he  was
    refused further leave to remain. Further, it is not entirely clear  why
    the Immigration Judge,  at  paragraph  16,  should  have  regarded  the
    appellant's  answers  to  question  6.7  on  the   VAF   as   a   false
    representation or omission.  As the  judge  noted,  the  appellant  had
    correctly answered the question and given  his  Home  Office  reference
    number.  The judge  regarded  the  provision  of  that  information  as
    "insufficient" noting that the appellant had not included the fact that
    his application had been unsuccessful.  However, the form  only  states
    that an applicant should "provide details"; it does not say what  those
    details should be and, in particular, it does not require the appellant
    to indicate whether or not any application had been  unsuccessful.   As
    the judge acknowledges, the provision  of  the  Home  Office  reference
    number should have been enough to have enabled the ECO  to  access  the
    necessary details.  Indeed, the appellant went further  than  that  and
    gave the date of his application.  Insofar as the judge may have  found
    that the appellant's answers to question 6.7 constituted  deception,  I
    find that the judge erred by applying an excessively harsh test.

11. This appeal turns, therefore, upon the answer which the appellant  gave
    to question 6.6.  It is agreed by the parties that  the  appellant  has
    never been deported or removed from the United  Kingdom  or  any  other
    country.  The question is whether he has been  "otherwise  required  to
    leave any country ... including the United Kingdom".  It is here  where
    the wording of the form or forms which had been served on the appellant
    is of importance.  In his review, the Entry Clearance Manager had noted
    that "on 25/04/2009 the appellant was encountered at  Heathrow  Airport
    departing voluntarily  and  was  served  with  papers  (IS151A)  as  an
    overstayer in  breach  of  the  conditions  of  his  stay,  namely  the
    prescribed duration  of  two  years."   That  statement  is  inaccurate
    because it understates the period during which the appellant  had  been
    in the United  Kingdom  with  legitimate  leave.   Notwithstanding  the
    reasons for  the  dismissal  of  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's  refusal  to  extend  his  leave  to  remain,  the
    appellant had applied before his leave as a  working  holidaymaker  had
    expired.  The appellant had  enjoyed  some  form  of  leave  to  remain
    (latterly under the provisions  of  Section  3C  (as  amended)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971) up until November 2008.   Neither  the  appellant
    nor the respondent has retained copies of the papers which were  served
    on the appellant.

12. The UKBA's Enforcement Instructions and Guidance indicates that, in the
    case of an individual who has not made an asylum or human rights claim,
    he or she would be served with a Form IS151A Part 2 (which notifies the
    recipient that he or she has no right to appeal whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom), rather than the Form IS151B.  The  Instructions  (Chapter  7)
    provide as follows:


      The procedures to be  followed  once  authority  to  serve  papers  is
      obtained are as follows:
      Serve form IS151A - (Notice that a person  is  to  be  treated  as  an
      illegal  entrant/a  person  liable  to  administrative  removal  under
      section 10 of the 1999 Act). This informs the person that they are  an
      illegal entrant/immigration offender and they are  liable  to  removal
      and detention.


      Serve immigration decision to remove, either
      IS151A part 2 - (Notice of decision to remove an  illegal  entrant/  a
      person liable to administrative removal) This notice informs a  person
      that a decision has been made to remove them from the UK and that they
      can appeal against this decision but only from outside the UK : or
      IS151B - (where asylum or Human Rights claim has  been  refused)  this
      notice informs a person that a decision has been made to  remove  them
      from the UK and that their asylum/human rights  claim  has  also  been
      refused. It notifies them that they  have  an  "in-country"  right  of
      appeal against the decision.
      For both the IS151A part 2 and the IS151B it is  possible  to  specify
      more than one country to which the person may be removed. This is  for
      disputed nationality cases, dual nationals etc.




13. All that is known in the present case (and accepted by both parties) is
    that the appellant was served with a "Form IS151A."  It  is  not  clear
    whether he was served with both Part 1 and Part 2. There is no evidence
    that he was served with a Form IS151B. It is agreed that the  appellant
    was "flight side" at the airport intending to leave the United  Kingdom
    when he was served.  There is no evidence that the respondent knew that
    the appellant would be at the airport that day; it appears that he  was
    encountered by the Immigration Officers by chance.

14.  The  standard  form  IS151A  appears  in  the  appellant's  bundle  of
    documents. The form does not contain any indication that it may be only
    the first of two parts. It is described as a "Notice to a Person Liable
    to Removal."  The form states that the Immigration Officer is satisfied
    "from all the information available" that the appellant is "a person in
    respect of whom removal directions may  be  given  in  accordance  with
    Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  (administrative
    removal)."  Four categories of such a person are then identified,  this
    appellant being described as "a person who  has  failed  to  observe  a
    condition of leave to enter  or  remain  or  remains  beyond  the  time
    limited by the leave."  The form then states:

        "LIABILITY TO DETENTION You are therefore a person who is liable to
        be detained under paragraph 16(2) of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration
        Act 1971  pending  a  decision  whether  or  not  to  give  removal
        directions [and, where relevant, your removal in pursuance of  such
        directions]."

15. During the course of the hearing, Mr Avery obtained a blank form of the
    document IS151B. Unfortunately, no copy of the Form IS151A Part  2  was
    produced. It is not clear whether  the  appellant  ever  made  a  human
    rights claim; it is possible that he had done  so  in   the  course  of
    appealing the refusal of his application for further leave  to  remain.
    Because that detail is unclear, the relevance of  the  Form  IS151B  is
    limited. I note, however,  that  the  document  is  headed  "NOTICE  OF
    IMMIGRATION DECISION...DECISION TO  REMOVE  AN  ILLEGAL  ENTRANT/PERSON
    SUBJECT TO ADMINISTRATIVE REMOVAL UNDER SECTION 10 OF  THE  IMMIGRATION
    AND ASYLUM ACT 1999 - ASYLUM/HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM REFUSED".  The text  of
    the form continues,  "You  were  served  with  form  IS151A  on  [date]
    informing  you  of  your  immigration  status  and  your  liability  to
    detention and removal...a decision has now been  taken  to  remove  you
    from the United Kingdom."  At the end of the form, after the details of
    any appeal the recipient of the form  might  have,  appear  the  words,
    "REMOVAL DIRECTIONS if you do not appeal or the appeal is unsuccessful,
    you must leave the United Kingdom.  If you do  not  leave  voluntarily,
    directions will be given for your removal from the  United  Kingdom  to
    [country]."  The latter statement is the first point in either the form
    IS151A or IS151B where it is stated, in terms, that  the  recipient  of
    the forms must leave the United Kingdom.  What might  be  described  as
    the "operative part" of the form IS151B  is  that  part  requiring  the
    recipient to leave the United Kingdom.  The  "operative  part"  of  the
    form IS151A is that part of the form notifying the recipient that he or
    she is a person liable to be detained.  In my opinion, the form  IS151A
    does not require a recipient to leave  the  United  Kingdom;  the  form
    IS151B makes that demand; it has not been possible to  confirm  whether
    or not the Form IS151A Part 2 does so also.

16. The evidence adduced by the respondent in this case is  unsatisfactory.
    The respondent's own Enforcement Instructions state that:

       51.2 Immigration Decision (section 10)
       Following the service of an IS.151A Part 1, an immigration decision
       should be served. It is best practice that the IS.151A Part 1 and
       the immigration decision are served together, but there may be
       situations where this is not appropriate.

       The immigration decision  will  trigger  a  right  of  appeal  under
       Section 82(2)(g) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002. This will be either an in country or an out of  country  right
       of appeal

17.   The instructions lend no support to any argument that  the  two  forms
    are likely to have been  served  together;  it  is  possible  that  the
    immigration officers did not consider it appropriate to serve the  Part
    2 or Form B. Later in the  same  paragraph,  the  Instructions  provide
    that:

       Service

       The decision can be served in person or by post (where  delivery  or
       receipt is recorded). The service of  these  immigration  decisions,
       and the method of service, should be recorded on CID.

18. The respondent has been unable to provide any copy of  that  record  of
    service, assuming one was ever made. The respondent is now  seeking  to
    deny the appellant entry on the basis that he has been dishonest. It is
    for the respondent accordingly to discharge the burden of  proving  the
    allegation. That burden may only be discharged if adequate evidence  is
    adduced by the respondent, including, where  appropriate,  evidence  of
    the service of documents upon which the respondent seeks to rely.

19. The Entry Clearance Officer has stated that the appellant  was  "issued
    with an IS151A and an admin removal from the United Kingdom" but he  or
    she has not stated the source of that assertion nor has any documentary
    or first-hand evidence from the immigration  officers  who  encountered
    the appellant at the airport been adduced, despite the  fact  that  the
    respondent's own instructions provide for a record to have  been  kept.
    Further, the words "an admin removal" might  refer  to  either  a  Form
    IS151A Part 2 or a Form IS151B. It is also possible  that  no  form  in
    addition to the IS151A was served given that the appellant was about to
    board an aircraft. I find that the bare and uncorroborated assertion of
    an Entry Clearance Officer, who had no direct knowledge of the  service
    of any forms upon the appellant and who fails to indicate the source of
    the facts asserted, has been insufficient to discharge  the  burden  of
    proof in this instance. The discharge of that  burden  may  not  always
    require the production of copies of  the  actual  forms  served  on  an
    individual (a statement from the immigration  officer  who  served  the
    papers may well suffice) but equally,  given  the  seriousness  of  the
    consequences for an appellant faced with a refusal under paragraph 320,
    a bare assertion in a refusal  letter  or  notice  is  unlikely  to  be
    adequate.

20. In the present appeal, I find only that  (as  the  parties  agree)  the
    appellant was served with Form IS151A (but not a Part 2 Form or IS151B)
    and, because that form did not require him to leave the United Kingdom,
    the appellant did not give a false answer when he answered "No" to  the
    question "Have you ever  been  ...  otherwise  required  to  leave  any
    country including the UK in the last ten years?"

21. The Immigration Judge  erred  in  law  by  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal.  I set aside the judge's determination  and  have  re-made  the
    decision.    Although  the  appellant  breached  the  United  Kingdom's
    immigration laws by overstaying (as  the  Immigration  Judge  correctly
    observed) his present application for entry  clearance  should  not  be
    thwarted by paragraph 320(7B) because he falls within that category  of
    applicant who has left the UK voluntarily and not at the expense of the
    Secretary of State and who did so more  than  twelve  months  ago  (see
    paragraph 320(7B)(d)(iii)). The appeal is allowed.



DECISION

22. This appeal is allowed.




Signed                                       Date:  22 January 2012


Upper Tribunal Judge C N Lane
