

                                    [pic]

Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of deportation order) [2017] UKUT
00166(IAC)

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 11 January 2017                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between



                           KEVIN CHRISTOPHER SMITH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr A. Mahmood,Counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble,Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


(i)   In cases involving convictions for an offence  for  which  the  person
    was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  4  years,  the
    Secretary of State's policy, as expressed in paragraph  391(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  is  that  the  public  interest  does  not  require
    continuation of a deportation order after a period  of  ten  years  has
    elapsed.


(ii)  However, paragraph 391(a) allows the Secretary of  State  to  consider
    on a  case  by  case  basis  whether  a  deportation  order  should  be
    maintained. The mere  fact  of  past  convictions  is  unlikely  to  be
    sufficient to maintain an order if the 'prescribed period' has elapsed.
    Strong public policy reasons would be needed to justify  continuing  an
    order in such circumstances.

(iii) Paragraph 391(a) will only be engaged in a 'post-deportation' case  if
    the person is applying for revocation of the order from outside the UK.
    Nothing in the strict wording of the rule requires the ten-year  period
    to be spent outside the UK. However, the main purpose of deportation is
    to exclude a person from the UK. Any breach of the deportation order is
    likely to be a strong public policy ground for  maintaining  the  order
    even though a period of ten years has elapsed since it was made.

(iv)  In 'post-deportation' applications involving sentences  of  less  than
    four years made before the end  of  the  ten-year  period,  and  'post-
    deportation' applications involving sentences of four  years  or  more,
    appropriate weight should be given to the Secretary of  State's  policy
    as expressed in the 'Conventions exception'  and  'sweep-up  exception'
    with reference to paragraphs  398-399A  and  390A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The appeal raises questions regarding the assessment  of  applications
    to revoke a deportation order made from outside the UK.

Background

2.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim in the context of an application to revoke  a  deportation
    order made  by  the  appellant  while  outside  the  UK  i.e.  a  post-
    deportation application.

3.    The appellant is a Jamaican citizen who entered the  UK  in  1999  and
    was granted leave to enter as a visitor for a period of six months.  He
    was granted further leave to remain as a student until 31 January  2001
    but overstayed when the  visa  expired.  On  02  October  2000  he  was
    convicted of supplying a class A drug. He was sentenced to a period  of
    32 months' imprisonment and recommended for deportation. A  deportation
    order was signed on 11 October 2001. On 24 October 2001 he was deported
    to Jamaica.

4.    The appellant re-entered the UK in breach of the deportation order  on
    18 March 2002. The breach was compounded by the fact that he entered in
    a false identity. He was granted leave to enter as a  visitor  for  six
    months. Further leave to remain was  granted  as  a  student  and  then
    subsequently as the spouse of a  work  permit  holder.  His  leave  was
    extended until 05 December 2004 in line with  the  sponsor's  leave  to
    remain. The appellant's first child was born on 11 December 2004.

5.    On 18 November 2004 the appellant was arrested.  Checks  revealed  his
    true identity and that he had  returned  to  the  UK  in  breach  of  a
    deportation order. The appellant made submissions relating to his right
    to family life with his wife and child but these were  refused  with  a
    right of appeal. He did not exercise the right of appeal. It is unclear
    from the evidence whether the appellant absconded  after  release  from
    detention but it seems that no further action was taken to  remove  him
    despite the fact that he was arrested on two  occasions  in  2006.  The
    respondent states  that  by  September  2007  he  was  recorded  as  an
    absconder for non-compliance with reporting restrictions.

6.    On 01 August 2008 the appellant was convicted of assaulting  a  police
    officer and sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  two  months  and
    nine days. The respondent made arrangements to remove him from the  UK.
    At the end of 2008 and early 2009 the appellant made a number of  human
    rights submissions and an application for  judicial  review;  all  were
    rejected or refused. Further submissions were made on 30  January  2009
    stating  that  the  appellant  had  three  children  from  a   previous
    relationship. The further submissions were rejected and  the  appellant
    was removed to Jamaica on 11 February 2009.

7.    On 25 September 2013 the  appellant  applied  for  revocation  of  the
    deportation order made on 11 October 2001. The respondent treated it as
    a human rights claim and refused the application in a decision dated 10
    August 2015 without a right of appeal. A second decision was made on 12
    October 2015. Although the reasons for making a second decision are not
    explained, it seems apparent that a right of appeal was not granted  in
    relation to the first decision. I find that it is reasonable  to  infer
    that the respondent may have had to reissue the decision  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim because it should have attracted a right of  appeal.
    In the second decision the respondent considered the family life issues
    raised by the appellant with reference to paragraphs  398-399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules but concluded that the public interest in maintaining
    his  exclusion  from  the  UK  was  not  outweighed   by   his   family
    circumstances.

8.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 01 August 2016. The judge  considered  the
    terms of paragraph 391  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  well  as  the
    particular circumstances of the case, including the family life  issues
    raised by the appellant, before concluding that his family life did not
    outweigh the public interest in his continued exclusion from the UK.

9.    The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal misunderstood and misapplied the test set
          out in paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules. In particular, the
          judge erred in apparently requiring the appellant to  have  spent
          ten years outside  the  UK  before  the  provision  contained  in
          paragraph 391(a) could apply.


      ii)  The   First-tier   Tribunal   took   into   account   irrelevant
          considerations relating to  the  appellant's  relationships  with
          several women, rather than concentrating on the  material  issue,
          which was the strength of his relationship with the four children
          he has in the UK.

Legal framework

10.   Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 states:

           32.    Automatic  deportationE+W+S+N.I.This   section   has   no
      associated Explanatory Notes
           (1)   In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
                 (a)   who is not a British citizen,
                 (b)   who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
           and
                 (c)   to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
           (2)   Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
                 imprisonment of at least 12 months.
           (3)   Condition 2 is that-
                 (a)   the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                       State under  section  72(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
                       Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (c.  41)  (serious
                       criminal), and
                 (b)   the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.
           (4)   For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act
                 1971 (c. 77), the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
                 conducive to the public good.
           (5)   The Secretary of State must make a  deportation  order  in
                 respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).
           (6)   The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation  order
                 made in accordance with subsection (5) unless-
                 (a)   he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,
                 (b)   the application for  revocation  is  made  while  the
                       foreign criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or
                 (c)   section 34(4) applies.
           (7)   Subsection (5) does not create a private right  of  action
                 in  respect  of  consequences  of  non-compliance  by   the
                 Secretary of State.

11.   Following changes to the appeal regime made  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014, for the purpose of most appeals, the relevant exceptions will  be
    section 33(2) (removal in pursuance of a deportation order would breach
    the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  or  obligations  under  the
    Refugee Convention) and  section  33(4)  (removal  in  pursuance  of  a
    deportation order would breach rights under the EU treaties).

12.   Paragraphs  390-392  of  the  Immigration  Rules  make  provision  for
    revocation of a deportation order.

                    390.     An application for revocation of a  deportation
                 order  will  be  considered  in  the  light  of   all   the
                 circumstances including the following:

                    i) on the grounds on which the order was made;
                   ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
                  iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                       maintenance of an effective immigration control;
                   iv)  the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                       compassionate circumstances.

                      390A.  Where paragraph 398 applies  the  Secretary  of
                 State will consider whether paragraph 399 or  399A  applies
                 and, if it  does  not,  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional
                 circumstances that the public interest in  maintaining  the
                 deportation order will be outweighed by other factors.

                      391.    In  the  case  of  the  person  who  has  been
                 deported following conviction for a criminal  offence,  the
                 continuation of the deportation order against  that  person
                 will be the proper course:

                 a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
                    person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                    than 4 years, unless 10 years  have  elapsed  since  the
                    making of the deportation order, when, if an application
                    for revocation is received, consideration will be  given
                    on a case by case basis to whether the deportation order
                    should be maintained, or


                 b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
                    person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
                    least four years, at any time,

                 Unless, in either case, the continuation would be  contrary
                 to the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, or  there  are
                 other exceptional circumstances that mean the  continuation
                 is outweighed by compelling factors.

                  391A.      In other cases, revocation of  the  order  will
                 not normally be authorised unless the  situation  has  been
                 materially altered, either by  a  change  of  circumstances
                 since the order was made, or by fresh information coming to
                 light which was not before the appellate authorities or the
                 Secretary of State. The passage of time  since  the  person
                 was deported may also in itself amount to such a change  of
                 circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.


                  392.       Revocation of  a  deportation  order  does  not
                 entitle  the  person  concerned  to  re-enter  the   United
                 Kingdom; it renders him eligible  to  apply  for  admission
                 under the Immigration Rules. Application for revocation  of
                 the order may be made to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  or
                 direct to the Home Office.
13.   In SSHD v ZP  (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1197  the  Court  of  Appeal
      considered the legal framework relating to revocation  of  deportation
      orders. Lord Justice Underhill noted that paragraph 391 provided for a
      "prescribed period" of time before an application for leave  to  enter
      will  be  entertained.  In  cases  involving  less  than  four  years'
      imprisonment the prescribed period is ten years. However,  the  policy
      is expressly stated not to apply in  two  distinct  circumstances  (i)
      where continuation of the deportation order would be contrary  to  the
      ECHR or the Refugee Convention ("the Conventions exception")  or  (ii)
      where  "there  are  other  exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the
      continuation is  outweighed  by  compelling  factors"  ("the  sweep-up
      exception"). He went on to make the following findings:
                    "24.     It does not, however, in my  view  follow  that
                 paragraph 391 requires a fundamental difference in approach
                 in  considering  post-deportation  revocation  applications
                 from that which is followed in considering  pre-deportation
                 applications under paragraphs 390A/398-399A.   It  is  true
                 that the structure of paragraphs 398 (at the relevant time)
                 and 391 is different.   In  the  case  of  the  former  the
                 Secretary of State has set out  herself  to  formulate  the
                 approach required by article 8, whereas in the case of  the
                 latter she has stated her policy but acknowledged  that  it
                 should not apply where that would lead to a breach  of  the
                 ECHR (in practice, article 8).  It is also true that  there
                 are some minor differences of wording.  But the  difference
                 in drafting structure does not require a different approach
                 as a matter of substance, since we know from  MF  that  the
                 exercise required by paragraph 398  is  the  same  as  that
                 required by article 8.  Likewise,  while  the  use  in  the
                 sweep-up  exception  of  the  phrase   "other   exceptional
                 circumstances  [involving]  compelling  factors"  no  doubt
                 implies that it is only  in  such  circumstances  that  the
                 Secretary of State's general policy will  be  displaced  by
                 article 8, that too is consistent with the approach in  MF.
                 As for the differences in wording, they may  be  vexing  to
                 the purist but they are plainly not intended to reflect any
                 difference of substance.  The exercise required in  a  case
                 falling under paragraph 391 is thus  broadly  the  same  as
                 that required in a case falling  under  paragraph  390A  or
                 paragraph 398.  Decision-takers will  have  to  conduct  an
                 assessment of the proportionality of maintaining the  order
                 in place for the prescribed period,  balancing  the  public
                 interest in continuing it against the interference with the
                 applicant's private and family life; but in  striking  that
                 balance they should take as a starting-point the  Secretary
                 of State's assessment of the public interest  reflected  in
                 the prescribed periods and  should  only  order  revocation
                 after a lesser period if there are compelling reasons to do
                 so.


                     25.     Mr Biggs argued that a  fundamental  difference
                 between the decision whether to make a deportation order in
                 the first place  and  the  decision  whether  to  revoke  a
                 subsisting order short of  the  prescribed  period  -  and,
                 particularly  where,  as  here,  the  applicant  has   been
                 deported - is that in the latter case the  public  interest
                 in maintaining the order will generally diminish  with  the
                 passage of time and that that must  be  borne  in  mind  in
                 striking the proportionality balance.  I would accept  that
                 up to a point.   Where  there  are  compelling  factors  in
                 favour of revocation the applicant's case is - other things
                 being equal - bound to be stronger  if  they  have  already
                 been excluded for a long period.  But I  would  not  accept
                 that the passage of time can by  itself  be  relied  on  as
                 constituting a compelling reason for early revocation.   It
                 is inherent in the making of a deportation order that there
                 must be a period before the deportee becomes  eligible  for
                 re-admission: otherwise it would be a mere  revolving-door.
                 Mr Biggs did  not  contend  that  the  ten-year  prescribed
                 period applicable to foreign criminals sentenced to between
                 one and four years' imprisonment was itself  irrational  or
                 that it inherently involved any breach of article 8.   That
                 being so, the  default  position  must  be  that  deportees
                 should "serve" the entirety of the prescribed period in the
                 absence of specific compelling reasons to the contrary.


                      26.    Paragraph 391A. The phrase "in other cases"  at
                 the beginning of paragraph 391A must at least  exclude  the
                 cases covered by the immediately preceding paragraph,  i.e.
                 paragraph 391, so that it certainly has no  application  in
                 the present case.  It is not necessary  for  us  to  decide
                 whether its effect is to  exclude  also  cases  covered  by
                 paragraph 390A - so that in practice  it  means  "in  cases
                 other than those of foreign criminals" - but the Government
                 Legal  Department  submitted  that  that  was  plainly  the
                 intention,    and    I    am    inclined     to     agree."



14.   In IT (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 932 the Court of Appeal  sought
      to apply the principles outlined in ZP (India) in  the  context  of  a
      'post-deportation' application for revocation of a  deportation  order
      before the expiry of  the  'prescribed  period'.  Lady  Justice  Arden
      observed, on the face of section 32(6), that the  Secretary  of  State
      has discretion to revoke a deportation order without reference to  the
      exceptions contained in section 33  but  concluded,  when  considering
      revocation, that the weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in
      deportation could not in practice be any less than when  the  original
      deportation order was made. She referred to Lord  Justice  Underhill's
      observation at [15] in ZP (India) where  he  stated  that  the  public
      interest in deportation did not cease the moment  a  foreign  criminal
      leaves the country.


Decision and reasons

Analysis of the legal framework

15.   The Immigration Rules outline several types of decisions  relating  to
    deportation.

              i) Initial deportation decisions involving human rights issues
                 under Article 8 ECHR (paragraphs 398-399A);


             ii) 'Pre-deportation'  revocation  decisions  (paragraphs  390-
                 390A);

            iii) 'Post-deportation' revocation decisions (paragraphs  390  &
                 391); and

             iv) 'Other' applications for revocation (paragraph 390 & 391A).

16.   In cases involving representations made on human rights grounds  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention, the heart of  the  assessment  is
    whether the deportation decision strikes a fair balance between the due
    weight  to  be  given  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
    deportation and the impact of the decision on the individual's  private
    or family life. In  assessing  whether  the  decision  strikes  a  fair
    balance  a  court  or  tribunal  should  give  appropriate  weight   to
    Parliament's and the Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of
    the general public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders  as
    expressed in the relevant rules and statutes: see  Hesham  Ali  v  SSHD
    [2016] UKSC 60. The decision in ZP (India) makes clear that differences
    in the wording of the provisions do not require a different approach as
    a matter of substance. The  exercise  is  broadly  the  same  in  cases
    falling under paragraphs 398, 390A and 391.

17.   In ZP (India) the Court  of  Appeal  considered  a  'post-deportation'
    application to revoke a deportation order made under paragraph 391. The
    application was  made  before  the  end  of  the  ten-year  'prescribed
    period'. For this reason, the court  concluded  that  the  'Conventions
    exception' or the 'sweep-up exception' applied. It  was  not  necessary
    for the court to conduct a detailed analysis of the effect of paragraph
    391(a) in circumstances where the 'prescribed period' had  not  elapsed
    since the making of the deportation order. However, the court  observed
    that deportees should "serve" the entirety of the prescribed period  in
    the absence of compelling circumstances to the contrary.

18.   Since the decision in ZP (India) the relevant  paragraph  was  amended
    by way of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC  693,  which
    came into effect on 20 October 2014.

           "391. In the case of the person who has been deported  following
           conviction for a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  the
           deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

                 a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
                    person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                    than 4 years, unless 10 years  have  elapsed  since  the
                    making of the deportation order, when, if an application
                    for revocation is received, consideration will be  given
                    on a case by case basis to whether the deportation order
                    should be maintained..." [italicised words added  by  HC
                    693]

19.   Prior to the amendment, the plain wording of paragraph  391(a)  stated
    that continuation of a deportation order would be the proper course  in
    cases involving periods of imprisonment of less than four years  unless
    the 'prescribed period' of  ten  years  had  elapsed.  The  wording  of
    paragraph 391(a) provides an additional exception to  the  'Conventions
    exception' and the 'sweep-up exception' i.e. a 'ten-year exception'. As
    paragraph 391(a) stood prior to amendment, the wording was  unqualified
    and gave rise to a presumption that  the  deportation  order  would  be
    revoked if ten years had elapsed since the making  of  the  deportation
    order.

20.   The amendment to paragraph 391(a) is drafted in  a  rather  cumbersome
    way. The explanatory notes  to  the  statutory  instrument  provide  no
    assistance as to the meaning. Having considered the provision,  I  find
    that it provides the Secretary of State with an element of  discretion,
    which enables her to consider each application for revocation on a case
    by case basis. It withdraws from the previous position,  which  created
    an unqualified presumption that a deportation order  would  be  revoked
    after the 'prescribed period' elapsed.  When  a  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four years  makes  a
    'post deportation' application for revocation of the  order  after  the
    'prescribed period' of ten years the Secretary of State  will  consider
    whether the deportation order should be maintained.

21.   Whether there are grounds to maintain  a  deportation  order  will  be
    driven by public interest considerations. However, there  would  be  no
    point in providing an exception after  a  'prescribed  period'  of  ten
    years if the balancing exercise remained  the  same.  The  respondent's
    policy, as expressed in paragraph 391(a) of the Immigration  Rules,  is
    that the public interest does not require  continuation  of  the  order
    after a period of ten years has elapsed. As the  court  in  ZP  (India)
    recognised, the public interest in maintaining the order will generally
    diminish with the passage of time. Paragraph 391A also makes clear that
    the passage of time since the person was deported  might  amount  to  a
    change in  circumstances  to  warrant  revocation  of  the  order.  The
    prescribed period would be rendered  meaningless  if  the  same  public
    interest considerations that led to the making of  the  original  order
    were sufficient to continue the order after a period of ten years.

22.   The fact that a person was convicted of a  very  serious  crime  might
    justify continuing an order but that  is  dealt  with  by  way  of  the
    distinction between cases involving sentences of imprisonment  of  less
    than and  more  than  four  years.  In  cases  involving  sentences  of
    imprisonment of four years or more there is no provision for revocation
    of the order after a  'prescribed  period'.  The  order  will  only  be
    revoked if the person can show that the public interest in  deportation
    is outweighed with reference to  the  'Conventions  exception'  or  the
    'sweep-up exception'. In such  cases  the  passage  of  time  might  be
    relevant to  the  weight  to  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the order, but the seriousness of the initial offence  will
    also be taken into account.

23.   In contrast, the 'prescribed period'  contained  in  paragraph  391(a)
    only applies to cases  where  the  sentence  of  imprisonment  is  less
    serious. The 'prescribed period' recognises  that  in  such  cases  the
    passage of time is likely to diminish the weight to  be  given  to  the
    public interest. The fact that a period of ten years has elapsed  since
    the making of the order creates a presumption that the  order  will  be
    discharged unless, having considered the individual facts of the  case,
    the Secretary of State considers that it continues to be in the  public
    interest to maintain the order. However, the mere fact of past criminal
    convictions is unlikely to be sufficient without strong  public  policy
    reasons to justify maintaining the order. If a person has 'served'  the
    ten-year period outside the UK, and there is  no  evidence  of  further
    offending, or behaviour that would be contrary to the public  interest,
    it is difficult to see what justification could be given  for  refusing
    to revoke an order. However, if there is evidence to show that a person
    has committed further offences, and may continue  to  pose  a  risk  of
    offending if readmitted to the UK,  such  circumstances  might  justify
    continuing the order even though the 'prescribed period' has elapsed.

24.   The facts of  this  case  also  raise  the  question  of  whether  the
    'prescribed period' must be spent outside the UK. Mr  Bramble  accepted
    that there was nothing in the strict wording  of  paragraph  391(a)  to
    suggest that this was a requirement. The only requirement is  that  the
    person is outside the UK when they make the application for  revocation
    of the order.

25.   However, the whole purpose of a deportation  order  is  to  exclude  a
    person from the UK for a specified or indefinite period. Although there
    is  nothing  in  the  wording  of  paragraph  391(a)  to  require   the
    'prescribed period' to be spent outside the UK, the fact that a  person
    might return to the UK in breach of the order, and has spent a  portion
    of the ten-year period living in the  UK,  is  a  serious  matter  that
    should be given significant weight in favour of the public interest.  A
    person should not be able to benefit from a clear breach of the  order,
    which  undermines  the  effectiveness  of  the  system  of  immigration
    control. Such actions are likely to provide  strong  justification  for
    continuing the order even if the ten-year period has elapsed.

26.   I draw the following conclusions from the above analysis:

       i) In cases involving convictions  for  an  offence  for  which  the
          person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than  4
          years, the Secretary of State's policy, as expressed in paragraph
          391(a) of the Immigration Rules, is that the public interest does
          not require continuation of a deportation order after a period of
          ten years has elapsed.


      ii) However, paragraph  391(a)  allows  the  Secretary  of  State  to
          consider on a case by case  basis  whether  a  deportation  order
          should be maintained.  The  mere  fact  of  past  convictions  is
          unlikely to be sufficient to maintain an order if the 'prescribed
          period' has elapsed. Strong public policy reasons would be needed
          to justify continuing an order in such circumstances.

     iii) Paragraph 391(a) will only be  engaged  in  a  'post-deportation'
          case if the person is applying for revocation of the  order  from
          outside the UK.  Nothing  in  the  strict  wording  of  the  rule
          requires the ten-year period to be spent outside the UK. However,
          the main purpose of deportation is to exclude a person  from  the
          UK. Any breach of the deportation order is likely to be a  strong
          public policy ground for maintaining  the  order  even  though  a
          period of ten years has elapsed since it was made.

      iv) In 'post-deportation' applications involving  sentences  of  less
          than four years made before the end of the ten-year  period,  and
          'post-deportation' applications involving sentences of four years
          or more, appropriate weight should be given to the  Secretary  of
          State's policy as expressed in the  'Conventions  exception'  and
          'sweep-up exception' with reference to  paragraphs  398-399A  and
          390A of the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

27.   I bear in mind the above principles in assessing  whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law.  The
    judge correctly identified that the appellant made a 'post-deportation'
    application for revocation of the order and that paragraph 391  applied
    [38]. He accepted that a ten-year period elapsed since  the  making  of
    the  deportation  order  in  October  2001  and  the  application   for
    revocation in September 2013. However, he  considered  the  passage  of
    time was insufficient reason to revoke the order given the  appellant's
    immigration history. He took into account the fact that  the  appellant
    re-entered the UK in breach of the order and in an assumed identity  in
    March 2002. He remained in the UK for a  large  part  of  the  ten-year
    period until he was removed for the second time in February 2009 [41].

28.    The  judge  considered  the   fact   that   the   appellant   entered
    relationships with several women and had children with them at  a  time
    when he was living in the UK in breach of the  deportation  order.  The
    judge also noted that there were several incidents recorded during that
    time "suggesting criminality"  [43].  The  appellant  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of possession with intent to supply crack cocaine in December
    2006 albeit there was no  subsequent  conviction.  Although  the  judge
    noted the  suggestion  of  criminality,  in  fact,  the  appellant  was
    convicted of assaulting a police officer in August 2008  and  sentenced
    to a period of nine weeks' imprisonment.  This omission was unlikely to
    make  any  material  difference  to  the  decision,  and  if  anything,
    supported the judge's overall conclusion.

29.   On behalf of the appellant it  is  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in
    apparently requiring him to have spent ten years outside the UK  before
    paragraph 391 could apply. It is also said that he summarised the legal
    framework incorrectly by conflating the  'prescribed  period'  and  the
    discretion to consider each application on a case by  case  basis  with
    the 'Conventions exception' and the  'sweep-up  exception'.  The  judge
    made the following finding [39]:

            "What appears to be the scheme of this rule is that if a  person
           has been deported on the grounds that he  has  convicted  of  an
           offence and sentenced to imprisonment for less than four  years,
           then provided ten years has  lapsed  since  the  making  of  the
           deportation order, consideration will be given as to whether the
           order should be maintained, unless the decision to maintain  the
           order is contrary to the appellant's human rights or  there  are
           other exceptional reasons that outweigh the continuation."

30.   This summary of  the  scheme  of  paragraph  391  includes  the  three
    exceptions, but does appear to conflate  them  with  one  another.  The
    first exception is the 'ten-year  exception'.  However,  it  is  not  a
    prerequisite that an applicant also needs to meet the 'Conventions' and
    'sweep-up' exceptions in order to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    391(a). Those act as alternative provisions in cases where an applicant
    has not completed the 'prescribed period'.

31.   It is also argued that  the  judge  required  the  appellant  to  have
    completed the full ten-year period outside the UK. The only place where
    he mentions this is at [41] where he observed that  the  appellant  had
    not lived outside the UK for a period of ten years "which is what  must
    have been in the mind of those who drafted paragraph 391".

32.   Having read the decision as a whole I find that there is no  error  of
    law. It was open  to  the  judge  to  observe  that  the  intention  of
    paragraph 391 was to exclude a person from the UK for a period  of  ten
    years. There is nothing in his decision to suggest that  he  considered
    it an absolute requirement that the whole period  needed  to  be  spent
    outside the UK.

33.   The plain wording  of  paragraph  391(a)  does  not  import  a  strict
    requirement that a person has spent the whole ten-year  period  outside
    the  UK.  However,  it  is  inherent  in  the  underlying  purpose   of
    deportation that the person is excluded from  the  UK.  The  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the fact that the appellant  returned  to
    the UK in breach of the order and used deception to enter and remain in
    the UK. Despite the  slightly  inaccurate  summary  of  the  exceptions
    contained in paragraph 391 it seems clear to me, as a matter  of  fact,
    that the judge applied the correct test. The fact  that  the  appellant
    breached the order, entered illegally and committed a  further  offence
    were sufficiently strong public policy reasons to  justify  maintaining
    the order. The judge concluded [44]:

            "When the appellant's character and conduct is fully taken  into
           account the impression is inescapable that this is a man who has
           very little regard either  for  the  law  or  the  feelings  and
           emotions of  other  people.  In  my  view  if  the  question  of
           revocation had to be considered, as paragraph 391 requires, on a
           case by case basis, the Secretary of  State's  decision  not  to
           revoke the deportation order in this case is a sustainable one."

34.   The judge was entitled to conclude  that  there  were  several  strong
    public policy reasons to support the respondent's decision to  maintain
    the order. There is nothing to suggest that the judge sought  to  apply
    the 'Conventions exception' or the 'sweep-up exception' at  this  stage
    of his assessment. Even though a period of ten years elapsed since  the
    deportation order was made, it was open to the judge to  conclude  that
    there were strong public policy reasons  to  justify  the  respondent's
    decision to maintain the order.

35.   The second ground of appeal argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient consideration to the best interests  of  the  children,  and
    instead, focussed on immaterial considerations relating to the  way  in
    which he pursued his relationships in the UK.

36.   After having made  clear  findings  relating  to  the  application  of
    paragraph 391(a) the judge turned to make separate findings relating to
    the 'Conventions exception' with reference to Article 8 of the European
    Convention. He accepted that the appellant had a family life  with  the
    three children he had with Ms X and  that  the  children  made  regular
    trips to Jamaica until 2013 [47]. In assessing the  proportionality  of
    continued exclusion the judge said that he made a  holistic  assessment
    taking into account the appellant's immigration history as well as  the
    adverse impact the decision had on the appellant and other  members  of
    his family [49]. The judge  acknowledged  that  the  children's  mother
    wanted them to have a relationship with their father. He stated that he
    did not underestimate the difficulty that she has had in raising  three
    children with varying degrees of behavioural issues. In particular,  he
    took into account the fact that one child suffered from Cerebral  Palsy
    [50].

37.   In assessing the extent and  quality  of  the  relationship  that  the
    appellant had with his children, which was relevant to the question  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children  to  continue  to  be
    separated from their father, it was open to the judge to  consider  the
    way in which he appeared to have conducted his family life while in the
    UK. He took into account the fact that  the  appellant  fathered  three
    children with Ms X at a time when he knew he was living in  the  UK  in
    breach of a deportation order. The  judge  summarised  the  appellant's
    relationship with Ms  X  as  one  conducted  by  way  of  "intermittent
    visits". At the same time the appellant was trying  to  regularise  his
    status in the UK under a false name by relying on his marriage to Ms Y.
    He noted that Ms X appeared to be unaware of the fact. He concluded:

            "52. ...The appellant could not have practically been able to do
           all the things he was up to including  keeping  his  association
           with other women with one of whom fathered a child  as  well  as
           devoting enough time to Ms Y and her  children  and  playing  an
           active role in their life.


            53. In my assessment whilst the  appellant  may  have  a  loving
           attitude towards his children, I do not find that their  welfare
           would be served by this particular  appellant's  involvement  in
           their life. In fact he could present a role model of  the  wrong
           kind that could harm their future.


            54. Taking into account  the  appellant's  criminal  conviction,
           conduct  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his  seriously   adverse
           immigration history; and  balancing  that  against  the  adverse
           impact on him and the hurt to  the  children's  emotion  by  not
           being able to be with their father, the conclusion  to  which  I
           have come is that the appellant's continued exclusion  from  the
           United Kingdom is proportionate."

38.   It seems clear to me that any findings he made about  the  appellant's
    relationships in the UK were made by way of assessing the  strength  of
    his parental ties with the children. While the judge did not doubt that
    there was a family life, it was open to  him  to  question  how  strong
    those ties were and the extent of the appellant's  commitment  to  that
    family life in circumstances where Ms X is, and always  has  been,  the
    primary carer. The judge was required to consider whether the  decision
    struck a fair balance between the due weight that was to  be  given  to
    the public interest  in  maintaining  the  deportation  order  and  the
    circumstances of the appellant and his children. It  is  understandable
    that the appellant disagrees with the decision but the judge's findings
    were within a range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

39.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
    law

Signed

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan                                 Date  16  March
2017
