
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

               Contractor (CAS-Tier 4) [2012] UKUT 00168 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2012                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE COULSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                         UPPER TRIBNUNAL JUDGE McKEE

                                   Between

                              MR A M CONTRACTOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


1) UKBA's announcement in  March 2011 of changes to  the  Immigration  Rules
which came into force on 21 April 2011  means  that  in  general  those  who
stood to be affected by those changes had adequate time to take  appropriate
action and hence that  in general no Patel fairness issues  arise.

2) This applies to the CAS-related requirement set out at para 116(da)  that
a new course had to be at an A-rated college and  also  to  the  CAS-related
requirement set out at para 118(c)(iii) for  an  applicant  starting  a  new
course at below degree level to  achieve Level B1 in  the  English  Language
Test in all four components.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal from a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (IJ
    David Clapham, SSC) promulgated on 25 August 2011, when he refused  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 23 June 2011 in
    which she refused the appellant's application for leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 Student.

2.    On 22 March 2011, the respondent announced the Government's  plans  to
    make changes to the Points Based System.  The changes were explained in
    a  document  entitled  'Student  Visas:   Statement   of   Intent   and
    Transitional Measures' published by the respondent in March 2011.   The
    relevant changes came into force on 21 April 2011.

3.    The provisions of paragraph 116  of  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules apply to all Confirmations of Acceptance for Studies (CASs).  The
    provisions at paragraph 118(b) of Appendix A apply to those CASs  which
    were assigned on or before 20 April 2011.  Paragraph 118(c) applies  to
    CASs assigned on or after 21 April 2011.

4.    The relevant parts of the various paragraphs for the purposes of  this
    appeal are as follows:-

         "116.     A Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  will  only  be
              considered to be valid if:
            ...


            (d)   it was issued by an institution with a  Tier  4  (General)
                  Student Sponsor Licence,


            (da)  where the application for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
                  remain is for the applicant to commence a  new  course  of
                  study, not for completion of a course already commenced by
                  way of re-sitting examinations or repeating a module of  a
                  course, the Sponsor must hold an A-rated or Highly Trusted
                  Sponsor Licence,


            (e)   the institution must still hold such a licence at the time
                  the application for entry clearance or leave to remain  is
                  determined...


         118.     (c)  For Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  assigned
                  on or after 21 April 2011, one of the requirements in  (i)
                  to (iii) below is met:


                  (i)  the course is degree level study and the Confirmation
                      of Acceptance for Studies  has  been  assigned  by  a
                      Sponsor which is a Recognised Body... or


                  (ii)  the  course  is  {a}  degree  level  study  and  the
                      Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  has  been
                      assigned by a Sponsor which is not a Recognised  Body
                      ... and:  (4)  the  applicant  provides  an  original
                      English language test  certificate  from  an  English
                      language test provider approved by the  Secretary  of
                      State  for  these  purposes,  which  is  within   its
                      validity date, and clearly shows:


                       i     the applicant's name,


                       ii     that the applicant has  achieved  or  exceeded
                           level  B2  of  the  Council  of  Europe's  Common
                           European Framework for Language Learning  in  all
                           four components (reading, writing,  speaking  and
                           listening) ... or


                  (iii)      the course is for below degree level study  and
                       ... : ... (4)  the  applicant  provides  an  original
                       English language test  certificate  from  an  English
                       language test provider approved by the  Secretary  of
                       State  for  these  purposes,  which  is  within   its
                       validity date, and clearly shows:


                       i     the applicant's name


                       ii    that the applicant  has  achieved  or  exceeded
                           level  B1  of  the  Council  of  Europe's  Common
                           European Framework for Language Learning  in  all
                           four components (reading, writing,  speaking  and
                           listening) ..."


5.    The appellant's existing leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  student
    expired on 31 May 2011.  On that date, he applied for leave  to  remain
    to undertake a  diploma  computing  course  at  Herbert  College.   His
    application relied on a CAS assigned by Herbert College on 31 May,  the
    same day as his leave expired. Accordingly, he made his application  on
    the very last possible day.

6.    On 23 June 2011, the respondent refused the application on  the  basis
    that Herbert College was not an A Rated or Highly Trusted Sponsor.   It
    held a B Rated Sponsor Licence.  In addition, the refusal letter  noted
    that the appellant's course was below degree level and  that,  although
    he had submitted the results of a  Pearson  Test  of  English,  he  was
    required to score a minimum of 43 points in each of the four  areas  of
    listening, reading, speaking and writing in order to achieve or  exceed
    Level B1. He had failed to  achieve  43  points  in  both  reading  and
    writing.

7.    The appellant appealed and when the  First-tier  Tribunal  upheld  the
    grounds of refusal, the appellant appealed again.

8.    There can be no doubt whatsoever that the respondent was  entitled  to
    refuse the  appellant's  original  application  for  leave  to  remain.
    First, Herbert College was not A-Rated and was  not  a  Highly  Trusted
    Sponsor.  Thus, because the appellant  was  applying  to  study  a  new
    course, his CAS failed  to  meet  paragraph  116(da)  and  (e)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.    Secondly, the appellant's application failed to comply with  paragraph
    118(c)(iii).  The appellant had failed to achieve level B1  in  two  of
    the four components.  In such circumstances, his application was  bound
    to be refused. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal was right  to
    uphold the respondent's refusal.

10.   That leaves the issue of fairness.  In Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC), the Upper  Tribunal  ruled
    that, on the facts of that case, the respondent had acted unfairly when
    she revoked a college's status after the application had been made  (at
    a time when it was still an approved sponsor) and failed to inform  the
    applicant of the revocation. She also failed to give him an opportunity
    to vary the application.  There was a  suggestion  in  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal in the present case that  the  respondent  had  acted
    unfairly in failing to give him sufficient warning of  two  changes  in
    the Immigration Rules introduced in April 2011; the  first  stipulating
    that a new course had to be at an A-rated college (para  116(da)),  and
    the second requiring an applicant starting a new course at below degree
    level to achieve Level B1 in the English  Language  Test  in  all  four
    components (para 118(c)(iii)).

11.   The fact that UKBA announced the proposed changes to  the  Immigration
    Rules in March 2011, and that such changes did not come into force  for
    a further 4 weeks, meant that, in general terms, those who stood to  be
    affected by the changes had adequate time to take  appropriate  action.
    In this case, both the appellant and Herbert College  would  have  been
    aware of the proposed changes to the Immigration Rules in  March  2011,
    at least a month in advance.  As to the requirement that the college be
    A-rated, it does not  appear  that  either  the  appellant  or  Herbert
    College ever made any enquires into these  changes  and  the  potential
    effect that they would have on the CAS assignment that  was  made.   On
    the contrary, the appellant did nothing until the very last day of  his
    existing leave, when he applied to extend it.

12.   As to the contention that the appellant did not have  sufficient  time
    to undertake the necessary English Language Test, the evidence is that,
    immediately before his application, the appellant underwent the Pearson
    Test in order  that  he  could  submit  the  results  as  part  of  his
    application, in accordance with the changes in the Rules.   The  timing
    of those  changes  did  not,  therefore,  prevent  the  appellant  from
    attempting to comply with them.  The difficulty for the  appellant  was
    that he failed the necessary English Language  Test.   Unhappily,  that
    was nobody's fault but his own.  In those  circumstances,  having  been
    given reasonable notice of the changes to the Rules and having acted in
    accordance with those changes, the appellant was not treated  unfairly;
    the reasons for the  refusal  of  his  application  come  down  to  the
    particular facts of his case.

13.   We do not say that there could never be a case in which  an  applicant
    endeavouring to meet these  changes  would  not  be  unfairly  treated.
    Fairness is always a matter of fact  and  degree,  as  demonstrated  by
    Patel.  But it seems to us that one of the main  considerations  as  to
    fairness will be the  respondent's  treatment  of  the  institution  in
    question and, in particular, her level of knowledge as  to  whether  or
    not that institution was about to be downgraded.  That was the critical
    factor in Patel; it is not a factor of any relevance here.

14.   For those reasons, this appeal is dismissed.




Signed

Mr Justice Coulson
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
