
ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL | |
|                                                                  |
|SV (Alleging misconduct and suppressing evidence) Iran [2005]     |
|UKAIT 00160                                                       |
|                                   |                             |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at:  Field House          |Determination Promulgated       |
|On  18 October 2005             |17 November 2005                |
|                                |................................|
|                                |.............                   |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr G Warr, Senior Immigration Judge                               |
|Mr J Perkins, Senior Immigration Judge                            |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr G Patel Miles of Hutchinson & Lithgow  Solicitors.


For the respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer.

This case is reported to deal with  the  question  of  the  approach  where
representatives ascribe blame to those previously instructed.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He was born on 12 June 1977 and  so  is
now twenty eight years old.  He appeals the decision of an  Adjudicator,  Mr
John R Aitken, who in a determination promulgated on 6 January 2005  decided
that the  appellant's  notice  of  appeal  to  an  adjudicator  against  the
decision of the respondent that he was not a refugee and that  removing  him
from the United Kingdom was contrary to  his  protected  human  rights,  was
served out of time and that there were no special  circumstances  making  it
unjust not to extend time.

We begin by considering the material before the Adjudicator.  There was  the
usual appeal bundle  prepared  by  the  respondent.   This  shows  that  the
appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 July 2004 and  claimed  asylum
on 11 July 2004.   According  to  the  respondent  the  notice  of  decision
refusing the application for asylum was sent by  recorded  delivery  to  the
appellant's address on 12  August  2004.   The  notice  of  appeal  was  not
received until 3 December 2004.  The  respondent  decided  not  to  use  his
powers to treat it as if it were received in time.

We note from the reasons for refusal letter dated 10 August  2004  that  the
application was refused under paragraphs 336 and 340 of HC 395  because,  in
the opinion of the respondent, the appellant had failed  without  reasonable
explanation to make a prompt and full disclosure of the facts of the  claim.
 There is a bundle from the appellant's present solicitors under a  covering
letter dated 2 December 2004 to the Home Office at Croydon.   This  includes
a copy of the respondent's "Determination of  Asylum  Claim",  a  notice  of
appeal, a statement of additional grounds and form SEF  and  a  copy  letter
from XYZ & Co to the respondent dated 23 July  2004  and  marked  "By  Fax".
According to the form SEF, 23 July 2004 was the last day on which  the  form
SEF could have been  received  in  time.  The  papers  do  not  include  any
evidence that the form was ever sent.

The "Determination of Asylum Claim" is, as was  to  be  expected,  a  purely
formal document confirming that  the  application  had  been  refused.   The
"Additional Grounds" assert that  in  the  event  of  removal  to  Iran  the
appellant risks serious ill treatment because of his membership of the  IKRP
and asserts,  in  general  terms,  that  removal  will  interfere  with  his
protected private and family life.  Although  the  Additional  Grounds  make
serious claims our task is to decide if the  Adjudicator  erred  in  law  in
refusing to extend time for service.

The first four Grounds of Appeal to the Adjudicator  are  in  general  terms
and do not require particular consideration.  Grounds 5, 6  and  7  are  set
out below:
  "5. The appellant's application for  asylum  has  been  refused  on  non-
  compliance grounds.  The appellant contends that his previous  solicitors
  Messrs XYZ & Co lodged the appellant's SEF and  statement  of  additional
  grounds by fax on 23 July 2004 a copy of XYZ & Co's letter  and  the  SEF
  and statement of additional grounds are annexed hereto.
  6   The appellant hereby applies for leave to appeal out of time.
  7   The appellant contends that he instructed his previous solicitors  to
  lodge an appeal but contends that for some reason they did not do so.  He
  had travelled from Gateshead to London to  see  them  in  September  upon
  receipt of his refusal papers.  He sets out  that  they  said  that  they
  would firstly write to the Home Office because the  reasons  for  refusal
  letter did not give any real reasons for refusal of  the  application  on
  his behalf.  He signed appeal papers and they said that they  would  deal
  with the matter on his behalf and lodge the appeal.  The  appellant  then
  received a letter  from  the  NASS  Section  of  the  Home  Office  dated
  15 October 2004 advising him that all appeal rights had  been  exhausted
  and that he no longer qualified  for  NASS  support.   He  spoke  to  his
  solicitor on the phone who advised him that he could do  nothing  further
  for him and that he should see another solicitor.  He then sought  advice
  from Miles Hutchinson & Lithgow about this and was seen  by  them  on  26
  October 2004.  Miles Hutchinson & Lithgow applied for XYZ & Co's file  of
  papers by way of a letter dated 29 October.  A reminder was  sent  on  12
  November and a further reminder was sent on 26 November 2004 and the file
  of papers was actually received on that date.  The person having  conduct
  of the file was out of the office until 1 December 2004 and this has been
  the earliest date upon which the appellant could lodge any appeal."

The form SEF sets out the alleged merits of the appellant's claim.

At all material times  the  conduct  of  this  appeal  was  subject  to  the
Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2003.  Rule 10(1)  provides
that where the notice of appeal is given outside the applicable  time  limit
the appellant must (a) state  in  the  notice  of  appeal  his  reasons  for
failing to give the notice within that period; and (b) attach to the  notice
of appeal any written evidence upon which he  relies  in  support  of  those
reasons.  This Adjudicator then had to consider that material before  making
his decision.

In his determination the Adjudicator noted that it  was  not  disputed  that
the notice of decision was served by  first  class  recorded  delivery  post
sent on 12 August 2004 and the appeal was  not  received  until  3 December
2004.  He then considered the explanation for lateness.  He said:
  "It is that the appellant was represented by XYZ & Co. and they failed to
  file his appeal as he had instructed them to do.  The present solicitors,
  Miles Hutchinson & Lithgow awaited the file on being instructed  and  had
  some difficulty in obtaining it hence further delay.  There is however no
  evidence of the failure alleged from  XYZ  &  Co.  save  the  appellant's
  instructions to his new solicitors ...If the appellant had been misled by
  his former solicitors into thinking they were dealing with his appeal  or
  failed to notify him of the refusal then they would be obliged  to  admit
  this to assist him, there is no such admission and I cannot  accept  that
  the appellant has established that his problem arises from the misconduct
  of his former advisers without an explanation from the firm in  question.
  This is the effect of the case of MM* [2004] 00182 at paragraph 36, where
  it was said that there should always be an attempt to put the failing  of
  a previous firm of solicitors to them for comment.  The  file  from  that
  firm is now in the possession  of  the  appellant's  new  solicitors  but
  nothing is put forward as evidence of the appellant's account."

As the Adjudicator indicated his reasoning  set  out  above  is  based  very
closely on paragraph 36 of  the  Decision  of  the  Tribunal  in  MM*.   For
convenience we set out below that paragraph in its entirety.
  "We add there has been no attempt to put to the previous  solicitors  the
  failings said to be attributable to them;  that  should  always  be  done
  where there is an allegation that  another  firm  of  solicitors  was  at
  fault.  This is all too easy an allegation to make and failure  to  raise
  the issue with those who might rebut it does not assist  the  credibility
  of the allegations."

We remind  ourselves  that  we  have  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
Adjudicator's decision unless it can be shown  to  be  wrong  in  law.   The
decision is criticised in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  IAT.   Ground  1
claims that the  appellant  is  a  Kurdish  Iranian  who  risks  persecution
because of his political activity and this claim has not been considered  on
its merits, if any.  We are very aware of the significance of this  decision
for the appellant, as no  doubt  was  the  Adjudicator.   We  also  reminded
ourselves that, unlike the narrower  grounds  applicable  to  cases  decided
under the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Appeals  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,  the
Adjudicator  had  to  decide  if  "satisfied  that  by  reason  of   special
circumstances it would be unjust" not to extend time.  This would appear  to
permit consideration of the merits of the appeal, if any.  However the  fact
that the appellant is an asylum seeker is not a trump card entitling him  to
overrule the requirements of  the  procedure  rules.   Almost  every  asylum
claim includes an assertion that a person risks very serious  ill  treatment
if returned to his or her country of nationality.  The merits  of  the  case
and the need to give anxious scrutiny in asylum  appeals  are  not  decisive
features of applications of this kind.  If Parliament had intended  that  to
be the law the rules would have been different.

Ground 2 asserts that the Home Office made mistakes in its assertions  about
the service of the Notice of Decision.  According to the grounds the  notice
was not served on 12 August 2004 as the respondent alleges.   It  could  not
have been served then because the decision to remove the appellant was  made
on 19 August 2004 and the tracking document  shows  that  the  document  was
delivered on 31 August 2004.  The grounds say it  is  the  appellant's  case
that he received notice of the refusal on 8 September 2004 but concede  that
the notice of appeal to the Adjudicator was served out  of  time.   We  have
not investigated the precise date  of  service  of  the  notice  of  refusal
because there is  no  reason  to  think  that  that  date  was  in  any  way
influential on the Adjudicator's decision.  It is clear  that  even  if  the
notice of decision was served later than the Respondent says the  notice  of
appeal to the Adjudicator was served very late.

Ground  3  asserts  that  the  service  of  the  notice  of  appeal  of  the
Adjudicator's decision to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  was  delayed  by
reason of Counsel giving incorrect advice.  That  ground  is  irrelevant  to
anything  that  we  have  to  consider.   We  are  not  concerned  with  the
appellant's reasons for being late in his appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal
Tribunal but to the Adjudicator.

The thrust of the case is set out in ground 4 which we set  out  below:  "It
is the appellant's case on this appeal that the  Adjudicator  has  erred  as
follows:
  (i)  in  omitting  properly  to  consider  whether  there  were   special
  circumstances making it unjust not to extend time in this case;
  (ii)      in requiring an admission of professional negligence  from  the
  appellant's former solicitors as proof of their misconduct concerning the
  appeal.  The Adjudicator has erred in treating  the  guidance  in  MM  as
  prescriptive and binding in all cases,  (it  is  guidance  and  does  not
  replace the Rules) and as requiring not just that failings be put to  the
  previous solicitors as per MM, but that such solicitors would be bound to
  admit the said failings and misconduct.  The  Adjudicator's  reasons  for
  declining to extend time are premised on the lack of the  admission,  not
  simply the failure to put allegations to the previously solicitor.
  (iii)     The Adjudicator's reliance on a solicitor's admission  arguably
  does injustice in cases such as this where an appellant has not only been
  poorly served by solicitor's negligence but also solicitor disloyalty and
  dishonesty.
  (iv)      in omitting to consider whether the Home Office refusal on non-
  compliance grounds was itself  erroneous  as,  contrary  to  the  refusal
  letter, there was evidence before the Adjudicator from XYZ & Co. that the
  SEF had been served  in  time.   Such  omission  is  significant  as  the
  evidence appears to discredit the very Home Office decision under appeal.
  (v) in omitting to consider that Home Office calculation  of  the  appeal
  line was manifestly erroneous as the removal decision was dated 19 August
  2004, that is after the refusal letter of the 10 August  2004  and  after
  the 12 August 2004 asserted date of service.
  (vi)      in omitting to consider, as relevant to whether it was just  to
  extend time, the merits of this case and that the appellant had  not  had
  any substantive consideration given to his appeal  and  was  seeking  the
  same."

The point taken at 4(i) above is a "catch  all"  and  requires  no  specific
consideration.  The point taken at 4(iv) is another way of complaining  that
the Adjudicator did not consider the merits of the appeal  but  attempts  to
take the point a step further by claiming that the respondent was  wrong  to
refuse the application for non-compliance under paragraph 340  of  HC  395..
Certainly it is the appellant's case that the application  should  not  have
been refused under paragraph 340 of HC 395 but we  have  not  been  able  to
find any evidence on the papers before us or  before  the  Adjudicator  that
the form SEF was in fact returned on 23 July 2004 as alleged.   There  is  a
form SEF dated 23 July 2005 and a copy letter from XYZ  &  Co  of  the  same
date  marked  "by  fax"  but  no  evidence  that  it  was  ever  sent.   The
"Chronology of  appeal  procedures"  prepared  by  the  appellant's  present
solicitors suggest that the "SEF and statement" were submitted to  the  Home
Office on 15 July 2004 (the statement is dated 15 July 2004)  but  there  is
no evidence that the SEF and statement were served on that date.

If follows that the appellant  has  not  established  that  the  Adjudicator
should have found the refusal under paragraph 340 to be  wrong  in  law  but
even if the refusal of the application were wrong for that reason  it  would
not necessarily amount to a special circumstance making  it  unjust  not  to
extend  time.   Such  an  interpretation  of  "special  circumstance"  would
circumvent the procedure rules.  There is nothing before us  that  persuades
us that the Adjudicator should, as a matter of  law,  have  found  that  any
wrongful refusal under paragraph 340 should have led him to find that  there
were special circumstances here.

It follows that even if the Adjudicator did err in  not  giving  thought  to
the claim that the respondent had wrongly dismissed the application  without
considering its merits he did not err in law in deciding that there were  no
special circumstances that made it unjust not to extend time.  If there  was
an error it was not material in this case.

The point taken at (v) is irrelevant.  The  Adjudicator  was  not  concerned
with about the date of service of the  notice  of  decision  but  about  the
lateness of the notice of appeal.  Point (vi) is  plainly  misconceived.   A
person is not necessarily always entitled  to  consideration  of  an  asylum
application  on  its  merits  if  that  person  does  not  comply  with  its
obligations under the procedure rules.

Points (ii) and (iii) clearly require more  detailed  consideration.   Point
(ii) complains that the Adjudicator premised his decision "on  the  lack  of
the admission, not simply the failure to put  allegations  to  the  previous
solicitor" and the point (iii) complains that  the  "Adjudicator's  reliance
on a solicitor's admission arguably does injustice in  cases  such  as  this
where an appellant has not only been poorly served by  solicitor  negligence
but also solicitor disloyalty  and  dishonesty".   The  problem  with  these
grounds is that they misrepresent the Adjudicator's reasoning.  It is  right
that  the  Adjudicator  said  "I  cannot  accept  that  the  appellant   has
established that his problem  arises  from  the  misconduct  of  his  former
solicitors without an explanation  from  the  firm  in  question"  but  this
comment must be understood in the context of  a  case  where  there  was  no
suggestion that the appellant's former advisers had been asked  to  comment.
If the Adjudicator had said, based on MM*,  that  he  could  not  under  any
circumstances extend time where former solicitors were being blamed but  had
offered no explanation he may well have been  criticised  but  this  is  not
what the Adjudicator said.  Faced with a case where there  were  allegations
of  error  by  a  former  solicitor  but  no  reason  to  suppose  that  any
explanation from that solicitor had been sought,  still  less  refused,  the
Adjudicator was entitled to say that the effect of MM*  was  that  he  could
not accept the criticisms that were being made.  The point of MM*  was  that
Adjudicator's should not accept criticisms made of earlier advisers  without
knowing that  the  criticisms  had  been  put  to  the  advisers  for  their
comments.  The Adjudicator had no reason to think that  such  enquiries  had
been made here.

In short the Adjudicator was faced with an application that  was  agreed  to
have been made out of time.  The only explanation for  lateness  before  the
Adjudicator was an assertion that the appellant had been  let  down  by  his
previous solicitors but there was no suggestion  that  that  allegation  had
been put to the solicitors involved and the Adjudicator disbelieved it.   We
can see no basis  at  all  for  concluding  that  the  Adjudicator  was  not
entitled to reach the decision which he did on the material that was  before
him.  We pressed Ms Patel several times about this point but she  could  not
show any error in the Adjudicator's approach.

This may well have been in the mind of  the  Senior  Immigration  Judge  who
ordered reconsideration because he said "The grounds are  arguable  but  the
appellant will need to satisfy the Tribunal that the  fresh  evidence  (i.e.
that with the application), can properly be admitted, and that it points  to
an error of law on the part of the Adjudicator".

The grounds supporting the application are very critical of the  conduct  of
XYZ & Co.  They refer to a letter from XYZ & Co. dated 1 December  2004  in
which XYZ & Co  claim  that  the  appellant  attended  their  offices  on  9
September 2004 and then withdrew his instructions  and  said  he  wished  to
change solicitors.  This letter is supported  by  an  attendance  note.   At
paragraph 7 of the grounds supporting the application Counsel,  who  settled
the grounds (not Ms Patel), said "the appellant's  solicitors  believed  on
reasonable grounds that the said solicitor's letter  and  "attendance  note"
was (sic) false.  The "attendance note" was inconsistent with  the  rest  of
the file which showed limited work expended on the  appellant's  case".   It
then goes on to develop the suggestion  that  "the  appellant  believed  the
previous solicitors to have fabricated a file note (a  serious  professional
charge) the said documentation created  ethical  and  professional  problems
for the appellant's solicitor."  Point 8 makes the very  serious  allegation
that the appellant's present solicitors did put  to  the  former  solicitors
the allegation of a failure to follow their client's instructions  but  "The
previous solicitor appears to have falsely protected  their  own  reputation
at the appellant's expense.  It follows that the  Adjudicator  inadvertently
erred in assuming  that  the  allegations  were  not  put  to  the  previous
solicitors.  His assumption concerning  solicitors'  professional  rectitude
was misplaced in this instance.  The appellant  has  lost  an  appeal  right
because of those erroneous assumptions."

In  short  the  appellant's  present  solicitors  now  choose  to  tell  the
Appellate Authority that a matter was put to the previous solicitors but  it
produced  an  answer  that  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  appellant's
instructions  and  this  information  was  not  relayed  to  the   Appellate
Authority.

We remind ourselves of the terms of Ground 7 of the  grounds  of  appeal  to
the Adjudicator.  This begins, "The appellant contends  that  he  instructed
his  previous  solicitors  to  lodge  an  appeal...".   It  seems  that  the
appellant's present solicitors, having put an allegation  of  poor  practice
to the previous solicitors, found the answer unhelpful to their  client  and
chose not to draw it to the attention of the Appellate  Authority.   Indeed,
the appellant's  present  solicitors  are  quite  open  about  this  because
paragraph 7 of the grounds of appeal  to  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
says in terms "For the professional and  ethical  reasons,  the  appellant's
solicitors did not include his correspondence in the application  to  extend
time to appeal.  The said letter and attendance  note  conflicted  with  the
appellant's instructions and discredited the appellant's  application."   In
short the appellant's solicitors made the tactical decision to exclude  from
the attention of the Tribunal evidence upon which the  appellant  now  seeks
to rely.

We accept, of course, that there are circumstances in which we can  look  at
fresh evidence because it helps us decide if there  has  been  an  error  of
law.  We have in mind particularly the case of  AG  (Turkey  -  CA  -  Fresh
Evidence) [2005]  UKIAT  00014  and  particularly  paragraph  14  where  the
Tribunal summarised  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  principles  "As  summarised  in
paragraph 23(ii) of E v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49."   One  of  these  is  that
"the fresh evidence could not have been obtained with  reasonable  diligence
for use at the trial".  The circumstances here could not be more  different.
 The fresh evidence was available but deliberately suppressed.  We  find  it
wholly inappropriate that the  appellant  should  now  seek  to  change  his
tactics in the hope that a  different  approach  will  produce  a  different
result.  Indeed  it  seems  to  us  that  these  are  exactly  the  kind  of
circumstances where a  person  should  not  be  entitled  to  produce  fresh
evidence but rather should be bound by the decision that he has made.

We also remind ourselves that the same paragraph of E  said  "as  a  general
rule, the fact that the failure to adduce  the  evidence  was  that  of  the
parties' legal advisers provides no excuse."  There is in our view  much  to
be said for a "cards on the table" approach  in  cases  of  this  sort.   An
applicant seeking the exercise  of  discretion  in  his  favour  should  put
forward all available material.

It is abundantly clear  to  us  that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
Immigration Judge's approach.  He cannot  be  criticised  for  reaching  the
decision that he did on the material that was before him.  The attempt  made
by the appellant's  present  solicitors  to  re-argue  the  issue  with  the
benefit of evidence that was available but  not  given  to  the  Immigration
Judge must fail.

As  indicated  above  we  are  very  aware  that  we  are  dealing  with  an
application by an asylum seeker and we  must  think  long  and  hard  before
invoking procedural mechanisms to prevent  a  decision  being  made  on  the
merits of his case.  For the reasons given we find that is  the  appropriate
response on the facts of this case.

We have reported this case because of what we say about  the  effect  of  MM
and of AG.  The decision in MM does not mean  that  the  Tribunal  will  not
accept that an appellant has been the victim  of  professional  incompetence
unless the advisor concerned accepts the criticism but  it  does  mean  that
the Tribunal will be very reluctant to  accept  that  a  criticism  is  well
founded unless it has been put to the advisor  concerned  and  the  comments
noted.

Following AG the Tribunal will be very slow  to  admit  on  appeal  evidence
that was available at an earlier  hearing  but  knowingly  excluded  by  the
appellant or his advisors.

DECISION
The original Tribunal did not make a material error of law and the original
determination of the appeal shall stand



                                                            Jonathan Perkins
                                                    Senior Immigration Judge
