
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

            MDB and others (Article 12, 1612/68) Italy [2010] UKUT 161 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 2 February 2010                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE S M WARD


                                   Between

                                     MDB
                                    MADB
                                    GRDB

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss L Appiah of Counsel instructed by Charles Annon
& Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer




     i) In  London Borough of Harrow v  Ibrahim  Case  C-310/08  and  Maria
        Teixeira v London Borough of Lambeth  Case  C-480/08  the  European
        Court of Justice ECJ confirmed the  principle  established  in  the
        Baumbast Case C-413/99 [2002] ECR I-7091, namely that in  order  to
        confer on a child a right of residence  Article  12  of  Regulation
        1612/68 requires only that he has lived with his parents or  either
        one of them in a Member State while at least one  of  them  resided
        there as a worker.

    ii) Although simply seeking employment may be  sufficient  to  make  an
        individual a worker in Union law for a limited period,  it  is  not
        enough to engage Article 12, since this provision requires that the
        parent concerned is someone who is or  has  been  employed  in  the
        territory of another Member State.

   iii) If there is a parent who meets the requirement of employment,  then
        his child can acquire an Article 12 right of residence.  But  under
        the Baumbast principle such a right of residence for  a  child  can
        only start to run from the date he or she begins in  education;  it
        cannot commence from the child's date of birth.(The same is true in
        respect of the derived right of residence of a parent carer of such
        a child).

    iv) On Baumbast principles, a child in education can continue  to  have
        an Article 12 right of residence even  if  the  said  parent  later
        ceases to be a worker.

     v)  In a case concerned with an EEA decision  the  tribunal  judge  is
        obliged by s.84(1)(d) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
        Act 2002 to  decide  whether  the  decision  breaches  any  of  the
        appellants' rights under the  Community  Treaties   in  respect  of
        their entry to  or   residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  (emphasis
        added); see also s.109(3). Where the  decision  is   a  refusal  to
        issue a permanent residence card that may necessitate, in the event
        that refusal is found correct, considering  whether  the  appellant
        was entitled nonetheless to an extended  right of residence.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellants are a mother and two sons. The  first  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Argentina.  Her two sons, however, are citizens of Italy and
    therefore EEA nationals.  They were born on 27  November  2001  and  23
    December 2004 respectively.  The first appellant first came to  the  UK
    in May 2002 following her marriage to an Italian citizen, Mr  LDB  (the
    father of her children).  On 26 November 2002 she applied for  and  was
    issued a residence card as the family member of an EEA  national  valid
    from 25 October 2002 until 25  April  2003.   She  was  issued  another
    residence card valid from 23 May 2003 until 23 November 2003.  In  both
    cases the issue was for a six month period only. This was  because  her
    husband was a job seeker, still yet  to  find  employment.   A  further
    application for a residence card was made on 21 November 2003  but  was
    refused as  no  evidence  was  provided  that  her  husband  had  found
    employment or was otherwise exercising Treaty rights.   On  29  January
    2008 she applied again, this time for permanent residence  for  herself
    and her two children.  They were all refused on 24 October 2008.  In  a
    determination notified on 6 March  2009  Immigration  Judge  (IJ)  E.B.
    Grant dismissed their appeals.  Their success in obtaining an order for
    reconsideration has brought the matter before us.

2.    Although when we heard this case we sat as members of the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (AIT), by virtue of  legislative  changes  brought
    into effect on 15 February 2010 we are now required to complete hearing
    it as judges of the  Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber
    (UTIAC).

3.    Before the IJ the appellants pursued  their  case  on  three  grounds.
    First it  was  claimed  that  all  three  were  entitled  to  permanent
    residence under reg 15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter the "2006 EEA Regs") on  the  basis
    of having been resident for five years as the family members of an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights.  Second, it was contended that  even
    if they could not qualify under reg 15(1)(b), they had a separate basis
    to found their claim,  namely  Article  12  of  Regulation  1612/68  as
    interpreted by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in Baumbast Case  C-
    413/99 [2002] ECR I-7091  (the  second  appellant  has  been  attending
    education since December 2006 and the third appellant since 25 February
    2008). Third, it was submitted that  the  decision  to  refuse  them  a
    permanent residence card breached their right to  respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 ECHR.  The IJ rejected  the  first  two
    grounds for the same reason: she was not satisfied that Mr LDB  was  in
    the UK exercising Treaty rights.  She also rejected the Article 8 claim
    because she concluded that the three appellants "can and should  return
    to Argentina together and their family life can continue there".

4.    The grounds for reconsideration challenged her  findings  on  each  of
    these matters.  It was  argued  that  as  Mr  LDB  was  in  receipt  of
    Jobseekers Allowance, which has as a condition of its payment that  the
    claimant shows he is looking  for  work  and  attending  workshops,  he
    should have been treated as a jobseeker for the purposes of  reg  6  of
    the 2006 EEA Regs.  Secondly, issue was taken  with  the  IJ's  summary
    dismissal of the Baumbast point.  Under  Baumbast  principles,  it  was
    said, all that had to be established was that the children of  the  EEA
    national must have installed themselves in a Member  State  during  the
    exercise by their parent or parents of rights of residence as a migrant
    worker - it did not matter that the parent concerned had ceased to be a
    migrant worker subsequently.  As regards Article 8,  it  was  contended
    that the IJ had failed to take sufficient account of the fact that  the
    children had been in the UK for over five years (over  seven  years  in
    the case of  the  second  appellant)  and  that  both  had  had  health
    difficulties.

5.    At the hearing the parties were asked to consider the  effect  of  two
    recent Advocate General (A-G) Opinions in London Borough  of  Harrow  v
    Ibrahim Case C-310/08 (A-G Maz�k) and Maria Teixeira v  London  Borough
    of Lambeth Case C-480/08 (A-G Kokott).

6.    Mr Avery said that he was prepared to accept for the purposes of  this
    appeal that the Opinions of the two Advocates General  represented  the
    correct legal position.

7.    In submissions to us Miss Appiah pointed out that  the  IJ's  apparent
    finding that Mr LDB had never worked was contrary to the  evidence  she
    herself accepted showing he had worked in August 2007.  In any event he
    had clearly been a jobseeker during September 2002  to  November  2003;
    that can have been the only basis  on  which  the  first  (and  second)
    appellant was granted a residence card.  The IJ had  also  accepted  in
    para 21 that Mr LDB was (now) "looking for work".  She  said  that  she
    accepted that the third  appellant  could  not  qualify  for  permanent
    residence because of his age, but  it  would  clearly  be  contrary  to
    Article 8 to allow the first two appellant's appeals but not  his  too.
    The IJ's treatment of Article 8 failed to approach matters relating  to
    the children in line with Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.

 8. Mr Avery sought to defend the IJ's decision. Given that the IJ found Mr
    LDB to be a wholly unreliable witness she was quite entitled, Mr  Avery
    maintained, to find that  he  had  never  exercised  Treaty  rights  by
    working and that at best he was a jobseeker for EEA purposes only for a
    relatively short period. The IJ had weighed all  the  circumstances  of
    the family and had reached defensible conclusions.


Legal Framework

9.    The requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations  relevant  to  this  case
    are as follows:


      'Qualified person'


      6-(1)      In these Regulations, 'qualified person'  means  a  person
             who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-


             (a)  a jobseeker;


             (b)  a worker;


             (c)  a self-employed person;


             (d)  a self-sufficient person; or


             (e)  a student.

        (2) A person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated
             as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-


            (a)  he is temporarily unable to  work  as  the  result  of  an
             illness or accident;


             (b)  he is in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
               having been employed in the United Kingdom, provided that he
               has registered as a jobseeker with the  relevant  employment
               office and-


                  (i)  he was employed for one year or more before  becoming
                  unemployed;


                  (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than  six  months;
                  or


                  (iii)      he can provide  evidence  that  he  is  seeking
                  employment in the United Kingdom and has a genuine chance
                  of being engaged;


             (c)   he  is  involuntarily  unemployed  and  has  embarked  on
                  vocational training; or


             (d)  he  has  voluntarily  ceased  working  and   embarked   on
               vocational  training  that  is  related  to   his   previous
               employment.


         (3)      A person who is no longer  in  self-employment  shall  not
             cease to be treated as a self-employed person for  the  purpose
             of paragraph (1)(c) if he is temporarily unable to  pursue  his
             activity as a self-employed person as the result of an  illness
             or accident.


         (4)       For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), "jobseeker" means  a
             person  who  enters  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to   seek
             employment  and  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is   seeking
             employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.
         ...


        Initial right of residence


        13.-(1)  An EEA national  is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
               Kingdom for a period not exceeding three months beginning on
               the date on which he  is  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom
               provided that he holds a valid  national  identity  card  or
               passport issued by an EEA State.


             (2)  A family member of an EEA national residing in the  United
               Kingdom under paragraph  (1)  who  is  not  himself  an  EEA
               national  is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
               provided that he holds a valid passport.


             (3)  But-


               (a)     this regulation is subject to  regulation  19(3)(b);
                  and


               (b)     an EEA national or his family member who becomes  an
                  unreasonable burden on the social  assistance  system  of
                  the United Kingdom shall  cease  to  have  the  right  to
                  reside under this regulation.


        Extended right of residence


        14.- (1)  A qualified person is entitled to reside  in  the  United
               Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person


                (2) A family member of a qualified person  residing  in  the
               United Kingdom under paragraph (1) or  of  an  EEA  national
               with a permanent right of residence under regulation  15  is
               entitled to reside in the United Kingdom for so long  as  he
               remains the family member of the  qualified  person  or  EEA
               national.

              (3)...


           (4)   A right to reside under this regulation is in addition  to
               any right a person may have to reside in the United  Kingdom
               under regulation 13 or 15.


           (5)     But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b).


        Permanent right of residence


        15.-(1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
               the United Kingdom permanently-


               (a)     an EEA  national  who  has  resided  in  the  United
                  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
                  continuous period of five years;


               (b)     a family member  of  an  EEA  national  who  is  not
                  himself an EEA national but who has resided in the United
                  Kingdom with the EEA national in  accordance  with  these
                  Regulations for a continuous period of five years;


               (c)     a worker or  self-employed  person  who  has  ceased
                  activity;


               (d)     the family  member  of  a  worker  or  self-employed
                  person who has ceased activity;


               (e)     a person who was the family member of  a  worker  or
                  self-employed person where-


               (i)     the worker or self-employed person has died;


               (ii)    the  family  member  resided  with  him  immediately
                    before his death; and


               (iii)   the  worker  or  self-employed  person  had  resided
                    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least the  two
                    years immediately before his death or the death was  the
                    result  of  an  accident  at  work  or  an  occupational
                    disease;

           (f)   a person who-


               (i)     has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                    these Regulations for a continuous period of five years;
                    and


               (ii)    was, at the end of that period, a family member  who
                    has retained the right of residence.

        (2)      Once acquired, the right of permanent residence under this
           regulation shall be lost only through absence  from  the  United
           Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

        3) But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b)."


10.   Relevant provisions of Directive 2004/38  (the  "Citizens  Directive")
are as follows:


         "Article 7


         Right of residence for more than three months


         1. All Union citizens shall have the  right  of  residence  on  the
         territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three
         months if they:


         (a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host Member  State;
         or


         ...


          (d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen who
         satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or (c).


         2. The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall  extend
         to family  members  who  are  not  nationals  of  a  Member  State,
         accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member State,
         provided that such Union citizen satisfies the conditions  referred
         to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).


         ...


         Article 10


          Issue of residence cards


         1. The right of residence of family members of a Union citizen  who
         are not nationals of a Member  State  shall  be  evidenced  by  the
         issuing of a document called 'Residence card of a family member  of
         a Union citizen' no later than six months from the  date  on  which
         they submit the application. A certificate of application  for  the
         residence card shall be issued immediately.


         2. ...


         ...


         Article 16


         General rule for Union citizens and their family members


         1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous  period
         of five years in the host Member State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent residence there. This right shall not be subject  to  the
         conditions provided for in Chapter III.


         2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also  to  family  members  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the Union
         citizen in the host Member State for a continuous  period  of  five
         years.


         ...


         Article 18


         Acquisition of the right of permanent residence by  certain  family
         members who are not nationals of a Member State


         Without prejudice to Article 17, the  family  members  of  a  Union
         citizen to whom Articles 12(2) and 13(2)  apply,  who  satisfy  the
         conditions laid down therein, shall acquire the right of  permanent
         residence after residing legally for a period of  five  consecutive
         years in the host Member State."


11.   Also to be noted here are recitals 11 and 17:


         "(11) The fundamental and personal right of  residence  in  another
         Member State is conferred directly on Union citizens by the  Treaty
         and is not dependent upon  their  having  fulfilled  administrative
         procedures.


         (17) Enjoyment of permanent residence by Union  citizens  who  have
         chosen  to  settle  long  term  in  the  host  Member  State  would
         strengthen the feeling of Union citizenship and is a key element in
         promoting  social  cohesion,  which  is  one  of  the   fundamental
         objectives of the Union. A  right  of  permanent  residence  should
         therefore be laid down for all  Union  citizens  and  their  family
         members who have resided in the host  Member  State  in  compliance
         with the conditions laid down in this Directive during a continuous
         period of five years  without  becoming  subject  to  an  expulsion
         measure."


12.    Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 which states:

         "The children of a national of a Member State who is  or  has  been
         employed in the territory of another Member State shall be admitted
         to that State's general educational apprenticeship  and  vocational
         training courses under the same conditions as the nationals of that
         State, if such children are residing in its territory Member States
         shall encourage all efforts to enable such children to attend these
         courses under the best possible conditions."


13.   Article 12 is  relevant  because  it  is  one  of  the  provisions  of
    Community (now Union) law on free movement of persons  left  unrepealed
    by the Citizens Directive. Being a mandatory provision of a  Regulation
    also means it has  direct  effect  in  UK  law  without  any  need  for
    transposition.

14.   Also relevant are the ECJ judgments dealing with this  type  of  case.
    In Brown v The Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland  (Free  Movement  of
    Persons) [1988] EUECJ R-197/86 the  Court  found  that  a  child  of  a
    national of one Member State, who resides in the territory  of  another
    Member State may not claim the benefit of Article 12 of  Regulation  No
    1612/68, where his parent, who no longer resides  in  the  host  State,
    last resided there as a worker before the birth of the child (para 31).
    In Landesamt f�r   Ausildungsforderung Nordrhein-Westfalen v Lubor Gaal
    [1995] EUECJ C-7/94 the Court reiterated that the effect of  Brown  was
    that "Article 12 of the Regulation  must  be  interpreted  as  granting
    rights only to a child who has lived with his parents or either one  of
    them in a Member State at a time when  at  least  one  of  his  parents
    resided there as a worker" (para 27); but went on to clarify  that  the
    Article did not exclude those still in education,  even  if  they  were
    already 21 years of age or older and were no longer dependants of their
    parents.


15.   In Baumbast the ECJ stated at para 63:

        "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to  the  first  question
        must be that children of a citizen of the European Union  who  have
        installed themselves in a Member State during the exercise by their
        parent of rights of residence as a migrant worker  in  that  Member
        State are entitled to reside  there  in  order  to  attend  general
        educational courses there, pursuant to Article 12 of Regulation No.
        1612/68. The fact that the parents of the children  concerned  have
        meanwhile divorced, the fact that only one parent is a  citizen  of
        the Union and that parent has ceased to be a migrant worker in  the
        host Member State and the fact that the children are not themselves
        citizens of the Union are irrelevant in this regard."


16.   As further developed by the ECJ in Ibrahim at paras 40-42 and 50:

      "40.  The right derived by children from Article 12 of  Regulation  No
             1612/68 is also not dependent on  the  right  of  residence  of
             their parents in the host Member State.  It is settled case-law
             that Article 12 requires only that the child has lived with his
             parents or either one of them in a Member State while at  least
             one of them resided there as a worker (Case 197/86 Brown [1988]
             ECR 3205, paragraph 30, and Gaal, paragraph 27).

       41.  To accept that children of former migrant workers  can  continue
             their education in the host Member State although their parents
             no longer reside there is equivalent to allowing them  a  right
             of residence which is independent of that  conferred  on  their
             parents, such a right being based on Article 12.

       42.  Article 12 of Regulation No 1612/68 must  therefore  be  applied
             independently of       the provisions  of  European  Union  law
             which govern the conditions of exercise of the right to  reside
             in another Member State.  That independence of Article 12  from
             Article 10 of that regulation formed the basis of the judgments
             of the Court referred to in paragraphs  29  to  31  above,  and
             cannot but subsist in relation to the provisions  of  Directive
             2004/38.
           ...


       43.   It follows that the children of a national of a  Member  State
           who works or has     worked in the host  Member  State  and  the
           parent who is their primary carer can claim a right of residence
           in the  latter  State  on  the  sole  basis  of  Article  12  of
           Regulation No 1612/68, without being  required  to  satisfy  the
           conditions laid down in Directive 2004/38."


Our Assessment

17.   We should first of all note that as the second  and  third  appellants
    are citizens of Italy, they are  EEA  nationals  in  their  own  right.
    However, the issue in their case is not whether they are  permitted  to
    be in the UK but whether they are entitled to EEA rights of  residence,
    and, most immediately, whether they are entitled to permanent residence
    cards. The arguments before the IJ identified two separate heads  under
    which  the  appellants  considered  they  should  succeed:   Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations and Article 12 of Regulation  1612/68.
    Under reg 15(1)(b), all three appellants were entitled  to  succeed  as
    family members if they could show that  Mr  LDB  has  been  in  the  UK
    exercising Treaty rights for at least the  past  5  years  continuously
    (both children were over 5 years old at the date of the hearing  before
    the IJ). Under Article 12, the second and  third  appellants  stood  to
    succeed if they could show they  had  a  derived  right  through  their
    father's  employment  activities.   Under   Article   12,   the   first
    appellant's position was entirely dependent on that of her children. If
    either or both of them could derive a right  of  residence  from  their
    father (Mr LDB) under this Article, then she  must  be  entitled  to  a
    right of residence in line, as their principal carer: see Ibrahim, para
    43.

18.   Mr Avery conceded before  us  that  the  respective  Advocate  General
    Opinions in Ibrahim and Teixeira should  be  taken  as  expressing  the
    correct legal position.  We now, of course, have to hand the subsequent
    judgments of the ECJ in both these cases, which are binding  on  us  in
    any event.  As they very much echo the Advocate  General  Opinions,  we
    saw no necessity to seek further submissions on their implications  for
    these appeals.

19.   It is not in dispute that the  second  appellant  has  been  attending
    education since December 2006 and the third appellant since 25 February
    2008.

20.   We consider that to some extent the  IJ  misunderstood  the  potential
    bearing that Baumbast principles had on the appellants' appeals. The IJ
    considered that in Baumbast the ECJ made eligibility under  Article  12
    dependent on the EEA national  parent  continuing  to  exercise  Treaty
    rights.  As our earlier citation makes clear, that is  incorrect.   For
    the Court the only requirement, so far as child is concerned is that he
    was living with his parents or one of them during the time one of  them
    resided there as a worker: see the ECJ in Ibrahim at paras 40-42, cited
    above at para 16.

21.   It remains to consider whether the  IJ's  error  was  a  material  one
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appellants' appeals.  In  order
    to decide that it is first of all necessary to consider in  more  depth
    the position of the adult EEA national on  whom  all  three  appellants
    depend for their contention that they  possess  a  right  of  permanent
    residence under Community law, namely Mr LDB.


Mr LDB's position

22.   The treatment by the IJ of the position of Mr LDB in relation  to  EEA
    rights is crucial to the outcome of the appellants' appeals.

23.   Mr Avery sought to submit that the IJ was right to regard  Mr  LDB  as
    an EEA national who had never exercised Treaty rights: in 2002/3 he had
    only ever been a jobseeker and in 2007 his period of work - ten  weeks'
    work for an eight hour a week job - was, he said, not  enough  for  EEA
    purposes. Nor did the evidence concerning his current position indicate
    he had become a worker more recently, since he  had  been  looking  for
    work well beyond any period that  could  reasonably  be  considered  to
    justify continuing to treat him as a worker for EEA purposes and he was
    found by the IJ not to genuinely intend finding  a  job.   Miss  Appiah
    contended that  Mr  LDB  should  have  been  considered  to  have  been
    exercising  Treaty  rights  during  2002/2003,  June-August  2007   and
    currently.

24.   Clearly the parties were right to see these three periods as the  only
    potentially relevant ones. There has been  no  challenge  to  the  IJ's
    adverse credibility findings and there was no satisfactory evidence  to
    show that Mr LDB was potentially exercising Treaty rights except during
    (or in the case of the June-August 2007 period, arising out  of)  these
    three periods of time.

25.   In our opinion, the IJ erred in her assessment of  Mr  LDB's  position
    in 2002/2003.

26.   So far as concerns September 2002/November 2003, it is not in  dispute
    that during this period he was issued with a residence permit (for  two
    periods of six months each) on the basis that he was a jobseeker.  That
    made him a qualified person within the meaning of  the  relevant  legal
    provision in force at the time - reg 5(a) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) 2000 Regulations (SI 2000/2326). Since  reg  3(1)(a)  of
    the same Regulations defined "worker"  as having the same meaning as in
    Article 39 of the EC Treaty, Mr LDB was entitled during this period  to
    be considered as a worker (the same definition is given in reg  4(1)(a)
    of the 2006 EEA Regulations), notwithstanding that he was only  looking
    for work. On principles established by the ECJ in  Antonissen  C-292/89
    [1991] ECR I-745, his jobseeking during that  time  was  sufficient  to
    qualify him as a worker for Community law purposes. Indeed, as Mr Avery
    eventually  conceded  during  discussions,  the  respondent  could  not
    lawfully have issued Mr LDB and his family with EEA residence documents
    in 2002/2003 unless satisfied he was a qualified person  who  exercised
    Treaty  rights  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Order)
    Regulations 2000. The respondent's own refusal decision of  24  October
    2008 confirms such documents were issued in view of an acceptance  that
    he was, during that earlier period, a qualified  person.   (Of  course,
    under the 2006 EEA Regulations "jobseeker" is now a  separate  category
    of qualified person, but that is only relevant in  this  case  when  it
    comes to considering Mr LDB's post-30 April 2006 position).

27.    Accordingly the IJ should have  found  that  Mr  LDB  was  exercising
    Treaty rights during this period.

28.   So far as concerns June-August 2007, however (by  which  time  Mr  LDB
    fell under the 2006 EEA Regulations), we consider it was open to the IJ
    to find that his employment for that  period,  a  period  of  10  weeks
    during which his hours of work  were  only  eight  hours  a  week,  was
    insufficient for him to qualify as a worker for the purposes of EU free
    movement law. Of course the term "worker" in Union law is to be given a
    very wide interpretation and a person might be  a  worker  even  if  he
    works only part-time and for a limited period. In  Levin  53/81  [1982]
    ECR 1035 a chambermaid who was employed for only 30 hours  a  week  and
    earned less than the minimum wage was held to be a worker. However, the
    tests applied in  Levin  and  subsequent  case  law  include  that  the
    services performed must be genuine and effective and more than marginal
    and ancillary. In addition, as noted by Arden LJ   in  Barry  v  London
    Borough of Southwark [2008] EWCA Civ 1440 and by the Tribunal in  IP  &
    Others (A2 national-worker  authorisation-exemptions)  Bulgaria  [2009]
    UKAIT 00042 (both cases citing Nini-Orasche Case C-413/01), in deciding
    whether a person is a worker it is also necessary to consider  all  the
    circumstances relating to the nature of the activities in question  and
    the employment relationship at issue, including  the  duration  of  the
    employment and prior employment history. The more  recent  judgment  of
    the ECJ in Vatsouras Case C-2/08 and Koupatantze Case 3/08, 4 June 2009
    (2009) EUECJ C-22/08 have  confirmed  these  principles.  As  noted  by
    Advocate General Colomber in his  Opinion  in  Vatsouras  at  para  63:
    "Anyone wishing to join the workforce has better  credentials  if  they
    have carried out responsibilities with a wage earning  aspect  of  some
    kind in the past."

29.   Bearing in mind that Mr LDB's period of employment in  2007  was  only
    for 10 weeks, that his  hours  were  only  8  hours  a  week  and  that
    previously he had been unemployed since his arrival in the UK in  2002,
    we do not consider that the IJ erred in evaluating the  facts  relating
    to his 2007 employment as she did.

30.   As regards Mr LDB's situation at the date of hearing  before  the  IJ,
    it was accepted that he was in  receipt  of  Jobseekers  Allowance  and
    there was a letter dated  3  December  2008  (whose  accuracy  was  not
    disputed by Mr Avery) from the Project Manager of Acton Training Centre
    stating that Mr LDB had  been  attending  training  full-time  for  six
    months. Notwithstanding this  the  IJ  found  his  claim  to  be  still
    actively interested in finding a job not credible.  As  noted  earlier,
    the IJ's findings of fact have not been challenged and they were in any
    event, we consider, findings that were open to her.  Whilst  Antonissen
    established that a job seeker could qualify as a worker, the case  also
    made clear that the period of time allowed for the job-seeker  to  find
    employment was not indefinite and that the applicant had to  show  that
    he was someone who was genuinely seeking employment. The  IJ's  finding
    that Mr LDB was not genuinely intent upon employment  entitled  her  to
    conclude that Mr LDB was not a worker or a jobseeker.

31.   Even though our analysis of Mr LDB's position has revealed two  errors
    on the part of the IJ, it remains to decide whether they were material.



32.   Having clarified Mr LDB's position (and also identified error  in  the
    IJ's treatment of his position) we can now turn to consider that of the
    three appellants.

Regulation 15(1)(b)

33.   Mr Avery conceded that for  the  purposes  of  these  appeals  we  can
    proceed on the basis that by virtue of Sch 1 to the 2006 EEA  Regs  any
    relevant  periods  of  residence  accrued  by  the   appellants   under
    Community/Union law  can  count  towards  establishing  the  qualifying
    periods of residence for the  purposes  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations
    (which include of course 15(1)(b)).

34.   We do not consider that the IJ materially erred  in  law  in  deciding
    that reg 15(1)(b) did not avail the appellants, not, at least,  on  the
    basis of Mr LDB's periods as a qualified  person.   As  already  noted,
    there has been no challenge raised  to  the  IJ's  adverse  credibility
    findings in respect of Mr LDB, so  at  best  the  documentary  evidence
    before the IJ established that he was exercising Treaty  rights  for  a
    limited period - totalling around 12 months  in  2002/2003  -  and  not
    thereafter. His period of relevant qualifying activity fell drastically
    short of the requisite five years.

   Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68

35.   It remains, however, to consider whether the IJ  materially  erred  in
    law in rejecting the appellants' claims  that  they  were  entitled  to
    permanent residence by another route, based directly on Article  12  of
    Regulation 1612/68.

 36.  Before  venturing  further,  we  need  to  acknowledge  one  point  of
    difficulty we have in describing the precise foundation for a claim  to
    a right to permanent residence based on residence accrued under Article
    12. Article 16(1) of the Directive states that Union citizens who  have
    resided legally for a continuous period of 5 years in the  host  Member
    State shall have the right of permanent  residence  there  and  Article
    16(2) states that family members who are  not  nationals  of  a  Member
    State and have legally resided with  the  Union  citizen  in  the  host
    Member State for a continuous period of 5 years shall also have a right
    of permanent residence. On one reading, a person who is entitled  to  a
    right of residence under Community/Union law by virtue of Article 12 of
    Regulation 1612/68 cannot properly accrue a period of  legal  residence
    under Article 16 of  the  Citizens  Directive  because  such  residence
    depends on there having been earlier  residence  (under  Article  7(2))
    during which the Union citizen has been exercising Treaty rights  under
    the Directive. On another view, it would be  incongruous  if  residence
    that is legal under directly effective  provisions  of  Community/Union
    law (Article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 is one of the directly  effective
    provisions of this Regulation left unrepealed by the new Directive: see
    Article 38(1)) could not  be  considered  legal  residence  within  the
    meaning of Article 16 of the Citizens Directive.

37.   There is a similar, perhaps  even  more  acute,  difficulty  when  one
    turns to the position under the  2006  EEA  Regulations.  The  decision
    appealed against was one to refuse to issue a permanent residence  card
    under these Regulations. Even applying the doctrine of indirect effect,
    it is difficult to see how these Regulations could be read as including
    Article 12-derived residence  within  Article  15(1)(b).  Both  Article
    15(a) and (b) requires residence "in accordance with these Regulations"
    for a continuous period of 5 years.  In  our  judgment,  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations were not intended to cover  and  do  not  cover  rights  of
    residence derived directly from Article 12.

38.   In the end  we  do  not  need  to  resolve  these  related  points  of
    difficulty because: (i) Mr Avery conceded  that  such  residence  could
    qualify for reg 15 purposes; and (ii) even if such residence could  not
    qualify for reg 15 purposes, the respondent would still be bound  under
    directly effective Union law to recognise that Article 12 beneficiaries
    had an established right  of  residence.  Under  either  head,  if  the
    appellants were able to show they  had  Article  12-derived  rights  of
    residence for the requisite period, then their appeals  would  have  to
    succeed since the decisions appealed against would have to be  seen  as
    not being in accordance with the law.

39.   Thus all turns on Article 12 having application.  Given  our  findings
    on Mr LDB's working history (confirming the IJ's finding  that  neither
    his 2007 employment nor his current activities amounted to the exercise
    of Treaty rights but rejecting her finding that he was  not  exercising
    Treaty rights in 2002/2003), the appellants'  cases  depend  wholly  on
    their being able  to  show  that  his  exercise  of  Treaty  rights  in
    2002/2003 had the effect of engaging their Article 12  rights.  But  in
    2002/2003, albeit he was entitled on the basis of his status as a  job-
    seeker to qualify as a worker for that period, he had never  worked  in
    the United Kingdom. Can a child in education (and a  parent  who  cares
    for the child in turn) derive Article 12 rights from a  parent  who  in
    the relevant period has exercised Treaty rights  (as  a  jobseeker  cum
    worker) but has  never  worked?  Miss  Appiah  submitted  that  even  a
    jobseeker parent was covered by Article  12;  Mr  Avery  submitted  the
    opposite. Although we have not  found  this  matter  entirely  free  of
    doubt, we are satisfied that Miss  Appiah's  interpretation  cannot  be
    right. We recognise that neither in  Brown,  Gaal,  Baumbast,  Ibrahim,
    Teixeira or any other case does the Court address the question  whether
    "employed" within the meaning of Article 12 can  include  a  jobseeker.
    However, the text of Article 12 specifies that the child  beneficiaries
    must be "children of a national of a Member State who is  or  has  been
    employed in the territory of another Member  State"  [emphasis  added].
    The definition of worker is not confined to, and is not to  be  equated
    with, the latter. Further, as noted by Lord  Hope  in  Zalewska  [2008]
    UKHL 67 at para 27, the structure  of  this  Regulation  differentiates
    between "Title I"  measures  relating  to  eligibility  for  employment
    (Articles 1-6) and "Title II"  measures  dealing  with  Employment  and
    equality of treatment (Articles 7-9). Title  III  deals  with  Workers'
    Families. Jobseekers are dealt with in Title I, not Title II or III. We
    accept, for reason outlined earlier, that a jobseeker can qualify as  a
    worker and that in this sense Mr LDB was a worker during the  specified
    periods during 2002/2003. Even so, we do not think that Article 12  was
    intended to cover persons who  have  never  worked  (as  was  Mr  LDB's
    position at the relevant time), even applying (as we must) a  purposive
    construction. Its  rationale  is  that  the  children  of  someone  who
    decides, having moved to another Member  State,  to  establish  himself
    there, should be able to enjoy the same rights  as  nationals  of  that
    state and to become  integrated  there  if  they  wished  without  that
    interrupting the children's education. But simply  seeking  employment,
    whilst it may be enough to make a person a  worker  in  Community/Union
    law for a limited period, does not seem  to  us  enough  to  make  that
    person someone who has installed himself for Article 12 purposes.

40.   In short, the facts of the appellants' case  fail  to  engage  Article
    12. Hence the IJ's error in relation to Mr LDB's 2002/2003 period as  a
    job seeker was not material.

         The appellants' grounds for reconsideration  also  maintained  that
    the IJ had materially erred in law in  failing  to  allow  the  appeals
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  However,  we  do  not  consider  that  in
    reaching her conclusions on this matter that the IJ erred in law. There
    were a number of factors counting in the appellants' favour. The  first
    appellant was married to an EEA national and their  two  children  were
    EEA nationals in  their  own  right  (being  citizens  of  Italy).  The
    respondent had granted Mr LDB a  residence  permit  in  2002/2003.  The
    first and second appellants had been in the UK for over 7 years and the
    third appellant had been born here in December  2004.  The  second  and
    third appellants had been attending school in  the  UK  since  December
    2006 and February 2008  respectively.  However,  there  were  weightier
    factors counting against the appellants. Since November 2003,  none  of
    the appellants has had a right  of  residence.  The  second  and  third
    appellants  were  of  a  tender  and  adaptable  age.   Of   particular
    importance, their father, Mr LDB, has been in the UK for over  8  years
    yet during that period has only ever worked for a  10  week  period  in
    June-August 2007.Over a considerable period, therefore, the family  had
    been a burden on public funds.  On the IJ's findings of fact the  first
    appellant did not face any particular difficulties  back  in  Argentina
    and it would not be unreasonable  to  expect  the  family  to  relocate
    there. More significantly, there was absolutely nothing in the evidence
    to suggest that it would be unreasonable to expect the family  to  live
    in Italy, a  country  of  which  Mr  LDB  and  his  two  children  were
    nationals. Although the IJ did not specifically  refer  to  Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39, her assessment of the position  of  the  family  showed
    proper regard to the position of the family as a whole.

41.   Accordingly the IJ did not materially err in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appeals on both EEA and Article 8 grounds. Her  decision  thus  stands.



42.   Given our above conclusions it is  not  necessary  to  us  to  address
    other submissions made by the parties concerning the nature of  Article
    12-derived rights. However, given that there are  likely  to  be  other
    cases arising relying on Article 12, it  is  appropriate  to  give  our
    observations on two particular matters.

The issue of when an Article 12 right commences

43. The first observation  concerns  the  question  of  from  what  date  an
    Article 12 right  commences.  Miss  Appiah's  submission  was  that  in
    assessing qualifying periods of residence under Article 12 the relevant
    date should be seen as the child's date of birth. Had we found  Article
    12 to be engaged that submission would have helped her contention  that
    the second and third appellants (and  the  first  appellant,  as  their
    carer) had completed the requisite period  of  residence  in  order  to
    qualify for a permanent residence card. However, in  our  view,  whilst
    Article 12 does create directly effective free movement rights, it does
    so only from the time that the child concerned enters education.  That,
    it seems to us, is the underlying premise behind the ECJ  judgments  in
    Baumbast, Teixeira and  Ibrahim.  Whilst  we  can  accept  that  it  is
    consistent with the language of Article 12 to consider that a child  of
    a migrant worker born in  the  UK  can  be  seen  as  someone  who  has
    installed himself in a Member State from the date of his birth, Article
    12 amounts to "the right of access  to  education"  (Teixeira  Case  C-
    480/08, para 45). It cannot  arise  from  the  moment  of  the  child's
    arrival or birth or installation in a Member State as  such,  but  only
    from the commencement of the child's education. Thus in  our  judgment,
    whilst we would have accepted (under this hypothesis) that  the  second
    and third appellants may have installed themselves  from  the  date  of
    their birth, each could only have begun  to  exercise  his  Article  12
    rights from the date he entered education. It is  that  date  which  is
    decisive for Baumbast purposes. This would have meant that even had  we
    found Article 12 to be engaged the earliest  time  that  any  of  these
    three appellants could have begun accruing residence was December 2006,
    when the second appellant began in education. That would not have  been
    long enough for any of them to qualify for permanent residence.

Rights of residence

44.   Our second observation concerns the relevance of Article 12  not  just
    for the issue of permanent  residence  (under  reg  15)  but  also  for
    extended residence (under reg 14). Where the decision is  a refusal  to
    issue a permanent residence card that may  necessitate,  in  the  event
    that refusal is found correct, considering whether  the  appellant  was
    entitled nonetheless to an extended  right  of  residence.  If  we  had
    accepted Article 12 had been engaged in  these  appeals  and  that  the
    second (and first appellant, as his carer)  began  accruing  qualifying
    residence from December 2006, then even though that would not have been
    enough to qualify them for permanent residence, it would have  sufficed
    to qualify them  (and  the  third  appellant  who  had  also  commenced
    education) for an extended right of residence under reg 14(2).  Had  we
    found ourselves in this situation we would then have had to  allow  the
    appeals, not because the appellants had a right of permanent residence,
    but because the respondent should  nevertheless  have  recognised  that
    they had an extended right of residence under reg 14. Section  84(1)(d)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires a tribunal
    judge to decide whether the decision breached any  of  the  appellants'
    rights under the Community Treaties (which include Regulation  1612/68)
    in respect of their entry to or for residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (emphasis added); see also s109(3). Regulation 14 implements Article  7
    of the Citizens Directive.

45.   In summary, our conclusion is that even though the  IJ  erred  in  her
    treatment of Mr LDB's status as a worker in 2002/2003, that  error  was
    not material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal.  Given  that  the
    appellants' Article 8 grounds of appeal were  also  properly  rejected,
    the IJ was  entitled  to  dismiss  their  appeals.  Her  decision  must
    therefore stand.


Signed



Senior Immigration Judge Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
