

|ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION TRIBUNAL                                   |
|                                                                  |
|                                   |                             |
|LB (Medical treatment of "finite" duration) Bangladesh [2005]     |
|UKAIT00175                                                        |
|                                                                  |
|THE IMMIGRATION ACTS                                              |
|                                                                  |
|Heard at: Field House                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2005                     |                         |
|                                        |12 December 2005         |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Before                                                            |
|                                                                  |
|Mr N H Goldstein-Senior Immigration Judge                         |
|Mrs W Jordan                                                      |
|Mr P Bompass                                                      |
|Between                                                           |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|Appellant                                                         |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                        |
|                           |        |                            |
|                           |        |Respondent                  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Carroll, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms V Chapman, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is a reconsideration of the determination promulgated  on  26  May
    2005 following a hearing on 19 May 2005, of Mr C C Wright,  Immigration
    Judge, who dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  20  January
    2004 to refuse her application for variation of her leave to remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   The  Immigration  Judge  dismissed   both   the
    Appellant's immigration  appeal  and  her  human  rights  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.    Ms  Catriona   Jarvis,   Senior   Immigration   Judge,   in   ordering
    reconsideration on 23 June 2005 considered that the grounds  of  appeal
    disclosed arguable material errors of law.  Ms Jarvis continued:

             "It is arguable that the Immigration Judge  erred  in  law  in
             determining that the Appellant's course of  medical  treatment
             was not finite.  It is arguable  that  the  Immigration  Judge
             misdirected himself as to the meaning and application  of  the
             requirement that the proposed course of treatment be of finite
             duration.  It is further submitted that the Immigration  Judge
             took into consideration and gave weight to an irrelevant  fact
             in calculating the duration of the proposed stay".


3.   At the outset of the hearing we reminded the  parties  that  the  issue
    for the Tribunal was whether the  Immigration  Judge  made  a  material
    error of law, this being an error of law that affected his decision  on
    the appeal: Rule 31(2)(5) of the 2005 Procedure  Rules.   The  Tribunal
    further drew to their attention the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    R [2005] EWCA Civ 982, in which it was held, inter  alia,  that  before
    the Tribunal could set aside a decision of an Immigration Judge on  the
    grounds of error of law, it had to be satisfied that the correction  of
    the error would have made a material difference to the outcome,  or  to
    the fairness of the proceedings.  Further the finding might only be set
    aside for error of  law  on  the  grounds  of  perversity,  if  it  was
    irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was
    wholly unsupported by the evidence.

4.    In  R  their  Lordships  pointed  out  that   an   Immigration   Judge
    determination ought not to be overturned for want  of  reasons,  unless
    the Tribunal could not understand the  thought  processes  employed  to
    make material findings.

5.   The Appellant sought an extension to her leave to remain as  a  visitor
    for private medical treatment.  The Appellant suffers  from  rheumatoid
    polyarthritis.

6.   The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 20 July 2000 and  was
    subsequently granted a number of extensions to enable her  to  continue
    her treatment in the United Kingdom.

7.   The Appellant submitted a further application to extend her leave as  a
    visitor which was refused on 20 January 2004 because the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the Appellant could  produce  satisfactory
    evidence, from a  registered  medical  practitioner,  who  held  a  NHS
    Consultant post that the medical  condition  required  consultation  or
    treatment or satisfactory arrangements for private medical consultation
    or treatment and as to its likely duration.

8.     It is  clear  from  the  papers  before  us  and  in  particular  the
    Immigration Judge's determination, that it was  accepted  by  both  the
    Immigration Judge and the Respondent that the  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom as a genuine medical visitor.

9.   As set out in the grounds of appeal, it was the  Appellant's  intention
    to return to Bangladesh once her treatment was completed and  this  was
    never a matter in issue in this case.  Indeed the unchallenged evidence
    demonstrated that the Appellant was from  a  very  wealthy  Bangladeshi
    family who wholly supported her in the United Kingdom and that all  her
    immediate family were resident in Bangladesh except for one of her sons
    who was here on a temporary student visa.

  10. It is apparent that the  Immigration  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
      Appellant had provided satisfactory evidence of her medical  condition
      from a consideration of the correspondence  from  Dr  B  K  Sharma,  a
      Consultant Rheumatologist who was treating the Appellant.   Dr  Sharma
      was indeed  listed  on  the  General  Medical  Council's  Register  of
      Specialists.


  11. The Immigration Judge however rejected the appeal on  the  basis  that
      the Appellant's proposed course  of  treatment  was  not  of  "finite"
      duration.  At paragraph 20 of this determination the Immigration Judge
      stated as follows:

             "Applying the dictionary definition to the  word  'finite',  I
             have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  at  the  date  of  the
             immigration  decision,  the  Appellant  was   bound   by   the
             requirements of paragraph 51(iii) and was unable to show  that
             her proposed course of treatment was of finite duration.   The
             post-decision evidence reinforces my view that, in effect, the
             Appellant's application is an indefinite one".


12.  It is noteworthy  that  at  paragraph  21  of  his  determination,  the
    Immigration Judge briefly summarised the submissions of the  Presenting
    Officer before him in relation to which no  mention  was  made  of  any
    issue raised on this particular matter.

13.  The Immigration Judge continued at paragraph 22 as follows:

             "While the Appellant's medical condition has been recorded  in
             the correspondence and I am satisfied that there is a  serious
             probability that it is an accurate description of her  present
             condition, the totality of the evidence  weighed  against  the
             word 'finite' satisfied me that the Respondent's decision  was
             at the date of the immigration  decision  in  complete  accord
             with the mandatory provisions of paragraph 51(iii) of  HC  395
             and of the other relevant Immigration Rules and I dismiss  the
             immigration appeal".


14   We begin by observing that at no stage of  the  determination  did  the
    Immigration  Judge  explain  what  he  meant  by  "the  other  relevant
    Immigration  Rules"  in  that  it  is  apparent  that  insofar  as  the
    Appellant's immigration appeal was concerned, he dismissed it  for  the
    sole reason that the Appellant was unable to show in  accord  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 51(iii) that her proposed course of treatment
    was of finite duration.  Indeed  it  is  apparent  that  in  all  other
    respects the Immigration Judge was satisfied that the requirements  for
    leave to enter as a visitor for private medical treatment were met.

15.  With respect to the Immigration Judge, he was  incorrect  in  referring
    to paragraph 51(iii) as a mandatory provision  in  the  sense  that  it
    requires the applicant to:
             ".. show, if required to do so, that any  proposed  course  of
             treatment is of finite duration".  (Our emphasis).


16.  Under the sub-heading "Findings", the Immigration Judge considered  the
    correspondence with Dr Sharma, beginning with what is described by  him
    as his "second" letter dated 6 January 2004. It was in  response  to  a
    Home Office letter where Dr Sharma  stated  that  the  Appellant  would
    require staying on her  medication  in  the  'long  term'  and  it  was
    impossible to give 'a probable end  date'  of  the  treatment.   In  Dr
    Sharma's third letter dated 13 April 2005, some fifteen  months  later,
    he estimated that the course of treatment needed to be  continued  'for
    another five years' and a fourth letter dated 18 May 2005  recorded  Dr
    Sharma's difficulty in being categorical about the  Appellant's  future
    prognosis.

17.  It would however be as well for the sake of  completeness  to  set  out
    below Dr Sharma's third and fourth letters.  The  letter  of  13  April
    2005 stated as follows:

             "I hereby confirm that (the  Appellant)  is  still  undergoing
             treatment for her long-standing rheumatoid polyarthritis under
             my care.  Over the past four years she has shown a great  deal
             of improvement.


             "The approximate annual cost of treatment is �5,000.  All dues
             are being adequately met.


             "Currently  she   is   taking   Methotrexate   Sulphasalazine,
             Prednisolone, Folic  Acid,  Alendronate  Tramacet.   She  does
             require her blood counts to be monitored regularly  while  she
             is on the above medications.


             "This course of treatment needs to be  continued  for  another
             five years.  According to her doctor in Bangladesh this course
             of treatment and proper supervision for this kind  of  therapy
             is not available in Bangladesh.  This therefore means that she
             needs to stay in the UK whilst  she  is  undergoing  treatment
             with the above medication".


18.  Dr Sharma's fourth letter dated 18 May 2005 stated as follows:

             "This is in response to further queries raised:


                  (1)  (The Appellant) has got  to  have  her  blood  counts
                      monitored every two months and the results need to be
                      checked  by  a  medical  practitioner,  so  that  any
                      appropriate action can be taken if so demanded.   The
                      consultation with  the  Consultant  should  be  every
                      three months but it can be more frequent depending on
                      her condition.


                  (2)  It is very difficult  to  be  absolutely  categorical
                      about the prognosis.  So far her  response  has  been
                      satisfactory and if she continues to respond in  this
                      fashion, one can expect a satisfactory  prognosis  in
                      the  future.   Rheumatoid  arthritis  is  a   chronic
                      illness and is subject to ups and downs from time  to
                      time.  This is why she needs to be under  supervision
                      of her specialist.


                  (3)  In addition to the above, I would like  to  add  that
                      she is at the moment taking Alendronate  which  is  a
                      biphosphonate being given to her in order to preserve
                      her bones against the possibility of adverse  effects
                      of corticosteroids that she is  taking  systemically.
                      I have been given to understand that this  medication
                      is not available in Bangladesh.


             "One can expect that after a period of say five years, if  her
             rheumatoid disease remained satisfactorily  in  remission  she
             may   not   need   corticosteroids,    namely    Prednisolone.
             Consequently she may not need supplementation with drugs  like
             Alendronate.  I am also given to  understand  that  the  other
             medications   which   she   is    on    namely    Methotrexate
             Sulphasalazine, Prednisolone and Folic Acid etc are  available
             in Bangladesh".


19.  The Immigration  Judge  then  considered  the  IDI  Guidance  Notes  at
    paragraph 18 as follows:

             "18. The IDI Guidance Notes record that  a  common-sense  view
             should be taken of the meaning of 'finite'  and  that  a  long
             period of treatment, although not precisely  defined,  may  be
             acceptable.  The  dictionary  definition  of  finite  is  'not
             infinite, limited, bounded ...'."


20.  We pause there to point out,  that  with  respect  to  the  Immigration
    Judge, in quoting from the IDI Guidance Notes, he omitted to mention  a
    key passage and for this purpose as regards duration  of  treatment  we
    set out below in full Annexe F of the policy document  at  paragraph  2
    that states as follows:

             "A common-sense view should be taken of the meaning  'finite'.
             A long period of treatment, although  not  precisely  defined,
             may be acceptable, providing that there is a  clear  need  for
             the patient to be here  to  receive  that  treatment  and  has
             sufficient funds".  (Our emphasis).


21.  We were indeed persuaded in this regard  by  Ms  Carroll's  submission,
    that accordingly, the meaning of "finite" insofar  as  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions on the matter were concerned, was  before  the
    Immigration Judge, namely that even if a long period of treatment could
    not be precisely defined, it was likely that  it  would  be  acceptable
    provided that the case worker was  satisfied  on  the  evidence  before
    him/her that there was a clear need for the patient to be in the United
    Kingdom to receive that treatment and  had  sufficient  funds  for  the
    purpose.

22.   We would agree with Ms Carroll that there was  no  suggestion  on  the
    part of the Respondent or indeed within the findings of the Immigration
    Judge, that the  Appellant  did  not  have  sufficient  funds  for  the
    purposes of her treatment and it was apparent from the various  reports
    and letters from her Consultant Dr Sharma, that there was a clear  need
    for the Appellant to remain here in order to receive that treatment.

 23.  Dr Sharma pointed out  in  his  letter  of  13  April  2005  that  the
    Appellant's course of treatment needed to be continued for another five
    years and that according to the Appellant's doctor in Bangladesh such a
    course of treatment and the proper supervision for the kind of  therapy
    required, was not available in Bangladesh.  Dr Sharma  continued  "This
    therefore means that she  needs  to  stay  in  the  UK  whilst  she  is
    undergoing treatment with the above medication".

  24.  In Dr Sharma's subsequent letter of 18 May  2005,  he  repeated  that
    one could expect after a period of "say five years" if the  Appellant's
    condition remained satisfactory in remission, that she might  not  need
    some of the medication presently prescribed, but in such  circumstances
    other medication that the Appellant received would on his understanding
    be available in Bangladesh.

25.  Dr Sharma's reference to  the  Appellant's  doctor  in  Bangladesh  was
    reflected in the letter before the Immigration Judge  from  Dr  Halimur
    Rhashid dated 15 December 2003 in which he confirmed inter  alia,  that
    it was:

             ".. not possible in Bangladesh to have an appropriate  medical
             care  and  better  treatment  for  the   disease,   rheumatoid
             arthritis, (that) (the Appellant) is suffering  from.   Before
             going to (the) UK for treatment, (the Appellant) was under the
             treatment of several  doctors  for  (a)  couple  of  years  in
             Bangladesh; but within a short time because  of  the  lack  of
             appropriate medical care her condition became very  bad.   All
             of her major joints had  been  affected  and  because  of  her
             serious pain in her joints, movement has also  been  seriously
             affected.  Because of her quickly deteriorating condition,  we
             have advised her to go to (the) UK for better and  appropriate
             treatment".


26.  Indeed there was before the  Immigration  Judge  a  detailed  statement
    from the Appellant's  daughter  signed  and  dated  13  May  2005.   At
    paragraph 7 she claimed that there was no Consultant or  Rheumatologist
    available  in  Bangladesh  and  as   a   consequence   and   upon   the
    recommendation of the Appellant's doctors in Bangladesh, her mother had
    decided to take treatment under  a  Consultant  Rheumatologist  in  the
    United Kingdom.

27.  We have concluded that the Immigration Judge  indeed  materially  erred
    in law.

28. He misdirected  himself  as  to  the  meaning  and  application  of  the
    requirement that the  proposed  course  of  treatment  be  of  "finite"
    duration.

29.    It is apparent to us that the  appropriate  IDI  Guidance  Notes,  to
    which the Immigration Judge partially referred  under  the  heading  of
    "Findings", provided the answer to the approach  of  Home  Office  case
    workers to this issue.  We would agree with Ms Carroll that bearing  in
    mind the evidence before the Immigration Judge he should have concluded
    that the Appellant met the necessary criteria.

  30.   In this regard it was noteworthy that Ms Chapman  in  responding  to
    Ms Carroll's submissions sought to suggest  that  in  terms  of  "clear
    need" it should not be the case that someone who could  afford  to  pay
    for her medical treatment could as a consequence be  entitled  to  some
    form of guarantee as to a right to stay in the United  Kingdom.   There
    must be a clear need to stay here.  Significantly, Ms Chapman  did  not
    however challenge Ms Carroll's interpretation, with which we agree,  as
    to the relevant IDI Guidance Notes that  a  long  period  of  treatment
    although not precisely defined might be acceptable provided  there  was
    evidence of "a clear need" for the patient to be here to  receive  that
    treatment and that she had sufficient funds.  Most fairly,  Ms  Chapman
    accepted that the issue before the Immigration Judge was whether or not
    the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules.

31.  Ms Chapman's suggestion that the Appellant might have misled  the  Home
    Office about her condition was with respect to her  misguided,  as  the
    final letter from Dr Sharma  was  clearly  written  with  the  view  to
    further clarifying his estimate and prognosis  as  it  related  to  the
    Appellant's  medical  condition  and  as  set  out  in   his   previous
    correspondence.

 32.  There is no doubt, as is apparent from Dr Sharma's last  two  letters,
    that the evidence showed,  that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  a
    difficult disease to treat and it is clear that the medication provided
    by her Consultant included various methods of drug treatment such  that
    the Appellant had now stabilised upon a group of drugs.

33.  We were not persuaded by Ms Chapman's earlier opening  remarks,  (which
    in fairness to her began by acknowledging "a degree  of  sympathy  with
    the Appellant"), that the Appellant had asked for eighteen months leave
    to remain initially  and  then  another  twelve  months  and  this  was
    followed by four extensions over a period  of  three-and-a-half  years.
    In acknowledging that  the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  a  chronic
    condition, Ms Chapman maintained  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she could not obtain in Bangladesh the medication  she
    received in this country.  However  the  medical  evidence  before  the
    Immigration Judge suggested the contrary.
34.   Further, it appeared to us that the submission amounted in  effect  to
    a contention that "enough was enough" but that of course  with  respect
    to Ms Chapman and indeed the  Immigration  Judge,  is  not  a  relevant
    requirement of the Rules.  Visitors may be admitted for private medical
    treatment  at  their  own  expense  provided  they  meet  the  ordinary
    requirements of the visitor Rule and must be  able  to  show  that  any
    proposed course of treatment is of  finite  duration  and  that  it  is
    intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of it.

  35. As pointed out in  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and  Practice  Sixth
    Edition paragraph 9.22, to which we referred the parties, there  is  no
    requirement to be precise about the length of any  proposed  course  of
    treatment.  The requirement is  to  produce  evidence  of  the  medical
    condition,  the  arrangements  for  consultation  and  treatment,   the
    estimated costs, the likely duration and the availability of sufficient
    funds in the United Kingdom to meet the  costs.   Further  the  IDI  at
    Annexe F paragraph 2 demonstrates that the availability of treatment in
    the applicant's own country is not a ground for refusing admission.

36.  An extension of stay for a medical visit can only  be  granted  if  the
    requirements for entry continue to be met and evidence must be produced
    from a registered medical practitioner, who  holds  an  NHS  Consultant
    post, of satisfactory arrangements for private medical consultation  or
    treatment and its likely duration.  If that treatment has already begun
    its progress (see paragraph 54(ii) of HC 395)  patients  must  also  be
    able to show that they have met any  costs  and  expenses  incurred  in
    relation to their treatment in the UK out of the resources available to
    them and that they  have  sufficient  funds  available  in  the  United
    Kingdom to meet further likely costs and intend to do so.

37.. Indeed Macdonald's, at paragraph 9.23 points out that, that:

             "If sufficient  evidence  of  these  matters  is  produced  an
             extension of stay will normally be given". (Paragraph 55(vi)).


38.  It was indeed on the basis of these requirements that, as  should  have
    been apparent to the Immigration Judge, earlier extensions of stay were
    granted by the Respondent.  We would agree with  Ms  Carroll  that  the
    Immigration Judge erred in misdirecting himself concerning the contents
    of Dr Sharma's medical report.   Dr  Sharma  did  not  state  that  the
    treatment was of  uncertain  duration  but  that  the  Appellant  would
    require to  stay  on  medication  "long  term"  and  he  could  not  be
    categorical about the Appellant's future prognosis and that her  course
    of treatment needed "to be continued for another five years".

 39.  There was in our view and for the above  reasons,  a  failure  by  the
    Immigration Judge to give proper consideration to the guidance on  Home
    Office policy in this matter and for that  purpose  the  proposed  five
    years' duration as indicated by  Dr  Sharma  was  "finite"  within  the
    meaning of that policy.

40.  We have therefore concluded that in this regard the  Immigration  Judge
    clearly materially erred in law in his  interpretation  of  the  proper
    application of the relevant Rule. Further that his understanding of the
    policy of the Home Office in such matters was not  only  misguided  but
    consequently played a material role in  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    immigration appeal.

41.  Ms Chapman notably took no issue within her submissions to paragraph  6
    of the grounds of appeal which contended  that  the  Immigration  Judge
    further erred in giving inappropriate consideration and  weight  to  an
    irrelevant fact in calculating the duration of stay  if  the  Appellant
    was successful when determining whether her treatment here was  finite.
    At paragraph 10 of his determination the Immigration Judge stated:

             "The evidence is that she has applied for extension  of  leave
             to remain for another five years until the summer of 2010,  in
             consequence of which the Appellant will face the  prospect  of
             remaining in the UK for private medical treatment  for  up  to
             ten years".


42.  As the grounds rightly contended and as further argued before us by  Ms
    Carroll, neither the Immigration Rules nor Home  Office  policy  placed
    relevance on the duration of the term of stay  of  a  medical  visitor.
    The Appellant's intention to leave the United Kingdom  after  treatment
    was completed was never in issue.  It follows that the term of stay  as
    the grounds put it "the unspoken consequence of  that  stay  (that  the
    Appellant might then qualify for  settlement  by  reason  of  long-term
    residence) was irrelevant  to  the  issue  whether  her  treatment  was
    finite".

43.  We would agree with Ms Carroll, who submitted that  there  was  nothing
    in the IDI Guidance Notes to say that simply because the Appellant  had
    the benefit of the extensions of stay for treatment in  the  past  this
    should somehow prejudice future renewals.

   44.  It  follows  that  in  this  regard,  we  have  concluded  that  the
    Immigration Judge reached conclusions unsupported by the  evidence  and
    therefore irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.

   45.  In effect the Immigration Judge had before him  a  clear  definition
    within the IDI Guidance Notes as to the meaning  of  "finite"  for  the
    purposes of the application of the  Rules  by  case  workers  and  went
    outside of them.  His consideration of whether the Appellant  might  be
    applying for further extensions of leave could result in her  remaining
    in the United Kingdom for up  to  ten  years,  was  not  based  on  the
    evidence or the requirements of the Rules but upon his own speculation.
     It was, upon our reading of the determination as a whole,  and  as  Ms
    Carroll rightly submitted, indicative that such a matter  was  "in  the
    forefront of his mind, yet of no relevance and outside his remit".

46.  Bearing in mind the issue before us was whether the grounds upon  which
    reconsideration of this appeal was granted disclosed material errors of
    law on the Immigration Judge's part, we were able to inform the parties
     that we had concluded, (for reasons  that  we  now  disclose  in  this
    determination), that such material errors of law were indeed disclosed.



47.  The parties' representatives informed  us  that  in  the  circumstances
    they did not propose to make further representations and  were  content
    that the Tribunal should make a fresh decision  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence already before them.

48.  For the reasons given by the Tribunal identifying the  material  errors
    of law in the Immigration Judge's approach to this appeal  we  are  for
    like reasons satisfied  that  the  following  decision  be  accordingly
    substituted.

DECISION

49.  The immigration appeal is allowed.

50.  As no issue was raised within  the  grounds  or  indeed  the  order  of
    reconsideration in relation to the Appellant's human rights appeal,  it
    follows that her human rights appeal remains dismissed.




                      N H GOLDSTEIN

      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE
Approved for electronic distribution.                 06.12.05
