
[pic]
ar

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

  R (on the application of DS) v Birmingham City Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT
                                 00175 (IAC)


In the Matter of an Application for Judicial Review



|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 March 2012 and 18 May 2012              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                       The Queen on the application of

                                     DS

                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                           BIRMINGHAM CITY COUNCIL

                                                                   Defendant


Representation:

For the Claimant:         No appearance
For the Defendant:       Mr Harrop-Griffiths, instructed by  London  Borough
    of Birmingham
                                        (on 27 March 2012)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The claimant is a national of Afghanistan who arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 19 November 2008 and claimed asylum shortly  after  arrival.
    He was referred at that stage to the London Borough of Croydon for  his
    age to be assessed as the Secretary of State did not believe his  claim
    that he was born on  1  January  1993.    In  an  assessment  dated  15
    December 2008, later found not to be Merton complaint, it was concluded
    that the claimant was over the age of 18.

2.    Subsequently, the claimant's age was re-assessed by the defendant  and
    his date of birth was estimated to be 1 January 1990.  He  applied  for
    permission to challenge that finding in judicial review proceedings.

3.    Permission was granted on 23 April 2010 and on 20 May 2010  directions
    were made for a fact-finding hearing.  Various orders were made in  the
    High Court and the application was transferred to the Upper Tribunal on
    7 June 2011.  The claimant is no longer  represented  by  his  previous
    representatives. Inquiries have been made both with the  defendant  and
    with the Children's Advisor at the Refugee  Council  but  neither  have
    been able to make contact with him.  Following the hearing on 27  March
    2012 it came to light that the notice of hearing had not been  sent  to
    the claimant as his whereabouts were unknown.  The  notice  of  hearing
    for 18 May 2012 has been properly served at the claimant's  last  known
    address. He has not  attended  this  hearing  and  there  has  been  no
    response from him.

4.    In summary, the claimant is no longer represented and there  has  been
    no contact between him and either the defendant or the Refugee Council.
     Attempts to locate him have failed.  He has not notified the  Tribunal
    of any change of address.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that  he  is  no
    longer interested in pursuing this application. His  challenge  to  the
    defendant's assessment of his date of birth as 1 January 1990  has  not
    been pursued and I accept this assessment as his most  likely  date  of
    birth. I dismiss his application for judicial review.

Decision

    1.       This application for judicial review is dismissed
    2.      The claimant is to pay the defendant's costs  on  the  standard
         basis to be subject to a detailed assessment if not agreed, not  to
         be enforced without further permission of the Tribunal 2.  2.  Ihgf
         Higfh


    3.      There is to be a detailed assessment of the claimant's publicly
         funded costs.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
