
[pic]

           In the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


R (on the application of  Onowu)  v  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) (extension of time for  appealing:  principles)  IJR  [2016]
UKUT 00185 (IAC)


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

Heard on
22 January 2016
                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of
                                Clever Onowu
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

            First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                                  Respondent


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                            Interested Party

Representation:

Mr A Gilbert, instructed by Wilsons LLP Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by Government Legal Department appeared on behalf of
the Interested Party.

The Respondent was not represented


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

In considering whether to exercise discretion to  extend  time  for  seeking
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  both  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and the Upper Tribunal should apply the approach commended by the  Court  of
Appeal in Mitchell v News Group Newspapers Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 1537;  Denton
v White [2014] EWCA Civ 906 and R (Hysaj) v Secretary of State for the  Home
Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1663.

Introduction


 1. This is an application for judicial review of a decision made by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers, sent to the parties  on  17  March  2015,
    extending time for the respondent to apply for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan allowing the  applicant's  appeal,  on  human  rights  grounds,
    against the respondent's decision to remove him to Italy  -  permission
    having been granted by the Vice President on the 14 September 2015.


 2.  Judge  Canavan's  decision  allowing  the   applicant's   appeal   was
    promulgated on 15 January 2015. The Secretary  of  State's  application
    for permission to appeal against this decision was not lodged with  the
    First-tier Tribunal until 25 February 2015, significantly beyond the 14-
    day timeframe permitted for doing so  pursuant  r.33  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 (SI 2014 No. 2604) ("the 2014 FtT Rules").


 3. Recognising that this was so the Secretary  of  State  applied  in  the
    following terms for an extension of time:


         "1.  The decision under challenge was dated  15  January  2015  and
             this application for appeal is out  of  time.   The  appellant
             accordingly seeks  an  extension  of  time  for  bringing  her
             appeal.  She contends that it is in  the  public  interest  to
             allow the appeal to be heard for the following reasons:


             (i)  the limited consideration given by the learned  judge  to
                  the considerable case law and evidence relating  to  Italy
                  Dublin II cases amounts to a clear error of law,  set  out
                  below.  It is in the interests of justice for  this  error
                  to be corrected on appeal;


             (ii) the case concerns complex issues of fact  and  law  which
                  are shortly to be heard in  the  Administrative  Court  in
                  judicial review proceedings (CO/7110/2013 and other linked
                  proceedings), in a substantive hearing  listed  for  three
                  days between 24th and 26th  March  2015.   It  is  in  the
                  interests of justice that  Mr  Onuwo's  application  under
                  Article 3, which involves identical issues (and has indeed
                  been cited in the Administrative  Court  proceedings),  be
                  determined  consistently  with  the   cases   before   the
                  Administrative Court;


         2.   The appellant regrets the lateness of this application but the
             decision was not considered until  it  came  to  the  Treasury
             Solicitor's  attention  after  it  was  included  within   the
             extensive further evidence served  by  the  claimants  in  the
             Administrative Court cases late on Friday 13th February  2015,
             as the Treasury Solicitors do  not  usually  have  conduct  of
             First-tier Tribunal  proceedings.   The  appellant  has  acted
             promptly since observing that decision."


 4. In the decision under challenge, Judge Cruthers granted  the  Secretary
    of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, stating:


         "1.  By a decision  promulgated  on  14  January  2015,  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Canavan allowed this appeal.   Having  assessed
             the evidence,  the  judge  concluded  that:  "the  appellant's
             removal to Italy in  consequence  of  the  decision  would  be
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 as being
             incompatible with his rights under Article 3 of  the  European
             Convention" (her paragraph 40).


         2.   The application for permission to appeal is out  of  time  (by
             about 25  days).   But  having  regard  to  the  interests  of
             justice, I have decided to admit this application.


         3.   To a  degree,  the  grounds  on  which  the  respondent  seeks
             permission to appeal might be seen as only a quarrel with  the
             judge's assessment of the evidence before her.  But overall, I
             think it is just arguable - as per  the  grounds  -  that  the
             judge erred in her assessment -  and  in  her  application  of
             relevant case law - such as EM (Eritrea) [2014]  UKSC  12  and
             Tarakhel v Switzerland (Application No.29217/12 -  4  November
             2014).


         4.   As suggested at paragraph 4 of the  respondent's  grounds,  it
             may be sensible if this  matter  is  now  'stayed  behind  the
             substantive Administrative Court cases  to  be  heard  between
             24th and 26th March 2015'.


         5.   There may also be relevance in the decided case of: R (on  the
             application of Weldegaber v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department (Dublin Returns -  Italy)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00070
             (IAC), circulated on 12 February 2015."


The 2014 FtT Rules


 5. The relevant provisions of the 2014 FtT Rules read as follows:


         "Overriding objective and parties' obligation to cooperate with the
         Tribunal:

         2.-(1)   The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
               Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly
           (2)    Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes -
                (a)    dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate
                    to the importance of the case,  the  complexity  of  the
                    issues, the anticipated costs and the resources  of  the
                    parties and of the Tribunal;
                (b)      avoiding   unnecessary   formality   and    seeking
                    flexibility in the proceedings;
                (c)    ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
                    able to participate fully in the proceedings;
                (d)     using  any  special  expertise   of   the   Tribunal
                    effectively; and
                (e)    avoiding delay, so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
                    consideration of the issues.
           (3)    The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the overriding
                objective when it -
                (a)    exercises any power under these Rules; or
                (b)    interprets any rule or practice direction... .


         Case management powers


         4.-(1)  Subject to the provisions of the 2007  Act  and  any  other
                enactment, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure...
           ...
           (3)    In particular, and without restricting the general powers
                in paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may -
                (a)    extend or shorten the time  for  complying  with  any
                    rule, practice direction or direction;
           ...


         Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal


         33.-(1)   A  party  seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
                Tribunal must make a written application to the Tribunal for
                permission to appeal.
           (2)    Subject to paragraph (3), an application under  paragraph
                (1) must be provided to the Tribunal so that it is  received
                no later than 14 days after the  date  on  which  the  party
                making the application was provided with written reasons for
                the decision.
           ...


         Tribunal's consideration of an application for permission to appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal


         34.-(1)  ...
           (2)    If the Tribunal decides not to review  the  decision,  or
                reviews the decision  and  decides  to  take  no  action  in
                relation to the decision, or part of it, the  Tribunal  must
                consider whether to give permission to appeal in relation to
                the decision or that part of it.
           (3)    The Tribunal must send a record of its  decision  to  the
                parties as soon as practicable.
           (4)    If the Tribunal refuses permission it must send with  the
                record of its decision -
                (a)    a statement with its reasons for such refusal; and
                (b)    notification with a right to make an  application  to
                    the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal...".


Discussion


Applicable Legal Principles


 6. It is initially necessary to identify the correct approach  a  Tribunal
    should take when faced with an application for an extension of time  to
    apply for permission to appeal. We found it  somewhat  surprising  that
    neither party's skeleton argument drew  our  attention  to  a  trio  of
    recent decisions from the Court  of  Appeal,  which  are  of  undoubted
    significance to the issue we are required to consider.


 7.  Both  parties,  in  their   respective   written   cases,   took   the
    aforementioned matter as having been settled by the decision of a three
    judge Deputy Presidential panel of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal
    in BO and Others (Extension of time for appealing) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT
    00035, the headnote to which reads:


         "...If a notice of appeal is given out of time, the first  task  in
         deciding whether to extend time is  to  see  whether  there  is  an
         explanation (or series of explanations) that cover  the  delay.  If
         there is, it and all other relevant factors, such as  the  strength
         of the grounds, the consequences of the decision, the length of the
         delay and any relevant conduct by the Respondent are  to  be  taken
         into  account  in  deciding  whether  "by  reason  of  the  special
         circumstances it would be unjust not to extend time"


 8. Reference in BO to "by reason of the special circumstances it would  be
    unjust not to extend time" is to a feature of the procedure rules  then
    in force governing the AIT. We pause here briefly to observe that  this
    procedural regime was replaced by the 2014  FtT  Rules  on  20  October
    2014, in relation to appeals in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Upper
    Tribunal (IAC) came into existence on 15 February 2010 and has its  own
    procedural regime, governed by The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 209 No. 2698) ("the 2008 UT Rules").


 9. Unlike the procedural regime considered in BO,  neither  the  2014  FtT
    Rules nor the 2008 UT Rules identify a specific 'test'  to  be  applied
    when considering applications for an extension  of  time  to  lodge  an
    application for permission to appeal, but rather such consideration  is
    aligned with the overriding objective of the Rules to deal  with  cases
    'fairly and justly'.


10. Turning to the first in time of the three recent and relevant decisions
    of the Court of Appeal,  Mitchell v News Group  Newspapers  Ltd  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1537, [2014] 1 WLR 795. The Court of Appeal therein  upheld  a
    Master's decision that a claimant who had served  a  costs  budget  six
    days late required relief from sanctions  under  CPR  3.9.  before  the
    costs budget could be considered by the court.


11. The decision in Mitchell was followed shortly  thereafter  by  that  of
    Denton v White [2014] EWCA Civ 906, [2014] 1 WLR 3926, which  concerned
    three conjoined appeals each of which involved the application  of  CPR
    3.9. to cases where the claimants  had  failed  to  comply  with  court
    orders or rules. For the purposes of our decision it is only  necessary
    to draw attention the following passages:


         "[35]  [The  court]  will  take  account  of  the  seriousness  and
         significance of the breach (which has been assessed  at  the  first
         stage) and any explanation (which has been considered at the second
         stage). The more serious or significant the breach the less  likely
         it is that relief will be granted unless there is good  reason  for
         it. Where there is good reason for a serious or significant breach,
         relief is likely to be granted. Where the breach is not serious  or
         significant, relief is also likely to be granted.


         [36] But  it  is  always  necessary  to  have  regard  to  all  the
         circumstances of the case. The factors that are relevant will  vary
         from case to  case.  As  has  been  pointed  out  in  some  of  the
         authorities that have followed  Mitchell,  the  promptness  of  the
         application will be a relevant circumstance to be  weighed  in  the
         balance along with all the circumstances. Likewise, other  past  or
         current breaches of the rules, practice directions and court orders
         by the parties may  also  be  taken  into  account  as  a  relevant
         circumstance."


12. The decisions in Mitchell and Denton had as  their  contextual  setting
    private law civil proceedings. In R (Hysaj) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1663 the court concluded  that  the
    same approach should be adopted in the public law arena;  acknowledging
    when doing so that a public law claim may raise  important  issues  for
    the public at large and that this should be a factor taken into account
    when considering whether there is a good reason for extending time.


13. At [93] of its decision in Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court  drew  together  the
    learning from Mitchell, Denton and Hysaj, in these terms:

         "...a Judge should address an application for relief from  sanction
         in three stages, as follows:
         i) The first stage is to identify and  assess  the  seriousness  or
         significance of the failure to comply with  the  rules.  The  focus
         should be on whether the breach has been serious or significant. If
         a judge concludes that a breach is not serious or significant, then
         relief will usually be granted and it will usually  be  unnecessary
         to spend much time on the second or third stages; but if the  judge
         decides that the breach is serious or significant, then the  second
         and third stages assume greater importance.
         ii) The second stage is to consider why the failure occurred,  that
         is to say whether there is a good reason for it. It was  stated  in
         Mitchell (at para. [41]) that if there is a  good  reason  for  the
         default, the court will be likely to decide that relief  should  be
         granted. The important point made in Denton was that if there is  a
         serious or significant breach and no good reason  for  the  breach,
         this  does  not  mean  that  the  application   for   relief   will
         automatically fail. It is necessary in every case to  move  to  the
         third stage.
         iii) The third stage is to evaluate all the  circumstances  of  the
         case,  so  as  to  enable  the  court  to  deal  justly  with   the
         application. The two factors specifically mentioned in CPR rule 3.9
         are of particular importance and should be given particular weight.
         They are (a) the need for litigation to  be  conducted  efficiently
         and at proportionate cost, and (b) the need to  enforce  compliance
         with rules, practice directions and court orders..."

14. The following further guidance can also be distilled from the  judgment
    in Hysaj:


      i) There is no  merit  in  constructing  a  special  rule  for  public
         authorities; they have a responsibility to adhere  to  the  court's
         rules even if their resources are  'stretched  to  breaking  point'
         [42];


     ii) A solicitor or public body having too much work will  rarely  be  a
         good reason for failing to comply with the rules [42];


    iii) Particular care needs to taken in  appeals  concerning  claims  for
         asylum and humanitarian protection to ensure that appeals  are  not
         frustrated by a failure  by  a  party's  legal  representatives  to
         comply  with  time  limits.  The  nature  of  the  proceedings  and
         identification of responsibility for a failure are  matters  to  be
         considered at the third stage  of the process [42];


     iv) The inability to pay for legal representation cannot be regarded as
         providing a good reason for delay [43];


      v) In most cases the merits of the appeal will have little to do  with
         whether it is appropriate to grant an extension of  time.  Only  in
         those cases where the court can see without much investigation that
         the grounds of appeal are either very strong or very weak will  the
         merits have a significant part to play when it comes  to  balancing
         the various factors that have to be considered at  stage  three  of
         the process [46].


15. In ZP (South Africa) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1273, the court also confirmed that the  fact  that  an
    appellant had applied for legal aid and was awaiting  a  decision  from
    the Legal Aid Agency should not normally be regarded as providing  good
    reason for a delay.


16. Although none of the decisions cited above were made  in  the  specific
    context that presents itself in the instant matter, we can see no  good
    reason, and none was advanced by the parties, as to  why  the  approach
    commended in Mitchell, Denton and Hysaj should not equally  be  applied
    to the First-tier Tribunal's, and Upper Tribunal's, consideration of an
    application for an extension of time to apply for permission to  appeal
    (assuming of course that the notice of appeal was actually filed out of
    time). Nothing in the approach rehearsed above is in discord  with  the
    overriding objective of either the 2014 FtT Rules or 2008 UT  Rules  to
    deal with cases justly and fairly; indeed,  it  is  the  aspiration  of
    achievement of these very objectives which was identified by the  court
    in Denton, at [24], as underpinning the rationale for the  third  stage
    of the process of consideration.


17. Although it should go without saying, we  nevertheless  emphasise  that
    insofar as there is any difference in the  approach  commended  by  the
    Tribunal in BO, and that identified by the Court of Appeal in Mitchell,
    Denton and Hysaj, then it is the latter which should be followed.


18. Having identified the relevant principles that are to be  applied  when
    consideration is being given to an application for an extension of time
    for applying for permission to appeal, we turn to a further  'issue  of
    principle' raised by Mr Malik.


19. In reliance on the absence of a positive obligation  in  the  2014  FtT
    Rules  to  provide  reasons  for  granting  permission  to  appeal,  in
    particular in rule  34  thereof  which  enshrines  the  requirement  to
    provide a statement of  written  reasons  for  refusing  permission  to
    appeal, Mr Malik submits that no such obligation exists.


20. We have no hesitation in rejecting  this  submission.  The  duty  on  a
    judicial decision-maker to provide reasons is firmly entrenched in  the
    common law (see for example  the  decision  of  Griffiths  LJ  to  this
    effect, now of over 30 years vintage, in Eagil Trust Co Ltd  v  Pigott-
    Brown [1985] 2 All ER 119).


21. A more apt example of this duty in action can be seen from an  analysis
    of the Court of Appeal's decision in R  (Tofik)  v  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal [2003] EWCA Civ 1138.


22. Tofik sought judicial review of a refusal  by  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal to grant an extension of  time  to  apply  for  permission  to
    appeal against a decision of an immigration adjudicator.  He  contended
    that the Immigration Appeal Tribunal was  obliged  (by  virtue  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 2000) to give  reasons
    for refusing to extend time. Sedley LJ  (giving  the  judgment  of  the
    Court)  accepted  this  submission  but  observed  as  follows  in  the
    alternative at [17]:


         "If this were wrong, however, I would  come  to  exactly  the  same
         conclusion at common law...The exercise of the power to extend time
         is correspondingly critical for the applicant. It is  a  matter  of
         judgment, not of discretion, and it should be taken as governed  by
         the same principles as have been set out by this court in English v
         Emery Reimbold and Strick Ltd [2002]  1  WLR  2409,  in  particular
         paragraphs 15 to 21. Without travelling through the body of  recent
         authority on the topic (not all of which was cited to the court  in
         English), one can say with confidence that such a  decision  cannot
         lie outside what is now the  general  obligation  of  judicial  and
         administrative decision-makers to explain, however succinctly,  why
         they are deciding as they are."


23. In our conclusion, the absence of a positively  stated  requirement  in
    the Tribunal Procedure Rules to provide reasons for granting permission
    to appeal does not come close to negating the weight of legal authority
    against Mr Malik on this issue.


24. The nature and extent of the duty  on  a  judicial  decision  maker  to
    provide reasons is context specific. In  the  context  of  deciding  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal that duty is
    not burdensome. Nevertheless, the decision must engage with the core of
    the appellant's arguments, including any submissions on  the  issue  of
    whether time for applying for permission to appeal should be  extended,
    and express,  albeit  succinctly,  what  the  judge  thought  of  those
    arguments.


Application of legal principle to the instant case


25. It is prudent to recall that Judge Cruthers' decision on the  issue  of
    whether to extend  time  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  apply  for
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  comprises  of  only  two
    discrete sentences, which when combined read:


         "The application for permission to appeal is out of time (by  about
         25 days). But having regard to the interests  of  justice,  I  have
         decided to admit the application."


26. On any analysis the reader of Judge Cruthers' decision cannot determine
    whether the judge undertook the three stage process required of him  by
    the legal authority analysed above.  Breaking  that  process  into  its
    component parts, the decision does not divulge whether the  judge  took
    the view that a delay of "about 25 days" in making the application  for
    permission to appeal constituted a "serious and significant delay".  If
    it is to be taken as such, then the judge was required  to  go  on  and
    consider the quality of the explanation  for  that  delay.  Again,  the
    decision is deficient in this regard. Finally, at the  third  stage  of
    the process, the judge was required to evaluate all  the  circumstances
    of the case so as to enable the application to be  dealt  with  justly.
    Save for a consideration of the merits of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  a
    matter  which  should  not  have  featured  at  all  in   the   judge's
    consideration  of  the   application   to   extend   time   given   his
    characterisation of the grounds as being "just arguable", there  is  no
    further identification of what the judge considered to be the  relevant
    circumstances and how the judge treated those circumstances.


27. Duly analysed, the most striking feature of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to extend  time  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  apply  for
    permission to appeal is its lack of analysis of any feature of the case
    that could be said to be relevant  to  such  decision.  In  short,  the
    decision is completely unreasoned and unexplained and falls  far  short
    of complying with even the limited duty to give reasons that applies to
    decisions on applications for permission to appeal. For this reason  we
    conclude that Judge Cruthers' decision to extend time for the Secretary
    of State to apply for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  must
    be quashed as, in consequence, must his decision granting permission to
    appeal.  The  Secretary  of   State's   applications   remain   pending
    determination by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor




