

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward
appeals)[2013] UKUT 00197(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Phoenix House, Bradford             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 March 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                   THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE BLAKE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR

                                   Between

             hamidreza azimi-moayed AND 3 OTHERS


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer






Decisions affecting children

   (1)  The case law of the Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
   principles to assist in the determination of appeals where  children  are
   affected by the appealed decisions:

        i) As a starting point it is in the best interests of  children  to
           be with both their parents and if both parents are being removed
           from the United Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so
           should dependent children  who  form  part  of  their  household
           unless there are reasons to the contrary.


       ii) It is generally in  the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

      iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
           can lead to development of social cultural and educational  ties
           that it would be inappropriate to disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
           compelling reason to  the  contrary.  What  amounts  to  lengthy
           residence is not clear cut but past and  present  policies  have
           identified seven years as a relevant period.

       iv) Apart from the  terms  of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that  seven years from age four  is likely to  be
           more significant to a child that the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable.

        v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones without  leave  or
           the reasonable expectation of leave to enter  or  remain,  while
           claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to
           private life deserving of respect in the absence of  exceptional
           factors. In any event, protection of the economic well-being  of
           society amply justifies removal in such cases.


    Onward appeals


    (2)  Duties to have regard as  a  primary  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of a child are so well established that a judge  should  take
    the point for him or herself as an  obvious  point  to  be  considered,
    where the issue arises on the evidence,  irrespective  of  whether  the
    appellants or the advocates have done so.


    (3)  Although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether
    the duty requires further information to be obtained or inquiry  to  be
    made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case. Where  that
    evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question, or that the child's
    best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no  basis  for  any
    further judicial exploration or reasoned decision on the matter.


    (4)  Even if a decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the  making
    of an error on a point of law, in deciding whether to grant  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is relevant whether there  are  any
    reasonable prospects of that Tribunal exercising its powers to  re-make
    the decision in a different way. The Upper Tribunal is unlikely  to  do
    so if the error was marginal and would not have made  a  difference  to
    the outcome.


    (5)  It is incompatible with the overriding objective and the scheme of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to permit a rule  25
    reply to open up fundamentally different grounds of  appeal  for  which
    permission has not been granted.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The first appellant is a national of Iran  who  entered  the  United
      Kingdom irregularly in January 2012 together with  his  wife  and  two
      children born in August 1998 and April 2007. He claimed asylum and the
      application  were  rejected  with  his  credibility  questioned.    He
      appealed and on 30 March 2012 Judge Wilson sitting in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal heard his appeal and that of his dependants that he dismissed
      in a written decision signed 2 April 2012.


   2.   The judge found the narrative account  of  the  first  appellant  on
      which his claim to protection was founded was a false one. He noted at
      one  point  during  the  first  appellant's  evidence  he  had  become
      emotional and was saying that the account he was giving was  something
      that a friend had suggested to him.

   3.   The judge rose and invited his counsel  to  have  a  word  with  the
      appellant to see if he was unwell. Counsel has subsequently  confirmed
      that he had no reason  to  suspect  that  the  appellant  was  unwell,
      although communication between  them  was  limited  as  the  appellant
      speaks Farsi and there was no private interpreter and counsel did  not
      ask to use the court interpreter.

   4.   On 25 April 2012, the same advocate settled grounds of appeal lodged
      by the appellants' solicitors on 27 April 2012.  These grounds did not
      challenge the asylum decision or the fairness of the proceedings,  but
      were simply directed to the secondary issue of whether the  judge  had
      given sufficient regard  to  the  welfare  of  the  third  and  fourth
      appellants. That was an ambitious submission considering that they had
      only been in the United Kingdom for  2  months  at  the  date  of  the
      appeal.

   5.   The judge had noted that the issues at  the  hearing  were  entirely
      confined to the asylum claim and no Article  8  submissions  had  been
      directed to him at all. Nevertheless, for completeness he undertook  a
      structured Razgar analysis, and found unsurprisingly that there  would
      be no interference with family life as the family would  face  removal
      together. Any interference that there may be with the private life  of
      each of the appellants during their brief stay here whilst the  asylum
      claim  and  appeal  were  processed  with  expedition   was   entirely
      proportionate and justified by the need to maintain a coherent system,
      of immigration control to promote the economic interest of society and
      the rights and freedoms of others.

   6.   No evidence or submission about the welfare and the best interest of
      the children had been directed at the judge. The judge  noted  that  a
      contention that the third appellant had lost her glasses in the course
      of the journey to Heathrow and suffered "blackspots" as a  result  was
      contradicted by photographic evidence.

   7.   On 16 May 2012, First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf granted  permission
      to appeal on the basis that s.55 UK Borders and Citizenship  Act  2009
      had not been expressly taken into account.

   8.   In June 2012 the respondent issued a rule 24 response to the  appeal
      opposing it. Standard directions were issued, to which the  solicitors
      made response in June 2012, attaching a note by different counsel  (Mr
      Hussain the advocate in  the  hearing  before  us)  to  which  further
      reference will be made below.

   9.   When the appeal came on before us, Mr Hussain was unable to  develop
      the ground on which permission to appeal had  been  drafted,  save  to
      repeat that the determination made no reference to s.55.

  10.  We are not surprised by  the  brevity  of  the  submission.   In  our
      judgment, there was no obligation on the First-tier Judge in this case
      to do more than he had done, and in any event any failure  to  explain
      that no welfare issue arose was incapable of amounting to an error  of
      law that might lead to the decision being re-made.

  11.  We reach this conclusion notwithstanding the clear principles of  law
      reflected in the jurisprudence of the Upper Tribunal  and  the  higher
      courts:-

           i) In  any  administrative  action,  including  any  immigration
              decision to remove a child or a carer of  a  child  from  the
              jurisdiction, the best interests of that child are a  primary
              consideration, to which regard must be had.


          ii) The duty under the UN Convention on the Rights of  the  Child
              is a critical part of any Article 8 ECHR evaluation of a case
              where an immigration action is challenged on appeal.

         iii) There is a parallel statutory duty that the discharge of  any
              immigration function has regard to the need to safeguard  and
              promote the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom
              (s.55  BCIA 2009).

          iv) These duties are so well established that a judge should take
              the point for him or  herself  as  an  obvious  point  to  be
              considered,  wherever  the  issue  arises  on  the  evidence,
              irrespective of whether the appellants or the advocates  have
              done so.

  12.  Although, judges of either Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  must  be
      alert to ensure that these duties are met and in some cases  may  need
      to explore  whether  the  duty  requires  further  information  to  be
      obtained or inquiry to be  made,  the  judge  primarily  acts  on  the
      evidence in  the  case.  Where  that  evidence  gives  no  hint  of  a
      suggestion that  the  welfare  of  the  child  is  threatened  by  the
      immigration decision in question, or that the best  interests  of  the
      child are undermined by such action, there is simply no basis for  any
      further judicial exploration or reasoned  decision  on  the  question.
      Here the children were aged 14 and 4 at the time of the appeal and had
      been resident with their parents in the UK pending  the  determination
      of the asylum claim for two months.


  13.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means that it is
      automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted to  remain
      in the United Kingdom, irrespective of age,  length  of  stay,  family
      background or other circumstances. The case law of the Upper  Tribunal
      has identified the following principles to assist in the determination
      of appeals where children are affected by the decisions:

           i) As a starting point it is in the best interests  of  children
              to be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
              removed from the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
              suggests that so should dependent children who form  part  of
              their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.


          ii) It is generally in the interests of  children  to  have  both
              stability and continuity of social and educational  provision
              and the benefit of growing up in the cultural  norms  of  the
              society to which they belong.

         iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin
              can lead to development of social  cultural  and  educational
              ties that it  would  be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the
              absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to
              lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
              policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

          iv) Apart from the terms of published  policies  and  rules,  the
              Tribunal notes that  seven years from age four  is likely  to
              be more significant to a child that the first seven years  of
              life. Very young  children  are  focussed  on  their  parents
              rather than their peers and are adaptable.

           v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave
              or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or  remain,
              while claims are promptly considered, are  unlikely  to  give
              rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence  of
              exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the economic
              well being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.

  14. There was no error of law in this case. The judge was not  obliged  to
      do more and there was only one conceivable outcome in  this  case.  We
      would further point out that the UT's task on appeal is three fold:-


           i) identifying whether the  decision  of  the  First-tier  judge
              involves the making of an error on a point of law (Tribunals,
              Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 s.11(1) and s.12(1));


          ii) if so, whether  it  is  a  case  where  the  Tribunal  should
              exercise its powers to re-make the case, although it  is  not
              obliged to (s.12(2)(a) TCEA 2007);

         iii) if so, how such a decision should  be  remade   (s.  12(2)(b)
              TCEA 2007).

      Even if the decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of
      law it would be a relevant consideration  for  the  judge  considering
      permission to appeal to also take  into  consideration  whether  there
      were any reasonable prospects of  the  UT  exercising  its  powers  to
      remake the decision in a different way. The UT is unlikely to do so if
      any error was marginal and would not have made any difference  to  the
      outcome of the appeal.


  15.  On 24 March 2013 following an exchange between his solicitors and the
      Tribunal, Mr Hussain applied to amend the notice of appeal to  include
      the  matters  raised  by  counsel  in  his  note  of  12  June   2012.
      Essentially these were:-


           i)  The  first  appellant  was  dissatisfied  with  the  service
              provided by counsel and had informed his solicitors  of  this
              in a letter dated 26 April 2012. He detailed  those  concerns
              in a letter dated 11 June 2012  sent to counsel  whose  reply
              of 24 June 2012 was included


          ii) A medical report from the Locala Community Partnership  dated
              11 June 2012 said that the first appellant was depressed  and
              counsel should have sought an adjournment or at  least  asked
              to take instructions through the official interpreter.

         iii) There was accordingly a procedural flaw in  the  hearing  for
              which the first appellant was not responsible.

  16.  We refused this application to amend the grounds. Our reasons are  as
      follows:-


           i) The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2007  (the
              Procedure  Rules)  rule  22(2)(b)  and  23(1A),  the   Senior
              President's Practice Statements and the  standard  directions
              issued by the Tribunal contemplate that the notice of  appeal
              will form the basis of the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  any
              further document such as a skeleton argument  amplifying  the
              contentions in the notice.


          ii) The Tribunal must send a copy of the written notice  granting
              permission  and  of  the  reasons  for  any  limitations   or
              conditions on permission to each  party  (rule  22(2)(a)  and
              23(6)).

         iii) The respondent may provide a response to a notice  of  appeal
              within one month (rule 24)[1] and an appellant may  reply  to
              the response within one month  (rule  25(2A))  or  five  days
              before the hearing whichever is the earlier.

          iv) There is a general power in the Procedure Rules rule  5(3)(c)
              to permit amendment of a document  but  the  Tribunal's  case
              management powers must be  exercised  to  promote  the  over-
              riding objective including  the  prevention  of  delay  (rule
              2(2)).

           v) It would be incompatible with the  overriding  objective  and
              the scheme of the Procedure Rules outlined above, to permit a
              rule 25 reply to open up fundamentally different  grounds  of
              appeal for which permission has not been granted  and  indeed
              to  challenge  a  different  decision  on  appeal  than  that
              contained in the notice of appeal.

          vi)  What should have happened in  this  case,  is  that  if  the
              appellant wanted to fundamentally depart from the grounds  of
              appeal on which permission was obtained he should have lodged
              an application to amend the notice of appeal in good time and
              secured that a copy of  such  a  notice  was  served  on  the
              respondent.

         vii)  Bearing in mind that an application for permission to appeal
              is normally required to be made within  the  relevant  period
              set out in  rule  21(3),  any  application  to  fundamentally
              change the grounds should be made as soon as practicable with
              some explanation of why a legally  assisted  person  did  not
              include the amended grounds in the original notice.

        viii)  Although  counsel's  note  was  dated  12  June  2012,   the
              application was not made until 24 March 2013  shortly  before
              the hearing. It was both made late and had not been served on
              the respondent who therefore had had no  chance  to  consider
              it.

          ix) Although the hearing of the appeal in the First-tier  was  30
              March 2012, it was only on  26  April  2012  that  the  first
              appellant raised concerns about the handling of  his  appeal.
              A genuine complaint should have been made promptly. If  valid
              it could  have  formed  the  basis  of  the  application  for
              permission to appeal. Further the medical  report  relied  on
              was only obtained in June 2012 and  therefore  is  of  little
              assistance as to the first appellant's state at the  time  of
              the hearing.

           x) The amended grounds  do  not  criticise  the  judge  for  his
              handling of the case, and  reveal  no  basis  for  doing  so.
              Although it is an error of law if  there  has  been  no  fair
              hearing, it will normally be through  disputed  decisions  of
              the judge that a complaint of unfairness arises.

          xi) Although  we  do  not  rule  out  that  unfairness  could  be
              established through the incompetence of the  advocate,  there
              is a high threshold to establish. It is not  sufficient  that
              the advocate exercised forensic judgment that  the  appellant
              now  disagrees  with  or  has  subsequently  proven   to   be
              unfortunate.  Some regard may be relevant to the test in  the
              Court of  Appeal  Criminal  Division  where  conduct  by  the
              advocate is relied on as a ground to challenge the safety  of
              the  conviction  (see  Archbold  2012  7-83).  Although   the
              criminal courts are now concerned primarily with  the  impact
              of the failure of the advocate on the  trial  process,  there
              must be demonstrated incompetence such as a course of  action
              that no reasonable advocate would have taken. The allegations
              against counsel appearing on 30 March  nowhere  reached  that
              standard.

         xii)  Just  as  in  criminal  appeals,  if  the  appellant  mounts
              criticism  of  a  representative,  legal  privilege  must  be
              expressly waived and draft statements  and  conference  notes
              relevant to the case should be disclosed. This was  not  done
              in  the  present  case.  We  have  no  explanation  for   the
              differences in account and why the appellant  behaved  as  he
              did at the  appeal  and  what  he  intended  to  say  if  any
              different from what the judge recorded him as saying. In  any
              event, where credibility is in issue his  complaint  may  not
              carry weight if it is evidentially unsupported.

        xiii) Where fresh evidence such as medical evidence comes to  light
              after the hearing, this should normally be the basis of fresh
              representations rather than support an error  of  law  in  an
              otherwise properly determined appeal.

         xiv)  The  medical  evidence  before  us  does  not  support   any
              suggestion that the appellant was not fit to give evidence at
              the appeal,  or  that  medical  problems  could  explain  the
              remarks he made to the judge.

  17. In summary, in addition to being raised late and in an  unsatisfactory
      way none of the issues raised in the amended  grounds  demonstrate  an
      arguable error of law that would result in the decision being remade.


  18. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed




                                Chamber President


                               Date   10   April 2013


                               -----------------------
[1] Subject to any direction under rule 5(3)(a) shortening this time.

