

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                  Rawofi (age assessment - standard of proof) [2012] UKUT
00197(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Given orally at Field House  |
|                                              |On 23 May 2012               |
|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                           LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                              SAIFULLAH RAWOFI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin


Where age is disputed in the context of an asylum  appeal  (in  contrast  to
age assessment in  judicial  review  proceedings),  the  burden  is  on  the
appellant and the standard of proof is as laid down  in  R  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department Ex parte  Sivakumaran  [1988]  AC  958  and  R
(Karanakaran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]  EWCA  Civ
11.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal from  the  determination  of  Designated  Immigration
    Judge Coates made on  21st  December  2010  in  an  asylum  case.   The
    appellant claimed to be a child, that is someone under the age  of  18,
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom  on  20th  September  2010.   The
    question of whether or not he was a child was plainly a matter that was
    material to the authorities who were required  to  determine  what,  if
    any, support should be offered to him and also the approach to be taken
    to his asylum claim.

 2. On arrival assessment was made by two social  workers  in  Lincolnshire
    who, having gone through a very detailed process, concluded that he was
    above the age of 18.  Subsequently, some six months later, he  was  the
    subject of a further assessment by an  independent  social  worker,  Ms
    Seymour, who also conducted a thorough process and  concluded  that  he
    was still under the age of 18.  It is not necessary for us  to  descend
    to any further detail as to  the  factors  that  each  of  these  three
    professionals  took  into  account  in   reaching   their   conflicting
    conclusions.  Judge Coates found, and we have no difficulty  in  coming
    to a similar conclusion, that each of  these  two  reports  was  Merton
    compliant and that the three social workers were bona fide and  in  all
    respects undertaking  a  professional  task  which  they  purported  to
    discharge.  Whilst it was not set up for determination  as  a  discrete
    preliminary issue, Judge Coates, rightly in our view, in fact addressed
    the age issue at  the  beginning  of  his  evaluation  and  it  is  his
    conclusion on that issue which is the sole point before us today.

 3. It is common ground,  and  indeed  obvious  from  the  reading  of  the
    judgment from paragraph 18 to paragraph 20, that  the  judge  descended
    into the detail of the various reports and summarised his  views  about
    the respective strengths or otherwise of the  material  before  him  in
    that  lengthy  section  of  his  judgment.   He  concluded  however  at
    paragraph 20 that he preferred the evidence of the Lincolnshire  report
    and therefore concluded that the appellant was at least 18 years of age
    and therefore fell to be treated as an adult.

 4. The appeal arises as a matter of law on the discrete and narrow  point,
    important though it is, of the standard of proof that the judge adopted
    in coming to his conclusion.

 5. Initially permission  to  appeal  was  sought  and  refused  by  Senior
    Immigration Judge Waumsley on 28th  January  2011,  but  at  a  renewed
    application on 23rd March 2011  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Peter  Lane
    granted permission to appeal and thus the matter has  been  brought  on
    before us this morning.  We are grateful both to counsel, Miss Khan and
    the presenting officer Mr Melvin for their respective submissions  both
    in writing and orally.  The point arises in this way.  At  paragraph  6
    of his judgment, Judge Coates says this:

             "The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that he is  a
             refugee or is entitled to humanitarian protection or that  the
             Respondent's decision is incompatible with  his  rights  under
             the 1950 Human Rights Convention.  The standard of proof is  a
             reasonable degree of likelihood.  I have  considered  all  the
             evidence in the round. "

6. The judge goes on as we have already described to conduct his  evaluation
   of the evidence but at paragraph 20 he expresses his conclusion in  these
   terms:

             "Having taken all matters into account, I have  concluded,  on
             the  balance  of  probabilities,  that   the   assessment   by
             Lincolnshire Social Services is to be  preferred  and  I  find
             that the Appellant is at least 18 years of age.   He therefore
             falls to be treated as an adult".


 7.    Miss Khan bases her appeal on the  wording  used  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 20.  She  says  that  the  express  reference  there  to  the
    application of the standard of proof as the balance of probability  was
    a material error of law.  She asserts that the standard  of  proof  was
    correctly described by the judge at paragraph 6 in these  asylum  cases
    as being the lower standard namely "a reasonable degree of  likelihood"
    and she therefore submits that the determination should  be  set  aside
    because of that material error.

 8.    Mr Melvin resists the appeal.  He resists it on  the  facts  of  the
    case and he also adopts the characterisation of the matter that we as a
    Tribunal had put earlier to Miss Khan.  In addition Mr Melvin seeks  to
    argue the root and branch legal point that the standard  of  proof  for
    the determination of age in asylum cases is now established to  be  the
    balance of probabilities and that the judge was indeed correct  to  use
    that standard in determining age and it follows was therefore incorrect
    insofar as the issue of age is concerned in describing the standard  as
    a reasonable degree of likelihood in paragraph 6.  We propose  to  deal
    with Mr Melvin's submissions on the matter of principle and the overall
    approach first of all.

 9.    The standard of proof to be applied  in  asylum  cases  has  been  a
    matter that has been determined by higher courts  and  certainly  until
    recently, said Mr Melvin, has been accepted to be the reasonable degree
    of likelihood.  It is not necessary for us to do more than flag up that
    the principal decision  was  of  the  House  of  Lords  in  R  (on  the
    application of Sivakumaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [l998] AC 958 which established that the lower standard was  applicable
    to the determination of future  fact.    That  was  taken  forward  and
    applied to all facts in asylum cases in the Court of Appeal decision in
    R (Karanakaran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2000]
    EWCA Civ 11 and it has therefore been settled law,  for  a  decade  and
    more, that a uniform  approach  is  to  be  applied  in  asylum  cases,
    adopting the reasonable degree of likelihood as the standard of  proof.



10.    Mr Melvin's submission is based upon  the  development  of  the  law
    since then in relation to  determination  of  age  in  judicial  review
    proceedings.  It is well known that there has been a burgeoning of case
    law and indeed a  burgeoning  volume  of  cases  which  turn  upon  the
    determination of the age of a young person in relation to the provision
    of services and support by local authorities  under  the  Children  Act
    and, of course, in relation to the approach taken  to  the  support  or
    otherwise by the authorities generally.  The case  law  to  which  both
    counsel have referred in relation to the determination of age in  those
    cases is similarly well established.  The standard of  proof  there  is
    the balance of probabilities.  The most recent authority,  and  we  are
    grateful to Mr Melvin for his reference to this, would seem  to  be  CJ
    (by his litigation friend SW) v Cardiff City Council  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1590 and that has been applied  by  this  Tribunal  in  age  assessment
    judicial review proceedings in the case of R (ES) v London  Borough  of
    Hounslow [2012] UKUT 00138.  It  is  therefore  well  settled,  in  age
    assessment  judicial   review   proceedings,   for   the   balance   of
    probabilities to be the evidential yardstick that is applied.

11.    Mr Melvin's submission is that the same test should apply here, that
    the matters of law sitting behind the conclusion as to the standard  of
    proof in the judicial review line  of  cases  should  apply  to  asylum
    cases.

12.    Miss Khan submits otherwise.  She  submits  that  the  law  is  well
    established, as we described a short  time  ago,  and  that  we  should
    continue to look for Judge Coates's  decision  to  be  based  upon  the
    reasonable degree of likelihood.

13.    In our view this court is bound by the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the case of Karanakaran and behind that, the decision of  the
    House of Lords in the case  of  Sivakumaran.   The  approach  taken  in
    asylum cases before the Immigration and Asylum Tribunals is established
    as the reasonable degree of likelihood and it seems to us  that  it  is
    just not open to this Tribunal to identify and hive off  the  topic  of
    age and say that this now should be the subject of a different standard
    of proof, namely the balance of probabilities.

14.   We must therefore apply the law as we have  described  it  in  asylum
    cases before the Immigration and Asylum Tribunals, irrespective of  the
    different approach which is taken in judicial review  proceedings.   In
    making that observation we are not blind to the fact that many, if  not
    most, of the age assessment judicial review  cases  are  now  heard  by
    judges sitting in this Tribunal.   There  is  a  need  for  clarity  of
    approach by a judge determining an age issue as to  which  of  the  two
    jurisdictions he or she is applying.  It is of note that the  case  law
    put before us by both sides in  this  case  draws  extensively  on  the
    judicial review determinations because those are the  more  recent  and
    the more widely reported on the age issue and there  is  a  danger,  it
    certainly seems to us, for judges to be drawn into the body of case law
    which they will know  well  in  relation  to  judicial  review  and  to
    consider applying the balance of probabilities to the determination  of
    age in asylum cases.  As we have described, we take the view  that  the
    test is different in these cases and where the  test  is  material  the
    lower test has to be applied.  There is also a difference in the burden
    of  proof.   This  is  accepted  by  Miss  Khan  before  us.   In   the
    determination of age in judicial review proceedings the burden of proof
    is attributed to neither party.  It is for the court to ask itself  the
    age question without loading it one way or the other by attribution  of
    the burden of proof.  In an asylum  case  before  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Tribunals Miss Khan accepts the burden of proof is  always  upon
    the appellant as Judge  Coates  described  correctly  in  paragraph  6.
    Therefore  this  further  distinction  between  the   judicial   review
    jurisdiction and the asylum jurisdiction must also be  borne  in  mind.
    Having dealt with the submissions that Mr Melvin makes  on  higher  and
    general matters of law and principle,  we  now  turn  to  look  at  the
    outcome in this case.

15.    It is correct that in the words that he used in paragraph  20  Judge
    Coates referred to the balance of probabilities. However when one looks
    at the exercise that he had undertaken and the conclusion on the  facts
    of this case to which he arrived, we do not consider that  that  was  a
    choice of words that materially  affected  the  outcome.   Miss  Khan's
    submissions on paper might have been read as  indicating  that  all  an
    appellant has to do is put forward a report  from  an  expert  who  was
    Merton compliant and otherwise bona fide indicating that the  appellant
    was not an adult, to satisfy the standard of proof of reasonable degree
    of likelihood irrespective of any other evidence in the case,  banking,
    as it were, on a positive report in the appellant's favour being enough
    to trigger a finding that the person was still not an adult.   In  oral
    submissions she rightly and realistically clarified  the  position  and
    accepted that the judge must take account of all the  evidence  in  the
    case and, when applying the standard of proof of reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood, must come to a conclusion as best he or she can on  all  of
    that evidence.

16.    Looking at it in that way it  is  absolutely  plain  that  if  Judge
    Coates was asked on the evidence before him in this case whether  there
    was a reasonable degree of likelihood that this young individual was  a
    child or an adult, the conclusion would have been adult.   He  says  in
    the course  of  paragraph  20  that  not  only  did  he  come  to  that
    conclusion, reading between the lines, that it  was  established  on  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, he found that it  was  established  on
    the balance of probabilities, the higher standard, that  the  appellant
    was an adult.  Sometimes in civil proceedings for example in the Family
    Division, where all that is required is a finding  on  the  balance  of
    probability, a judge will go further and say  "I  am  satisfied  beyond
    reasonable doubt" that a particular fact  is  or  is  not  established.
    That is not legally impermissible; it is a way of describing the degree
    of certainty or otherwise that the  judge  has  achieved  following  an
    analysis of the evidence.

17.    The point Miss Khan raises would be extremely important if the judge
    had phrased matters in a different way.  If he had in paragraph 6  said
    "the standard of proof that this appellant has to achieve is to satisfy
    me that he is a child on the balance  of  probabilities,"  Miss  Khan's
    case would be  extremely  strong  given   the  analysis  of  the  legal
    position that we have already given.  But that was not this case.   The
    judge  was  faced  with  two  sets  of  professional  evaluations.   He
    conducted a detailed comparison of the two and came  to  a  conclusion,
    making a  choice  between  the  one  and  the  other,  which  certainly
    satisfied the standard of proof of reasonable degree of likelihood  and
    indeed on his appraisal went further.  On that basis we  are  satisfied
    that there is no material irregularity in the course  of  the  decision
    given by Judge Coates and we therefore dismiss this appeal.


                               Signed        Date






                                Lord Justice McFarlane

