


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Pirzada (Deprivation of citizenship: general principles) [2017]  UKUT  00196
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Stoke                                |                             |
|On 24 November 2016                           |Promulgated on               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            ABDUL WAHEED PIRZADA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:  Ms Kullar, Solicitor, instructed by S H Solicitors.

 i) The  Secretary  of  State  has  two  separate  powers  of  deprivation,
    exercisable on different grounds, as set out in sub-ss (2) and (3) of s
    40 of the British Nationality Act 1981.


(ii) The power under s 40(2) arises  only  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good.

(iii)    The power under sub-s (3) arises only if the Secretary of State  is
    satisfied that registration or naturalisation was  obtained  by  fraud,
    false representation or concealment of a material fact.  The  deception
    referred to must have motivated the grant  of  (in  the  present  case)
    citizenship, and therefore necessarily preceded that grant.

(iv) The separation of sub-ss (2) and (3)  makes  it  clear  that  obtaining
    naturalisation by one of the means of deception set out  in  sub-s  (3)
    cannot of itself amount to a reason enabling the Secretary of State  to
    be satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good  for  the
    purposes of sub-s (2); but, in an appropriate case, there would  appear
    to be no reason why the Secretary of State should not be satisfied that
    the conditions under both subsections exist.

(v)  The restrictions on the rights of appeal imposed by s 84  of  the  2002
    Act do not apply to appeals against a s  40  decision:  therefore,  any
    proper ground of appeal is available to an applicant.  The  grounds  of
    appeal are, however, limited by the formulation of s  40  and  must  be
    directed to whether the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  in  fact
    empowered by that section.  There is no suggestion that a Tribunal  has
    the power to consider whether it is satisfied of any of the matters set
    out in sub-ss (2) or (3); nor is there any suggestion that the Tribunal
    can itself exercise the Secretary of State's discretion.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of Judge R R
    Hopkins in the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision primarily in question
    was made by the Secretary of State on 8 October 2015 and is a  decision
    that the claimant should be deprived of his British citizenship.

 2. The facts are as follows.  The applicant was born in 1962.   He  is  or
    was a national of Afghanistan.  He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    June 2001 and claimed  asylum.   His  claim  was  refused  because  the
    Secretary of State did not think that he had given a  truthful  account
    of his immigration history.  Nevertheless,  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain, and it appears that he had such  leave  until  23  March  2006.
    Just before the expiry of that leave he applied for indefinite leave to
    remain, and that was granted.   On  7  February  2008  he  applied  for
    naturalisation as a British citizen.  The application was granted and a
    certificate of naturalisation was issued on 14 May  2008.   Since  that
    date, therefore, he has been a British citizen.

 3. The applicant's history before he arrived in this country is  far  from
    clear.  He evidently spent some time  in  Russia,  apparently  studying
    medicine.  He has a diploma indicating his graduation  with  a  medical
    degree from St Petersburg University in 2000, which is  thought  to  be
    genuine.  Certainly,  in  other  proceedings  which  we  shall  shortly
    mention, he has relied upon it.  He has apparently worked at some stage
    in Pakistan.  The fact that he was in St Petersburg, presumably  for  a
    considerable period of time ending in 2000,  incidentally  demonstrates
    that the account he gave of his history when claiming  asylum  was  not
    the truth.  He has no qualification entitling him to practice  medicine
    at any level in the United Kingdom.

 4. From 2004 onwards he was working  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  various
    medical contexts.  In that year he obtained a job at  the  PAK  Medical
    Centre in Birmingham as a part-time practice  nurse.   That  employment
    continued at least until 2011.  In 2011 he obtained further  employment
    as  a  physician's  assistant  at  the  Al-Shafa  Medical   Centre   in
    Birmingham.  In addition, for a short period in 2010  he  worked  as  a
    locum at the Oakwood Surgery, also in Birmingham.

 5. Those activities and some others form some basis  of  criminal  charges
    brought against him in the autumn of 2011.  On 26 April 2012 he pleaded
    guilty to charges 1, 3 and 4 on an indictment, those  charges  relating
    to the activities we have set out above.   As  we  understand  it,  the
    charges were on the basis of obtaining the employment and the  relevant
    salary by  fraud:  these  were  not  charges  of  pretending  to  be  a
    registered  practitioner  under  the  Medical  Act  1983   or   similar
    legislation.  The claimant was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  17  months
    imprisonment for the three offences to which he had pleaded guilty.

 6. After making enquiries of the claimant, the Secretary of State  made  a
    decision to deprive him of his British nationality  on  3  April  2014.
    The claimant appealed against that decision and the appeal was  allowed
    by Judge Andrew in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and thus could  not  stand.
    That decision was dated 27 July 2015.  The Secretary of  State  made  a
    new decision on 8 October 2015.  It  was  against  that  decision  that
    Judge Hopkins determined the appeal.  We shall examine the Secretary of
    State's decisions and the judges' decisions in due course,  but  it  is
    convenient first to set out the relevant legislation.

 7. The provisions enabling the Secretary of State to deprive a  person  of
    citizenship are in s 40 of the British Nationality Act  1981.   At  the
    dates of the decisions and  appeals  under  examination,  the  relevant
    provisions were as follows:

          "40. Deprivation of citizenship
                   ...
           2)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person  of  a
              citizenship status if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied
              that deprivation is conducive to the public good.
           3)  The Secretary of State may by order deprive a  person  of  a
              citizenship status which results  from  his  registration  or
              naturalisation if the Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that
              the registration or naturalisation was obtained by means of -
               a) fraud,
               b) false representation, or
               c) concealment of a material fact.
           4)   The  Secretary  of  State  may  not  make  an  order  under
              subsection (2) if he
                     is  satisfied  that  the  order  would  make  a  person
              stateless.
          (4A) [This sub-section came into force on 28 July 2014]. But  that
              does not prevent the Secretary of State from making an  order
              under subsection (2) to deprive a  person  of  a  citizenship
              status if -
               a)  the  citizenship  status  results  from   the   person's
                  naturalisation,
                    b)  the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that   the
                       deprivation is conducive to the public  good  because
                       the person, while having that citizenship status, has
                       conducted  him  or  herself  in  a  manner  which  is
                       seriously prejudicial to the vital interests  of  the
                       United Kingdom, any of the Islands,  or  any  British
                       overseas territory, and
                    c) the Secretary of State  has  reasonable  grounds  for
                       believing that the person is able, under the law of a
                       country or territory outside the United  Kingdom,  to
                       become a national of such a country or territory."

 8. Section 40(5) requires the Secretary of  State  to  give  a  notice  in
    writing of her intention to make an order under s 40, and s 40A confers
    a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal upon a person who is given
    such a notice.  Section 40A(3) provides that certain  sections  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 shall  apply  to  such  an
    appeal as they apply in relation to an appeal under s 82 (or ss 83  and
    83A before their appeal) of the 2002 Act.  We do not need to  set  that
    provision out, save to say that s  84,  which  both  before  and  after
    amendment by the 2014 Act, sets out the possible grounds of appeal,  is
    not a section that is made applicable to appeals against deprivation of
    citizenship.

 9. We draw the following conclusions from the statutory provisions.

           A.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  two   separate   powers   of
              deprivation, exercisable on   different grounds, as  set  out
              in sub-ss (2) and (3) of s 40.


           B.    The power under s 40(2) arises only if  the  Secretary  of
              State is satisfied  that  deprivation  is  conducive  to  the
              public good.

           C. The power under sub-s (3) arises only  if  the  Secretary  of
              State is satisfied that registration  or  naturalisation  was
              obtained by fraud, false representation or concealment  of  a
              material fact.  The deception referred to must have motivated
              the grant of (in the present case) citizenship, and therefore
              necessarily preceded that grant.

           D.   The separation of sub-ss (2) and (3) makes  it  clear  that
              obtaining naturalisation by one of the means of deception set
              out in sub-s (3) cannot of itself amount to a reason enabling
              the Secretary of State to be satisfied  that  deprivation  is
              conducive to the public good; but, in  an  appropriate  case,
              there would appear to be no reason why the Secretary of State
              should not  be  satisfied  that  the  conditions  under  both
              subsections exist.

           E. The restrictions on the rights of appeal imposed by s  84  of
              the 2002 Act do not apply to appeals against a s 40 decision:
              therefore, any proper ground of appeal  is  available  to  an
              applicant.  The grounds of appeal are,  however,  limited  by
              the formulation of s 40 and must be directed to  whether  the
              Secretary of State's decision was in fact empowered  by  that
              section.  There is no suggestion  that  a  Tribunal  has  the
              power to consider whether it  is  satisfied  of  any  of  the
              matters set out in sub-ss  (2)  or  (3);  nor  is  there  any
              suggestion  that  the  Tribunal  can  itself   exercise   the
              Secretary of State's discretion.

10. We may take the history of the earlier  appeal  as  set  out  by  Judge
    Hopkins in his decision:


          "13. On 3rd April 2014 the Secretary of State made a  decision  to
              deprive him of his British nationality.  A copy of the notice
              of  decision  has  been  provided.   The  Appellant  appealed
              against that decision.  There is before  me  a  copy  of  the
              notice of appeal and the grounds of appeal.


          14.   The Appellant has a wife, Saeed Hameeda, who is a  Pakistani
              national.  On 10th December 2014 the  Respondent  refused  to
              grant her further leave to remain in the UK as the spouse  of
              the Appellant.  This decision was made on the basis that  the
              Appellant was not present and settled in the  UK.   She  also
              appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  two  appeals  were
              set down to be heard together on 23rd July  2015.   Prior  to
              the hearing SH & Co wrote to the  Presenting  Officers'  Unit
              inviting the Respondent to withdraw the decision  in  respect
              of the Appellant.  It would seem  this  approach  was  partly
              prompted by the fact that the Appellant had by now  completed
              a period of 14 years in the UK and the Respondent's  guidance
              at the time was that she would not normally  deprive  someone
              of their British citizenship where they have  had  more  than
              that length of residence.  But the decision was not withdrawn
              and the appeal proceeded to the hearing.


          15. The appeals were heard  by  Judge  C  Andrew.   I  have  been
              supplied with a copy of her decision dated  27th  July  2015.
              She allowed the Appellant's wife's appeal  outright,  as  the
              Appellant had not, as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing,  been
              deprived  of  his  British  citizenship.   As   regards   the
              Appellant, she allowed his appeal to the limited extent  that
              it was not in accordance with the law. This was  because  the
              refusal letter was confused.  It  referred  only  to  section
              40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981 but  it  seemed  to
              suggest that he should be deprived of his  citizenship  under
              section 40(2).  If  the  Respondent  was  relying  upon  that
              provision, she should have gone on to consider section  40(4)
              and (4A) and her own policies, but she had not done so."

    Although no issue was taken on the matter, it appears that Judge Andrew
    may have erred in thinking that s 40(A) applied to the decision because
    it was not in force at the time that that decision was taken.

11. The new decision, taken, as  we  have  said,  on  8  October  2015  and
    contained in a letter on that date, sets out the Secretary  of  State's
    thinking in the following way:


          "4.    West   Midlands   Police   advised   that   through   their
              investigations into your activities in  the  United  Kingdom,
              specifically  in  relation  to  your  work  in  the   medical
              profession, you were charged with several counts of fraud and
              deception offences relating to your  medical  qualifications.
              You pleaded guilty to the charges and on  27  September  2012
              you were sentenced to 17 months imprisonment for  3  offences
              of committing fraud by false representation.   The  Judge  at
              your court hearing  dismissed  your  claim  that  you  are  a
              qualified doctor.

           5. Your legal representatives, SH & Co Solicitors, responded  to
              the proposed deprivation action  on  your  behalf  via  their
              letter  of  29  December  2013.   You  advised   your   legal
              representatives that the  police  had  deliberately  withheld
              evidence to discredit your case.  You claim that a  Detective
              Constable made enquiries with  the  General  Medical  Council
              (GMC) about the University you claim to  have  obtained  your
              qualifications from.  The Witness Statement (WS) made by  the
              Detective Constable advised that your claims were correct and
              accurate.  You claim the WS was dated 15 November  2011,  but
              it was not disclosed until 24 August 2012, as such you  claim
              this was a  deliberate  attempt  by  the  police  to  conceal
              evidence and to discredit you.


           6. You have not supplied any evidence to support your claim that
              the WS was deliberately withheld by the police.  It is common
              practice for a WS  to  be  drafted  in  advance  of  a  court
              hearing,  this  does  not  mean  it  was  withheld  for   any
              unscrupulous reasons and the fact that  it  would  have  been
              disclosed would suggest that the basis of the  statement  was
              not detrimental to your case.


           7. You also claim  that  your  previous  employers  made  you  a
              "Scapecoat" when they were questioned about your role at  the
              Pak Medical Practice where you worked between  2004  -  2010.
              The Staff at the practice  and  the  doctors  in  particular,
              distanced themselves  from  you  when  you  were  faced  with
              criminal proceedings.  However, no evidence has been provided
              that would support this claim.  The fact that the Judge found
              you had not undertaken the  work  you  did  for  sinister  or
              financial reasons does not add weight to your claim that your
              employers  had  turned  their  back  on  you  once   criminal
              proceedings had begun.


           8. It is noted that whilst you  admit  what  you  had  done  was
              relevant to the decision  to  deprive  you  of  your  British
              citizenship, you  believe  that  your  actions  were  not  so
              serious  to  warrant  deprivation  action.    This   is   not
              considered to be the case because of the fraud and  deception
              you used could  have  had  serious  consequences  if  medical
              advice you were giving was incorrect.  Therefore  it  is  not
              accepted  that  your  actions  are  not   so   serious   that
              deprivation should not be taken.


           9.  It  is  also  noted  that  when  you  applied  for   British
              citizenship in 2008, you were already engaged in the  medical
              profession but you did not  mention  on  your  naturalisation
              application from that you were not a fully qualified  doctor.
              By deliberately withholding such information your application
              succeeded.  However, had it been known that you  were  not  a
              fully qualified medical practitioner, but  still  engaged  in
              medical practices, you would have failed the  good  character
              requirements  that  must  be  met  to  be   granted   British
              citizenship.


          10.  In the Nationality  Instructions,  Annex  D  Chapter  18  it
              states that a person's good character would  be  in  question
              if, for example, there was information to suggest:  they  did
              not respect and were not prepared to abide by the  law  (i.e.
              were, or were suspected of being, involved in crime.

          11. In addition, an applicant's  good  character  would  also  be
              called into doubt if they had practised deceit, for  example,
              in their dealings with the Home Office, Department  for  Work
              and Pensions (DWP) or HM Revenue & Customs.  In view  of  the
              fact that you were willingly  undertaking  employment  within
              the medical profession, when you were not a  fully  qualified
              medical practitioner, suggests that if this  had  been  known
              you would not have passed the good character requirement.

          12. You were not abiding by the law of the United Kingdom because
              you were passing yourself off as a medical practitioner  when
              not licensed to do so, which under the law  of  this  country
              means you were engaged in criminality  by  doing  so.   Apart
              from concealing your lack of  qualifications  with  the  Home
              Office it is also considered to be the  case  that  you  were
              deceiving DWP  and  HM  Revenue  &  Customs.   You  were  not
              entitled to work within the medical field in the  manner  you
              did and it is reiterated that had this fact  been  known  you
              would not have been  successful  in  obtaining  your  British
              citizenship.

          13.  At  the  time  you  lodged  your  application  for   British
              citizenship you were fully aware that the employment you  had
              undertaken was not an avenue of work that was  open  to  you.
              You were not a  fully  qualified  doctor  and  you  were  not
              permitted to act as though you were such a professional.   If
              you had misdiagnosed a patient's health  problem  this  could
              have had a major impact on their  wellbeing  and  could  have
              caused severe problems."


12. Judge Hopkins heard evidence from the claimant,  and  submissions.   He
    set out his assessment of the case in relation to s 40 in paragraphs 26
    to 34 of his decision.  He noted first that, although  there  is  clear
    reference to s 40(3), a great deal of the tone of the decision  appears
    to be directed not to the identification of some deception by means  of
    which citizenship was obtained, but to general issues of bad character,
    which might be relevant to s 40(2) but are not relevant to s 40(3).  He
    noted that, if s 40(2)  is  in  play,  there  remains  the  difficulty,
    identified by Judge Andrew, that sub-s(4)  is  also  relevant,  because
    there is no evidence that the applicant's  previous  nationality  would
    not be lost on his acquisition of British citizenship.  And,  as  Judge
    Hopkins put it, he could not "just assume" the matter in the  Secretary
    of State's favour without any evidence or indeed  any  indication  that
    the matter had been considered.  Further, sub-s(4A) was also  certainly
    now potentially in force in relation to a decision under s 40(2).

13. Looking then at s 40(3), Judge Hopkins noted the applicant's history of
    offending, but also that only one of the charges related (in part) to a
    time before his naturalisation as a British  citizen.   The  curriculum
    vitae he had provided was, as Judge Hopkins remarked, "almost  entirely
    a work of fiction"; and the convictions  left  no  doubt  that  he  had
    deceived  his  employers.   After  considering  further  the   question
    whether, in truth, the applicant had sufficient qualifications to  work
    at the PAK Medical Centre, Judge Hopkins said this:


          "32.  However, the issue for me is not whether he is a  person  of
              good  character:  it  is  whether  he  obtained  his  British
              citizenship  by  means  of  fraud,  false  representation  or
              concealment of a material fact.  I have some concern that  in
              his earlier application for indefinite  leave  the  statement
              from his solicitors indicated he was a practising GP,  which,
              of course, was  untrue.   But  it  is  not  clear  that  this
              representation in fact led to the grant of  leave  and  that,
              but for it, he would not have qualified.  The decision letter
              dated 8th October 2015 makes no mention of  that  application
              or the representation made in it.  He did not repeat  in  his
              naturalisation  application  the  statement  that  he  is   a
              practicing doctor: he described his occupation as that  of  a
              Clinical Assistant at Pak Health Centre.  I accept this was a
              true statement.  I do not find that there has been any  fraud
              or false representation in  relation  to  the  naturalisation
              application.


          33.    I turn to the question whether the Appellant has  concealed
              a material fact.  This depends, it seems to me, upon  whether
              there was information he was under a duty to reveal.  I  note
              that the indefinite leave application form included a general
              question in which he was asked  if  he  had  engaged  in  any
              activities which might be relevant to the question whether he
              was a person of good  character.   It  may  be  there  was  a
              similar question in the naturalisation application form, but,
              since only part of this form  has  been  provided  to  me,  I
              cannot be sure how he answered it.  However, it  is  doubtful
              that he would have said something like "I  have  obtained  my
              current employment by fraud but I have now been  found  out".
              In any event, I am not convinced  that  he  was  expected  to
              confess  to  criminal  behaviour  which  had  not  yet   been
              detected.   Privilege  against  self  incrimination   is   an
              established principle of law and it is supported by Article 6
              of ECHR: Heaney & McGuiness v Ireland [2000]  ECHR  684.   It
              might have been different if at the time of  the  application
              he had been under police investigation, since this would have
              been a material fact which he could have told the Home Office
              about without having to make any admission of guilt.  In  the
              circumstances I do not find that he obtained his  citizenship
              by concealment of a material fact.


          34.   I am not  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  is  entitled  to
              deprive the Appellant of British  citizenship  under  section
              40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981."

14. Judge Hopkins went on to say that if the matter had depended on article
    8 alone (which the claimant had pleaded), he would not have allowed the
    appeal.

15. Before us, Mr Bates emphasised the danger which might  have  arisen  if
    the applicant, as an unqualified person, had issued a  prescription  or
    undertaken work that should be performed only by a  registered  medical
    practitioner.  As we observe, with the greatest  respect,  those  fears
    might motivate a decision under  sub-s  40(2),  but  cannot  assist  in
    relation to sub-s(3).  As we also observed, the letter itself is to  an
    extent unspecific.  The heading is: "NOTICE OF DECISION TO  DEPRIVE  OF
    NATIONALITY UNDER SECTION 40A OF THE BRITISH NATIONALITY ACT 1981", but
    s 40A contains neither the power to deprive nor the requirement to give
    a notice.  There is general reference to s 40 in para 17  but  para  19
    makes it clear that the order is to be under  s  40(3).   There  is  no
    reference to sub-s(2) in the decision.

16. It therefore appears to us that Judge Hopkins  was  entirely  right  in
    looking to see whether the Secretary of State was entitled to  conclude
    that the claimant's naturalisation had been obtained by conduct of  the
    type set out in s 40(3).  Evidence of the  claimant's  general  conduct
    does not and could not do that.  In order for the power under  s  40(3)
    to be exercisable, there must be an identifiable deception, of the sort
    listed in that sub-section, which can be shown or properly  assumed  to
    have been operational in the grant of naturalisation.  As Judge Hopkins
    remarked, it is difficult to see  that  a  person  ought,  without  any
    specific question, to be regarded as not disclosing  relevant  material
    if all that is said is that he may have committed  a  criminal  offence
    but has not yet been charged with it.  On its own terms, therefore,  we
    think that Judge Hopkins'  decision  is  unassailable.   The  decision-
    letter wholly failed to demonstrate any basis upon which the  Secretary
    of State could properly say that s 40(3) applied to the claimant.

17. As  Judge  Hopkins  noted  at  para  33,  however,  only  part  of  the
    naturalisation application form was available to him.  We do  not  know
    why that was.  The form was on  the  Home  Office  file  and  Mr  Bates
    provided a copy to us without any  difficulty.   Section  3  begins  as
    follows:

                        "Good character requirement.
          In this section you need to give information which will help the
          Home Secretary to decide whether he can be satisfied that you are
          of good character.  Checks will be made with the Police and
          possibly other Government departments, the Security service and
          other agencies."

18. Question 3.6 asks about criminal convictions  in  the  United  Kingdom;
    question 3.7 asks whether the applicant has been  charged  or  indicted
    inside or outside the United Kingdom with a criminal offence for  which
    he has not  yet  been  tried  in  Court.   That  question  is  answered
    (correctly, so far as we know) "No".  There are  then  questions  about
    international crimes of various sorts.  Then there is this:


          "3.11  Have you engaged in any other  activities  which  might  be
               relevant to the question of whether you are a person of good
               character?"

19. The claimant has answered that question "No".

20. As distinct from the matters actually referred  to  in  the  notice  of
    decision, it seems to us perfectly clear that that answer was  a  false
    representation.  The claimant was a person who, at the time he answered
    that question, had for four years  been  engaged  in  fraud.   We  have
    little doubt that that answer would, in the circumstances of this case,
    have justified action under s 40(3).  But, as we have said, it  is  not
    relied upon.  Further, although that part of the application form might
    have generated the power under s 40(3), the discretion is the Secretary
    of State's alone.

21. It is in our view wholly unsatisfactory that, in  making  an  important
    decision, the Secretary of State should apparently ignore  material  in
    front of her that might have justified the position and instead make  a
    decision by reference to materials which could not  justify  it.    The
    claimant's case looks very much like one in which  a  decision  of  the
    sort against which he appealed would  be  not  merely  permissible  but
    entirely justified.  But we agree with the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that no lawful decision has yet been made.  We  therefore  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.










                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 27 March 2017
