

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

           Kunnel (length of academic year) [2012] UKUT 00195(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                              |Given orally at Field House  |
|                                              |On 23 May 2012               |
|                                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                           LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                         GISHA VARKEY KAMPAKA KUNNEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin

The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not  erred  in  law  in  finding  that
attendance at a course over a period of three months was  not  a  course  of
study "of at least one academic year in duration"  under  paragraph  245  HD
(g) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395).





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by Gisha Varkey Kampaka  Kunnel  against  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  19  December
    2011.  The brief factual background to the case is that the  appellant,
    who is qualified in her home country of India as a nurse  and  who  was
    born on 20th March 1983, initially  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
    leave as a Tier 4 student on 20th October 2010.  The  leave  was  valid
    for 12 months until 17th October 2011.  In August  2011  the  appellant
    sought to vary her leave  to  that  of  a  Tier  2  migrant,  but  that
    application was refused.  Although she had all of the necessary  points
    under Appendices A, B and C to the Immigration Rules, she fell  at  the
    hurdle of establishing attendance at a course which was  sufficient  to
    come within paragraph 245 HD (g) of the Immigration Rules as they  then
    were.  That provision read as follows:

             "An applicant who was last  granted  leave  as  a  Student,  a
             Student Re-Sitting an Examination, a Student Nurse, a  Student
             Union Sabbatical Officer,  or  a  Tier  4  Migrant  must  have
             completed studying a course of study of at least one  academic
             year in duration during that period of leave."


 2. It was accepted on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the
    appellant did indeed  attend  a  course  at  City  University  and  was
    successful in achieving a certificate at the conclusion of that course.
     The  certificate  indicates  that  she  completed  a  module  entitled
    "Overseas Nurses Programme".  The certificate also is precise as to the
    dates of her attendance and it certifies that she "attended  the  above
    course between 23rd  November  2010  and  1st  March  2011";  a  period
    therefore of just over three calendar months.

 3. The position taken by the Secretary of State was that the attendance at
    this course for that period was  insufficient  to  establish  that  the
    appellant had attended a course "of  at  least  one  academic  year  in
    duration" during the period of her  initial  leave  to  be  here.   She
    appealed against the Secretary of State's determination.   The  outcome
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was that whilst the facts
    were found in her favour in the sense to  which  we  will  refer  in  a
    moment, it was impossible, concluded the Tribunal,  to  hold  that  her
    attendance at this course came within the definition of  "one  academic
    year".

 4. Our advertence to the facts being found in the appellant's favour is in
    relation to the description of the course.  It seems from what we  read
    in the first Tribunal's judgment that the course length was a  variable
    commodity.  The aim of the course, certainly in part, would seem to  be
    to establish that those  attending  it  achieved  a  level  of  nursing
    proficiency to a particular standard  and  that  the  emphasis  of  the
    course, once an initial ten  days  of  class-based  learning  had  been
    completed, was to demonstrate practical aspects  of  nursing  by  being
    placed on particular placements in the Health Service.
 5. It therefore was accepted by the Tribunal that the more  proficient  an
    individual might be, the shorter their time could  be  on  the  course.
    Paragraph 13 of the determination states:

             "While the course could take longer, up to  nine  months,  and
             the dates  on  the  original  confirmation  of  acceptance  of
             studies document suggested that it would continue until August
             2011, those with more experience of  nursing  took  much  less
             time  to  complete  it  as  it  included  a  practical  aspect
             involving nursing placements after  an  initial  ten  days  of
             class-based learning".


    Therefore the picture is that this appellant,  who  was  proficient  in
    nursing, was able to get through the course more  quickly  than  others
    and therefore was only occupied on the course  between  the  two  dates
    certified in the certificate.


 6. The First-tier Tribunal looked at the later policy guidance  which  has
    been applied by the Home Secretary, to this  category  of  work,  which
    states that "an academic year" is normally to be regarded as  being  of
    at least 8 months  in  duration.   The  conclusion  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is in paragraph 20 in these terms, where Judge Ruth said:

             "In my view, therefore, even though it is correct to say there
             is no definition of  the  term  "one  academic  year"  in  the
             immigration rules and there appears to have been none  in  the
             guidance in force at the date of application, there can be  no
             doubt that a course running for only three months or which can
             be completed in three months is not a course  lasting  for  at
             least one academic year".


 7. The point raised  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  is  to  challenge  that
    conclusion.  It is said in ground four that the judge  took  the  wrong
    approach by looking at the time it took for the appellant to finish the
    course whereas the point should have been that this was a course  which
    could run for a full academic year or for a period of time which  would
    be recognised as occupying a full academic year.  The fact that she was
    able to complete it more quickly should not be held  against  her.   We
    paraphrase but, as we would read it, that is the thrust of the  grounds
    of appeal.

 8. This morning the Tribunal office has been informed by those acting  for
    the appellant that they have had no further instructions from  her  for
    some time and their understanding is that she may well have  gone  back
    to India already.  Nevertheless we have considered the issues raised by
    the appeal and have heard submissions on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State by the Presenting Officer, Mr Melvin.

 9. It is our view that this appeal raises a need to audit the  finding  of
    fact undertaken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We  do  not  feel  it
    necessary to offer a definition of the phrase "one academic year".   In
    our view this case was not finely  balanced.   The  conclusion  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was, in effect, that, whatever  the  definition  in
    nice and precise terms of one academic  year  may  be,  a  three  month
    course of this type fell very much  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  line
    insofar  as  that  is  viewed  by   the   appellant.    Our   task   is
    straightforward.  We have to consider whether  there  are  grounds  for
    interfering with that finding of fact.  Having  looked  at  the  matter
    carefully we find there are no grounds for interfering with the finding
    of the First-tier Tribunal on this key, indeed only, point in the  case
    and we therefore dismiss the appeal and uphold the determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal.







                               Signed                    Date




                                Lord Justice McFarlane

