

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber

NN (Teachers: Matabeleland/Bulawayo: risk) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
00198(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 March 2013                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

                                     NN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Hussain instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts.
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Wardle,   Home Office Presenting Officer

   The  "geographical  filter"  identified  in  EM  and  Others  (Returnees)
   Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98(IAC) and confirmed more  recently  in  CM  (EM
   country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059(IAC)  is
   equally applicable to teachers. Thus, a teacher will generally not face a
   heightened risk  on  return  to  Zimbabwe,  on  account  of  his  or  her
   occupation or former occupation alone,  if  his  or  her  destination  of
   return is (a) rural Matabeleland North or  Matabeleland  South,  where  a
   returnee will in general not face  a  real  risk  of  harm  from  Zanu-PF
   elements, including the security forces, even if  he  or  she  is  a  MDC
   member or supporter; or (b) Bulawayo, where the returnee will in  general
   not face such a risk, even if he or she has a significant MDC profile






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The main issue arising in  this  appeal  is  whether  former  teachers
      returning to Zimbabwe as failed asylum seekers after a  period  living
      in the United Kingdom face an enhanced risk on return on that  account
      throughout Zimbabwe or whether the "geographical filter" identified in
      EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT  98  (IAC)  and  re-
      stated recently in CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG
      [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) should now inform the assessment of risk where
      return is to one of the areas where being identified as a supporter or
      member of or activist on behalf of  the  MDC  is  not  something  that
      attracts any real difficulty.


   2. We have, to assist us in addressing that question, a  report  prepared
      recently by a country expert, Dr Laurel Birch Aguilar. Although, as we
      shall see, there is reason to find that report to  be  problematic  in
      respect of its conclusions specific to this particular  appellant,  it
      is accompanied by a collection  of  news  reports  about  difficulties
      experienced by teachers in Zimbabwe. As  this  appeal  was  previously
      adjourned specifically for that expert report to be  compiled,  it  is
      reasonable to assume that this bundle of news reports, assembled by Dr
      Aguilar to accompany her report, represents a reasonably comprehensive
      picture of the level of harassment or persecution  to  which  teachers
      and former teachers are being subjected in Zimbabwe.

   3. In addressing us upon the historic reasons why  teachers  in  Zimbabwe
      have for some time been  recognised  to  fall  within  a  category  of
      enhanced risk, Mr Hussein identified the following:

        a. Teachers are seen as "opinion formers" in society and, given the
           nature of their work  they  have  an  unmatched  opportunity  to
           influence the views of children and young people;
        b. Zanu-PF, and the government it has controlled since the days  of
           independence, has always regarded one of its strengths to lie in
           harnessing the support of young people, hence the emergence  and
           deployment of the "green bombers" and other youth  militia  used
           as instruments of the ruling party and the regime  of  President
           Mugabe, particularly at the time of elections;
        c. Teachers are perceived, generally, to be more likely to  support
           the aims of the MDC than of Zanu-PF, whether that is the fact or
           not. In part, this arises from  the  relative  strength  of  the
           trade union associations representing teachers;
        d. Teachers have been used as polling officers  and  so  are  in  a
           position to "influence" the voting process, to the  disadvantage
           of Zanu-PF, hence the intimidation, threats and  violence  meted
           out to teachers to ensure compliance with the will of Zanu PF.


   4. Thus the risk, it would appear, is predicated upon the imputed profile
      of a teacher being someone who would  support  the  MDC,  to  seek  to
      influence others, especially young people, to that point of view,  and
      seek to thwart the electoral ambitions of Zanu-PF.


   5. The appellant, who was born  on  16th  June  1972,  is  a  citizen  of
      Zimbabwe. She arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  2nd  May  2008,  and
      claimed asylum. She claimed that she would be at  risk  on  return  to
      Zimbabwe on account of her political opinion as a supporter or  member
      of the MDC. She and  her  husband  had  both  worked  as  teachers  in
      Zimbabwe in a place called Nkayi,  which  is  in  Matabeleland  North,
      about three hours drive from Bulawayo. In interview she said that  her
      husband "taught agriculture" and she herself worked  part  time  as  a
      teacher at primary school level. She explained that in  2008  soldiers
      came to the school and accused her husband of teaching MDC politics to
      the boys. They were both beaten and her husband was taken away.


   6. The appellant said she went to stay at the family home in Bulawayo and
      a few days later discovered her husband's body  at  the  morgue.  Soon
      after  that  she  was  visited  by  the  men  who  she  presumed  were
      responsible for her husband's death. As a consequence of  the  demands
      they made of her she left for South Africa  where,  about  two  months
      later, she secured the services of an agent who arranged her flight to
      the United Kingdom.

   7. The appellant's appeal against the immigration  decision  (refusal  of
      leave to enter) that accompanied refusal  of  her  asylum  claim  came
      before Immigration Judge Birkby on 16th September 2008.  It  might  be
      observed before reflecting further upon that  determination  that  the
      country guidance provided by RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe [2008]  UKAIT  83
      did not become available until after the  date  of  that  hearing,  it
      being added to the list of published country guidance decisions  about
      two months later, on 19th November 2008.

   8. The judge dismissed the appeal because he did not accept  to  be  true
      any part of the appellant's account of being a member or supporter  of
      the MDC or of having attracted any adverse attention from soldiers  or
      anyone else before choosing to leave Zimbabwe and travel to the United
      Kingdom.   Having   identified   significant    inconsistencies    and
      contradictions in the appellant's evidence he concluded  that  it  had
      been "fabricated".

   9. Specifically, the judge did not accept that the appellant or her  late
      husband were ever involved with the  MDC  or  that  he,  that  is  her
      husband, was "singled out" at school for adverse attention. The  judge
      found also that there had been no unwelcome  visitors  to  the  family
      home, and concluded that:

           "I do not find therefore that the  Appellant  left  Zimbabwe  in
           fear of persecution or any form of ill-treatment."

  10. The judge did, though, accept two aspects of the appellant's evidence.
      He said:


           "I accept that  she  may  well  have  been  a  schoolteacher  in
           Zimbabwe..."


      and he said nothing  to  suggest  that  he  rejected  the  appellant's
      evidence that her late husband also worked as a schoolteacher.


  11. The judge looked  at  the  country  evidence  about  the  position  of
      schoolteachers and, noting reports of  recent  agreement  having  been
      reached between the MDC and President Mugabe,  presumably  as  to  the
      power sharing arrangements that resulted, said this:

           "... it is not possible at this  stage  to  assess  whether  the
           political and human rights situation is going to improve in  the
           short or medium term. Therefore I  accept  from  the  background
           documentation that there is substantial evidence of human rights
           abuses, in particular ill-treatment of  political  opponents  of
           the Robert Mugabe regime and within the  groups  who  have  been
           persecuted schoolteachers."


      Notwithstanding  that,  he  concluded  that  this  particular   former
      schoolteacher would not be at risk on return:


           "That situation still presents risks for certain Zimbabweans  on
           return. I do not however consider that the evidence given by the
           appellant as to her history of persecution in Zimbabwe and  that
           of her husband is credible. I do not consider her to be at  risk
           on  return.  Her  evidence  was  at   times   inconsistent   and
           implausible."


  12. It seems from what  is  said  in  the  determination  that  the  judge
      excluded the risk of ill-treatment on return simply on the basis  that
      he had rejected her account of past persecution,  without  considering
      the  likely  reception  this  appellant,  with  no  history  of   past
      persecution, would experience as a former teacher returning  from  the
      United Kingdom after a relatively brief absence.


  13. On 11th March 2009 Hickinbottom J granted an order for reconsideration
      of that decision because he found  that  the  issue  of  the  risk  of
      persecution faced by the appellant as  a  teacher  might  need  to  be
      reviewed in the light of RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  [2008]  UKAIT  83.
      Although RN was not before the judge, a good deal of the evidence that
      was to be considered, and accepted, by the Tribunal in RN  was  before
      the judge, including a  report  from  the  country  expert,  Professor
      Ranger, who gave evidence before the Tribunal in RN.

  14. At the first stage reconsideration hearing a Senior Immigration  Judge
      found that the Immigration Judge had indeed erred in law in failing to
      carry out an  adequate  assessment  of  the  risk  on  return  to  the
      appellant as a teacher, in the light of  that  part  of  the  evidence
      reviewed in RN that had also  been  available  before  him.  That  re-
      assessment was carried out by Immigration Judge Kelly before whom  the
      hearing was listed on 14th September 2009.  He  found  that  the  risk
      faced by teachers had diminished since the country guidance in RN  was
      published and so dismissed the appeal.

  15. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.
      On  10th June 2010 Sullivan LJ ordered, with consent of  the  parties,
      that the appeal be remitted to the Upper Tribunal:

           "... for rehearing of the issue of the risk of persecution faced
           by the  appellant,  as  a  teacher  returning  from  the  United
           Kingdom, in the light of (i) the credibility  findings  made  by
           the first Immigration Judge, (ii) RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe [2008]
           UKAIT 83, and (iii) any further objective evidence  relevant  to
           this issue.


           The finding that the appellant is a teacher is preserved."

  16.  And so the matter now comes before us.

  17. Before moving on to deal with  the  review  of  the  country  evidence
      offered by the parties that now must be undertaken, something might be
      said about the delay in the listing of this appeal which  was,  as  we
      have said, remitted to the Upper Tribunal as long  ago  as  10th  June
      2010.


  18. It was well known in the late summer of 2010 that there was  to  be  a
      new Zimbabwe country guidance case to be heard. The  hearing  of  that
      country guidance case, which was to be  published  as  EM  and  Others
      (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  (IAC),  commenced  on  18th
      October 2010 although the hearing was subsequently adjourned  and  was
      not completed until 14th January 2011.

  19. It may be that the file in the present case simply lost its way in the
      Tribunal's listing process and, as neither party made any  enquiry  as
      to when the appeal might be listed, the file did not come  to  receive
      any attention. But, in case it may be thought that listing was delayed
      in the hope and expectation that the fresh country guidance  would  be
      available to inform the re-making of the decision in this  appeal,  we
      address that approach  also.  After  all,  the  panel  in  RN  plainly
      contemplated that country conditions were likely  to  change  as  time
      moved on after the elections that had just taken place.

  20. But, any expectation that there may be a change in, or a challenge to,
      the current country guidance should not, in general, lead to any  need
      to delay the determination of an appeal, and we are satisfied that was
      not the case here,  especially  given  the  application  made  by  the
      appellant at the last hearing for a  lengthy  adjournment  so  that  a
      report could be commissioned from a country expert.

  21. Country guidance stands until it has been replaced or  unless  it  has
      been found by the higher courts to be legally flawed.  That  much  has
      always been clearly established: see, for example, OM (AA(1) wrong  in
      law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00077. The fact  that  there  may  be  a
      pending country guidance case or that  permission  to  appeal  to  the
      Court of Appeal has  been  granted  in  respect  of  existing  country
      guidance is not, of itself and in the absence of any other  reason  to
      do otherwise, reason to delay the determination  of  current  appeals.
      That position was authoritatively re-stated recently in respect of the
      latter proposition by the Court of Appeal  in  SG  &  another  v  SSHD
      [2012] EWCA Civ 940. Upholding the view  previously  expressed  below,
      Stanley Burnton LJ said, at paragraph 71 of SG:

           "In relation to evidence  other  than  that  considered  by  the
           Tribunal, and in particular evidence  of  subsequent  events,  I
           would endorse the test formulated by Irwin J. The  Court  should
           not stay removal pending the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal
           unless the claimant has adduced a clear  and  coherent  body  of
           evidence that the findings of the Tribunal were in error."

  22. In respect of the first proposition, that determination of  an  appeal
      should not be stayed where fresh country guidance is  expected  to  be
      published in the reasonably near future, the position is no different.
      True it is that recently, a panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal  comprising
      Wilkie J and Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson granted a stay on removal in
      the context of an application by a Sri Lankan claimant in fresh  claim
      judicial  review  proceedings  on  the  basis  that  removal  was  not
      appropriate until fresh country guidance in respect of Sri  Lanka  was
      published. But, as  Wilkie  J  made  clear  in  his  judgment[1],  the
      circumstances in that case were "truly unique". That was  because,  in
      opening submissions before the Tribunal hearing the  country  guidance
      case, which  is  presently  part-heard,  counsel  for  the  respondent
      conceded that there  would  have  to  be  an  extension  of  the  risk
      categories.


  23. That meant that it was accepted by the Secretary of  State  that  some
      categories of claimant not falling within  currently  identified  risk
      categories would do so under updated country  guidance,  although  the
      precise details would not be known until the  fresh  country  guidance
      was published.

  24. Country guidance is a starting point from which the judge is  entitled
      to depart if the evidence the parties choose to put forward  justifies
      such departure. Absent that,  like  cases  should  be  treated  alike,
      informed by the country guidance, as  is  made  clear  by  the  Senior
      President's Practice Direction:

           12.2       A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or
                  the IAT bearing the letters "CG" shall be treated  as  an
                  authoritative  finding  on  the  country  guidance  issue
                  identified in the determination, based upon the  evidence
                  before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT  or  the  IAT
                  that determine the appeal. As a  result,  unless  it  has
                  been expressly superseded or replaced by any  later  "CG"
                  determination, or is inconsistent  with  other  authority
                  that is binding on the Tribunal, such a country  guidance
                  case is authoritative in any subsequent appeal, so far as
                  that appeal:-
                       (a)  relates  to  the  country  guidance   issue   in
                           question; and
                       (b) depends upon the same or similar evidence.
           12.3  ...


           4. Because of the principle that like cases should be treated in
              like manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
              applicable country guidance case or to show why it  does  not
              apply to the case in question is likely  to  be  regarded  as
              grounds for appeal on a point of law.

  25. Thus, we return to address the question posed at the beginning of this
      determination. Is it the position, currently, that a teacher  faces  a
      heightened or enhanced level or risk wherever he or she is located  in
      Zimbabwe? Or is there a "geographical filter" so that the fact that  a
      person is known to be, or to have been, a teacher, will not give  rise
      to an enhanced risk, in certain areas of Zimbabwe?


  26. The answer to that question will inform our  assessment  of  the  risk
      faced by this appellant on  return  to  Bulawayo,  her  home  area  in
      Zimbabwe, on the basis  that  she  worked  as  a  teacher  before  her
      departure in May 2008 but  otherwise  had  no  particular  profile  or
      history of previous persecution or harassment.


  27. It might be added that when she left Zimbabwe in 2008 she left her two
      young children with relatives in Bulawayo.


  28. Time and country guidance have moved on since the date of the remittal
      by the Court of Appeal. As we have observed, the country  guidance  in
      EM has been reinstated by the publication in January 2013  of  CM  (EM
      country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC),
      which we examine  in  some  detail  below.  This  had  the  effect  of
      replacing (and displacing) the country guidance in  RN,  making  clear
      not just that the  country  guidance  in  EM  was  re-established  but
      bringing that guidance up to date to the extent that the scope of that
      hearing permitted.

  29. In making that final observation we recognise  that,  in  that  latter
      respect, CM has not been designated  in  its  entirety  as  a  country
      guidance case.  But what CM has to say about the position in  Zimbabwe
      as at October 2012, though not  comprehensive  and  not  authoritative
      country guidance, is worthy of note, particularly since that  position
      was found not to  have  materially  altered  since  the  period  under
      consideration in EM.


  30. Current  country  guidance  represents  the  starting  point  for  the
      assessment, once the facts are settled, as they are here. The Tribunal
      will then look at any fresh evidence offered by the parties  and  will
      depart from the country guidance only if the fresh evidence  makes  it
      appropriate to do so. For that to be appropriate, there will be a need
      for evidence that can properly be regarded as cogent. As was conformed
      by Davis LJ in SS at paragraph 24:

           "...  decision  makers  and  tribunal   judges   should   follow
           applicable country guidance determination  unless  "very  strong
           grounds supported by cogent evidence" were  adduced  to  justify
           not doing so."

  31. Generally, it will not be necessary to look back  at  earlier  country
      guidance, where the more recent guidance  is  stated  specifically  to
      replace, it rather than to supplement it.


  32. But in the present case it is helpful to examine  the  development  of
      the guidance relating to teachers in Zimbabwe  as  country  conditions
      generally have changed for the better or for the worse. We shall  then
      look at the current country evidence in  the  public  domain  and  the
      fresh evidence upon which the appellant relies in this appeal.

SM and Others (MDC - internal flight - risk categories) Zimbabwe CG [2005]
UKIAT 00100

  33. In SM the Tribunal considered a report by Professor  Ranger,  who  has
      given  evidence  in  subsequent  country  guidance  cases   concerning
      Zimbabwe. That report was dated February 2005. The Tribunal summarised
      his evidence as follows:


           "There had been a falling away of threats to  teachers  in  2003
           and early 2004.  However, two processes have been going on which
           once again exposed teachers  to  threat.    The  first  was  the
           process of increasing state and party presence within schools. A
           number of those trained in youth militia camps were now teaching
           in schools.  A new union, the Teachers  Union  of  Zimbabwe  had
           been  established  which  was  openly  committed   to   ZANU-PF.
           Teachers were under pressure to join  it.   The  second  process
           related to the approach of the March  general  elections.    The
           Zimbabwe Human Rights NGO Forum  reports  have  again  begun  to
           report violence  against  teachers.    On  9  January  2005  the
           Standard reported that scores of teachers were converging on the
           Education Ministry Office in Mutare  seeking  transfers  because
           they wanted to get out of  the  rural  areas  before  the  March
           elections were held
           ...


           There would be special difficulties for  people  who  wished  to
           return to previous  employment.    Teachers  had  to  undergo  a
           period in which enquiries were made by the Ministry about  their
           past activities.
           ...


           Teachers and civil servants were assumed to have influenced  the
           votes and there would be a period of post-election  retribution.


           ...
           The disturbing feature was an increasing  network  of  informers
           amongst teachers and lecturers.
           ...


           Teachers and trade unionists probably would have a CIO file.
           ...


           There was a heightened risk for  returnees  at  present  in  the
           light of the assertions by  the  Zimbabwe  government  that  the
           decision to return  Zimbabweans  could  be  a  cover  to  deploy
           elements trained in sabotage and  to  de-stabilise  the  country
           before and during the  elections.     There  was  evidence  that
           those returned would be interrogated.  There  was  a  particular
           risk for teachers.   There was evidence that all deportees  were
           handed over to the authorities for questioning."

  34. On the basis of this evidence the Tribunal concluded that:


           "There does continue to be a risk for teachers with an actual or
           perceived political profile of support for the MDC."

HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 00094


  35. HS was silent as to the plight of teachers in  Zimbabwe  in  2007  but
      that case was focused upon the  risk  on  return  on  arrival  at  the
      airport and it  was  not  suggested  that  teachers,  as  a  class  of
      returnees, faced any such enhanced risk at that stage.


RN (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT 00083


  36. RN considered country conditions in Zimbabwe at the very height of the
      violence blighting that country as the election cycle  ground  to  its
      dreadful climax. At paragraph 95:

          95. Professor Ranger gives a similar account as does W66  of  the
              elections in March. It was  because  the  votes  were  posted
              outside each polling station that large  scale  vote  rigging
              was very difficult. The best that could  be  achieved,  after
              weeks of delay, was  to  deprive  the  MDC  of  the  outright
              victory they claimed to be entitled to  in  the  Presidential
              elections so that there would have to be a run off vote:


                     "But  these  locally  posted  results  allowed  militia
                     gangs, soldiers and CIO to identify targets.  By  early
                     May many press reports were appearing of  retaliations.
                     On May 8, (a  news  report)  described  how  the  worst
                     violence in Zimbabwe's  recent  political  history  had
                     taken place in Mapondera  village.   There  the  posted
                     result showed that 70 people had voted for the MDC  and
                     only  10  for  ZANU/PF.   Militia  attacked  at  night,
                     telling people that "you made us lose and you  have  to
                     pay for it ... They  pulled  out  husbands  and  wives,
                     separated them and killed them on the spot;  then  they
                     proceeded  to  the  school  where  they   killed   four
                     teachers.
                     ...


                     Another vivid and  disturbing  report  had  been  filed
                     earlier...  This described how nurses and patients were
                     dragged out of Louis Guidotti hospital in Mutoko.  They
                     were addressed by armed  men  with  the  same  message:
                     "This is your last chance.   You  messed  up  when  you
                     voted. Next time you must get it right or you die."


          96. Asked to address the position of teachers  in  Zimbabwe,  the
              professor  explained  that,  once  again,  they  have  become
              targets. This is because many had acted as  polling  officers
              and were accused of favouring the MDC. A report in the  state
              sponsored Herald newspaper asserted that  many  teachers  who
              had rigged the poll had fled the country to escape "the  long
              arm of the law". The evidence indicates that  2,700  teachers
              had fled, dozens of schools had closed and 123 teachers  were
              charged with election fraud offences. On April 30th 2008  the
              Institute for  War  and  Peace  Studies  published  a  report
              entitled "Zimbabwe: Teachers fall victim to  rural  violence"
              in which an account was given of teachers being subjected  to
              "hate speech" and assaults.

  37. And at paragraph 130 of RN:


           A Zimbabwe Crisis report in May 2008 said that hundreds of rural
           schools had been closed because "most teachers have  fled  local
           violence":


                 "War veterans and  militias  have  reportedly  unleashed  a
                 reign of terror  in  the  countryside,  and  although  many
                 victims are said  to  be  opposition  supporters,  ordinary
                 teachers have also borne the brunt.
                 ...
                 Teachers have long been regarded as community  leaders  and
                 opinion formers, particularly in the rural areas, and often
                 they have found themselves the target of militias loyal  to
                 the governing party."


  38. It can be seen from these extracts that  even  in  2005  there  was  a
      perceptible difference in the level of  risks  to  teachers  depending
      upon whether they were based  in  a  rural  area,  although  that  was
      articulated on the basis that such  teachers  were  "particularly"  at
      risk rather than there being an absence of risk in a  non-rural  area.
      This evidence, and more, led the Tribunal in RN to reach the following
      conclusion in respect of teachers:


           "There is clear evidence also that teachers  in  Zimbabwe  have,
           once again, become targets for persecution in Zimbabwe. This  is
           confirmed by the evidence  of  Professor  Ranger  considered  at
           paragraph 96 of this determination and reinforced  by  the  news
           reports, examples of which are given at paragraphs 130 and  148.
           As many teachers have fled to avoid  retribution,  the  fact  of
           being a teacher or having been a teacher in the  past  again  is
           capable of raising an enhanced risk, whether or not a person was
           a polling officer, because when encountered it will not be known
           what a particular teacher did or did not do in another area."


  39. All of this is to be considered in  the  context  of  the  politically
      motivated violence being experienced across the country generally.  At
      paragraph 215 and 216 of RN the Tribunal said this:


           "What is clear, however, is that  it  has  been  established  by
           overwhelming evidence  that  in  deploying  these  militias  the
           regime unleashed against its own citizens a vicious campaign  of
           violence, murder, destruction, rape and displacement designed to
           ensure that there remains of the MDC nothing capable of mounting
           a challenge to the continued authority of the ruling party.


           This campaign has been rolled out  across  the  country  not  by
           disciplined  state  forces  but  by  the  loose  collection   of
           undisciplined militias who have delivered a quite  astonishingly
           brutal wave of violence to whole  communities  thought  to  bear
           responsibility for the "wrong" outcome of the March  2008  poll.
           It is precisely because of  that  that  any  attempt  to  target
           specifically those who have chosen to  involve  themselves  with
           the MDC has been abandoned. In our view there can be no doubt at
           all from the evidence now before the Tribunal that those at risk
           are not simply those who are seen to be supporters  of  the  MDC
           but anyone who cannot demonstrate positive support  for  Zanu-PF
           or alignment with the regime."


  40. Thus, as we have observed, the factors that led to the  enhanced  risk
      for teachers, above and beyond the risk to  any  citizen  of  Zimbabwe
      unable, if called upon to do so, to demonstrate loyalty to the regime,
      were  threefold.  First,  teachers  were  perceived  to  be   "opinion
      formers", occupying a position in society such as to provide them with
      an opportunity to influence the thinking of young people; second, they
      were perceived as more likely to be supporters of the MDC than of Zanu-
      PF; and  third,  many  acted  as  polling  officers,  sometimes  being
      required to discharge that  role  as  schools  were  used  as  polling
      stations, so that they were suspected  of  seeking  to  influence  the
      process of voting itself to the disadvantage of the ruling party.


  41. It is important to bear in mind,  also,  that  the  enhanced  risk  to
      teachers was associated with the tensions and violence associated with
      the election cycle in Zimbabwe  which,  by  the  time  of  EM,  varied
      significantly from area to area.

  42. It is clear that there was a significant change in country  conditions
      subsequent to the peak of the violence in the lead up to  and  in  the
      run-off from the 2008 elections. The power sharing  agreement  between
      Zanu-PF and the MDC was very far from perfect but it  brought  to  the
      country a degree of stability.

  43. That change in country conditions, recognised to be  significant,  was
      reflected in the country guidance provided by EM. It is not  necessary
      to examine in detail the  country  guidance,  found  in  EM.  That  is
      because that guidance has been subsumed within the updated guidance of
      CM, having been amended to take account of RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012]
      UKSC 38.

  44. With regard to the link between elections and  violence  in  Zimbabwe,
      the panel in CM agreed with what was said in EM to the effect that  it
      should not be assumed that there  would  be  a  repetition  in  future
      elections of the violence that was seen  in  2008.  At  paragraph  98,
      having looked at what was offered to  support  a  contrary  view,  the
      Tribunal said this:

           "None of these new materials detracts from the overall thrust of
           the evidence as a whole, including that before the  Tribunal  in
           EM, that both SADC and South Africa were anxious to ensure,  not
           only that there would be no repeat of the 2008 election violence
           in Zimbabwe, but also that future elections  would  be  regarded
           internationally as legitimate..."

  45. This is how that restatement of the EM country guidance was  expressed
      in the head note:

         The only change to the EM Country Guidance that it is necessary  to
         make as regards the position as at the end of January  2011  arises
         from the judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38. The EM  Country
         Guidance is, accordingly, re-stated as  follows  (with  the  change
         underlined in paragraph (5) below):


         (1)       As  a  general  matter,  there  is   significantly   less
             politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe, compared with  the
             situation considered by the AIT in  RN.   In  particular,  the
             evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
             of a failed asylum seeker from the United Kingdom,  having  no
             significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing  a
             real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


         (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the  case
             of a person without ZANU-PF connections,  returning  from  the
             United Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural area  of
             Zimbabwe, other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.
             Such a person may well find  it  difficult  to  avoid  adverse
             attention, amounting to serious  ill-treatment,  from  ZANU-PF
             authority  figures  and  those  they  control.   The   adverse
             attention  may  well  involve  a  requirement  to  demonstrate
             loyalty to ZANU-PF, with the prospect of serious harm  in  the
             event of failure.  Persons who have shown themselves not to be
             favourably disposed to ZANU-PF are entitled  to  international
             protection, whether or not they could and  would  do  whatever
             might  be  necessary   to   demonstrate   such   loyalty   (RT
             (Zimbabwe)).


         (3)    The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas
             and there may be reasons why a particular individual, although
             at first sight appearing to fall within the category described
             in the preceding paragraph, in reality does  not  do  so.  For
             example,  the  evidence  might  disclose  that,  in  the  home
             village, ZANU-PF power structures or other means  of  coercion
             are weak or absent.


         (4)     In general, a returnee from the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
             Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to
             face significant difficulty from ZANU-PF  elements,  including
             the security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC  member  or
             supporter. A person may, however, be able to show that his  or
             her village or area is one that, unusually, is under the  sway
             of a ZANU-PF chief, or the like.


         (5)      A returnee to Harare will in general face  no  significant
             difficulties, if going  to  a  low-density  or  medium-density
             area. Whilst  the  socio-economic  situation  in  high-density
             areas is more challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF
             connections  will  not   face   significant   problems   there
             (including  a  "loyalty  test"),  unless  he  or  she  has   a
             significant MDC profile, which  might  cause  him  or  her  to
             feature on a list of those targeted for harassment,  or  would
             otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely to
             engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to
             the adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


         (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the
             adverse attention of ZANU-PF, including the  security  forces,
             even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.


         (7)      The issue of what is a person's home for the  purposes  of
             internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of  fact  and
             is not necessarily to be determined by reference to the  place
             a person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her  rural  homeland.
             As a general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a well-
             founded fear of persecution in a major urban  centre  such  as
             Harare will have a viable internal relocation alternative to a
             rural  area  in   the   Eastern   provinces.   Relocation   to
             Matabeleland  (including   Bulawayo)   may   be   negated   by
             discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


         (8)      Internal  relocation  from  a  rural  area  to  Harare  or
             (subject to what we have just said) Bulawayo is,  in  general,
             more realistic; but the socio-economic circumstances in  which
             persons are reasonably likely to find themselves will need  to
             be considered, in order  to  determine  whether  it  would  be
             unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect them to relocate.


         (9)      The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the
             period considered in RN. The  replacement  of  the  Zimbabwean
             currency by the US dollar and the South African rand has ended
             the recent hyperinflation. The availability of food and  other
             goods in shops has likewise improved, as has the  availability
             of utilities in Harare. Although these  improvements  are  not
             being felt by everyone,  with  15%  of  the  population  still
             requiring food aid, there has not been  any  deterioration  in
             the humanitarian situation since late  2008.  Zimbabwe  has  a
             large informal economy, ranging from street traders  to  home-
             based enterprises,  which  (depending  on  the  circumstances)
             returnees may be expected to enter.


         (10)     As was the position in RN, those  who  are  or  have  been
             teachers require to have their cases determined on  the  basis
             that this fact places them in an enhanced or  heightened  risk
             category, the significance of which will need to  be  assessed
             on an individual basis.


         (11)  In certain cases, persons found to be  seriously  lacking  in
             credibility may properly be found as a result to  have  failed
             to show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they  would  not,  in
             fact, be regarded, on return, as aligned with  ZANU-PF  and/or
             (b) that they would be returning to a socio-economic milieu in
             which problems with ZANU-PF will arise. This  important  point
             was identified in RN ... and remains valid.


  46. The Tribunal in CM then went on consider whether the post January 2011
      evidence of country  conditions,  which  was  before  it,  required  a
      departure from the EM country guidance, and to make some  observations
      about that more recent evidence:


        In the course of deciding CM's appeal,  the  present  Tribunal  has
        made an assessment of certain general matters regarding Zimbabwe as
        at October 2012. As a result, the following country information may
        be of assistance to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not
        Country Guidance within the scope of Practice Direction 12  and  is
        based on evidence which neither party claimed to be comprehensive:


        a) The picture presented by the fresh evidence as  to  the  general
           position of politically motivated violence  in  Zimbabwe  as  at
           October 2012 does not differ in any material  respect  from  the
           Country Guidance in EM.


        b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


        c) In the  light  of  the  evidence  regarding  the  activities  of
           Chipangano, judicial-fact finders may  need  to  pay  particular
           regard to whether a person, who is reasonably likely  to  go  to
           Mbare or a neighbouring high density area of Harare,  will  come
           to the adverse attention of that group; in particular, if he  or
           she is reasonably likely to have to find employment  of  a  kind
           that Chipangano  seeks  to  control  or  otherwise  exploit  for
           economic, rather than political, reasons.


        d) The fresh evidence regarding the position at the point of return
           does not  indicate  any  increase  in  risk  since  the  Country
           Guidance was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe  CG
           [2007] UKAIT 00094. On the contrary, the available  evidence  as
           to the treatment of those  who  have  been  returned  to  Harare
           Airport since 2007 and the absence of any reliable  evidence  of
           risk there means that there is no  justification  for  extending
           the scope of who  might  be  regarded  by  the  CIO  as  an  MDC
           activist.

  47. The question that presents itself is why the Tribunal in EM  concluded
      that there  was  no  adverse  consequence  of  being  perceived  as  a
      supporter of or even an activist on  behalf  of  the  MDC  in  certain
      areas, including Bulawayo,  which  is  the  city  with  which  we  are
      concerned in this appeal as that is the  appellant's  home  area,  yet
      still  expressed  the  risk  for  teachers  to  be  a  heightened  one
      generally, with no geographical based qualification. The answer may be
      found in the fact that the question of whether there was any real risk
      for an individual on the basis of him or her being or  having  been  a
      teacher was to be assessed on a case by case  basis.  That  means,  of
      course, that all the circumstances are to be taken  into  account  and
      that would include the intended destination for return.


  48. It  is also relevant  that, in finding a heighted risk  for  teachers,
      the Tribunal in EM was not invited to carry out a geographically based
      analysis of the evidence  of  harassment  and  persecution,  recording
      that:


        "In the present appeals, the respondent acknowledges that  teachers
        remain in a category where there is a heightened or enhanced  risk.
        That is plainly right.   Various  news  reports  submitted  by  the
        appellants demonstrate the fact that  teachers  can  face  problems
        from ZANU-PF."


      The Tribunal  went  on  to  examine  a  number  of  examples  of  such
      difficulties  experienced  by  teachers,  none  of  which  were   said
      specifically to have taken place in the areas where the Tribunal found
      that being active in support of the MDC  would  be  unproblematic  and
      concluded that:

        "Being in a heightened risk category is not, however, to be  equated
        without more as being at real risk of persecution.  There  needs  to
        be an individual assessment  of  the  circumstances  (TM  (Zimbabwe)
        [2010] EWCA Civ 916)."

  49. We now turn to consider the more recent evidence  relied  upon  by  Mr
      Hussein in support of his submission that teachers are  at  heightened
      risk throughout Zimbabwe and not  just  in  those  areas  where  being
      perceived to be a supporter of the MDC or, more acutely,  where  being
      perceived simply as someone who is not a  supporter  of  or  otherwise
      aligned to Zanu-PF or the regime controlled by the party is  something
      that attracts adverse treatment.


  50. That evidence is  found  in  a  bundle  prepared  by  his  instructing
      solicitors specifically for the hearing which, it  will  be  recalled,
      was focussed on this narrow issue of the risk to teachers in  Zimbabwe
      today.

  51. We start our consideration of this material by looking at Dr Aguilar's
      report.

  52. As we have observed, this appellant has family connections in Bulawayo
      and  it  was  to  the  family  home  in  Bulawayo  that  she  returned
      immediately before her departure from Zimbabwe. It  is  reasonable  to
      proceed on the basis that she would return there now and so we  assess
      the level of risk she may face on that basis. Her evidence to  us  was
      that the family home is presently unoccupied but there is  nothing  to
      indicate that it does not remain available.


  53. In the light of the current country guidance, if it were not  for  the
      fact that some years ago this appellant worked as a part time  primary
      school teacher in a rural area in Matabeleland North about three hours
      drive away from Bulawayo, any assertion of risk would  be  unarguable.
      But Mr Hussein submits that, as  a  teacher,  the  level  of  risk  is
      enhanced and needs to  be  assessed  on  the  specific  basis  of  her
      individual profile.

  54. The analysis of that risk must be informed by the reasons why teachers
      have attracted an enhanced level of risk. For example, if the risk  is
      enhanced because being a teacher brings with it a  perception  that  a
      person is likely to be a supporter of the MDC then, if no  consequence
      flows from such perception, there is no heightened level  of  risk  on
      that account.

  55. It is plain from CM that in Bulawayo no real risk  generally  attaches
      to demonstrating overt support for the MDC, even for  someone  with  a
      "significant profile" in that respect. Similarly, if, as the  Tribunal
      in CM were satisfied is the case,  Zanu-PF  and  its  supporters  have
      significantly less purchase in Bulawayo, then it is hard  to  see  how
      the perception, entirely erroneous in this particular case, that as  a
      teacher the appellant might have sought to influence young  people  to
      support the MDC when working as a primary school  teacher  some  years
      ago, can give rise to any real risk.

  56. Support for that view may be found in the  fact  that,  although  this
      appeal was remitted for reconsideration specifically upon the issue of
      risk on return as a failed  asylum  seeker  who  former  worked  as  a
      teacher in Zimbabwe and was identified  as  potentially  suitable  for
      giving country guidance on the position of teachers,  it  is  striking
      that there is no evidence at all of any recent difficulty  experienced
      by any teacher, even those presently working as such, in the  Bulawayo
      area.

  57. Dr Aguilar sets out her academic and career history at  the  beginning
      of the report and it is sufficient to say that she has a long-standing
      interest in Zimbabwean affairs, although it is not clear when she last
      visited the country. She has written many reports and is qualified  to
      offer an expert opinion.

  58. Having said that, there are real difficulties  with  her  report,  not
      least  that  it  is  based  upon  an  unqualified  acceptance  of  the
      appellant's factual account  of  being  associated  with  the  MDC  in
      Zimbabwe and of having been attacked by soldiers at the  school  where
      she and her husband worked before  her  husband  was  taken  away  and
      killed by the authorities. All of that, as we have seen, was  rejected
      by the judge as untrue and those findings have been preserved  by  the
      Court of Appeal in remitting the appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Yet  Dr
      Aguilar has written her report on the basis that this account is true.

  59. That much might not, though, be such  as  to  detract  from  the  real
      purpose of commissioning a report from this expert because that was to
      do with the general risk to teachers, so that an incorrect approach to
      the credibility of this particular appellant  would  not,  in  itself,
      undermine  any  sound  expert  view  expressed   concerning   teachers
      generally.

  60. Having made the general observation about teachers, true  in  Zimbabwe
      as anywhere else, that as individuals they will be well  known  within
      their communities,  Dr  Aguilar  says  that  in  Zimbabwe,  as  public
      servants, there  is  an  expectation  that  teachers  will  serve  the
      government, so that speaking against  the  government  or  the  ruling
      party - Zanu-PF - means that the teacher will be "accused  of  imputed
      political beliefs in opposition to the Zanu PF". She continues:

           "Once a teacher  is  believed  to  be  opposed  to  the  Zanu-PF
           government that teacher is likely to suffer persecution such  as
           harassment,  being  monitored  and   spied   upon   by   Zanu-PF
           supporters, forced to demonstrate support for  Zanu-PF  such  as
           marching, chanting or attending rallies. Some have been arrested
           and thousands have fled in fear of persecution."


      That may well have been the case at the  height  of  the  violence  in
      2008, but it takes no account at all of the  views  expressed  by  the
      Tribunal in EM and CM or the significant improvement in that regard to
      the country conditions so far as they relate to the  risk  in  certain
      areas of the country, including  Bulawayo,  on  account  of  professed
      support for or association with the MDC.

  61. Much of Dr Aguilar's conclusions specific to this particular appellant
      must be discounted because they  are  predicated  upon  the  appellant
      having a profile that she has been found  not  to  possess.  Thus,  Dr
      Aguilar asserts that the appellant may be detained at the airport  for
      questioning by the CIO as her name may be linked with that of her late
      husband who would be known to be an MDC activist. That is  simply  not
      sustainable. There is no reason at all to suppose that  the  appellant
      would attract any adverse interest as she passes through  the  airport
      on return to  Zimbabwe,  either  because  of  any  perceived  personal
      profile or because she may be travelling on  documents  other  than  a
      passport.


  62. Similarly, the assertion by Dr Aguilar that the appellant  would  then
      be "contacted again by Zanu-PF in her home area after arrival" is  one
      that takes no account at all of the country  guidance  to  the  effect
      that, in Bulawayo, that is not something that is generally  likely  to
      happen.

  63. At paragraph 5.2 of her report Dr Aguilar says this:

           "In the present situation in  Zimbabwe  there  is  ample  recent
           evidence, as recent as February 2013, that teachers continue  to
           be persecuted. In addition there is recent evidence in 2013 that
           there is real fear of violence with fresh elections suggested as
           soon as July 2013"

  64. Some of the material offered by Dr Aguilar in support of her  view  is
      very old, some as old as 2002. The following postdates the publication
      of EM  in March 2011:


        a. A printout from the website of the Putz teachers' union  website
           on 17th February 2013 described a  "raid"  by  two  "overzealous
           police officers" on the PTUZ offices in Manicaland.  There  were
           no arrests reported.
        b. A news  report  dated  7th  February  2013  concerning  concerns
           expressed by Education minister David Coltard  about  poor  pass
           rates in  examinations  being  achieved  by  schools  that  were
           suffering from underfunding and a lack  of  qualified  teachers,
           many of whom "had left the country for greener pastures  due  to
           poor salaries".
        c. A news report dated 7th January  2013  about  threatened  strike
           action by teachers in Zimbabwe because of poor  salaries,  union
           leaders making confident assertions as to the government  having
           resources from the diamond mines to fund  significant  increases
           in teachers' pay.
        d. A News Day report dated  12th  December  2012.  This  makes  two
           points after referring to the violence that had  led  to  70,000
           teachers having left Zimbabwe since 2000. First it is said that:


                 "... the education sector was under siege as  violence  was
                 rearing its ugly head again  ahead  of  possible  elections
                 sometime next year."


           But that evidence of violence is not identified or expanded upon
           with no examples offered. Second:


                 "Their involvement as polling officers during elections was
                 also cited as another  factor  that  contributed  to  their
                 victimisation."


           But it is noticeable that, although offering  that,  Dr  Aguilar
           does not make any reference to the news reports also  available,
           confirming that the Education Minister has banned teachers  from
           acting as polling officers, either in  the  imminent  referendum
           vote or in the forthcoming elections. This was said to be linked
           to his concern as to falling standards in schools and  the  need
           to avoid anything that would "disturb the learning process".
        e. Next, there is  an  Education  International  report  dated  7th
           January 2013 concerned only with  the  issue  of  the  level  of
           teachers' salaries and the threat of strike action.
        f. Complaints that flea market  stall  holders  in  Chitungwiza  in
           Mashonaland might lose their stalls  to  Zanu-PF  supporters  as
           elections approach,  reported  in  the  Zimbabwean  Standard  in
           February 2013, do not really illuminate the assessment  of  risk
           for teachers in areas like Bulawayo.
        g. Nor do reports in January of this  year  that  in  Midlands  and
           Mashonaland Central  districts  there  have  been  incidents  of
           corruption involving officials demanding bribes in exchange  for
           allocation of teaching jobs.
        h. Next is an extract from a report from UHHCR dated "August 2012".
           This looks back at the pre 2008 violence and appears to draw  on
           an OGN from August 2012 in stating:


                 "... since  President  Robert  Mugabe  announced  elections
                 would take place in  2011  teachers,  especially  in  rural
                 areas, have been the  victims  of  political  violence  and
                 extortion  by  war  veterans  and  Zanu-PF  supporters...",
                 although the very few examples of that given  are,  indeed,
                 all in rural areas."


        i. Similarly, a report said to be  a  "Relief  Web  reprint  of  18
           December  2012  report  from  "the  Zimbabwean"  speaks  of  the
           "resurfacing of youth militia bases in some rural schools".
        j. Next, there is an unattributed report entitled "Zimbabwe:  Zanu-
           PF Re-Calls Green Bombers". This reports that  each  of  the  10
           provincial governors had been tasked with recruiting 200  youths
           to work in the prison service and it was feared that those  jobs
           would go to Zanu-PF supporters.
        k. Finally, there is a lengthy report from Freedom  House  in  2012
           which notes that:


                 "since 2009, Zimbabwe has experienced a period of  relative
                 calm which may prove to be but  a  brief  respite  for  the
                 country"


           because of forthcoming elections. But the report offers  nothing
           to contradict or cast doubt upon the conclusions reached  in  CM
           concerning  the  geographical  context  of  risk  arising   from
           political profile or perceived profile.

  65. Having set out the historical context of difficulties for teachers, Dr
      Aguilar asserts that the forthcoming elections, expected in the summer
      of 2013, are bringing with them fresh  evidence  of  violence  against
      teachers. But there is no evidence of such violence occurring in areas
      where an open display of support for the MDC does not bring  to  those
      involved the ill-treatment or harassment experienced elsewhere at  the
      hands of Zanu-PF supporters or the other instruments of that party.


  66.  For those reasons we are satisfied that Dr Aguilar's report  provides
      no support for the assertion that  there  is  a  heightened  risk  for
      teachers in an area where, in general, no  adverse  consequence  flows
      from actual or imputed support for the MDC.

  67. Next in the appellant's bundle is The Operational Guidance Note issued
      by UKBA recently, in  February  2013.  The  position  of  teachers  in
      Zimbabwe is considered at the section  commencing  at  paragraph  3.7.
      Importantly,  the  OGN,  reflecting  the  current  country   guidance,
      recognised that assessment of risk on return,  generally,  "will  very
      much depend upon the place to which he or she would return":

           "In general, those returning to MDC  dominated  rural  areas  of
           Matabeleland North or  Matabeleland  South  would  generally  be
           highly unlikely to  face  significant  difficulty  from  Zanu-PF
           elements, including the security forces".


      Recognising that the same could not be said of other rural areas,  the
      OGN assets also that,  even  for  those  faced  with  such  a  primary
      destination, internal relocation to Harare or  Bulawayo  was  possible
      and should not be  unduly  harsh.  The  section  of  the  OGN  dealing
      specifically with teachers recites details of difficulties experienced
      by teachers that  are  either  now  historic,  predating  the  current
      country guidance or which relate to incidents in rural  areas  outside
      the scope of the  focus  of  this  determination.  The  conclusion  in
      respect of what  has  been  previously  accepted  to  be  a  generally
      heightened risk for teachers is set out at paragraph 3.7.10:


           ... The heightened risks associated with being a teacher  should
           be considered alongside the  individual  circumstances  of  each
           case, including their previous employment, any adverse  interest
           by the authorities and an assessment of  the  risk  to  them  on
           return to Zimbabwe whether or not  they  seek  to  resume  their
           career as a teacher..."


      We would add that "individual circumstances" include  inescapably  and
      importantly the destination on return. Thus, there is nothing  in  the
      OGN that provides support for  any  claimed  heightened  risk  in  the
      particular areas with which we are concerned where  open  support  for
      the MDC does not attract adverse consequences.


  68. The same can be said of the other reports contained within the bundle,
      a detailed examination of which explains why Mr Hussein was unable  to
      refer us to anything that provided support for the  general  assertion
      that teachers will experience an  enhanced  risk  of  coming  to  harm
      irrespective of location.


  69. Drawing all of this together, we are satisfied that an examination  of
      all the evidence relating to risks faced by teachers that the  parties
      have been able to put before  us,  considered  in  the  light  of  the
      current country guidance provided by CM, leads to  only  one  rational
      conclusion: The "geographical filter" identified in EM  and  confirmed
      more recently in CM is equally applicable to teachers. Thus, a teacher
      will not face a heightened risk on return to Zimbabwe, on  account  of
      his or her occupation or  former  occupation  alone,  if  his  or  her
      destination of return is (a) rural Matabeleland North or  Matabeleland
      South, where a returnee will in general not face a real risk  of  harm
      from Zanu-PF elements, including the security forces, even  if  he  or
      she is a MDC member or supporter; or (b) Bulawayo, where the  returnee
      will in general not face such  a  risk,  even  if  he  or  she  has  a
      significant MDC profile

  70. That is sufficient to dispose of the protection  claim.  There  is  no
      reason at all to suppose, given her present  circumstances,  that  the
      appellant will seek to re-establish herself  anywhere  other  than  in
      Bulawayo. The appellant also pursues a claim under article  8  of  the
      ECHR, although that can be dealt with quite  briefly.  As  Mr  Hussein
      conceded at the beginning of the hearing, the appellant "does not wish
      to pursue the article 8 claim with any vigour".

  71. It is not hard to see why the appellant takes that view,  nor  why  Mr
      Hussein, quite realistically, does not  suggest  that  the  article  8
      claim discloses any real cogency. We accept that the appellant  has  a
      child, born in the United Kingdom on 10th June  2010  and  so  aged  2
      years and 10 months. But we reject her late assertion that this  child
      may be a British Citizen. The father, who lives in  a  different  city
      than does the appellant, has contributed nothing at all in support  of
      the appellant's account of the child and we simply do not accept  that
      what  she  says  is  true.  The  appellant  has  had  the  benefit  of
      experienced solicitors throughout and it is simply not credible  that,
      if the child were indeed a British citizen in regular or even sporadic
      contact with a British father who was intent on maintaining contact or
      even wished to commence  contact,  that  there  would  be  nothing  to
      support the appellant's bare assertion to that effect.

  72. Thus the best interests of this very young child are to  be  with  her
      mother, and her mother's place is in her country of nationality  where
      we are satisfied she will be able  to  live  in  the  family  home  in
      Bulawayo with her other two children from whom she has been  separated
      since 2008.

  73. There is no continuing relationship with the father of her  child  and
      so there will be no interference with family life. Nor  is  there  any
      evidence of any  significant  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Therefore, on the  evidence  presented,  there  is  no  engagement  of
      article 8, even recognising that the threshold of engagement is not  a
      particularly high one.

  74. The appellant told us that she would  not  work  again  as  a  teacher
      because it had been too long since she had done so and she would  need
      to retrain. But she has also worked in Zimbabwe in  a  shop  and  will
      have access to the informal economy in Zimbabwe in  common  with  many
      others.  She is plainly a  resourceful  woman  who  does  have  family
      assistance to call upon, even if the family has become  geographically
      dislocated. Although she will, like many citizens  of  Zimbabwe,  find
      life challenging, we do not accept that she will face  destitution  on
      return or be otherwise unable to provide for her  children,  nor  that
      whatever arrangements are in  place  to  provide  for  the  continuing
      education of her younger child now in Zimbabwe will be interrupted  as
      a consequence of her return.

  75. For the sake of completeness we should record that Mr Hussein did  not
      advance any submission based upon the appellant's health or  need  for
      treatment for her HIV status that the appeal  should  succeed  on  the
      basis of an infringement of the appellant's  human  rights.  There  is
      nothing before us to suggest otherwise and so  we  need  say  no  more
      about that.

   76.      Finally, we should record that, although  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing this appeal had not been formally  categorised  as  a  country
      guidance case, it had in the past been identified, as the parties  are
      aware, as a potential vehicle  to  provide  country  guidance  on  the
      current position relating to teachers in Zimbabwe ad the expert report
      had been commissioned on that basis.

   Summary of Decision:


  76. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


                               Signed




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 28th March 2013
                      SCHEDULE OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE


                               |Date                |                                                       |
|Undated but received|Country Expert Report by Dr Laurel Birch Aguilar       |
|by fax on 11/03/2013|                                                       |
|28/02/2013          |The Herald: Zimbabwe: Coltart Bars Teachers from       |
|                    |Referendum.                                            |
|17/08/2012          |Zimbabwe Peace Project Report; July 2012               |
|07/08/2012          |UKBA Operational Guidance Note; August 2012            |
|13/07/2012          |UKBA COI Report; July 2012                             |
|18/04/2012          |Voice of America News Report: Zimbabwe President Wants |
|                    |Elections to End Coalition Government.                 |
|13/02/2012          |ZimOnline Report: Half of Zim teachers are victims of  |
|                    |violence                                               |
|19/01/2012          |SW Radio Africa Report: Zanu PF violence intensifies in|
|                    |Mbare                                                  |
|23/06/2011          |SW Radio Africa Report: Union says militia & CIOs      |
|                    |harassing striking teachers.                           |
|27/03/2011          |Voice of America News Report: Zimbabwe Tensions Rise   |
|                    |Before Regional Meeting.                               |
|22/03/2011          |Voice of America News Report: Zimbabwe Group Says      |
|                    |Political Violence Back to Levels Seen in Early 2009.  |
|18/03/2011          |ZimOnline Report: Zim soldiers rob, rape women.        |
|05/11/2010          |SW Radio Africa Report: Four teachers severely beaten  |
|                    |by Zanu PF youths in Masvingo.                         |
|03/08/2010          |Radio Africa Report: Teachers the target of violence as|
|                    |country slides into election mode.                     |


                               -----------------------
[1] PK and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC
1064 (Admin)


