

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AUJ (Trafficking - no conclusive grounds decision) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT
00200 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 April 2018                               |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                                    A U J
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                  ANONYMITY

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco, of Counsel, instructed by Schneider
                    Goldstein Immigration Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr. T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



In cases in which there is no "Conclusive Grounds" decision:

      (i)   If a person ("P") claims that the fact of  being  trafficked  in
        the past or a victim of modern slavery gives rise to a real risk of
        persecution in the  home  country  and/or  being  re-trafficked  or
        subjected to modern slavery in the home country and/or that it  has
        had such an impact upon P  that  removal  would  be  in  breach  of
        protected human rights, it will be for P to establish the  relevant
        facts to the appropriate (lower) standard of proof  and  the  judge
        should made findings of fact on such evidence.

      (ii)  If P does not advance any such claim  in  the  statutory  appeal
        but adduces evidence of being trafficked  or  subjected  to  modern
        slavery in the past, it will be a question of  fact  in  each  case
        (the burden being on P to the lower standard of proof) whether  the
        Secretary of  State's  duty  to  provide  reparation,  renders  P's
        removal in breach of the protected human rights.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and background facts:


 1. There are two issues in this appeal, as follows:

    (i)     (the first issue) whether  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Robinson  (hereafter  the  "judge"  unless   otherwise   indicated)
        materially erred in law in failing  to  make  any  findings  as  to
        whether the appellant had been trafficked in the United Kingdom;

    (ii)    (the second issue) whether Judge Robinson materially  erred  in
        law in failing to decide whether the appellant met the requirements
        of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in   the
        Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the "Rules").

 2. Following a hearing before him on 3 November 2017, the judge  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal in a determination promulgated 21 November  2017
    on asylum grounds and on human  rights  grounds.  In  relation  to  the
    latter, the judge only  considered  Article  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    (ECHR).

 3. The judge did not consider Article 8.

Immigration history

 4. The judge referred to the appellant's immigration history as not  being
    in dispute, an observation that Mr Franco relied upon  at  the  hearing
    before me, as will be seen.

 5. At para 3 of his decision, the judge said that the appellant arrived in
    the United Kingdom on an unknown date in 1998, travelling with a couple
    his mother used to work for. On 14 August 2011, he was arrested by  the
    police and subsequently granted temporary admission. He  submitted  two
    applications for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  dated  12
    September  2001  and  13  October  2014.  On  8   December   2011   his
    representatives asked for the first  refusal  to  be  reconsidered.  He
    failed to report to an Immigration Officer as required on 18 April 2013
    and 18 October 2013. On 15 January 2015, his representatives  lodged  a
    pre-action protocol letter and on 13 March 2015 a response was sent  by
    the Secretary of State stating that the original decision  made  on  31
    December 2014 was maintained. On 7 May 2015 his representatives  lodged
    an application for judicial  review  challenging  the  decision  of  31
    December 2014. The application was refused. Permission to appeal to the
    Court of Appeal was refused on 12 October 2015.

 6. On 7 November 2016, the appellant was arrested when he was  encountered
    driving a rickshaw in  London  and  checks  revealed  that  he  was  an
    absconder. He claimed asylum on 29 November 2016. The asylum claim  was
    refused on 30 May 2017. This is the decision that was  the  subject  of
    the appeal before the judge.

Basis of asylum and human rights claims

 7. The appellant's nationality was in dispute before the judge, as was his
    ethnicity and sexual orientation. The basis of his asylum claim made on
    29 November  2016  was  that  he  was  a  Rohingya  Muslim  of  Burmese
    nationality, born in Buthidaung, Arakan State, Burma (now Myanmar).  He
    and his parents left Burma in 1990 because  they  were  ill-treated  by
    Buddhists. They went to Bangladesh where they lived  on  the  Kotupalen
    makeshift refugee camp, before they travelled to Sylhet.

 8. The appellant lived in Sylhet until  1998  when  he  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom with a Bangladeshi couple. He stayed with the couple for
    3 to 4 days (para 3(d) of the respondent's decision). They  forced  him
    to work for them. He did not receive any wages and was made to sleep on
    the floor. He left the house after a few days and went  to  Whitechapel
    where he was found crying by some Bengalis. They offered him a job in a
    restaurant where he worked until 2003. He began to realise he  was  gay
    in 2004.

 9. The appellant had made a previous  claim  in  2011  when  he  described
    himself as a citizen of Bangladesh.

10. The appellant claimed to be at risk on return in Myanmar on account  of
    his ethnicity and in Bangladesh on account of his sexual orientation.

11. It should be noted that he did not at that stage (nor  at  the  hearing
    before the judge, as Mr Franco  confirmed  before  me)  claim  to  fear
    persecution in Myanmar or in  Bangladesh  on  account  of  having  been
    trafficked in the past or that he was at risk of  being  trafficked  in
    Myanmar or in Bangladesh if returned to either country.

12. Insofar as concerns his Article 8 claim, the appellant said,  at  paras
    49-51 of his witness statement, as follows:

      "49.  My only family in this world are my friends in the UK. I  depend
             on them for moral and emotional support.  I  do  not  have  any
             contact with my parents in Bangladesh and I do not even know if
             they are still alive or not. I am originally from Burma but  as
             a Rohingya Muslim I fear going to Burma because Rohingya people
             are treated very harshly and are persecuted every day in Burma.

      50.   I cannot imagine my life without my friends in  the  UK  whom  I
             consider as my family and I certainly do not consider  it  safe
             for me to return to Burma, a country I left when I was 6  years
             old, and I do not have any ties with Burma.

      51.   My friends in the UK are supportive of me. I am  living  in  the
             UK in peace and without any fear for safety of my life. I  feel
             I have integrated into the British way of life and believe that
             I will not be able to continue with my life  in  Burma.  I  can
             confirm that I am in good health and in a  fit  state.  I  have
             built a very strong Private life in  the  UK  in  the  last  19
             years."

13. In oral evidence, the only evidence he  gave  about  his  private  life
    claim was that he had supported himself in the United Kingdom with  the
    help of friends (para 16 of the judge's decision).

Grounds of appeal to First-tier Tribunal

14. At para 7 of the appellant's grounds of appeal, it was  said  that  the
    appellant relied upon the following grounds of appeal under s.84 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act (the "2002 Act"):

    (i)     that the decision was not in accordance with the law;

      (ii)  that the decision is unlawful because it is  incompatible  with
        the appellant's rights under the ECHR; and

    (iii)   that the appellant's removal would be in breach of  the  United
        Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  unlawful
        under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (the "1998 Act").

15. The grounds of appeal did not mention Article 8 in terms.

16. Since the decision appealed against was dated 30 May 2017,  ground  (i)
    was not in fact available because of the amendments to s.84 of the 2002
    Act by the Immigration Act 2014 (the "2014 Act") which came into  force
    on 20 October 2014. The grounds have to be read with reference  to  the
    2014 Act as a complaint that the appellant's removal would  breach  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the  Refugee  Convention  (the  "new
    s.84(1)(a)") or that removal would be unlawful under s.6  of  the  1998
    Act (the "new s.84(1)(c)").

The judge's decision

17. At para 7 of his decision, the judge recorded that the hearing  of  the
    appellant's appeal was first listed at Hatton Cross hearing  centre  on
    13 July 2017 when it was adjourned to 3 November 2017 as the respondent
    had agreed that the appellant be referred to  the  Competent  Authority
    under the National Referral Mechanism  ("NRM")  for  assessment  as  to
    whether he had been the victim of trafficking or  modern  slavery.  The
    Competent Authority is the authority that, under  domestic  law,  makes
    decisions on  trafficking  under  the  European  Convention  on  Action
    Against Trafficking  in  Human  Beings  ("ECAT").  A  decision  by  the
    Competent Authority is effectively a decision by the Secretary of State
    because the NRM operates under the auspices of the Home Office.

18. The appellant's solicitors consented to the adjournment on his  behalf.
    However, no further action was taken by the Home  Office  to  make  the
    necessary arrangements. At the hearing before the judge on  3  November
    2017, this was raised again  by  the  respondent's  representative  who
    applied for an adjournment so that  the  necessary  referral  could  be
    made. He explained that the case worker had been on maternity leave and
    there had been a lack of action in pursuing the referral.

19. Counsel for the appellant said he withdrew consent to the  referral  as
    more than 3 months had passed without progress. However, the  appellant
    wanted his appeal to be heard on the evidence then available. The  case
    therefore proceeded before the judge. The judge said  at  para  7  that
    there was no purpose in adjourning for a referral to the NRM if consent
    was not forthcoming.

20. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant with the assistance of
    a Bengali interpreter. He also heard evidence oral evidence from  Mr  J
    A, the appellant's friend.

21. The appellant's oral evidence on his claim to have been trafficked  was
    set out by the judge at para 11 of his decision, which reads:

            "11. He gave details of his situation when  he  arrived  in  the
             UK. He stayed with the couple who brought him here. He was told
             by them that he had to do housework and he  cried  for  a  long
             time. He managed to escape from them after 3  days.  They  took
             him out to carry their shopping and he  saw  many  Bangladeshis
             living in the market. He met asked [sic]  a  young  Bangladeshi
             man to help and he was taken to a restaurant where he was given
             a job as a kitchen porter."

22. The judge considered  the  evidence  before  him  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed nationality, ethnicity and  sexual  orientation  in
    considerable detail. He did not find the  appellant  credible.  In  the
    course of giving his reasons, he said that he found that the  appellant
    had not given any reasonable explanation why he waited almost 19  years
    after his arrival in the UK before seeking asylum and why  he  made  no
    mention of his sexuality in his previous human rights claim when he was
    also silent about his ethnicity and nationality (para 53).

23. The judge's main findings may be summarised  as  follows:  He  did  not
    accept that the appellant was born in Myanmar and  went  to  Bangladesh
    when he was 7 years old. He found that the appellant is a  national  of
    Bangladesh. He did not accept that the appellant is a Rohingya  Muslim.
    He did not accept that the appellant is gay or that he had lived openly
    in the United Kingdom as a  gay  man  (para  59).  He  found  that  the
    appellant had fabricated an account in order to support a false  asylum
    claim.

24. The judge therefore dismissed the appellant's claim on  asylum  grounds
    and on human rights grounds. As stated above, the judge's  decision  in
    relation to human rights was limited to Article 3.

25. The skeleton argument relied upon on the appellant's behalf before  the
    judge raised Article 8 briefly. It was submitted that  the  appellant's
    appeal "[fell] to be allowed under Article  8  within  the  Immigration
    Rules, specifically  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  on  the  basis  of  the  very
    significant  obstacles  the  appellant  would  face  reintegrating   in
    Bangladesh".

26. The judge's Record of Proceedings ("RoP") shows that he  was  addressed
    briefly on Article 8 by the respondent's representative.  The  relevant
    part of the RoP reads:

            "No corroboration  of  claim  to  have  been  here  since  1998.
             Applied  twice.  Refuse.  Speaks  little  English.   Not   fin.
             independent."

27. The judge was also addressed briefly by Mr Franco  on  Article  8.  The
    relevant part of the RoP reads (the word in brackets  is  difficult  to
    decipher and appears to be "asthma"):

            "His evidence was he was doing some work. Not a  burden  on  the
             state. Has (asthma?). No medical evidence  with  him.  Goes  to
             Article 8 to some extent."

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the grant of permission

28. Permission was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Doyle  on
    limited grounds.

29. Judge Doyle refused the appellant permission to argue that, in deciding
    the issue of whether the appellant was a Rohingya Muslim, the judge had
    failed to take into account  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  some
    knowledge of the Rohingya language as (the grounds contend) he had said
    in evidence that he spoke the "Rohingya dialect well".

30. I record that no application was made to the Upper  Tribunal  to  renew
    the application for permission on the ground upon which permission  was
    refused. In any event, Mr Franco accepted that there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge that the appellant could speak  the  Rohingya  dialect
    well, or at all, or any evidence to support Mr Franco's assertion  that
    the appellant had lapsed into speaking  the  Rohingya  dialect  at  the
    hearing, an assertion that was based on what the appellant had said  at
    the hearing. The appellant had not  chosen  to  give  evidence  in  the
    Rohingya language or to submit  expert  evidence  from  an  independent
    linguist confirming that he speaks the Rohingya language or dialect.

31. The grant of permission was limited to the two issues described  at  my
    para 1 above.

Submissions

The first issue

32. Mr Melvin relied upon the recent judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    SSHD v MS (Afghanistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594. In MS  (Afghanistan),  the
    Court of Appeal held,  inter  alia,  that,  in  circumstances  where  a
    negative trafficking decision by the Competent Authority had  not  been
    challenged by way of judicial review, the First-tier Tribunal may  only
    entertain an indirect challenge to such a decision if  the  trafficking
    decision is demonstrated to be perverse or irrational or one which  was
    not open to the Competent Authority.

33. Mr Melvin relied upon paras 69,  77  and  79  of  MS  (Afghanistan)  in
    support of his submission that it was not necessary for  the  judge  to
    have decided whether the appellant had been a victim of trafficking. At
    paras 69, 77 and 79, Flaux LJ said:

            "69. In my judgment, it is absolutely clear that  the  Court  of
             Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) was limiting  the  circumstances  in
             which, on a statutory appeal against  a  removal  decision,  an
             appellant  can  mount  an  indirect  challenge  to  a  negative
             trafficking decision by the  authority  (in  the  circumstances
             where the appellant has not challenged it by  way  of  judicial
             review), to where the trafficking decision can be  demonstrated
             to be perverse or irrational or one which was not open  to  the
             authority, those expressions being effectively  synonymous  for
             present purposes. ... there is a two stage approach.  First,  a
             determination whether the trafficking decision is  perverse  or
             irrational or one which was  not  open  to  the  authority  and
             second, only if it is, can the appellant invite the Tribunal to
             re-determine the relevant facts and take account of  subsequent
             evidence since the decision of the authority was made.

             77.   ...  What  the  Upper  Tribunal  did  was  to  treat  the
             trafficking decision as if it were  an  "immigration  decision"
             under section 82 of the 2002 Act susceptible to  the  procedure
             applicable to the  determination  of  statutory  appeals  under
             section  84  of  the  2002  Act.  However,  as  already  noted,
             trafficking  decisions  are  not  in  the  list  of   decisions
             susceptible to appeal, either before or after  the  changes  to
             sections 82 and 84 effected in 2014. Accordingly, it  is  clear
             that the Upper Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction.

            79.  Nothing in those cases bears on the approach  which  should
             be adopted to a trafficking decision which is not the  decision
             of the Secretary of State which is being  appealed,  but  which
             may be relevant to the decision  under  appeal.  As  AA  (Iraq)
             established, there is no right of appeal against a  trafficking
             decision. The only remedy is by way of judicial review.  Where,
             as in the present case, there has been no judicial  review,  AS
             (Afghanistan) establishes that the trafficking decision is only
             susceptible to an indirect  challenge  on  a  statutory  appeal
             where it is demonstrated to have been perverse or irrational or
             one which was not open to the authority...."

34. Mr Melvin submitted that, as the appellant had refused  the  suggestion
    by the respondent's representative that the  hearing  be  adjourned  so
    that his case could be referred to the Competent Authority,  there  was
    no breach of any policy in relation to the Article 4 of  the  ECHR  and
    there was no trafficking issue before the judge. Accordingly, the judge
    did not err in  law  in  failing  to  make  findings  of  fact  on  the
    appellant's claim that he had been trafficked.

35. Mr Melvin said that, if the appellant wishes to have a referral to  the
    NRM, he was sure that any such request would be considered, although it
    was difficult to see how his claim that he had been trafficked 15 years
    ago (in fact, on the appellant's evidence, 19 years ago) could have any
    material impact on his removal.

36. I asked Mr Franco to address me on the question why findings as to  the
    appellant's evidence that he had been trafficked or as to Article 4  of
    the ECHR were relevant in this particular appeal.

37. Mr Franco accepted that the appellant had not claimed to be  at  future
    risk of persecution on account of having been trafficked in the past or
    that he was at real risk of being trafficked in Myanmar or  Bangladesh.
    However, he submitted that it was still relevant for the judge to  make
    findings on his evidence that he had been trafficked.

38. In Mr Franco's submission, it was necessary or relevant for  the  judge
    to make such findings of fact because the Secretary of  State  had  not
    complied with her policy to refer potential victims of  trafficking  to
    the Competent Authority under the NRM. Mr Franco submitted that, as the
    Secretary of State had not complied with her policy, the appellant  was
    "entitled" to look to the First-tier Tribunal to make the findings that
    the Competent Authority should have made.

39. In this regard, Mr Franco relied  upon  para  17  of  the  judgment  of
    Longmore LJ in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1469, quoted  at
    para 26 of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  MS  (Afghanistan).
    Para 17 of AS (Afghanistan) reads:

            "17. For the reasons given  above,  I  cannot  agree  with  this
             paragraph of SHL. It seems  to  me  that  First  Tier  Tribunal
             judges are competent to consider whether the Secretary of State
             has complied with her policy in  relation  to  trafficking;  if
             asked to  consider  that  question,  they  should  then  decide
             whether she has in fact complied with her policy since that  it
             is (or may be) relevant to her removal decision."

40. On this basis, Mr Franco sought to distinguish MS (Afghanistan).

41. In his reply to Mr  Melvin's  submissions,  Mr  Franco  relied  upon  a
    further distinction, i.e. that there is no trafficking decision in  the
    instant case. Accordingly,  he  submitted  MS  (Afghanistan)  does  not
    apply. Instead, in his submission, AS (Afghanistan) applied.

42. Furthermore, Mr Franco relied  upon  the  fact  that  it  was  not  the
    appellant's fault that the Secretary of State had  failed  to  progress
    his referral to the Competent Authority. He decided to proceed with his
    hearing because he was fed up with the delay.

43. Mr Franco relied upon the fact  that,  in  granting  permission,  Judge
    Doyle had said that the judge had not considered Article 4 of the ECHR.
    The judge had merely set out the appellant's evidence on this aspect of
    his case.

The second Issue

44. Mr Melvin did not accept that the respondent had  accepted  before  the
    judge that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998.

45. Mr Melvin submitted that, even if Article 8 was before the judge, there
    was very little evidence going to Article 8.  The  appellant  has  been
    living within the Bangladeshi community in the United  Kingdom,  hiding
    from the authorities. He speaks little English.  There  has  been  very
    little integration in the United Kingdom.

46. Mr Franco confirmed that there was no application before the judge  for
    permission to amend the grounds to raise Article 8. I asked  Mr  Franco
    to address me on the question why  para  276ADE(1)  of  the  Rules  was
    relevant before the judge.

47. Mr Franco submitted that, notwithstanding the general  terms  in  which
    the grounds of appeal raised the ECHR (paras 14(ii) and  (iii)  above),
    the grounds did raise human rights. He had made submissions before  the
    judge on  Article  8,  as  did  the  respondent's  representative.  The
    skeleton argument relied upon on the  appellant's  behalf  raised  para
    276ADE(1)(vi). The appellant's witness statement raised Article 8.  The
    respondent's decision considered Article 8.

48. In Mr Franco's submission, the fact that the judge had  said  that  the
    appellant's immigration history was not in dispute and  the  fact  that
    the judge had considered the delay in claiming asylum on the basis that
    the appellant  had  delayed  for  a  period  of  19  years,  which  the
    respondent had not challenged, meant that the respondent could not  now
    be allowed to dispute that the appellant has been living in the  United
    Kingdom since 1998.

Assessment

The first issue., i.e. whether the judge materially erred in law in  failing
to make any findings as to whether the appellant had been trafficked in  the
United Kingdom

49. Mr Franco suggested, in effect, that if MS (Afghanistan) did not  apply
    for  one  reason  or  another,  then  AS  (Afghanistan)  applies.  This
    submission is misconceived because it is clear that the  two  judgments
    are consistent. The Court of Appeal  in  MS  (Afghanistan)  was  merely
    clarifying the judgment in AS (Afghanistan).

50. Mr Franco sought to distinguish MS (Afghanistan) on the  basis  that  a
    trafficking decision had been  made  in  that  case  by  the  Competent
    Authority. On that basis, he submitted that AS  (Afghanistan)  applies.
    However, this is a false distinction because  there  had  also  been  a
    trafficking decision in AS (Afghanistan) (para 6 of AS (Afghanistan)).

51. In AS (Afghanistan) and in MS (Afghanistan), the  decisions  that  were
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal were decisions under  s.10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (the "1999  Act")  and  the  rights  of
    appeal arose under s.82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act. It  is  clear  from  the
    judgment in AS (Afghanistan) that the claimant's evidence that  he  had
    been trafficked was relevant to the decision to remove.

52. In relying upon para 17 of the judgment in AS (Afghanistan), Mr  Franco
    is being selective in what he relies upon and  ignores  the  concluding
    words  of  para  17.  At  paras  17  and  18  of  the  judgment  in  AS
    (Afghanistan), Longmore LJ said that:

            "17.... First Tier Tribunal judges  are  competent  to  consider
             whether the Secretary of State has complied with her policy  in
             relation to trafficking; if asked to  consider  that  question,
             they should then decide whether she has in fact  complied  with
             her policy since that it is (or may be) relevant to her removal
             decision.

            18.   In this context  it  is  important  to  be  aware  that  a
             decision to refuse asylum is not itself an immigration decision
             appealable pursuant to section 82(2) of the 2002 Act (any  more
             than a trafficking decision is such a decision).  The  relevant
             immigration decision is the decision to  remove  the  appellant
             under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  (see
             s.82(2)(g) of the 2002 Act).  It is in reaching the decision to
             remove that the  Secretary  of  State  must  consider  relevant
             matters including (where relevant)  whether  an  applicant  for
             asylum is a victim of trafficking.  No doubt, if  a  conclusive
             decision has been reached by  the  Competent  Authority,  First
             Tier Tribunals  will  be  astute  not  (save  perhaps  in  rare
             circumstances) to allow an appellant to re-run a  case  already
             decided against him on the facts.  But where, as  here,  it  is
             arguable that, on the facts found or  accepted,  the  Competent
             Authority has reached a decision which was not open to it, that
             argument should be heard and taken into account."


            (my emphasis)

53. Thus, at para 18 of AS (Afghanistan), Longmore LJ drew attention to the
    importance of the fact that the  decision  to  refuse  asylum  was  not
    itself an immigration decision appealable pursuant to  s.82(2)  of  the
    2002 Act and that the relevant immigration decision was the decision to
    remove under  s.10  of  the  1999  Act.   It  is  clear  from  both  AS
    (Afghanistan) and MS (Afghanistan) that, if (and only if) the Competent
    Authority has reached a negative "Conclusive Grounds" decision that was
    irrational or perverse or not open to it and the trafficking or  modern
    slavery claim is relevant to the decision  to  remove,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must make findings on the trafficking / modern  slavery  claim
    to the extent that such findings are relevant on  deciding  the  appeal
    against the removal decision.

54. With effect from 20 October 2014, ss. 82 and 84 of the  2002  Act  have
    been amended. Section 84 sets out the grounds upon which a decision may
    be  applied.   The  versions  of  ss.82  and  84  that  were  in  force
    immediately prior to 20 October 2014 (the "old ss.82 and  84)  and  the
    current versions are set out below:

      The old ss.82 and 84:

            "82 Right of appeal: general


            (2)  In this Part "immigration decision" means-


            ...
            (g)   a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
               Kingdom by way of directions under  section  10(1)(a),  (b),
               (ba) or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  (removal
               of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),


            ..."


            "84 Grounds of appeal


            (1)  An appeal  under  section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
             decision must be brought  on  one  or  more  of  the  following
             grounds-


            ...
            (e)   that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
     law;


            (g)   that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
               consequence of the immigration  decision  would  breach  the
               United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
               would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
               1998 as being incompatible with the  appellant's  Convention
               rights."


     The new ss.82 and 84:

         "82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal


         (1)      A person "P" may appeal to the Tribunal where -
             (a)       the Secretary of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                 protection claim made by P,
             (b) the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse  the  human
                 rights claim made by P, or
             (c)       the Secretary of State has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                 protection status.

      84. Grounds of appeal


         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1)(a)  (refusal  of  protection
             claim) must be bought on one or more of the following  grounds
             -
             (a)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
                  under the Refugee Convention;
             (b)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  in
                  relation to persons eligible for a grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection;
             (c)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
                  Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act  contrary  to
                  Human Rights Convention).
         (2)      An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human  rights
             claim) must be bought on the  grounds  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

55. Accordingly, a decision to refuse asylum  can  now  be  appealed  under
    s.82. However, s.84 focuses on removal being in breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention and removal being in
    breach of s.6 of the 1998 Act. As a further point  of  distinction,  it
    should be noted that the wording of the old s.84 (i.e. the  version  in
    force at the time that  AS  (Afghanistan)  and  MS  (Afghanistan)  were
    decided) meant that the "not in accordance  with  the  law"  ground  of
    appeal was available so that a decision of the Secretary of State  that
    should have awaited a decision by the Competent Authority but did  not,
    might have been appealable on that ground.

56. Tribunal judges are not obliged to make findings of fact on all aspects
    of the evidence adduced before them. They are, however, obliged to make
    adequate findings of fact. The adequacy  of  a  judge's  findings  will
    depend  on  what  issues  are  relevant.  These  principles  are  well-
    understood. Nevertheless, at times, the scope of the findings that need
    to be made may not be readily apparent. Trafficking and modern  slavery
    claims may fall within this category.

57. Where an appellant relies upon evidence that he was trafficked or was a
    victim of modern slavery in the past, the question arises as to whether
    the trafficking or modern slavery  claim  is  relevant  to  the  asylum
    ground  and/or  the  human  rights   ground.   AS   (Afghanistan),   MS
    (Afghanistan) and EK (Ivory Coast) (Article  4  ECHR:  Anti-trafficking
    Convention) Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC) make it clear that  it  is
    necessary for the Tribunal to assess evidence  that  an  appellant  was
    trafficked or was a victim of modern slavery  in  the  past  if  it  is
    relevant in deciding whether his removal would  be  in  breach  of  the
    United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  or  in
    deciding whether his removal would be in breach of his protected rights
    under the ECHR, whether or not  the  Competent  Authority  has  made  a
    decision.

58. Accordingly, it is necessary to remember not only that the focus is  on
    removal but also that the focus is only whether  removal  would  be  in
    breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention
    or in breach of an individual's protected rights under the  ECHR.  This
    will help to ensure that only relevant  issues  are  dealt  with  in  a
    statutory appeal and that issues that  are  properly  only  within  the
    province of the Competent Authority or which should only be the subject
    of judicial review proceedings are not  dealt  with  in  the  statutory
    appeal. It is clear from MS (Afghanistan) that it is important to  keep
    in mind the separate functions of each process.

59. Mr Franco's submission, that as the Secretary of State had not complied
    with the policy to refer potential victims  of  trafficking  or  modern
    slavery to the Competent Authority the appellant was "entitled" to look
    to the First-tier Tribunal to make  the  findings  that  the  Competent
    Authority should have made, is simply misconceived because  it  ignores
    the fact that the two bodies have separate functions and  jurisdiction,
    the question before the First-tier Tribunal being confined to  deciding
    whether the appellant's removal  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or whether it  would
    be in breach of his protected rights under the ECHR.

60. An appellant's claim that he was trafficked or was a victim  of  modern
    slavery in the past may  be  relevant  in  reaching  a  decision  in  a
    statutory appeal as to whether his removal would be in  breach  of  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or  whether
    his removal would be in breach of his protected rights under  the  ECHR
    in the following ways, by way of example:

    (i)     if he claims that the fact that he has been trafficked  in  the
        past or was a victim of modern slavery exposes him to a  real  risk
        of persecution or being trafficked again  or  subjected  to  modern
        slavery on return to his home country;

    (ii)    if he claims that the fact that he has been trafficked  in  the
        past or was a victim of modern slavery has had such an impact  upon
        him that (irrespective of the Secretary of State's duty to  provide
        reparation) his removal would be in breach of his  protected  human
        rights: for example, Article 3 or Article 8 of the ECHR;

    (iii)   if the Secretary of State's duty to  provide  reparation  under
        the ECAT is relevant in deciding whether his removal  would  be  in
        breach of his protected rights under the ECHR; for example, because
        interruption of his rehabilitation would be in breach of his rights
        under the ECHR. The Secretary of State's duties under ECAT  include
        an obligation to adopt such measures as may be necessary to  assist
        victims  in  their  physical,  psychological  and  social  recovery
        (Article 12 paragraph 1) and to issue a renewable residence  permit
        to victims if their stay  is  necessary  owing  to  their  personal
        situation (Article 14), which must include consideration of his  or
        her medical needs (head-note (4) of EK.

61. The above is not an exhaustive list and it may be that (ii)  and  (iii)
    are linked.

62. In my view, applying AS (Afghanistan) and MS  (Afghanistan),  cases  in
    which  the  Competent  Authority  has  reached  a  "Conclusive  Grounds
    decision" should be approached as follows:

      (i)   Where there is a positive "Conclusive Grounds decision" and  the
        Secretary of State has complied with her duty to provide reparation
        are unlikely to come before the Tribunal before such  time  as  the
        individual concerned is refused a renewal of his  residence  permit
        and faces removal. In such cases, the judge should  not  go  behind
        the decision of the Competent Authority that the  appellant  was  a
        victim of trafficking or modern  slavery.  The  focus  will  be  on
        whether removal of the appellant at that stage would be  in  breach
        of the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or
        in breach of his rights under the ECHR.

      (ii)  In  cases  in  which  the  Competent  Authority  has  reached  a
        negative "Conclusive Grounds decision" but the appellant  continues
        to rely (in his statutory appeal) upon evidence that he has been  a
        victim of trafficking or modern slavery, the judge  should  decide,
        at the start of the hearing and  before  oral  evidence  is  given,
        whether the decision of the Competent  Authority  was  perverse  or
        irrational or not reasonably open to it. At  this  stage,  evidence
        subsequent to the decision of the Competent Authority must  not  be
        taken into account. If (and only if) the judge concludes  that  the
        Competent Authority's decision was perverse or  irrational  or  one
        that was not reasonably open to it, that the  judge  can  then  re-
        determine  the  relevant  facts  and  take  account  of  subsequent
        evidence.

63. In cases in which there is no "Conclusive Grounds" decision:

      (i)   If  the  appellant  claims  that  the  fact  that  he  has  been
        trafficked in the past or was a victim of  modern  slavery  exposes
        him to a real risk of persecution in his home or  being  trafficked
        again or subjected to modern slavery in his home country or that it
        has had such an impact upon him that his removal would be in breach
        of his protected human rights, it will be for him to establish  the
        relevant facts to the appropriate (low) standard of proof  and  the
        judge should make findings of fact on such evidence.

      (ii)  If the  appellant  does  not  advance  any  such  claim  in  the
        statutory appeal but he adduces evidence that he was trafficked  or
        subjected to modern slavery in the past, it will be a  question  of
        fact in each case (the burden being on the  appellant  to  the  low
        standard of proof) whether the Secretary of State's duty to provide
        reparation makes his removal in  breach  of  his  protected  rights
        under the ECHR. If, for example, he claims that interruption of his
        rehabilitation would be in breach of his rights under Article 8, it
        will for relevant to consider all the circumstances very carefully,
        including the  length  of  time  that  has  elapsed  since  he  was
        trafficked or subjected to modern slavery, whether  he  has  sought
        medical attention since then, any difficulties he  has  experienced
        since being trafficked in terms of his physical  and  psychological
        health and his social integration, the evidence as to  his  medical
        needs for his physical, psychological and social recovery  as  well
        as the situation that he will face on return to his  home  country.
        If the evidence does not indicate that  the  Secretary  of  State's
        duty to provide reparation may  be  relevant  in  deciding  whether
        removal would be in breach  of  the  appellant's  protected  rights
        under the ECHR and no such claim is advanced by the appellant, then
        it may be unnecessary to make findings of fact on the  evidence  of
        past trafficking or modern slavery.

64. In all cases, it is not open to the Tribunal to  make  findings  as  to
    whether the United Kingdom is in breach of its obligations  under  ECAT
    or whether there  has  been  a  breach  of  the  procedural  obligation
    (including delays in making or failures in making referrals to the NRM)
    under Article 4 of the ECHR (paras 83-84 of MS (Afghanistan)). Nor  can
    such delays be relied upon as the sole basis for  contending  that  the
    Tribunal is  obliged  to  make  findings  of  fact  on  an  appellant's
    trafficking claim or claim to have been a  victim  of  modern  slavery.
    Although Article 8 of  the  ECHR  incorporates  a  requirement  that  a
    decision be in accordance with the law, this phrase in Article 8 has  a
    different meaning from that which applied in relation to old s.84(1)(e)
    of the 2002 Act.  For  the  purposes  of  Article  8,  the  phrase  "in
    accordance with the law" refers to the need for there to be in place  a
    legal basis for the decision appealed. In the instant case,  the  legal
    basis of the decision to remove is that the appellant is a  person  who
    requires leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  but  does  not
    have it (s.10(1) of the 1999 Act). This suffices for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8.

65. In the instant case, even if it is the case that the Secretary of State
    was in breach of her  policy  to  refer  potential  victims  of  modern
    slavery to the NRM, it was not explained to the judge, nor to  me,  how
    this was relevant in deciding whether the appellant's removal would  be
    in breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  Refugee
    Convention or in breach of his protected rights under the ECHR.

66. Mr Franco accepted that it was not part of the appellant's case  before
    the judge that he was at real risk of being trafficked or subjected  to
    modern slavery in Myanmar or Bangladesh or that his past experience  of
    having been subjected to modern slavery exposed him to a real  risk  of
    being  trafficked  or  subjected  to  modern  slavery  in  Myanmar   or
    Bangladesh.

67. It was not part of the appellant's  case  before  the  judge  that  the
    Secretary of State's duty to provide reparation as a victim  of  modern
    slavery (if he was a victim of modern slavery) rendered his removal  in
    breach of  his  protected  rights  under  the  ECHR.  Furthermore,  the
    evidence before the judge did not disclose that the duty of  reparation
    was relevant in deciding whether his removal would be in breach of  his
    protected rights under the ECHR.  His  evidence  was  that,  after  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom in 1998, he was forced into servitude  by
    the couple with whom he travelled to the United  Kingdom  and  that  he
    escaped from the couple after 3 to 4 days  or  "a  few  days".  On  his
    evidence, he has been living in the United Kingdom since then,  i.e.  a
    period of almost 19 years as at the date of hearing before  the  judge.
    There was no medical evidence before the judge. At  most,  the  judge's
    RoP indicates (para 26 above) that he may have given oral  evidence  to
    the effect that he has asthma. There was no evidence before  the  judge
    of any difficulties in terms of his physical and  psychological  health
    and his social integration experienced by him in the period  of  almost
    19 years since his period of enforced servitude. There was no  evidence
    as to his medical needs for  his  physical,  psychological  and  social
    recovery. He  did  not  give  evidence  that  his  period  of  enforced
    servitude almost 19 years ago would, to the low standard of proof, have
    an impact on his circumstances on  return  to  Bangladesh  such  as  to
    render his removal in breach of his protected right under the ECHR.

68. In these circumstances, I have concluded that any duty of the Secretary
    of State  to  provide  reparation  was  not  relevant  to  whether  the
    appellant's removal would be in breach of his  protected  rights  under
    the ECHR. It was therefore not necessary for the judge to make findings
    of fact on the appellant's evidence that he  was  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery 19 years ago.

69. In any event, on the very limited evidence that was  before  the  judge
    and even if he had accepted the appellant's evidence that he  had  been
    forced into servitude for a few days after his arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 1998 (which is  by  no  means  clear,  given  the  wholesale
    adverse credibility assessment in relation  to  the  remainder  of  the
    appellant's evidence), it is impossible to see  how  the  Secretary  of
    State's duty of reparation could make any material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal and therefore impossible to  see  how
    the judge's decision could have been any different, given the  lack  of
    evidence as explained at para 67 above. Accordingly, even if the  judge
    did err in law in failing to make findings of fact on  the  appellant's
    evidence that he was a victim of modern slavery, I  have  decided  that
    his decision should not be set aside.

The second issue, i.e. whether the judge materially erred in law in  failing
to decide whether the appellant met the requirements of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)
of the Rules

70. Mr Melvin (correctly) did not suggest before me that reliance upon para
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules was a "new matter"  within  the  meaning  of
    s.85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act, as explained in Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002
    - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC), given that the respondent had
    considered para 276ADE(1)(vi) in the decision letter.

71. As is clear from para 14 above, the grounds of appeal before the  judge
    raised human rights in  general  terms  only.  There  was  no  specific
    mention of Article 8 and it is clear that the  evidence  going  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 private life claim was very limited.

72. However, even if the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  decide  para
    276ADE(1)(vi), it is impossible to see how his decision on  the  appeal
    could have been any different, for the following reasons:

73. I do not accept Mr Franco's submission that, given the absence  of  any
    challenge, the respondent was precluded from going behind  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  19
    years. The fact is that the judge plainly misapprehended  the  position
    when he said at para 3 of his decision that the appellant's immigration
    history was not in dispute because the respondent's representative  had
    submitted that there was no corroboration of the appellant's  claim  to
    have been here since 1998 (para 26 above).

74. However, even if the judge had decided the para  276ADE(vi)  issue  and
    even if he had decided it on the basis that the appellant had lived  in
    the United Kingdom for  19  years,  this  would  have  meant  that  the
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 14  years.  Given
    that his account that he was a national of Myanmar had been rejected by
    the judge, it follows that, if the judge had considered the matter,  he
    would have been bound to decide para 276ADE(1)(vi) on  the  basis  that
    the appellant had lived in Bangladesh from birth until he was 14  years
    old when he left Bangladesh. In other words, he was  a  minor  when  he
    left Bangladesh. However, he was not a minor of tender years.

75. The appellant did not explain in terms, in his witness statement or  in
    oral evidence, what obstacles he would experience on  reintegration  in
    Bangladesh. If the judge had considered the matter, he would have  been
    left to draw inferences from  the  length  of  his  residence  and  his
    evidence that he does not have contact with his parents in Bangladesh.

76. The appellant's screening interview and asylum interview were conducted
    with the assistance of Bengali language interpreters. He gave  evidence
    at the hearing before the judge through an interpreter in  the  Bengali
    language. It is clear from the judge's summary of his oral evidence, at
    paras 11 and 14 of the judge's decision in particular,  that  he  lived
    among members of the Bangladeshi community.

77. In all of these circumstances, given the very limited evidence that was
    before the judge, it is inevitable, on any reasonable  view,  that,  if
    the judge had considered para 276ADE(1)(vi), he would have  been  bound
    to conclude, on any legitimate view, there was only one answer  to  the
    appellant's claim under  para  276ADE(1)(vi),  i.e.  that  he  had  not
    established that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Bangladesh.

78. For all of the reasons given above, I have concluded that, even if  the
    judge erred in law in  not  deciding  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules,  his  decision  should
    not be set aside.

79. The appeal is therefore dismissed.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Robinson  did  not
    involve the making of any error on a point of law such that it falls to
    be set aside.






[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 17 May 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
