
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

        NA (UT rule 45: Singh v Belgium) Iran [2014] UKUT 00205 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
| on 31 October 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                     NA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent





(1)      Rule 45 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
      2005 confers discretionary, procedural case management powers. It does
      not require the First-tier Tribunal to  undertake  evidence-gathering.
      Any direction given under rule 45 to the Secretary of  State  to  seek
      out or validate evidence must be exercised sparingly and  in  a  fact-
      sensitive way, bearing in mind CM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 13. When  considering  whether  to
      exercise its power  under  rule  45  to  direct  a  party  to  produce
      evidence, the First-tier Tribunal should also be alert to its duty  of
      impartial and independent adjudication and the essentially  procedural
      nature of this rule.

 (2)          Neither Article 47 of the Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of
      the European Union nor the decision of the CJEU in MM v  Minister  for
      Justice, Equality and Law Reform, Ireland [Case - 277/11]  establishes
      anything to the contrary.  Similarly, neither of the  ECtHR  decisions
      in Singh and Others v Belgium [Application number 33210/11] and  RC  v
      Sweden [Application number 41827/07] is authority to the contrary.

(3)  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in  MJ  (Singh  v  Belgium:  Tanveer
      Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC), that in  relation
      to assessing the reliability of documentary evidence the Tanveer Ahmed
      [2002] Imm AR 318* principles continue to apply, is reaffirmed.


INTRODUCTION

1.   By a decision dated 22nd August 2012, the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (hereinafter "the Secretary of State"), the  Respondent
    herein, communicated to the Appellant a refusal of his application  for
    asylum.  His case under Articles 2, 3 and 8  ECHR  and  his  claim  for
    humanitarian protection were also rejected.   The  Appellant  exercised
    his right of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the FtT").
     The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The Appellant's  application
    for permission to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  was  refused  initially.
    Following a renewed application, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted
    permission to appeal on the following ground:

         "....  It is arguable that the FtTJ erred  in  law  in  failing  to
         engage with the conclusions of the ECtHR  in  Singh  and  Others  v
         Belgium and seeking to distinguish it on the facts without more."

     We shall comment at a later stage of this judgment  on  the  procedural
    course which this appeal followed thereafter.

FRAMEWORK OF THIS APPEAL

2.   The Appellant is a national of Iran,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  aged  21
    years.  He entered the United Kingdom without leave in January 2012 and
    claimed asylum almost immediately.  His case, in brief compass, is that
    in the event of returning to Iran he faces a real  risk  of  death  and
    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment on  account  of
    his race  and  imputed  political  opinion.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted his professed nationality and  Kurdish  ethnicity.   The  main
    elements of his account were evaluated and determined in the  following
    way:

     a) His claim that his maternal uncle had worked for and supported  the
        KDPI and was executed by the Iranian authorities five years  before
        the Appellant's birth on  account  of  his  political  opinion  was
        assessed as unsubstantiated.


     b) His assertion  that  he  had  possessed  a  managerial  role  in  a
        photocopying shop was rejected as unworthy of belief.

     c) His claim that a friend had been photocopying KDPI  literature  and
        was  politically  active  in  this  organisation  was  treated   as
        unsubstantiated.

     d) Ditto his claim that the authorities had visited his  home  on  1st
        January 2012.

    The decision maker further highlighted that the Appellant had lived  an
    entirely normal  life  until  December  2011  (the  occasion  when  the
    authorities allegedly visited his home, in his absence)  and  that  the
    Iranian authorities had granted him an exemption from national  service
    due to the death of his father, which was considered suggestive  of  no
    adverse interest in him on account of  his  uncle's  alleged  political
    activities.  The omnibus conclusion was that the Appellant  had  failed
    to demonstrate a well founded fear of persecution in Iran on account of
    his Kurdish ethnicity or professed political opinion.

3.   The FtT at first instance,  having  considered  the  evidence  in  some
    detail, made the following findings in paragraph [34]:

         "Looking at the evidence  in  the  round  I  have  found  that  the
         Appellant did not have sole charge of a photocopying shop.  I  have
         found his evidence to be vague and lacking in the  detail  I  would
         expect if his claim were true.  I have found  that  he  lied  about
         losing contact with his family.  I have found that he has  produced
         documents that are not reliable to support his  claim.   I  do  not
         accept that there is credible evidence to support  a  finding  that
         the Appellant has been the victim of persecution at  the  hands  of
         the Iranian authorities for his imputed political  beliefs.   I  do
         not accept that he has been convicted in his absence or that he  is
         of interest to the authorities and I find that the far more  likely
         situation is that he has fabricated this story to bolster  a  claim
         for asylum."

    The  Judge  then  reasoned,  drawing  on  these  findings,   that   the
    Appellant's profile is that of an Iranian national who left his country
    illegally and subsequently claimed asylum unsuccessfully in the  United
    Kingdom. Giving effect to the country guidance decision in SB (risk  on
    return-illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053, he concluded that  the
    Appellant would not be exposed to a real risk of persecution  or  other
    ill treatment in the event of returning to his country.  The appeal was
    dismissed on all grounds.

4.   We have adverted above to the narrow  ground  on  which  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal was granted.  At the  outset  of  the  hearing,
    Counsel for the Appellant made an application that all of  the  grounds
    contained in the  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  be
    considered.  This application was made without prior notice  to  either
    the Respondent or this Tribunal.  Acceding to it would inevitably  have
    resulted in an adjournment to enable  the  Respondent  to  make  proper
    preparations, with consequential wasted costs and delay.   Taking  this
    factor into account, together with the care with  which  and  terms  in
    which the other grounds of appeal had been refused by two Judges of the
    Upper Tribunal,  coupled  with  the  inexplicable  absence  of  advance
    notice, we refused this application.

5.   In the hearing which followed, this Tribunal's exhortations to  Counsel
    for the  Appellant  to  formulate  his  main  arguments  in  clear  and
    unambiguous terms met with limited success.  The absence of a  skeleton
    argument, unacceptable in the context of this appeal,  compounded  this
    difficulty.  Ultimately, following careful  and  repeated  enquiry,  it
    appeared to us that Counsel was advancing  the  following  two  central
    arguments:

     a) The FtT was under a duty to take  positive  steps  to  confirm  the
        authenticity of certain documents on which the Appellant relied  in
        support of his case and had erred in law in failing to perform this
        duty.


     b) Linked to (a), the FtT had further erred in law in failing to order
        the Secretary of State to take appropriate verification steps.

     The documents in question consisted of a summons  to  attend  court  in
    Iran, an Iranian court judgment and a medical report.  The  Appellant's
    case was that these documents  had  been  transmitted  to  him  by  his
    brother in Iran by email attachment. Counsel appeared to submit that it
    had been  practically  impossible  for  the  Appellant  to  secure  the
    originals of these documents and produce them in evidence.

6.   In developing these two main arguments, Counsel submitted that the  FtT
    had  a  duty  to  take  steps  to  dispel  all  doubts  concerning  the
    Appellant's case.   It was further submitted that the FtT  should  have
    specifically warned the Appellant that without  the  originals  of  the
    documents under scrutiny his appeal would be dismissed.  Next,  it  was
    submitted that the FtT should have asked the Appellant  to  consent  to
    the Tribunal undertaking further  enquiries,  directed  to  unspecified
    national Iranian authorities, in an attempt to secure the originals  of
    the documents. When we probed this submission, Counsel  suggested  that
    the practical outworkings of this duty would entail  the  FtT  pursuing
    enquiries through UK  Government  Agencies  such  as  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office ("the FCO").

7.   Counsel was pressed by this Tribunal to  identify  the  source  of  the
    power for which he was contending.  The submission in  response,  which
    was repeated, was that this takes the form of an implied power,  to  be
    derived from the FtT's duty of "anxious scrutiny".   This Tribunal then
    adjourned to allow Counsel to consider  this  discrete  issue  further.
    Following the adjournment, Counsel revised his  submission,  contending
    that the power reposes  in  rule  45  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. This provides, in material part:

         "(1) The Tribunal may give directions to the  parties  relating  to
             the conduct of any appeal or application ........


          4) Directions of the Tribunal may, in particular -


             (a)  relate to any matter concerning  the  preparation  for  a
             hearing;


              (b) specify the length of time  allowed  for  anything  to  be
         done;


              (c) vary any time limit .......


              (d) provide for ..........


                  (iii)    a party to provide further details of  his  case,
                      or  any  other  information  which  appears   to   be
                      necessary for the determination of the appeal ......"


    At this belated stage of  the  hearing,  the  Respondent's  submissions
    having been completed, counsel's  submissions  also  invoked,  for  the
    first time, the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, specifically  Article
    47.

CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

8.    As  we  commented  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  we   found   it
    unsatisfactory that the bundle of authorities supplied  by  Counsel  in
    support of his argument did not  include  the  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected)  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 254 (IAC) which was reported on  01  May  2013,  especially
    given his acknowledged awareness of this decision. We shall  return  to
    the decision in MJ below.

The Singh Decision

9.   The mainstay of Counsel's argument  was  the  decision  of  the  Second
    Section of the European Court of Human Rights in  Singh  and  Others  v
    Belgium [Application number 33210/11], given on 2nd October 2012.  This
    decision requires careful analysis. In this case, a  family  of  Afghan
    nationals complained that their proposed deportation to Russia  by  the
    Belgian Government would entail a risk of repatriation  to  Afghanistan
    in breach of Article 3  ECHR.   They  had  travelled  to  Belgium  from
    Moscow.  They pursued applications for asylum which  were  rejected  by
    both the relevant Belgian authority and, on appeal, the Aliens Disputes
    Board.   It was held  that  they  had  failed  to  prove  their  Afghan
    nationality and findings adverse to their credibility were made.  Their
    appeal to the Conseil d' Etat was declared inadmissible. A petition  to
    the ECtHR ensued and the Petitioners also  applied  to  the  Court  for
    protective provisional  measures,  which  were  swiftly  granted.   The
    written decision of the Court which followed some time  later  was  its
    formal ruling on this discrete application.

10.  The Belgian Government submitted, inter alia, that it was not  for  the
    Strasbourg Court to rule afresh on the Petitioners' asylum claims or to
    determine their nationality. The Court, agreeing with this  submission,
    observed, in [55]:

         "Indeed, it is the national authorities which are  responsible  for
         asylum claims to investigate the fears of the Petitioners  and  the
         documents provided by them and to assess the risks they run in case
         they are sent back to their country of origin or to an intermediate
         country in light of Article 3 ......


         This comes from the principle of subsidiarity which is at the basis
         of the system of the Convention ....   as well  as  the  fact  that
         neither the Convention nor any of its Protocols guarantee the right
         of political asylum ...."

    In [56], the Court formulated its task in the following terms:

         ".....   The  Court  must  investigate  if  the  Petitioners   have
         defendable grounds for appeal  to  suffer  treatments  contrary  to
         Article  3  and,  if  they  do,  if  they  have  enjoyed  effective
         guarantees within the meaning of Article 13, which would allow them
         to argue these grounds  of  appeal  and  protect  them  from  being
         deported arbitrarily and indirectly to the country  they  had  fled
         from ...."

    The Court's approach was to determine the Petitioners' application  for
    protective   measures under a combination of Articles 3  and  13  ECHR.
    This reflected the Petitioners' contention  that,  under  Belgian  law,
    they  had  inadequate  facilities  for  challenging   the   deportation
    decision.


11.  The Court concluded, firstly,  that  the  Petitioners'  fear  that  the
    Russian authorities would  repatriate  them  to  Afghanistan  had  some
    merit: see [86].  Its second conclusion  was  that,  having  regard  to
    various reports, the Petitioners' fears  that  their  deportation  from
    Belgium would give rise to a violation of their rights under Article  3
    ECHR had some basis: see  [87] and [88].  In the latter paragraph,  the
    Court stated:

         "The Court believes, in  light  of  this  evidence  and  the  legal
         problems in play, that the allegations of the Petitioners of  risks
         of violation of Article 3 of the Convention would  manifestly  call
         for a detailed investigation and that they were able to defend them
         before the Belgium authorities in accordance with the  requirements
         of Article 13."

     The Court's third conclusion is expressed in [97] thus:

         "The appeals in question are not  suspensive  ipso  jure  from  the
         execution of the deportation measure and  therefore  they  did  not
         meet one of the  requirements  of  Article  13  of  the  Convention
         combined with Article 3."

    The final question considered by the Court in  [99],  was  whether  the
    Petitioners had, within the Belgium legal process:

         "....    at  their  disposal  ....    an  appeal  which   met   the
         requirements of Article 13 and which would  protect  them  from  an
         arbitrary, even indirect, deportation to Afghanistan."

    The   Court   then   examined   the   processes    of    the    initial
    investigative/deciding  agency  and  the  appellate  body,  the  Aliens
    Disputes Board.  The Court noted that each of these agencies had failed
    to investigate the authenticity of the identity documents presented  by
    the Petitioners and, further, the Board had given no weight to  certain
    important documentary evidence ex facie emanating from a  "partner"  of
    the UNHCR in  Belgium  on  the  ground  that  "...   they  were  easily
    falsified and the Petitioners failed  to  provide  originals.":  [101].
    This gave rise to the following conclusion:


         "[103]   Thus, the Court  insists  on  the  fact  that,  given  the
                  importance it gives to  Article  3  and  the  irreversible
                  nature of the harm likely to be  caused  in  case  of  the
                  realisation of the  risk  of  ill  treatment,  it  is  the
                  responsibility of the national authorities  to  show  that
                  they are as rigorous as possible and carry out  a  careful
                  investigation of the grounds of appeal drawn from  Article
                  3 without which the appeals lose their efficiency ......


                  Such an investigation must remove all doubt, legitimate as
                  it  may  be,  as  to  the  invalidity  of  a  request  for
                  protection regardless of the competences of the  authority
                  responsible for the control."

              [Emphasis added.]

12.  The Court's omnibus conclusion was couched in the following terms:


         "[105]    It  results  from  what  precedes   that   the   internal
                  authorities have not  investigated  the  validity  of  the
                  grounds of appeal, in accordance with the requirements  of
                  Article  13,  that  the  Petitioners  were  arguing   were
                  defendable under Article 3.  Thus there was  a  breach  of
                  Article 13, combined with Article 3  of  the  Convention."
                  [Emphasis added]

    The net result was that the protective measures  which  the  Court  had
    notified to the Belgian Government at the beginning of the proceedings,
    upon receipt of the Petition, remained in force until the ruling of the
    Court became legally binding in accordance with Article 44(2).


13.  The submission on behalf of the Appellant which we have  identified  in
    [5](a) above relied heavily on [103] of  the  ECtHR  ruling  in  Singh,
    quoted above. It was argued that the effect  of  this  passage  was  to
    oblige  the  FtT  to  proactively   investigate   and   determine   the
    authenticity of the documents on which the Appellant relied  by  making
    enquiries  of  certain  unidentified  Iranian   authorities   via   the
    appropriate UK authorities, in particular  the  FCO.   We  reject  this
    submission  for  the  following  reasons.   Firstly,  it  rests  on   a
    comparison between two  quite  different  contexts  which  attempts  to
    equate apples with pears.  The decision in Singh entailed a  ruling  by
    the ECtHR that certain failings in the  Belgium  legal  processes  gave
    rise to a breach of Article 13 ECHR, in conjunction with Article 3.  In
    the present case, the Appellant does not - and could not  -  assert  an
    infringement of Article 13 ECHR, which is not one  of  the  "Convention
    rights" under  the  Human Rights Act 1998. The  latter  statute  itself
    provides for an effective national remedy and it is one  of  which  the
    Appellant has been able  to  avail  in  the  context  of  this  appeal.
    Secondly, the criticism of the ECtHR  was  directed  primarily  to  the
    administrative authorities of Belgium. It is evident  that  neither  of
    the agencies in question had the status of a court or tribunal: see  in
    particular [27] of the judgment, which makes clear that  the  appellate
    body in question (the  "CCE")  is  an  administrative  authority  which
    determines appeals against decisions of the first level deciding agency
    (the "CGRA").

14.  Our  third  reason  for  rejecting  this  argument  is  that  it  would
    effectively  shift  the  onus  of  proof  from  the  Appellant  to  the
    Respondent, thereby extending the Respondent's obligations well  beyond
    the duty of cooperation enjoined by  Article  4  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Our fourth reason, which is linked to the third, is that it
    is the judicial function to determine litigious disputes on  the  basis
    of the evidence presented by the parties.  Courts and tribunals do  not
    have evidence gathering functions or duties.  While there is a power to
    direct a party or parties to produce evidence,  enshrined  in  rule  45
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  ("the  Rules"),
    this neither requires nor empowers the Tribunal itself to engage in  an
    evidence  gathering  exercise.   Furthermore,  and  in  any  event,  we
    consider that this power should be exercised sparingly, bearing in mind
    every tribunal's duty of impartial and independent adjudication.

15.  Fifthly,  we  reject  the  contention  that  the  duty  for  which  the
    Appellant contends is found in rule 45 of the Rules  (see  [7]  supra).
    There are four free standing reasons for this.  The first is that  rule
    45 has the effect  of  conferring  discretionary  powers,  rather  than
    imposing duties, on the FtT.  The second is  that,  properly  construed
    and viewed in its  full  context,  it  is  concerned  with  matters  of
    procedure.  Thirdly, it only empowers the Tribunal to  give  directions
    to the parties.  Fourthly, it is clear that (in common with rule  5  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) rule  45  does  not
    prescribe any general  evidence-gathering  powers  or  obligations.  It
    depends rather for its  true  character,  limits  and  efficacy  on  an
    appreciation of the limits on the obligation of the Secretary of  State
    to seek out  or  validate  evidence  according  to  the  fact-sensitive
    context of each case:  see CM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 13 at [20] and [28]. We  consider  that
    there is  a  world  of  difference  between  properly  exercising  this
    discretionary,  procedural  case  management  power   and   proactively
    conducting the obligatory evidence gathering investigation canvassed in
    the Appellant's argument or subjecting the Secretary of State to such a
    duty under its guise.

     The EU Fundamental Rights Charter

16.  The final limb of this argument invoked, belatedly, Article 47  of  the
    Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ("the Charter"), in
    conjunction with  Article  39  of  Council  Directive  2005/85/EC  (the
    "Procedures" Directive).  The most recent decision on the status of the
    Charter in United Kingdom domestic law is R (AB)  v  Secretary of State
    for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  3453  (Admin).   Recalling  the
    earlier combined domestic and European litigation in NS v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EUECJ C-411/10, Mostyn J observed:



         "[14]    The  constitutional  significance  of  this  decision  can
             hardly be overstated.  The Human Rights Act 1998  incorporated
             into our domestic law large parts, but by no means all, of the
             [ECHR].   Some  parts  were   deliberately   missed   out   by
             Parliament.  The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
             Union contains, I believe, all of those missing  parts  and  a
             great deal  more.    Notwithstanding  the  endeavours  of  our
             political representatives at Lisbon it  would  seem  that  the
             much wider Charter of Rights is now part of our  domestic  law
             ....  [and] .....  would remain part of our domestic law  even
             if the Human Rights Act were repealed."


    We are mindful that this statement must be considered in the  light  of
    one of the cornerstone provisions of the Charter, Article 51(1),  which
    delimits its field of application in the following terms:

         "The provisions of this Charter are addressed to the  Institutions,
         bodies, offices and agencies of the Union with due regard  for  the
         principle of subsidiarity and to the Member States only  when  they
         are implementing Union law."

     [Our emphasis.]

     We turn next to the provision of the Charter, Article 47, on which  the
    Appellant's argument was based:

         "Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law  of  the
        Union are violated has the right to an effective  remedy  before  a
        Tribunal in compliance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
        Article."

    Article 39(1) of the Procedures Directive provides:


         "Member States shall ensure that applicants  for  asylum  have  the
         right to an effective remedy before a  court  or  tribunal  against
         .....   a decision taken on their application for asylum ....."


17.  It is clear from Article 51(1) of the Charter that this  instrument  is
    operative in United Kingdom   domestic law only when EU law applies  to
    the case or issue in hand. This has been affirmed  by  the  CJEU  in  a
    series of  decisions:  see,  for  example,  Case  C-  617/10,  Akerberg
    Fransson, 26/02/13. In the present context,  it  is  not  necessary  to
    explore further whether AB  went too far because it is  uncontroversial
    that in the asylum appeal before us EU law does  apply  and  that  this
    includes both  Article  47  of  the  Charter  and  Article  39  of  the
    Procedures Directive.

18.  We reject the argument that there was a proactive duty on  the  FtT  to
    either (a) direct investigation and collation of evidence on  the  part
    of the Secretary of State or (b) to undertake  its  own  enquiries  and
    evidence gathering exercise, reposing in these provisions  of  EU  law.
    We consider, firstly, that  the  appeal  which  the  Appellant  pursued
    before the FtT provided him with an effective remedy.  Its efficacy was
    not compromised by the fact that  it  was  theoretically  possible  for
    stronger or better evidence to have been marshalled in support  of  his
    claim for asylum.  The shortcomings in the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Appellant, as analysed by the judge, were a feature of the  Appellant's
    case, to be distinguished from the efficacy  of  the  remedy  which  he
    could potentially secure. The FtT was clearly  alert  to  them  and  we
    consider that  the  ensuing  balancing  and  weighing  exercise  to  be
    undertaken in the prevailing litigation context was a matter for it. We
    are satisfied that, in these respects, there was  nothing  unlawful  in
    the FtT's conduct of the appeal.

19. Secondly, we are satisfied that the remedy available to  the  Appellant
    in the present case complied with the three requirements articulated by
    the ECtHR in Singh [90] viz he enjoyed, and exercised,  recourse  to  a
    deciding authority which was available and  accessible;   the  relevant
    national authority (the Secretary of State) was  competent  to  examine
    the Appellant's claim and, given the context, did so independently  and
    rigorously; and, throughout the process, the  Appellant  was  protected
    from removal from the United Kingdom: see [90] - [92].   There  was  no
    suggestion in argument that the effective remedy requirements of EU Law
    (specifically Article 39 of the Procedures Directive and Article 47  of
    the Charter) differ in any material  respect  from  those  of  European
    human rights law.


20. Thirdly, we are  unable  to  derive  from  either  Article  39  of  the
    Procedures Directive or Article 47 of the Charter a duty on the part of
    the FtT to conduct the kind of proactive  investigation  and  evidence-
    gathering exercise suggested on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   This  is
    neither expressly stated nor to be reasonably implied.  Furthermore, it
    is to be emphasised that a central requirement of both Article  39  and
    Article 47 is that the effective remedy be provided by  an  independent
    and  impartial  tribunal:  we  consider  that  each  of  these  crucial
    qualities would be compromised by the kind of exercise  for  which  the
    Appellant  contends,  as  this  would  trespass  on   the   universally
    recognised values of judicial independence and  impartiality.  Finally,
    we consider that the words "established by law"  import  a  requirement
    that the court or tribunal concerned act in accordance with and  within
    the limits of the powers  and  jurisdiction  conferred  on  it  by  the
    relevant law.  As we have already ruled,  the  case  management  powers
    conferred on the FtT and  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  discretionary  and
    essentially procedural  in nature, designed to operate in a manner  and
    for a purpose quite different from the wide-ranging duty  canvassed  on
    behalf of the Appellant. Moreover, these powers most be exercised in  a
    manner which reflects the tribunal's fundamental duties  of  neutrality
    and impartiality.  Thus the "law" in play  does  not  provide  for  the
    judicial duty for which the Appellant contends.

     The UT Decision in MJ

21.  In this context we would highlight the approach of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in MJ, where there was a very similar  attempt  to  rely  on  Singh  as
    authority for  a duty on the Secretary of State  to  verify  documents.
    The Upper Tribunal said this:

          "47. In Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318, a starred decision of the
             Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the following principles were set
             out after a careful assessment of the case law.


                  "37.  In  summary  the  principles   set   out   in   this
                      determination are:


                      1. In asylum and human rights  cases  it  is  for  an
                           individual claimant to show that  a  document  on
                           which he seeks to rely can be relied on.


                      2. The  decision  maker  should  consider  whether  a
                           document is one on which reliance should properly
                           be placed after looking at all  the  evidence  in
                           the round.


                      3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an
                           allegation of forgery, or evidence strong  enough
                           to support it.  The allegation should not be made
                           without such evidence.  Failure to establish  the
                           allegation on the balance of probabilities to the
                           higher  civil  standard  does  not  show  that  a
                           document is reliable.  The decision  maker  still
                           needs to apply principles 1 and 2."
         ...
         49.   At  [35] the Tribunal  made  the  point  that  there  was  no
             obligation on the Home Office to make detailed enquiries about
             documents produced by individual claimants.  It was said  that
             doubtless there were cost and logistical difficulties  in  the
             light of the number of  documents  submitted  by  many  asylum
             claimants.  The Tribunal went on to say as follows:


                  "In the absence of a particular reason on the facts of  an
                  individual case, a decision by the Home Office not to make
                  enquiries,  produce  in-country  evidence  relating  to  a
                  particular document or scientific evidence should not give
                  rise  to  any  presumption  in  favour  of  an  individual
                  claimant or against the Home Office."


         50.   This is a starred decision of the IAT and  we  are  bound  by
             it.  It is relevant however to consider it in the  context  of
             what was said in Singh v Belgium.  Upon  consideration  we  do
             not think that what was said in Singh is inconsistent with the
             quotation we have set out above from paragraph 35  of  Tanveer
             Ahmed.  Tanveer Ahmed does not entirely preclude the existence
             of an obligation on the Home Office  to  make  enquiries.   It
             envisages, as can be seen, the existence of  particular  cases
             where it may be appropriate for enquiries to be made.  Clearly
             on its  facts  Singh  can  properly  be  regarded  as  such  a
             particular case.  The documentation in that case  was  clearly
             of  a  nature  where  verification  would  be  easy,  and  the
             documentation came from an unimpeachable source.   We  do  not
             think that Ms Laughton has  entirely  correctly  characterised
             what was said in Singh in suggesting that in  any  case  where
             evidence  was  verifiable  there  was  an  obligation  on  the
             decision maker to seek to verify.  What is said  at  paragraph
             104 is rather in terms of a case where documents  are  at  the
             heart of the request for protection where it would  have  been
             easy to check their authenticity as  in  that  case  with  the
             UNHCR.  That is a very long way indeed from  the  difficulties
             that would have  been  involved  in  this  case  in  attempted
             verification by the Home Office of  documents  emanating  from
             Hizb-i-Islami.  We do not think that what is said in  Singh  v
             Belgium in any sense justifies or requires any departure  from
             the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed which is binding on us and which
             we consider to remain entirely sound.

     We have reproduced the relevant passages in full. We concur  with  them
    and consider that they require no elaboration.




     RC v Sweden

22.  Counsel also relied on the decision of  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in RC v  Sweden [Application number  41827/07],  promulgated  on
    9th June 2010.   In this decision, the ECtHR acknowledged, firstly - by
    implication - the nature of the burden imposed on asylum  claimants  to
    establish their claim. Next, in paragraph  [50],  it  identified  three
    general principles:

     a) It is frequently necessary to give asylum claimants the benefit  of
        the doubt when assessing the credibility of  their  statements  and
        the supporting documents submitted.


     b) When information is presented giving strong reason to question  the
        veracity  of  an  asylum  claim,  the  claimant  must   provide   a
        satisfactory explanation for the alleged discrepancies.

     c) Where the claimant adduces evidence capable of proving  that  there
        are substantial grounds for believing that deportation  or  removal
        would expose him to a real risk of treatment proscribed by  Article
        3, it is for the Government to dispel any doubts about it.

    We have considered with care [53] of  the  judgment,  where  the  Court
    stated:


          "Firstly, the Court notes that the applicant initially produced  a
          medical certificate before the Migration Board as evidence of  his
          having been tortured (see paragraph 11). Although the  certificate
          was not written by an expert specialising  in  the  assessment  of
          torture injuries, the Court considers that it, nevertheless,  gave
          a rather strong indication to the authorities that the applicant's
          scars and injuries  may  have  been  caused  by  ill-treatment  or
          torture. In such circumstances, it was for the Migration Board  to
          dispel any doubts that might have persisted as  to  the  cause  of
          such scarring (see the last sentence  of  paragraph  50).  In  the
          Court's view, the Migration Board ought to have directed  that  an
          expert opinion be  obtained  as  to  the  probable  cause  of  the
          applicant's scars in circumstances where he had made out  a  prima
          facie case as to their origin. It did not do so  and  neither  did
          the appellate courts. While the burden  of  proof,  in  principle,
          rests on the applicant, the Court disagrees with the  Government's
          view that it  was  incumbent  upon  him  to  produce  such  expert
          opinion. In cases such as the present one, the State has a duty to
          ascertain all relevant facts, particularly in circumstances  where
          there is a strong indication that an applicant's injuries may have
          been caused by torture."


    We are satisfied that the main focus of this  passage  relates  to  the
    conduct of the Migration Board, which is the Swedish equivalent of  the
    Secretary of State in this jurisdiction.  In our opinion, the  words  "
    .......neither did the appellate courts......"  were  not  designed  to
    suggest that there was a duty on the  part  of  the  Swedish  appellate
    court (the Migration Court) to proactively  obtain  an  expert  medical
    opinion on the probable cause of the Appellant's scars. We are  of  the
    opinion that, considering this passage as a whole, the  ECtHR  did  not
    intend to suggest  that  an  independent  and  impartial  court  should
    conduct the kind of proactive and detailed investigation and  evidence-
    gathering exercise, in  private  and  outwith  the  court  proceedings,
    suggested by the Appellant or require the State to do so.  We  consider
    that this decision is to be viewed on its  particular  facts.   We  are
    satisfied that there  is  no  statement  of  general  principle  in  RC
    supporting the Appellant's contention.


    The CJEU Decision in MM

23.   Finally,  Counsel  also   mentioned  (without  developing)  the   CJEU
    decision in Case - 277/11, MM v  Minister for Justice, Equality and Law
    Reform, Ireland  decided on 22nd November 2012.  In its  decision,  the
    First Chamber of the CJEU considered the  Irish  legal  system  whereby
    applications for  refugee  status  and  subsidiary  protection  involve
    separate, successive examination and determination.  It held  that  the
    claimant's right to  be  heard  must  be  observed  in  each  of  these
    procedures.  In thus holding, the Court, having noted that Article 4 of
    Directive  2004/83  is  concerned  with  "assessment   of   facts   and
    circumstances", stated:

        "[64]     In actual fact, that  'assessment'  takes  place  in  two
             separate stages.  The first stage concerns  the  establishment
             of factual circumstances which may  constitute  evidence  that
             supports the application, while the second  stage  relates  to
             the legal appraisal of that evidence, which  entails  deciding
             whether, in the light of the specific facts of a  given  case,
             the substantive conditions laid down by Articles 9 and  10  or
             Article 15 of Directive 2004/83 for the grant of international
             protection are met.


        [65] Under Article  4(1)  of  Directive  2004/83,  although  it  is
             generally for the Applicant to submit all elements  needed  to
             substantiate the application, the fact remains that it is  the
             duty of the Member State to co-operate with the  Applicant  at
             the  stage  of  determining  the  relevant  elements  of  that
             application.


        [66] This requirement that the Member  State  co-operate  therefore
             means, in practical terms, that if, for any reason whatsoever,
             the  elements  provided  by  an  Applicant  for  international
             protection are not complete, up to date  or  relevant,  it  is
             necessary  for  the  Member  State  concerned  to   co-operate
             actively with the Applicant, at that stage of  the  procedure,
             so  that  all  the  elements  needed   to   substantiate   the
             application may be assembled.  A  Member  State  may  also  be
             better placed than the Applicant to  gain  access  to  certain
             types of documents."

     [Our emphasis.]

     We consider that in these passages, the  First  Chamber  was  referring
    clearly to the first stage of the Article 4 "assessment" in the context
    of an examination by a primary decision-maker.   This  cannot,  in  our
    view, be equated with the function and duties  of  an  independent  and
    impartial appellate  tribunal.  Alternatively,  we  consider  that  the
    First Chamber was clearly  not  intending  to  promulgate  prescriptive
    guidance on how courts or tribunals should approach the question of the
    collation of evidence  in  an  asylum  appeal.  We  conclude  that  the
    decision in MM provides no support for the Appellant's contention.

24.  We would further observe that the  Appellant's  argument  also  suffers
    from a manifest incongruity.  In  response  to  a  question  from  this
    Tribunal whether the Appellant would have  consented  to  the  kind  of
    investigative  steps  which  the  FtT  should,  it  was  argued,   have
    proactively undertaken or directed, Counsel replied  in  the  negative.
    This contradicted directly the statement  in  Counsel's  submission  to
    this Tribunal, dated 23rd January 2013:

             "The Appellant consents to an attempt by the UK authorities to
         establish the authenticity of the documents,  copies  of  which  he
         produces, with the Courts or the authorities in Iran."

     The diametrically  opposite  stance  was  adopted  by  Counsel  at  the
    hearing, without explanation. Furthermore, while  submitting  that  the
    FtT was under the positive  duty  formulated  above,  Counsel  did  not
    challenge the correctness of the principle that in  every  asylum  case
    the authorities of the investigating state have a  duty  to  avoid  any
    steps which might jeopardise the safety of the asylum claimant  or  any
    other person in the country concerned. This exposes yet another frailty
    in the argument.

CONCLUSION

25.  For the reasons elaborated above, this  appeal  has  no  merit  and  is
    dismissed accordingly.

PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

26.  We are bound to draw attention to the following unsatisfactory  aspects
    of the conduct of this appeal by the Appellant's legal representatives:



     (a) The failure to comply with the direction addressed to both  parties
         "to state whether they have any views as to whether this case would
         be suitable" for adjudication  by  a  senior  panel  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

     (b) The response, composed and signed by  Counsel  for  the  Appellant,
         which consisted of a series of submissions relating  to  the  cases
         mentioned above and a slightly longer formulation  of  the  earlier
         "Grounds of Appeal" document, also composed and signed by  Counsel.
         This failed to engage with this direction.

     (c) The failure to provide to this  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent  the
         bundle of authorities prior to the beginning  of the hearing.

      d)      Having regard to the way in which the  case  was  argued,  the
         failure to proactively prepare a skeleton argument  and  serve  and
         file the same at least three clear days before the hearing.


      e) The application made at the beginning of the hearing, made  without
         notice  to  this  Tribunal  or  the  Respondent,  to  re-open   the
         previously refused grounds of appeal.

27.  We have considered the letter sent to this Tribunal by the  Appellant's
     solicitors, in response to  the  direction  we  gave  at  the  hearing,
     requiring an explanation  for  the  failures  adumbrated  above.   This
     provides no satisfactory explanation  of,  or  justification  for,  any
     aspect of the menu of defaults.  We note, in particular, the absence of
     advance consideration of whether a senior panel should be allocated  to
     hear this appeal; the lateness of the application for  public  funding;
     and the unjustifiable delay in retaining Counsel.

28.   We  take  this  opportunity  to  emphasise  that  adherence   to   the
     professional standards to be expected of legal representatives  by  any
     court or tribunal is not to be measured  exclusively  by  reference  to
     procedural   directions.    The   indispensable   obligation   on   all
     practitioners   to   observe   high   professional   standards   exists
     independently of procedural directions.  Initiative  is  an  obligatory
     commodity in contemporary litigation. Both the overriding objective and
     the administration of justice itself become casualties in  cases  where
     the necessary standards are not properly implemented in practice.

DECISION

29.  For the reasons elaborated above, we dismiss the appeal and affirm  the
    decision of the FtT.




                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER



