

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 RS (immigration and family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 00218(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Directions Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2012                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                           LORD JUSTICE McFARLANE
                         MR JUSTICE BLAKE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     RS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Khan, instructed by JL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

1. Where a claimant appeals against a  decision  to  deport  or  remove  and
there are outstanding family    proceedings  relating  to  a  child  of  the
claimant, the judge of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  should  first
consider:

       i) Is the outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely to be
          material to the immigration decision?
      ii)  Are there compelling  public  interest  reasons  to  exclude  the
          claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of  the  outcome  of
          the family proceedings or the best interest of the child?
     iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant in an
          immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe that the family
          proceedings have been instituted to delay or frustrate removal and
          not to promote the child's welfare?

2. In assessing the  above  questions,  the  judge  will  normally  want  to
consider: the degree of the   claimant's previous interest  in  and  contact
with the child, the timing of contact proceedings and  the  commitment  with
which they have been progressed, when a decision is likely  to  be  reached,
what materials (if any) are already available or can be  made  available  to
identify pointers to where the child's welfare lies?

3. Having considered these matters the judge will then have to decide:

     i) Does the claimant have at least an Article 8 right to remain  until
        the conclusion of the family proceedings?
    ii) If so, should the appeal be allowed  to  a  limited  extent  and  a
        discretionary leave be directed as per the decision  on  MS  (Ivory
        Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133?
   iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for  a  short  period  of  an
        adjournment to be granted to enable the core decision to be made in
        the family proceedings?
    iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a  view  on
        the present state of knowledge of whether the  appellant  would  be
        allowed to remain in the event  that  the  outcome  of  the  family
        proceedings is the maintenance of family contact between him or her
        and a child resident here?


We direct that in any report of these proceedings the identity of the  child
H and her parents shall not be revealed.

                                   RULING AND DIRECTIONS

    1. The appellant is an Indian citizen born in April 1976. He arrived in
       the United Kingdom in September 2000  with  a  valid  visa  and  was
       granted six months leave to enter. He has  remained  in  the  United
       Kingdom without leave since March 2001. In  June  2002  he  came  to
       adverse police attention for  the  offences  of  driving  without  a
       licence, no insurance and obstructing a constable and was fined.  No
       immigration action followed until July 2003 when he was served  with
       a notice of liability to removal as an illegal entrant.  He  made  a
       claim for asylum that he withdrew in November 2003 and he was placed
       on weekly reporting conditions.


    2. On 12 November 2004 he married HK, a  UK  born  British  citizen  of
       Pakistan ancestral  origins.  Mrs  S  gave  birth  to  the  couple's
       daughter H on 4 April 2005.

    3. On 27 June 2008 the appellant made an application to remain  on  the
       grounds of marriage and that application remained outstanding  until
       a decision was taken to deport him in December 2009.

    4. In April 2009 police were called to the matrimonial home occupied by
       the appellant in connection with a  disturbance.  A  search  of  the
       premises revealed a false identity document in  his  possession.  He
       was  arrested  and  detained  and  on  29  June  2009  convicted  of
       possession of a false identity document  and  given  a  sentence  of
       twelve  months  imprisonment.  Despite  our  repeated  requests  the
       judge's sentencing remarks have not been made available to us and we
       now presume that they are lost.

    5. The appellant's conviction and  sentence  made  him  susceptible  to
       automatic deportation pursuant to s.32 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007
       and, despite his representations  to  the  contrary,  a  deportation
       order was made on 14 December 2009. Having served his  sentence  the
       appellant remained in immigration detention until 1 March 2010  when
       he was released and returned to the matrimonial home. The  appellant
       appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision  to  deport
       him relying on the family life he enjoyed in the United Kingdom with
       his British citizen wife and daughter.

    6. On 8 February 2010, while the  appellant  was  still  detained,  the
       local authority became concerned about H's welfare as a result of  a
       GP referral to  social  services.  There  were  concerns  about  the
       mother's mental health and her ability to cope with the child alone.
       An urgent visit was made to the house which was in a very poor state
       of cleanliness, and H had not been fed or clothed  properly.  Mrs  S
       said  she  had  insufficient  resources  to  do  so.  An   emergency
       protection order was made and the child taken into interim  care  on
       12 February 2010. Those proceedings have  continued  in  the  county
       court ever since.

    7. The appellant's  case  on  appeal  was  that  his  presence  in  the
       household was vital to keeping the family together  and  in  a  good
       state of health and without it H would remain in care  as  his  wife
       could not cope alone.  There was some support  for  the  appellant's
       contention in  a  statement  made  before  the  panel  in  the  care
       proceedings of Lynne McGowan, a social worker employed by the  Luton
       Borough Council.

    8. As to his offending, the Probation Officer's report before the panel
       revealed that the appellant had told the author  that  he  used  the
       false Italian passport to  obtain  employment  to  provide  for  his
       family pending the outcome of his application for  indefinite  leave
       to remain as a spouse.  The family had not claimed benefits when  he
       was at liberty but had needed to do this when he was  in  detention.
       There were good reports of his behaviour in prison, and  he  was  in
       regular contact with his wife who he was anxious to support  on  his
       release from detention.

    9. The Home Office submissions were that it was not disproportionate to
       remove the appellant to India since his British  wife  and  daughter
       could be expected to follow him there, and they could still continue
       a level of communication if they chose not to go there.

   10.  A panel of the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal on  26  March
       2010. The panel concluded:

             "We have considered all the evidence in [the round]. We do not
             think it is proportionate for maintaining immigration  control
             for this Appellant to be removed to India. We have noted  that
             he is a caring husband and that his wife  is  almost  entirely
             reliant upon him and without him is unable  to  survive  on  a
             daily basis as the evidence demonstrated, since the result  of
             the imprisonment was that the child was taken into care as she
             could not cope with looking after her. He is not able to go to
             India as she has no relatives there and she cannot  live  with
             her husband and her husband's family. Her husband knows no-one
             in India except his parents and he  cannot  live  without  his
             wife and daughter. If the husband was to return to  India  the
             wife would not be able to retain custody of the  daughter  who
             would remain in care until the age of majority. She has  never
             been to  India  and  she  has  never  been  to  Pakistan.  The
             Appellant could not go to Pakistan either with his  wife.  She
             has no relatives in Pakistan. Her relatives in the UK  do  not
             like to be associated with the Appellant. It seems to us  that
             far from assisting the wife's mental health, by returning  the
             Appellant  to  India  she  would  become  progressively  worse
             mentally. We have taken into account the case of  Beoku-Betts,
             the rights of third parties when assessing the  provisions  of
             article 8, in this case the rights of the wife and the  child.
             We consider it would be wholly disproportionate to remove  the
             Appellant in these circumstances".


   11.  The respondent was granted leave to  appeal  and  the  appeal  came
       before Designated Immigration Judge Woodcraft sitting  as  a  Deputy
       Judge of the Upper Tribunal. He found that  the  panel  had  made  a
       material error of  law,  in  that  the  primary  legitimate  aim  in
       deporting the appellant was the  prevention  of  crime  rather  than
       maintaining immigration  control,  and  the  panel  had  accordingly
       failed to give weight to the gravity of the offence as determined by
       the Court of Appeal in Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim  2113.  He  further
       concluded that he should proceed with the immigration appeal  rather
       than await the outcome of the care proceedings,  as  otherwise  each
       court would be continue to wait for the other to decide the issue.


   12.  The judge noted:-

          i. The appellant had not applied to regularise his status for some
             years after his marriage.
         ii. He had been working as a building contractor without  informing
             his employers of his false passport.
        iii. His family  life  had  already  been  interfered  with  by  the
             decision of the local authority to seek a care order.
         iv. He was in no position to know whether the local authority still
             contended that the appellant had been violent to his wife which
             was  an  allegation  that  the  wife  made  resulting  in   the
             attendance of the police but he noted that the care proceedings
             had continued despite the appellant's release on bail.
          v. It would not be possible for the family court to anticipate the
             decision on the deportation appeal and in the circumstances the
             decision of the local  authority  to  continue  with  the  care
             proceedings was wholly understandable.
         vi. It was common ground that Mrs S could not be expected  to  look
             after H on her own if the appellant is deported.
        vii. Mrs S's family had not provided assistance to her with  H  when
             her husband was in prison, but he was not  prepared  to  assume
             that the appellant's parents would not be supportive to her  in
             India although this was  a  mixed  marriage  between  a  Moslem
             mother and a Hindu father.


   13. The judge examined the various scenarios as to the family's  future:
       Mr and Mrs S going to India without H; Mr S being deported to  India
       without his wife and child; Mrs S and H joining Mr S in  India  with
       the leave of the family court. He had no doubt that it  was  in  H's
       best interests that she be looked after by her parents  rather  than
       be placed in foster care.  Whilst the panel's  approach  might  have
       been legitimate if the public interest in removing the appellant was
       limited to the fact that he had no leave to remain, this was not the
       case and in addition he had committed a serious offence of  identity
       fraud.


   14. He concluded  that  the  interference  with  family  life  would  be
       diminished if Mrs S and H could join  the  appellant  in  India  and
       concluded that the interference was justified because it pursued the
       legitimate aim of the prevention of crime.

   15. The appellant then sought leave to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
       against this remade decision. Whilst he accepted that  the  original
       panel had made a material  error  of  law  in  not  considering  the
       legitimate aim of the prevention of crime, he  contended  that   the
       Deputy Judge had erred  in his conclusions:-

          i. by speculating on the outcome of the family proceedings;
         ii. by failing to have regard to the fact that the wife  and  child
             were British citizens by birth who had never lived in India  or
             Pakistan;
        iii. by failing to give weight as a  primary  consideration  in  the
             decision to H's interests as a child.


         Permission to appeal was granted  and  on  the  8  March  2011  the
         decision of the UT was set aside by consent of the parties  on  the
         basis  that  ii.  and  iii.  above  demonstrated  errors  of   law,
         particularly in the light of the guidance given  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
         [2011] UKSC 4,  1 February 2011.


   16. The appeal came back before the UT on 17 June  2011  (The  President
       and Judge Martin) when the appellant was unrepresented. Our  initial
       reading of the papers suggested that applying the basic findings  of
       fact of the First-tier Tribunal with respect to the  best  interests
       of the child to the enhanced case   of  deportation  in  the  public
       interest by reason of the appellant's passport offence, and applying
       the developing jurisprudence on automatic deportation where the best
       interests of a British citizen child  are  concerned  (see  Omotunde
       (best interests - Zambrano applied - Razgar) [2011] UKUT 247  (IAC),
       25 May 2011) we could remake this decision on the available evidence
       without further delay or difficulty.


   17.  However, the Tribunal made contact with  the  judge  of  the  court
       where the care proceedings were continuing to  find  out  when  they
       would be resolved.  The District Judge was kind enough to provide us
       with the transcript of his fact finding hearing on 3  December  2010
       where he concluded that the father  had  been  violent  towards  the
       mother on more than one occasion including in the  presence  of  the
       child, and the appellant's refusal to accept that finding might well
       result in the local authority seeking an order permanently  removing
       H from the care of her parents.

   18. Since in our view H's best interests were likely to play a  decisive
       role in the outcome of the deportation appeal, we concluded that  we
       had no alternative but to adjourn these proceedings until the family
       court  had  examined  all  the  information  available  to  it   and
       determined where those best interests lay.  We  were  informed  that
       there would be a case management hearing likely to lead to  a  final
       hearing in the autumn of 2011. We made  a  number  of  supplementary
       directions  on  that  occasion  including   directions   that    the
       respondent should:-

          i. make contact with the  local  authority  solicitors  to  obtain
             relevant information about the issues in the case;
         ii. supply us with a copy of the sentencing transcript;
        iii. give consideration to granting the appellant permission to work
             pending the adjourned  hearing  of  this  appeal  so  he  could
             support his family without  their  having  recourse  to  public
             funds.


         From what we heard from Mr Saunders on 22 May it  appears  that  no
         consideration has been given to i. and iii.

   19. In August 2011, the District Judge ordered that a copy of an  agreed
       'case summary' from the family proceedings and a copy of the  latest
       order be disclosed to the Tribunal.


   20. The case next came before the President on 2 November 2011, when the
       Tribunal was informed that the final hearing in the family court was
       listed for 11 January 2012 with a time estimate of three days.  This
       appeal was directed to be listed for a date after  1  February  2012
       and a response from the respondent was directed to be issued  by  25
       January 2012.


   21. On the  16  February  2012  further  directions  were  made  by  the
       President  in  the  light  of  the  information  supplied   by   the
       appellant's solicitors, including the fact that the  family  hearing
       had been adjourned to early May. No response of any  kind  had  been
       received by the respondent. The directions were as follows:

          "The Tribunal proposes to re-list this appeal on  a  date  to  be
          fixed between 15 and 25 May.  The  matter  will  not  be  further
          adjourned whatever the state of the  family  law  proceedings  by
          this date.


          The Tribunal directs that the respondent comply with  [previously
          issued] directions not later than 28 days from the date  of  this
          direction.  In the response to this appeal the respondent  should
          address the following:


               i.  Has  Mr  S  been  granted  permission  to  work  pending
                  determination of this appeal, consideration of which  was
                  directed (direction 6(viii)) in June 2011.  If  not,  why
                  not?


              ii. What submissions does the respondent make as to the  best
                  interests of the child in this case, and on the basis  of
                  what investigations (if any)?


             iii. Does the respondent accept that in a  case  where  public
                  law proceedings  are  outstanding  at  the  time  of  the
                  decision to deport, and the outcome of those  proceedings
                  is considered material to the decision in the deportation
                  appeal that   the  Tribunal  should  either  adjourn  the
                  deportation  appeal  for  a  period   to   enable   those
                  proceedings to be completed or else allow the  appeal  on
                  the basis that deportation should not  take  place  until
                  the outcome of the care proceedings is known,   and  that
                  the appellant should be given such leave as is  necessary
                  to  enable  him  to  participate  in  those   proceedings
                  pursuant to the approach in Ciliz v Netherlands ECtHR and
                  MS (Ivory Coast) [2007]  EWCA Civ 133, if not why not?


              iv. In the event that a Tribunal  allows  an  appeal  on  the
                  basis of iii) above, does the respondent have  the  power
                  to make a fresh decision to deport (whether discretionary
                  deportation or a further automatic deportation decision)?

          The Tribunal proposes to consider the interplay of public law
          care proceedings and deportation proceedings in this appeal and
          the respondent's informed participation in these proceedings is
          needed.

          Notwithstanding the failure to comply with the two previous
          directions, the Tribunal expects to receive the assistance it has
          asked for as set out in this letter within the extended time set.



          An unexplained failure to comply with this further direction may
          lead the Tribunal to conclude that the appeal is not opposed on
          the basis of iii. above and the matter may be determined on the
          papers without further notice after the expiry of the 28 days."

   22. Following these directions the appeal was listed before the Tribunal
       on 22 May 2012  before  a  panel  that  now  included  Lord  Justice
       McFarlane in order to ensure we had the benefit of  his  family  law
       experience in addressing the issues of principle we  had  previously
       identified.


   23. On 15 May 2012 we received a bundle from the appellant's  solicitors
       from which it was apparent that the family proceedings scheduled  to
       be heard in May had yet again been adjourned to a date in June 2012.



   24. On 21 May 2012, the respondent outlined to the appellant its present
       position based on the information available to it by this date:-

          i. Although Mrs S was dependent on  the  appellant  there  was  no
             reason why she could not join him in India or  in  his  absence
             could turn to her parents for support.
         ii. Since February 2010 H has been in foster care with Mr and Mrs S
             visiting her for two hours three times a week.
        iii. On  the  basis  of  the  District  Judge's  findings  that  the
             appellant had twisted his wife's arm, hit her with a golf club,
             attempted to strangle  her  with  a  scarf  and  was  sexually,
             physically and verbally abusive of her, and that it was  likely
             that  H  had  witnessed  some  of  this  behaviour,  the  local
             authority did not support  returning  H  to  the  care  of  her
             parents.
         iv. The appellant had now accepted those findings.
          v. UKBA concluded that H's best interests are that she remains  in
             foster care as per the local authority care plan.
         vi.  The  UKBA  consider  that  H's   interests   are   a   primary
             consideration in the deportation decision but there  are  other
             factors that outweigh them.
        vii. By contrast to the decision in ZH (Tanzania) the appellant  was
             a foreign criminal as defined in s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
             2007 and the child was not being required to locate  to  India,
             on the contrary her best interests were  that  she  remains  in
             foster care in the United Kingdom where  she  has  a  right  to
             remain as a British citizen.
       viii. The separation from H was  a  consequence  of  the  appellant's
             criminality; he had been an "inconstant presence" in  her  life
             having regard to his term of imprisonment and he could continue
             to enjoy contact with her by electronic means from India.
         ix. The seriousness of the appellant's conduct had been  summarised
             by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft who  had  pointed  out
             that the appellant had used the passport to  obtain  employment
             and his previous contact with the police had involved dishonest
             use of a name to avoid traffic prosecution.

The submissions before us

   25. Mr Khan submitted that  the  most  appropriate  course  now  was  to
       adjourn pending the outcome of the family court decision in June. It
       was not possible finally to decide this appeal unless it were  known
       whether the court concluded that H's interests favoured a structured
       return to the care of her parents or a  cessation  of  the  parental
       relationship by placing the child  for  adoption  or  in  long  term
       foster care as was the local authority's proposal. Mr  Saunders  did
       not oppose that course.


   26.  Before reaching a conclusion on this application we  explored  with
       the parties what their respective submissions as to the  outcome  of
       this  appeal were if following the decision of the family court:

          i. H was to be returned to the parents' care or
         ii. H was to be permanently separated from her parents.


   27. It appeared to us from the history of the care proceedings  that  no
       member of Mrs S's family had come forward to offer to look after  H,
       and all possible other informal carers had been eliminated from  the
       investigation.


   28.  We consider the second option first. In addressing ii. Mr  Saunders
       relied on the UKBA decision letter and the fact that the family life
       between Mr and Mrs S had been established when he had  no  leave  to
       remain, he had no expectation of being  allowed  to  remain  on  the
       grounds of marriage, and he had then  gone  on  to  commit  criminal
       offences and in addition had been violent and abusive to  his  wife.
       Whether or not it would be reasonable to expect Mrs S to go to  live
       in India for the first  time,  it  was  submitted  that  exceptional
       factors would be needed  before  it  could  be  concluded  that  the
       appellant's deportation was disproportionate in these circumstances.

   29. Mr Khan acknowledged that applying the authorities noted  above  and
       below where the case law is reviewed in more detail that  if  option
       ii. were to be the outcome, exceptional reasons would be  needed  to
       make  the  appellant's  removal  disproportionate.  He  nevertheless
       submitted that Mrs S's nationality plus her poor  mental  state  and
       her unusual degree of  dependence  on  her  husband  supplied  those
       reasons.

   30.  As to option i. Mr Saunders had no  detailed  submissions  to  make
       apart from the general one that it was open to us to hold  that  the
       strength of the public interest in the prevention of crime was  such
       to entitle the Tribunal to conclude that H's best interests could be
       outweighed by other pertinent considerations. He  acknowledged  that
       the UKBA letter was drafted on a fundamentally different basis  than
       Deputy Judge Woodcraft's assumptions and conclusions,  and  had  not
       addressed the contingency that the family court may decide  that  it
       was in H's best interests to return her to the care of both parents.



   31. As to the seriousness of the index  offence,  Mr  Saunders  accepted
       that the criminal courts in sentencing offenders  had  stressed  the
       distinction between offences of simple possession  and  offences  of
       possession with intent; further they had distinguished between those
       who used a false passport  to  deceive  an  immigration  officer  or
       indeed a judge considering a claim to remain under  the  Immigration
       and Nationality Acts on the one hand and those who were  awaiting  a
       decision from the Home Office as to  their  immigration  future  and
       obtained a false document to obtain employment to support themselves
       or their families: see  Attorney General's Reference  Nos 1 and 6 of
       2008  (Dziruni and Laby) [2008] EWCA Crim  677   4  March  2008   at
       [16], [19] [26] and [31].  The  distinction  is  summarised  in  the
       decision of the Court of Appeal  in R v Ovierakhi [2009]  EWCA  Crim
       452 at  [16]:

          "wherever the case is on the spectrum, a  custodial  sentence  is
          likely , save  in  exceptional  circumstances,  for  the  reasons
          stated in Carneiro. In cases in which a false passport is  to  be
          used for the purposes of securing entry into the United  Kingdom,
          the guidance contained in Kolawole  applies.  Where,  however,  a
          false passport is used to obtain work or a bank account, its  use
          does not enable the  offender  to  obtain  entry  to  the  United
          Kingdom and for that reason  it  may  properly  be  treated  less
          severely than the use of a passport which does, or may, have that
          effect. What the use of a passport to obtain work does,  however,
          do is to facilitate the offender remaining in the United  Kingdom
          in breach of immigration controls. For that  reason  a  custodial
          sentence is usually required. But it  can  justifiably  be  less,
          particularly if the offender is of good character and has done no
          more than use or try to use it to seek  employment  in  order  to
          maintain himself/herself of his/her family".


         See further Archbold Criminal Pleading and Practice 2011 22-45e  at
2126.


   32. We take as a given fact that the appellant has received  a  sentence
       of twelve months and is therefore liable to  automatic  deportation.
       Any crime deserving such a sentence is a serious one. In the absence
       of one of the exceptions to automatic deportation, such  a  sentence
       will result in deportation, but where  there  is  a  credible  human
       rights claim advanced by way of resistance to deportation,  part  of
       the assessment that the determining judge is required to make is  to
       assess the seriousness of the offence and the circumstances  of  the
       offender in the overall balance. For reasons we  have  explained  in
       Sanade and others (British children -Zambrano - Dereci) [2012]  UKUT
       48 (IAC) it is not the case that  because  Parliament  has  set  the
       level of offending engaging automatic deportation at twelve  months,
       Parliament  has  also  decided  that  all  Article  8   claims   are
       automatically outweighed by the public interest  in  the  legitimate
       aim  of  preventing  crime.  In   assessing   proportionality,   the
       nationality of the various parties, the immigration  status  of  the
       appellant at the time  of  the  marriage,  the  seriousness  of  the
       offending, whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  family  members
       affected by the removal of the appellant  to  relocate  abroad,  and
       whether there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  removal  are  all
       relevant factors.


   33.  We normally expect to have the judge's sentencing remarks available
       to us in deportation  cases,  but  our  endeavours  to  obtain  them
       through UKBA have been  unsuccessful  and  the  description  of  the
       offence in the deportation letter was minimal.  We have had to  make
       our own evaluation without such assistance. It is in that context we
       note and accept Mr Saunders' acknowledgement that the use Mr  S  put
       this passport  to,  whilst  undermining  an  aspect  of  immigration
       control and therefore serious, was to support his family  pending  a
       decision on his application rather  than  to  deceive  the  UKBA  by
       falsely representing that he did not need permission to reside here.




    The care proceedings

   34. It is apparent that the care proceedings have been  outstanding  for
       more than two years now, and while the most  important  question  in
       the case may be resolved at the next date for the final  hearing  in
       June, there is no certainty that this will be the case, and  on  the
       most favourable outcome  to  the  appellant  it  is  likely  that  a
       carefully  structured   plan   with   continuing   local   authority
       involvement will be needed if it  is  concluded  that  H  is  to  be
       returned to her parents.


   35. As we understand the history of the proceedings from the information
       provided to us:-

           i. The proceedings started when there was striking  evidence  of
              H's neglect by mother in February 2010 at  a  time  when  the
              family had lost the financial and other material  support  of
              the father, who had been in detention for ten months, and the
              mother was struggling to feed and clothe H and  to  heat  and
              maintain the house in father's absence.


          ii.  The  local  authority  was  also  concerned  about  Mrs  S's
              allegation of violence towards her by the appellant that  had
              led the police to the matrimonial home in the first place. It
              was aware of a previous report of abuse.


         iii. Mrs S did not support her allegation of being the  victim  of
              violence in these proceedings. She was  at  first  considered
              too mentally incapacitated to represent herself.  By  January
              2012 this assessment had changed, in the light of up to  date
              medical reports and the services of the Official Solicitor to
              represent her were dispensed with.

          iv. The appellant at first disputed  that  he  had  been  violent
              towards the mother and accordingly there  was  no  basis  for
              work to address his conduct in  that  respect.  The  District
              Judge made the findings summarised at  [17]  and  [24  (iii)]
              above and the appellant continued to dispute them  until  the
              autumn of 2011. The father was assessed by a psychiatrist  as
              posing a moderate risk of harm to mother in May 2011.


           v. On the basis of the mother's capacity, the father's  violence
              towards mother and his unwillingness to acknowledge  it,  the
              local authority plan for H was to remove her from her parents
              as they were considered unsuitable carers for her.


          vi. Following his  acknowledgment  of  his  violent  conduct  the
              appellant has  been  seeking  psychotherapy  and  counselling
              since December 2011.

         vii. The proceedings were adjourned in May 2012 to  determine  how
              far  the appellant has progressed in addressing his behaviour
              and whether he is now still assessed to be a moderate risk of
              harm to mother.

        viii. The appellant has attended for assessment as directed by  the
              District Judge on 9 May.

          ix. Throughout this period mother and father have been  seeing  H
              regularly three times a week for two hours.

    The inter-relationship of care and immigration proceedings


   36. Deputy Judge Woodcraft acknowledged the problem of 'who goes  first'
       where there are  parallel  proceedings  in  immigration  and  family
       cases. The family court may well be assisted by  knowing  whether  a
       person in the position of the appellant is  likely  to  be  able  to
       remain in the United Kingdom  and  be  an  active  presence  in  the
       child's life. The immigration court would be informed by the  family
       court's assessment of the child's welfare.

   37. Although both the Secretary of State and the judges  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal have a duty to  treat  the  child's
       best interests as a primary  consideration  in  the  application  of
       administrative action including immigration action that is likely to
       affect the child, the Tribunal does not have any means of  assessing
       these matters for itself, in particular: there is no local authority
       or children's guardian, no access to the service provided by CAFCAS,
       and no independent means of ascertaining the  wishes,  concerns  and
       interests of the child.  It is generally not considered desirable to
       hear oral evidence from a child of tender years (below  the  age  of
       12) when this is likely to  be  a  source  of  stress,  anxiety  and
       possibly tension with any caring parent. It would be undesirable  if
       the child felt responsible  in  some  way  for  the  removal  of  an
       offending parent.

   38.   Although  the  Tribunal  encourages  either   party   to   provide
       independent assessments from teachers, doctors, social  workers,  or
       other child-centred professionals,  this  cannot  be  compelled  and
       funding arrangements for such reports are uncertain and are unlikely
       to improve with the coming into force of the Legal  Aid  Courts  and
       Sentencing Act  2012.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  considerable  case
       management powers  under  rule  5  and  following  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (as  amended),  but  it  is
       conscious of the funding restraints on both appellants and the  UKBA
       when making such directions.  Quite frequently there is  no,  or  no
       timely, response to directions, particularly, as in  this  case,  by
       the  respondent.  Even  if  the  Tribunal  concludes  that  it  will
       consequently remake the decision on the papers in the light of  what
       material is available it  will  often  be  wholly  uninformed  about
       important aspects of the child's life and development.


   39. Our directions in February 2012 invited the parties to consider  the
       case of Ciliz v Netherlands [2000] ECHR 265 where the European Court
       found a procedural violation of Article 8 when Mr Ciliz was deported
       before the family courts had had the opportunity  to  determine  his
       application for contact/residence with  his  child.   This  led  the
       Court of Appeal in MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133 to  consider
       that where family proceedings are under consideration in the case of
       a party who has no leave to remain or is facing removal, a period of
       discretionary leave should be  granted  to  enable  that  person  to
       remain lawfully in the UK and participate in those  proceedings.  It
       observed:
       1. "In our judgment the AIT did not decide the hypothetical question
          it  was  incumbent  upon  it  to  decide,  namely   whether   the
          appellant's Article 8 rights would be violated by a removal  when
          the case was before it i.e.  when  the  contact  application  was
          outstanding. Time has moved on. It is  now  9  months  since  the
          AIT's decision. The circumstances will be different. The AIT will
          need to know what has happened in the  contact  proceedings.  One
          can envisage arguments both ways. Mr Bourne points out  that  the
          facts are some way removed from those in Ciliz. The appellant has
          served a lengthy  prison  sentence  for  physical  abuse  of  her
          children and, as far as we are aware, has not seen them for  some
          time. The present views of the  children  and  their  father  are
          unknown. If the AIT had  decided  the  question  it  should  have
          decided and concluded that her Article 8 rights would be violated
          by her removal then the next question would have been the  length
          of discretionary leave to remain and quite a short  period  might
          have been  appropriate  to  cater  for  the  outstanding  contact
          proceedings; it could of course always be extended. The  AIT  had
          jurisdiction to decide this issue (see s 87 2002 Act).
       1. Whilst it is correct, as the authorities show, that the  decision
          maker is, to an  extent,  required  to  consider  a  hypothetical
          situation, it is neither required nor  appropriate  to  speculate
          about the future. Thus  questions  about  what  may  happen,  for
          example, to the appellant's mental health in circumstances as yet
          unknown were irrelevant to the AIT's consideration.
       1. The appellant was entitled to  have  determined  whether  removal
          from the United Kingdom with an outstanding  contact  application
          would breach s 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. That question  was
          capable of  resolution  one  way  or  the  other.  What  was  not
          appropriate was to leave  her  in  this  country  in  limbo  with
          temporary admission and the promise not to remove her  until  her
          contact application has been concluded. Temporary  admission  is,
          as we have explained, a status given  to  someone  liable  to  be
          detained pending removal. If the  appellant  had  a  valid  human
          rights claim she is not liable to be  detained  pending  removal.
          And if she has not, she ought to be removed. If she  is  entitled
          to discretionary leave to remain she ought to  have  it  for  the
          period the Secretary of State thinks appropriate,  together  with
          the advantages that it conveys; and if not she ought not to.
       1. In the course of argument the point was made  that  circumstances
          could arise where a contact hearing was likely to be resolved in,
          for example, a matter of days. It would in those circumstances be
          impractical to expect a human rights decision without knowing the
          outcome of that application. In our judgment that is the kind  of
          situation that can be dealt with by appropriate case  management.
          "
          The Court then concluded at [75]:
         "On the point of principle the AIT should have decided whether  the
         appellant's removal on the facts as they were when they  heard  the
         appeal, i.e. with her outstanding application for contact with  her
         children, would have violated Article 8 of the ECHR  and  thus  put
         the Secretary of State in breach of s 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
         1998 if he removed her. It was not open to the AIT to rely  on  the
         Secretary of State's assurance or undertaking  that  the  appellant
         would not  be  removed  until  her  contact  application  had  been
         resolved. Nor was it appropriate to speculate  upon  whether  there
         might be a violation of Article 8 on different facts at some  point
         in the future. Had the AIT decided  the  Article  8  point  in  the
         appellant's favour she should have been granted discretionary leave
         to remain as envisaged in the API of January 2006. This could  have
         been for quite a short period, whatever was regarded as  sufficient
         to cover the outstanding contact application. It  would  have  been
         open to the appellant later to apply for the period to be  extended
         should the circumstances so warrant. It was open to the AIT under s
         87(1) of the 2002 Act, if it allowed the appeal, itself to fix  the
         period of discretionary leave to  remain.  Alternatively  it  could
         have remitted that question to the Secretary of State. "
   40.  These remarks were  made  in  the  context  of  a  case  where  the
       appellant  had  been  sentenced  to  three  years  imprisonment  for
       violence to the children she was seeking contact with. It was not  a
       case of automatic deportation, but in principle we can see no reason
       why the Tribunal could not conclude that leave to remain  should  be
       granted on a discretionary basis pending the  resolution  of  family
       proceedings that should be concluded  before  a  person  is  removed
       and/or the outcome of which  is  material  to  whether  that  person
       should be removed.


   41. The statutory structure of s.32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act  does  not
       prevent the respondent from subsequently  relying  on  the  criminal
       conviction to justify deportation even if there has been an  interim
       period  of  discretionary  leave  granted.  The  application  of  an
       exception does not remove the conclusion that deportation is in  the
       public good (see s.33 (7)(b) of the UK Borders Act 2007).

   42.  However,  there  is  no  universal  obligation  that  a  period  of
       discretionary leave must be granted where family proceedings  remain
       unresolved. The Court of appeal so decided in  DH  (Jamaica)  [2010]
       EWCA Civ 207.  In this case an appellant had been permitted  to  re-
       enter the UK for the sole purpose of giving evidence in  a  criminal
       trial.  He had a child by a partner with whom the  relationship  had
       broken down. The Immigration Judge had found:
         "29. In the present case  balancing  the  public  interest  against
         extent of the  interference  with  both  the  appellant's  and  his
         daughters' right to respect for their family life and  taking  into
         account the appellant's immigration history and  the  circumstances
         in which he returned to this country and the fact that  he  has  on
         two occasions made asylum claims specifically for  the  purpose  of
         delaying  his  removal,  I  find  that   removal   would   not   be
         disproportionate to a  legitimate  aim  within  article  8(2)  even
         though it deprives him of the opportunity  of  pursuing  a  contact
         application in this country."
       The appellant obtained leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal on the
       basis of the failure of the Tribunal to  direct  that  discretionary
       leave be granted pending the outcome  of  the  contact  proceedings.
       Sedley LJ said in dismissing the appeal at [10]:
            "What is happening is an example of the unfortunate game of  cat
           and mouse that develops when removal of an  illegal  entrant  is
           resisted on the ground that he has children here  with  whom  he
           hopes to establish a right of contact. The family court in order
           to decide contact needs to know what his immigration status  is.
           The Home Office in order to decide his immigration status needs
           to know what his contact rights are. The stalemate can go on for
           years. If contact is granted, Immigration Rule 246 confers  an
           entitlement to leave to enter provided the  qualifying  criteria
           are met. The proposition for which MS (Ivory Coast) is authority
           is that the Home Office  cannot  meet  the  state's  Article 8
           obligation by simply granting  temporary  admission  (in  effect
           release on bail from immigration detention) and undertaking  not
           to remove the entrant while contact is decided. If it  is  going
           to authorise his remaining here they must  grant  him  leave  to
           remain in  the  way  specifically  envisaged  by  asylum  policy
           instruction (or API). ....."
         and concluded at [12]
           "What MS (Ivory Coast)  concerns  is  the  unacceptability  of
           keeping an individual in limbo rather than giving legal  effect,
           by the grant of limited leave to enter outside the Rules, to her
           accepted entitlement to remain here  for  a  specified  purpose.
           What the present case concerns is whether the appellant has  any
           such entitlement."
   43.  In our judgment, when a judge sitting in an immigration appeal  has
       to consider whether a person  with  a  criminal  record  or  adverse
       immigration history should be removed or  deported  when  there  are
       family  proceedings  contemplated  the  judge  should  consider  the
       following questions:


          i)    Is the outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely
             to be material to the immigration decision?
         ii) Are there compelling public interest  reasons  to  exclude  the
             claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of
             the family proceedings or the best interest of the child?
        iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant in
             an immigration appeal, is there any reason to believe that  the
             family proceedings have been instituted to delay  or  frustrate
             removal and not to promote the child's welfare?
         iv) In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally  want
             to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest  in
             and contact with the child, the timing of  contact  proceedings
             and the commitment with which they have been progressed, when a
             decision is likely to be reached, what materials (if  any)  are
             already available or can be made available to identify pointers
             to where the child's welfare lies?


   44.  Having asked those questions,  the judge will then have to decide:-


          i)    Does the claimant have at least an Article 8 right to remain
             until the conclusion of the family proceedings?
         ii) If so should the appeal be allowed to a limited  extent  and  a
             discretionary leave be directed?
        iii) Alternatively, is it more appropriate for a short period of  an
             adjournment to be granted to enable the  core  decision  to  be
             made in the family proceedings?
         iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a  view
             on the present state of  knowledge  of  whether  the  appellant
             would be allowed to remain in the event that the outcome of the
             family proceedings is the maintenance of family contact between
             him or her and a child resident here?


   45. As to the choice between discretionary leave and adjournment, we are
       particularly conscious that irregular migrants do not have the right
       to work or obtain social security absent a human rights bar to their
       removal. The present appellant has not been able to work  since  his
       release on bail in March 2010 and the longer legal proceedings  take
       to resolve the important issues, the greater  the  burden  of  self-
       sufficiency  or  dependence  on   a   relative's   social   security
       entitlement is  likely  to  be.  Indeed  his  automatic  deportation
       appears to have come about as a result of his intention to make  his
       family self-sufficient whilst his future was decided.  An  inability
       to support his family may adversely impact on the family proceedings
       themselves.


   46. There is, however, a public interest that immigration proceedings be
       expeditiously decided and a right to remain on human rights  grounds
       should not be created solely by reason of family  links  created  or
       significantly developed during pending appeals.


   47.  In addressing these  questions  there  will  need  to  be  informed
       communication between the judge deciding  the  immigration  question
       and the judge deciding the family question. It is important  that  a
       system be established so that both jurisdictions can be  alerted  to
       proceedings in the other and appropriate relevant information can be
       exchanged, without undermining  principles  of  importance  to  both
       jurisdictions.

Conclusions

   48. In the light of the above we now reach our conclusions on the future
       conduct of this appeal.


   49. As we announced at the conclusion of the  hearing  we  have  decided
       that, in the light of the  submission  of  the  parties,  the  short
       period of adjournment anticipated before decisions are  made  as  to
       where H's interests lie means that we should not attempt  to  decide
       this appeal today on the material known to us, either finally or  to
       the extent envisaged in MS (Ivory Coast).

   50. With some reluctance,  therefore,  we  will  further  adjourn  these
       proceedings until after the decision of the family court  is  known.
       The present decision is  not  a  determination  but  a  ruling.  Our
       determination will follow the ruling of  the  family  court  in  the
       light of the directions we make below. That determination will be  a
       final one.

   51. However, it appears to us that the family court will  either  decide
       that H should be returned to the care of her parents in some form or
       placed permanently elsewhere. The  primary  facts  are  settled,  as
       indeed is the nature of the judgement that we are called on to  make
       in determining the human rights ground.  We  consider  that  we  can
       indicate what the immigration decision will be on the  material  now
       known to us and in the light of the submissions developed before us.
       We also conclude that the family court may be concerned to know what
       immigration outcome is likely to follow if it reaches a decision  in
       principle about future relations between H and her parents.

   52. The conclusions we indicate at [53] and [54] below  are  necessarily
       provisional and, as the history of  these  proceedings  demonstrate,
       new facts may emerge and  further  considerations  relevant  to  the
       decision may still come to light. If the family court  makes  either
       of the two decisions we have identified  above,  we  will  afford  a
       further opportunity to the parties to permit them  to  make  written
       representations to this Tribunal within 28 days  from  communication
       of the family court's decision. On receipt of those  submissions  or
       expiry of the period of 28 days whichever is the  earlier,  we  will
       decide whether any consideration  arises  that  either  justifies  a
       further oral hearing or  requires  us  to  set  aside  or  vary  our
       provisional decision. If it does not, then  we  will  make  a  final
       determination without an oral hearing in the light of  the  decision
       of the family court. We stress that a failure to comply  with  these
       directions will deprive the party in default of the  opportunity  of
       making further submissions to us.

   53. In the event that the  family  court  concludes  that  H  should  be
       permanently removed from the care of her  parents  then  we  do  not
       consider that the deportation of  the  appellant  would  breach  his
       human rights or amount to a disproportionate interference  with  the
       right to respect to the family life he enjoys with his wife and H or
       his private life derived from his  residence  here.   We  apply  the
       principles developed in the automatic deportation cases noted above.
        In summary our reasons are as follows:-

          i. The appellant had no right to reside in the UK when he  married
             Mrs S, indeed he had stayed beyond the period of his  visitor's
             leave and had been informed he was  liable  to  removal  as  an
             illegal entrant.  In  those  circumstances  the  state  is  not
             obliged to respect the couple's preferred choice of matrimonial
             home, and in the general run of such  cases  interference  with
             the family life existing between the couple will be justified.
         ii. Mrs S may choose not to travel to  India  and  may  not  be  so
             committed to the future of the marriage  as  a  result  of  her
             husband's past conduct towards her, or risk  of  repetition  of
             future conduct, or her mental frailty. But in our judgment none
             of these reasons make the interference in the marital relations
             disproportionate in the present factual context.
        iii. We recognise that there will be real difficulties for Mrs S  to
             move to a new country that she has never been to and where  she
             may not have the support of  her  husband's  family  given  the
             distinctions of  religion  and  national  origins  between  the
             couple. Although it may not be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
             leave the United Kingdom in the light of her nationality,  long
             residence here and mental  frailty,  we  do  not  consider  the
             problems facing the couple in living together if that is  their
             primary concern are insuperable. There is no reason to  believe
             that Mrs S would not be admitted to India  or  would  otherwise
             not be safe there. Her husband has skills that  he  can  employ
             there and he can support her financially and emotionally.  Such
             a move would not result in loss of important contact by  Mrs  S
             with her own parents who are resident in the United Kingdom  as
             they have already failed to support her  through  the  marriage
             and its problems.
         iv. Whilst it would be the case that such residence in India  would
             be apart from H, such separation results from the conclusion of
             the family court as to where H's best interests lie;  it  would
             not be contrary to H's best interests and welfare and it may be
             doubted in such circumstances whether family life between H and
             her parents continues after such a decision.
          v. The appellant's offending makes it conducive to the public good
             that he be deported. He is not only guilty of  the  offence  of
             possession of the false identity document but he  has,  by  his
             own admission, been violent to his wife.

   54. If on the other hand,  the family court concludes that  H's  welfare
       requires her to be re-introduced to the  care  of  her  parents,  we
       conclude that the appellant's deportation would be  disproportionate
       and in breach of the human rights of  each  member  of  the  family.
       Again we apply the principles set out in the authorities noted above
       where the interests of a child, particularly a British one,  are  to
       be given weight as a primary, albeit not a paramount  consideration.
       Again we give our reasons in summary form:

          i. A family court has decided  where  H  best  interests  are  and
             effect  should  be  given  to  that  conclusion  as  a  primary
             consideration in the case.
         ii. H is seven years of age, has lived in the UK all her life,  and
             in the light of her experiences to date, we anticipate that her
             welfare will require the continued  supervision  of  the  local
             authority and the family courts.
        iii. We consider that Deputy Judge Woodcraft's  previous  assessment
             that the family court would approve H's removal to  India  with
             her parents in the foreseeable future  to  be  speculation  and
             improbable in the light of what we now know about the case.
         iv. Serious as the offending of the appellant is, it does not reach
             that level  of  criminality  that  demands  expulsion  for  the
             protection  of  the  public  from  harm  from  the   individual
             appellant or to  deter  others  from  acting  as  he  has  had,
             irrespective of the impact on his British wife and child.
          v. It would not be reasonable to expect wife and child  to  follow
             the appellant to India to resume  the  family  life  they  have
             enjoyed together since the child's birth with the exception  of
             the time the appellant was in  custody.  The  child  cannot  be
             penalised for  both  the  irregular  status  and  the  criminal
             offending of the appellant.
         vi.  Assessing  the  appellant's  character,  conduct,  length   of
             residence and every other relevant  factor  in  the  Article  8
             balance it is not proportionate to separate this family as they
             rebuild their relations of mutual interdependence.

Directions

51.  We now give the following directions to give effect to this ruling:

               1. This appeal is further adjourned to await the decision of
                  the family court.
          2. The identity of the  child  H  and  her  parents  shall  remain
             confidential. The Tribunal will examine the question of whether
             the appellant's identity  should  remain  confidential  in  its
             final determination.
          3. The appellant must  notify  the  Tribunal  and  the  respondent
             promptly when those proceedings have been determined.
          4. The Tribunal will  in  addition  forward  to  the  parties  any
             information it receives about the outcome of those  proceedings
             that is not already known to them and identity the  start  date
             for any further representations to be made.
          5. Either party may make written representations within 28 days of
             the date of transmission in 4 above to make representations  in
             accordance with this ruling.
          6. The Tribunal will issue  a  determination  on  receipt  of  the
             submissions or  the  expiry  of  the  period  for  making  them
             whichever is the sooner.
          7. The  Tribunal  anticipates  it  will  remake  the  decision  in
             accordance with this ruling without a further oral hearing.



                               Signed                    Date 18 June 2012




                               Mr Justice Blake
                               President of the Upper Tribunal,
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

