
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


DH (Particular Social Group: Mental Health) Afghanistan [2020]  UKUT  00223
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Hearing on                                    |                Decision     |
|                                              |promulgated                  |
|on 29 May 2020                                |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     DH
                   (BY HIS LITIGATION FRIEND SALLY PRESTT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Bandegani instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


1. The Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees  1951  provides
greater  protection  than  the  minimum  standards  imposed  by a  literal
interpretation)  of  Article  10(1)(d)  of   the   Qualification   Directive
(Particular  Social  Group).  Article  10  (d) should  be  interpreted  by
replacing the word "and" between Article 10(1)(d)(i) and (ii) with the word
"or", creating an alternative rather than cumulative test.

2. Depending on the facts, a 'person living with disability or  mental  ill
health' may qualify as a member of a Particular Social Group ("PSG")  either
as (i) sharing an innate characteristic or a common background  that  cannot
be changed, or (ii) because they may be perceived as being different by  the
surrounding society and thus have a distinct identity in  their  country  of
origin.

3. A person unable to secure a firm diagnosis of the nature of their  mental
health issues is not denied  the  right  to  international  protection  just
because a label cannot be given to his or her  condition,  especially  in  a
case where there is a satisfactory explanation for why this is so (e.g.  the
symptoms are too severe for accurate diagnosis).

4. The assessment of whether a  person  living  with  disability  or  mental
illness constitutes a member of a PSG is fact specific to be decided at  the
date of decision or hearing. The key issue is how an individual  is  viewed
in the eyes  of  a  potential  persecutor  making  it  possible  that  those
suffering no, or a lesser degree of, disability or illness may also  qualify
as a PSG.

5. SB (PSG - Protection Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG  [2008]  UKAIT  0002
and AZ (Trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010] UKUT 118 (IAC) not followed.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 23 January  1993.
        He appealed the decision of the Secretary of State dated 30  August
        2017 to refuse his human rights claim, and a further decision of 26
        February 2018 refusing his protection claim  and  a  further  human
        rights claim.
     2. On  8  November  2017  at  Central  London  Magistrates  Court  the
        appellant was convicted  of  committing  an  act  outraging  public
        decency and exposure. The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  weeks
        imprisonment on 13 February 2017 and placed on  the  Sex  Offenders
        Register for 7 years. The District Judge (Magistrates Courts) notes
        the  appellant  had  intentionally  exposed  his  penis   and   was
        considered to have met the criteria for  deportation  on  conducive
        grounds.
     3. A judge of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal against the
        refusal  of  the  asylum  claim  and  entitlement  to  a  grant  of
        Humanitarian Protection but allowed the appeal on  Article  3  ECHR
        grounds, which has not been challenged by the Secretary of State.
     4. Error of law was found in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
        Mr Bandegani identified the issue in this matter in  the  following
        terms:


             This appeal raises a single  issue  which  is  did  the  Judge
             materially err in law by failing to determine whether A is  at
             real risk of serious harm for  a  refugee  Convention  reason?
             This in turn raises an issue of  principle.  If  a  person  is
             subject to prohibited  treatment  due  to  their  mental  ill-
             health,  are  they  being  persecuted  by  reason   of   their
             membership of a particular social group (PSG)?


     5. Mr Bandegani submitted that this issue had been raised  before  the
        Judge both in his skeleton argument and oral submissions which  was
        not disputed by Mr Diwnycz. As it was a point at large  before  the
        Judge which the Judge failed to deal with, which may  have  made  a
        material difference to  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  on  asylum
        grounds, it was found the Judge  has  erred  in  law  in  a  manner
        material to the decision to dismiss this aspect of the appeal; such
        that the decision in relation to the asylum ground was set aside.
     6. In this decision the Upper Tribunal will consider  the  outstanding
        issue with a view to substituting a decision  to  either  allow  or
        dismiss the asylum appeal.


The Law

     7. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that:


             An asylum applicant will  be  granted  asylum  in  the  United
             Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


             (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at  a  port  of
             entry in the United Kingdom;


             (ii) he is a refugee,  as  defined  in  regulation  2  of  The
             Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
             (Qualification) Regulations 2006;


             (iii) there are no reasonable grounds for regarding him  as  a
             danger to the security of the United Kingdom;


             (iv) he does not, having been convicted by a final judgment of
             a particularly serious crime, he does not constitute danger to
             the community of the United Kingdom; and


             (v)  refusing  his  application  would  result  in  him  being
             required to go (whether immediately or after the time  limited
             by any existing leave to enter or remain)  in  breach  of  the
             Geneva Convention, to a country in which his life  or  freedom
             would  threatened  on   account   of   his   race,   religion,
             nationality, political opinion or membership of  a  particular
             social group".

     8. Regulation 2 of the Person  in  Need  of  International  Protection
        (Qualification) Regulations 2006 defines a refugee as a person  who
        falls within Article 1(A) of the  Geneva  Convention  and  to  whom
        regulation 7 does not apply.
     9. Article 1(A) of  the  Refugee  Convention  as  originally  approved
        reads:


          A. For the purposes of the present Convention, the term "refugee"
             shall apply to any person who:
          1) Has been considered a refugee under the Arrangements of 12 May
             1926 and 30 June 1928 or under the Conventions of  28  October
             1933 and 10 February 1938, the Protocol of 14  September  1939
             or the Constitution of the International Refugee Organization;
             Decisions  of  non-eligibility  taken  by  the   International
             Refugee Organization during the period of its activities shall
             not prevent the status of refugee being  accorded  to  persons
             who fulfil the conditions of para-graph 2 of this section;
          2) As a result of events occurring  before  1  January  1951  and
             owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons  of
             race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social
             group or political opinion, is out-side  the  country  of  his
             nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling
             to avail himself of the protection of that  country;  or  who,
             not having a nationality and being outside the country of  his
             former habitual residence as  a  result  of  such  events,  is
             unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return  to  it.
             In the case of a person who has more than one nationality, the
             term "the country of his nationality" shall mean each  of  the
             countries of which he is a national, and a person shall not be
             deemed to be lacking the protection  of  the  country  of  his
             nationality if, without any valid reason based on well-founded
             fear, he has not availed himself of the protection of  one  of
             the countries of which he is a national.


    10. The Convention relating to the  Status  of  Refugees  ("the  Geneva
        Convention") therefore initially applied only to those  who  became
        refugees as a result of events occurring before 1 January 1951.  It
        came into force on 22 April 1954. The 1967 Protocol relating to the
        Status of Refugees amended the Geneva Convention so  that  it  also
        applies to  those  who  become  refugees  as  a  result  of  events
        occurring on or after 1st January 1951. This came into force  on  4
        October 1967.
    11.  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International   Protection
        (Qualification)  Regulations  2006  in   part   implement   Council
        Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for  the
        qualification and status of third country  nationals  or  stateless
        persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need  international
        protection  and  the  content  of  the  protection   granted   (the
        Qualification Directive).  Regulation 6 states:


         (1) In deciding whether a person is a refugee....


             (d)  a group shall be considered to form a  particular  social
         group where, for example:


                    i)   members   of   that   group   share   an    innate
                       characteristic, or a common background  that  cannot
                       be changed, or share a characteristic or belief that
                       is so fundamental to identity or conscience  that  a
                       person should not be forced to renounce it, and
                   ii) that group has a distinct identity in  the  relevant
                       country, because it is perceived as being  different
                       by the surrounding society;
             (e)  a particular social group might include a group based on a
                  common characteristic of  sexual  orientation  but  sexual
                  orientation  cannot  be   understood   to   include   acts
                  considered to be criminal in accordance with national  law
                  of the United Kingdom;


Background

    12. The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
        Article  3  ECHR  on  the  basis  that  the  manifestation  of  the
        appellant's mental illness created a strong likelihood of  sexually
        disinhibited behaviour that in Afghanistan would  lead  to  serious
        harm, making the following finding:


             103.      There  is  a  real  risk  he  would  behave   in   a
                  disinhibited fashion. The risk must increase in proportion
                  to the deterioration in his mental state. His  convictions
                  relate to incidents taking place some years ago.  However,
                  the evidence of Ms Underhill and Dr Wootton shows that  he
                  continues to  act  inappropriately  towards  females.  His
                  mental health is very likely to  deteriorate  if  he  were
                  returned. It is reasonable to infer  from  this  that  the
                  risk of the appellant  behaving  in  an  unacceptable  way
                  would also increase.


             104.     Even if the strict letter of  the  law  will  not  be
                  applied to him, the consequence of the appellant  behaving
                  inappropriately towards a woman  or  touching  himself  in
                  public would be to enrage onlookers. There is a real  risk
                  of mob violence. The  risk  is  more  than  fanciful.  The
                  appellant's risky behaviours have endured in  the  UK  for
                  several years now.



Submissions



     13. The term 'Particular Social Group' is, at times, abbreviated  below
         as 'PSG'.
     14. Following the Initial Hearing at Bradford before the Upper Tribunal
         on 29 October 2019 Mr Bandegani was given leave to provide  further
         written submissions and details of authorities he  sought  to  rely
         upon but had not provided copies of.
     15. Those further submissions are dated 15 November 2019 in which it is
         submitted, inter alia, that to identify a social  group,  one  must
         first identify the society of which it  forms  part;  a  particular
         social group may be recognisable as such in one country, but not in
         another: K &  Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 at [13] (Lord Bingham).
    16. In relation to the approach to be  taken  to  assessing  whether  a
        person with mental health issues such  as  DH  is  entitled  to  be
        recognised as a refugee as a member of a PSG, Mr Bandegani submits:




             11. The following key principles inform  the  approach  to  the
             1951 Convention ("the Convention"):


             11.1          The Convention is concerned  with  international
                  protection i.e. surrogate
                   protection. See e.g. Horvath v Secretary of State for the
                  Home Department [2001] 1 AC 498, 496C  (Lord  Hope),  509A
                  (Lord Clyde);


             11.2      The proper approach to construction -  in  accordance
                  with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on  the  Law  of
                  Treaties - is to ascertain the "ordinary meaning" of  the
                  relevant provisions "in their context and  in  light  of"
                  the object and purpose of  the Convention, taking account
                  of the  factors  identified  in  Article  31(3)  (namely,
                  subsequent agreement and subsequent State practice). Thus
                  context,  object  and  purpose   should  be  treated   as
                  integral to the identification of "ordinary meaning".  As
                  noted  by Lord Bingham in R v Asfaw [2008] 1 AC 1061,  at
                  [11] while it is "true that in  construing  any  document
                  the literal  meaning  of  the  words  used  must  be  the
                  starting-point",  those  words  "must  be  construed   in
                  context, and an instrument such as the Refugee Convention
                  must be given a purposive  construction  consistent  with
                  its humanitarian aims" (see  also [56] per Lord Hope);

             11.3     The Convention should  be  interpreted  as  a  living
                  instrument with an  autonomous meaning based on its object
                  and purpose, as well as  its  humanitarian  underpinnings.
                  These  humanitarian  principles  call  for  a  "large  and
                  liberal spirit" when "a court is asked  to  say  what  the
                  convention means": See e.g. Re B;  R  (Hoxha)  v   Special
                  Adjudicator [2005] 1 WLR 1063 at [7-8] (Lord Hope); "It is
                  well-established that the Convention must  be  interpreted
                  in accordance with its broad  humanitarian  objective  and
                  having  regard  to  the  principles,  expressed   in   the
                  preamble,  that  human  beings  should  enjoy  fundamental
                  rights  and  freedoms  without  discrimination  and   that
                  refugees should enjoy  the  widest  possible  exercise  of
                  these rights  and  freedoms"  See  Fornah  at  [10]  (Lord
                  Bingham). See also Shah and Islam at  638H-639D  and  643E
                  (Lord Steyn), 650H-A (Lord Hoffmann), 656E (Lord Hope);

             11.4      "Since the Convention is an international  instrument
                  which no supra-national court has the ultimate  authority
                  to interpret, the  construction  put  upon  it  by  other
                  states, while not determinative (R v Secretary  of  State
                  for the Home Department, Ex p Adan [2001] 2 AC 477,  508-
                  509, 515-518, 524-527, 528-531), is of importance, and in
                  case of doubt articles 31-33 of the Vienna Convention  on
                  the Law of Treaties (1980) (Cmnd 7964) may be invoked  to
                  aid the process of interpretation: see Januzi v Secretary
                  of State for the Home
                  Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 WLR 397, para  4,  and
                  the cases there cited" See  e.g.  Fornah  at  [10]  (Lord
                  Bingham);

             11.5      The PSG ground is interpreted in  the  light  of  the
                  other four enumerated  opinion".  This  is   the  ejusdem
                  generis approach. See Shah and Islam  at  640H  and  643C
                  (Lord Steyn),  651F (Lord Hoffmann), 656F (Lord Hope);

             11.6      Viewed in these ways the focus of PSG  is  on  groups
                  who  are  discriminated  against.  That  allows  for  the
                  inclusion (a) of groups coming  within  the  Convention's
                  anti- discriminatory purpose  and  objects,  and  (b)  of
                  grounds on which a person may be discriminated against by
                  society. See Shah and Islam at 639C  (Lord  Steyn),  651D
                  (Lord Hoffmann), 656F (Lord Hope).


    17. Mr Bandegani further submits:


             12.6      Two approaches may be taken in regard to  defining  a
             PSG.

                  (1) First, the "protected characteristics  approach".  In
                     order to identify  the  PSG,  it  is  helpful  to  ask
                     whether  members   of   the   PSG   share   a   common
                     characteristic which unite the group. It  may  be  (a)
                     "immutable",  which  the  individual  cannot,  or  (b)
                     "fundamental", which the individual ought  not  to  be
                     required to, forsake
                     because the characteristic is closely  linked  to  the
                     identity  of  the  person  or  is  an  expression   of
                     fundamental human rights. This approach is  associated
                     with the analysis  of  the  US  Board  of  Immigration
                     Appeals in In  re  Acosta  (1985)  19  I.&N.  211(US),
                     reflected in  the  Supreme  Court  of  Canada's  "good
                     working rule"
                     in Ward v Attorney General of Canada  (1993)  103  DLR
                     (4th) 1 at 33h. See  Shah  and  Islam  at  644D  (Lord
                     Steyn), 651E (Lord Hoffmann), 658E-F (Lord  Hope);

                  (2)  The  second  approach  is  the  "social  perception"
                     approach. The question to be  established  is  whether
                     the PSG is "cognisable" as a group, viewed objectively
                     in terms of the relevant society. It may be cognisable
                     "objectively"  having  regard  to  the   circumstances
                     considered by a Court. It  may  be  seen  to  be  "set
                     apart",  for  cultural,  social,  religious  or  legal
                     factors. This approach is associated with Applicant A,
                     where  McHugh  J  said  PSG  would  generally  involve
                     external perception (1997) 142 A.L.R 331  at  359  and
                     Dawson J described a cognisable group set apart within
                     society (at 341). See also Shah and  Islam  at  657D-H
                     (Lord Hope); Applicant S [2004] HCA 25 at [27],  [30],
                     [34], [62-63], [69], [76];  Liu v Secretary  of  State
                     for the Home Department [2005] 1 WLR 2858 at [26,  30]
                     (Rix LJ);

             12.7      On the one hand although there is  no  "legal  litmus
                  test", there must be "a global appraisal in a  particular
                  cultural, social, political and legal milieu, judged by a
                  test which, though it has legal  and  linguistic  limits,
                  has a broad humanitarian purpose": Fornah at [107]  (Lady
                  Hale); on the other  hand  "[T]he  need  to  establish  a
                  particular social group should  not  become  an  obstacle
                  course in which the postulated group  undergoes  constant
                  redefinition".  Cases   should   "not   degenerate   into
                  nitpicking around the margins of definition": Liu at  [8]
                  (Maurice Kay LJ);

             12.8       Causation:  "The  text  of  article  1A(2)  of   the
                  Convention makes plain that a person is entitled to claim
                  recognition as  a  refugee  only  where  the  persecutory
                  treatment of which the claimant has a  well-founded  fear
                  is causally linked with the Convention  ground  on  which
                  the claimant relies. The ground  on  which  the  claimant
                  relies need not be the only or even  the  primary  reason
                  for the  apprehended persecution. It is enough  that  the
                  ground relied on is an effective reason. The  persecutory
                  treatment need not be motivated by enmity,  malignity  or
                  animus on the part of the persecutor, whose professed  or
                  apparent motives may or may not be the  real  reason  for
                  the persecution. What matters  is  the  real  reason.  In
                  deciding whether the causal link is established, a simple
                  "but  for"  test  of  causation  is  inappropriate:   the
                  Convention  calls  for  a  more  sophisticated  approach,
                  appropriate to the context and taking account of all  the
                  facts and
                  circumstances relevant to the particular case": Fornah at
                  [17] and [18] (Lord Bingham).

    18. In his reply dated the 28 November 2019, Mr Diwnycz  observed  that
        the appellant, if he does not  succeed  in  relation  to  the  1951
        Convention ground, will be granted status by way of  Article  15(c)
        protection as a result of the appeal being  allowed  on  Article  3
        grounds.
    19. Mr Diwnycz accepted the principles arising from the cases relied on
        by Mr Bandegani from other jurisdictions which, whilst not  binding
        on the Upper Tribunal, were welcomed for the  light  they  shed  on
        matters of interpreting issues before the Upper Tribunal.
    20. In relation to the key issue Mr Diwnycz writes:


             3)   It is R's response to A's  arguments,  that  this  matter
                  hinges  solely  on  membership  of  a  'Particular  Social
                  Group', as argued in the error-in-law  hearing.   All  the
                  authorities produced, and the eloquent discussion of  them
                  by A's counsel all point to A being a member of a 'PSG' by
                  virtue of his mental health. R argues that  in  order  for
                  that to qualify A as a member of a PSG, his mental  health
                  characteristics, at the date of the FTT hearing, must have
                  been and must  remain  immutable.  The  expertise  of  the
                  medical experts is not disputed, but it is painfully trite
                  to observe that they have not  been  able  to  come  to  a
                  specific diagnosis as to what exactly it is which  affects
                  A. This  is  not  to  disparage  the  seriousness  of  his
                  illness,  far  from  it.  R  politely  reminds  the  Upper
                  Tribunal that she has mounted no challenge to the findings
                  of the FTT  and  will  implement  humanitarian  protection
                  status on A in due course.  It is the basis upon which any
                  putative  findings  of  immutability  of   the   condition
                  affecting A is made which is the point  of  contention.  R
                  argues that, notwithstanding the persuasiveness of any  of
                  the authorities relied upon by A, the sample  legal  basis
                  upon which the matter immutably rests must  start  with  a
                  definite and  reliable  diagnosis.    Immutability  cannot
                  flow  from  uncertainty.   If  A's  condition  cannot   be
                  accurately named, or diagnosed, then nothing concrete  can
                  be made of  it,  even  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
                  required of an asylum decision. Any assessment of  how  he
                  might  be  treated  upon  a  now  theoretical  return   to
                  Afghanistan can only be at best, a sterile exercise.


             4)   The nature of any illness at the date of the  hearing  is
                  dependent upon its own characteristics and pathology.  The
                  analogy of an accurately-diagnosed, incurable illness  may
                  assist. At the date of  the  hearing,  such  an  incurable
                  illness would logically be accepted as  immutable,  as  it
                  could only continue in that state.  The  same  cannot,  be
                  postulated for the condition affecting A. At the date  (s)
                  of any hearing(s), it could not be accepted as  immutable,
                  as the lack of an accurate diagnosis roots  the  illnesses
                  own capricious nature at any point  in  time.  It  may  be
                  incurable,  it  may  not  worsen   over   time,   it   may
                  spontaneously go into remission, or it may be  capable  of
                  being treated and managed effectively. All of which render
                  it indistinct in terms of  immutability.  The  only  thing
                  which has been stated with certainty by the expert medical
                  opinions is that they have no concrete diagnosis  for  it.
                  That must by definition, render it to be not immutable.


                  This was  the  stance  taken  by  R's  Senior  Presenting
                  Officer  at  the  error-in-law  hearing,  and  essentially
                  remains  so.  A  cannot  "..  Share  a  common   immutable
                  characteristic  over  which  he  has  no  control..",  (my
                  paraphrase and ellipses) as stated by Steyn LJ in Shah and
                  Islam.  He is afflicted by a serious condition, the  exact
                  diagnosis  of  which  has  not  been  able  to  be   made.
                  Psychiatric illnesses span a wide spectrum, and it  cannot
                  be taken without more telling detail, that  the  point  on
                  the spectrum at which A's illness might be  fixed  can  be
                  taken to be the core of an immutable characteristic.


    21. In his reply Mr Bandegani  submits  the  respondent  explicitly  or
        implicitly accepts:


                i. The PSG assessment must  be  made  at  the  date  of  the
                   hearing.
               ii. That the appellant has a "serious illness" or a  "serious
                   condition" and  that  whatever  else  is  stated  by  the
                   respondent it should not  be  taken  as  disparaging  the
                   seriousness of his illness. The respondent has not at any
                   stage  disputed  the  appellant  lacks  capacity  at  the
                   present time and has lacked capacity for years.
              iii. That the expertise of the medical expert is not disputed.
               iv. That the respondent  has  mounted  no  challenge  to  the
                   findings of the First-Tier Tribunal
                v. That the respondent does not dispute that  in  principle,
                   mental illness may constitute a PSG, she accepts that "an
                   incurable  illness  would  logically   be   accepted   as
                   immutable".  Rather "It  is  the  basis  upon  which  any
                   putative  finding  of  immutability  of   the   condition
                   affecting the appellant is made which  is  the  point  of
                   contention".
               vi. The respondent does not dispute any  of  the  submissions
                   made on law in the appellant's written submissions  dated
                   15 November 2019 as summarised at Section I,  other  than
                   those points referred to immediately below.


    22. Specifically responding to Mr  Diwnycz'  submissions  Mr  Bandegani
        writes:


             a) Diagnoses


             16.  Further to the above, R  submits  "psychiatric  illnesses
                span a wide spectrum, and it cannot be taken  without  more
                telling detail, that the point on that  spectrum  at  which
                A's illness might be fixed can be taken to be the  core  of
                an immutable characteristic".  In response A submits:


                16.1   First, A does have a diagnosis. A has been diagnosed
                      with  a  mental  disability  and/or   disorder.   R's
                      submission is predicated on a false premise;


                16.2    Second,  even  if  there  were  no  diagnosis,   or
                      sufficiently certain diagnosis,  in  this  case,  R's
                      submission asks the UTIAC to look only at form and to
                      ignore substance. Just because the exact category  of
                      illness cannot be definitively  labelled  (i.e.  with
                      "certainty")  that  does  not  mean  there   is   any
                      "uncertainty"  about  whether  A  has  an  underlying
                      mental health illness. The doctors have  consistently
                      labelled him with a serious and debilitating  illness
                      and so there is no uncertainty or dispute that A  has
                      a "serious  illness"  or  "condition".   That  is  an
                      established fact, and R rightly accepts it.


                16.3   Third, it is  the  symptoms  that  count  (i.e.  the
                      substance).  There is  in  R;s  language,  sufficient
                      "telling  detail"  about  A's   symptoms.    Everyone
                      accepts A is " afflicted" by  the  symptoms  set  out
                      above which  constitutes  the  "serious  illness"  or
                      "condition". The reason there can be no diagnosis is,
                      according to Dr Thomas,  because  of  the  degree  of
                      incoherence with which [DH] presents...". It  is  the
                      doctors view "... That this incoherence in itself  is
                      indicative of mental ill health".


                16.4   Fourth, even where  there  is  doubt  about  exactly
                      which category of mental illness A falls into,  there
                      is in this jurisdiction a  "more  positive  role  for
                      uncertainty" which must be resolved  in  his  favour:
                      Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] EWCA Civ 11.  For  example,
                      it is unthinkable that the appellant in LQ,  who  was
                      accepted  to  be  a  child,  would  have  failed   to
                      demonstrate his membership of the  particular  social
                      group "children" because there existed uncertainty as
                      to whether he was 11, 12 or 13 years of age;


                16.5    Fifth,  those  with  a  political  opinion  may  be
                      persecuted in their home country by reason  of  their
                      membership of a PSG even if their  political  opinion
                      does not exist. Art 10(2) of the QD is reflective  of
                      the Refugee Convention jurisprudence on  this  issue.
                      The QD provides: "when assessing if an applicant  has
                      a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  it   is
                      immaterial whether the appellant  actually  possesses
                      the racial, religious, national, social or  political
                      characteristics  which  attracts   the   persecution,
                      provided that such a characteristic is attributed  to
                      the applicant by the actor of  persecution".  If  the
                      person's "characteristic" need not exist, it is  hard
                      to see why the label attached to the "characteristic"
                      (here, the label to be attached to A's serious mental
                      illness, is legally determinative of the existence of
                      the characteristic  in  the  first  place.  In  other
                      words, on R's case , the political neutrality in  the
                      Supreme Court authority RT (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2012]
                      UKSC  38  not  engage  the  Convention   because   no
                      political label could be attached to him.


             a) The illness must be (a) permanent and (b) constant


             17.  In response, A submits:


                  17.1      First,  the  decision-maker  cannot  enter  into
                      speculation or into a hypothetical  assessment  about
                      "spontaneous remission" and the like. R's  submission
                      this respect is speculative. It is neither  based  on
                      any diagnosed scientific learning,  the  evidence  in
                      this particular case. In fact R's submissions  amount
                      counter the evidence  (some  of  which  is)  set  out
                      above;


                  17.2     Second, the fact a person receives  treatment  in
                      the UK can only rationally be evidence that there  is
                      a serious illness to be treated in the  first  place.
                      If the evidence demonstrates that a person's  illness
                      can be "treated and managed effectively" in the  home
                      country that is not a  matter  that  bears  upon  the
                      question whether - at the  date  of  decision  -  A's
                      mental illness is immutable (i.e. it is something  he
                      cannot change at that time) although it the issue may
                      be relevant to the question of risk and  conversation
                      including for the reasons explained at [28.1] of  A's
                      skeleton argument, dated 15 November 2019;


                  17.3     Third, R's submission is directly contrary to the
                      ejusdem generis principle as well  as  the  principal
                      that there being no hierarchies of protection amounts
                      the Convention reasons  for  persecution  (the  well-
                      founded fear of  persecution  test  set  out  in  the
                      Convention is no change according to which Convention
                      reason was engaged). There is no requirement  that  a
                      political activist,  for  example,  claims  that  his
                      political  opinions  shall  remain  the  same,   that
                      whatever his political  opinion  is,  it  shall  last
                      forever. Similarly, there is no requirement  that  an
                      adherent to the precepts of  a  persecuted  religious
                      minority must satisfy  the  decision-maker  that  her
                      faith will not lapse sometime in the future;


                  17.4       Third,    R's    approach    contravenes    the
                      antidiscrimination and humanitarian purpose object of
                      the Convention. Compare (A), a person with a learning
                      disability (which is permanent and constant) with (B)
                      a  person   suffering   from   fluctuating   paranoid
                      schizophrenia. Bearing in  mind  the  objectives  and
                      purpose of the  Convention  there  is  no  principled
                      basis to distinguish between (A) and (B), but on  R's
                      analysis, even though  both  (A)  and  (B)  suffer  a
                      mental impairment at the date  of  the  hearing,  and
                      even if the country evidence demonstrates people with
                      conditions   identical   to   (A)   and   (B)    been
                      systematically persecuted by the state, only (A) will
                      be protected by the Convention. That will  be  flatly
                      inconsistent with  the  object  and  purpose  of  the
                      Convention.


              D. CONCLUSION

             18.  On the  accepted  facts  and  evidence  in  this  matter,
                  further to the reasons above and  those  provided  in  A's
                  recent case, it is not disputed A  has  a  serious  mental
                  illness. Applying the rule, he  satisfies  the  'protected
                  characteristics' approach and/or the  'social  perception'
                  approach to membership PSG. A is a refugee.


Case law


    23. Mr Bandegani refers to  the  decisions  in  SB  (PSG  -  Protection
        Regulations - Reg 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 0002,  PO  (Trafficked
        women) Nigeria CG [2009] UKAIT 00046  at  [69]  and  [72],  and  AZ
        (Trafficked women) Thailand CG [2010]  UKUT  118  (IAC)  which  are
        criticized for adopting  what  he  considers  to  be  an  incorrect
        approach to assessing whether a person is a member of a PSG.
     24. SB (Moldova): This case was the first application of Art 10 of  the
         Qualification Directive  in  the  UK  to  a  case  involving  human
         trafficking in which the Tribunal found  that  trafficking  victims
         are capable of being members of a Particular Social Group.
        In  relation  to  Regulation  6(1)(d)  and  Article  10(d)  of  the
        Qualification Directive the Tribunal in SB concluded that the  word
        'and' linking the subparagraphs in  Regulation  6(1)(d)  should  be
        given its natural  meaning.  This  means  that  an  applicant  must
        satisfy both subparagraphs. This was held to be in accordance  with
        the general interpretation that a PSG should always  be  considered
        against the context of the society in question.  A  possible  issue
        as to whether the Qualification Directive  properly  reflected  the
        Refugee Convention was sidestepped.
    25. The Tribunal accepted that, if it could  be  shown  that  the  harm
        feared "related' to  the  Convention  reason,  then  causation  was
        shown. In this case the background evidence and the  facts  already
        accepted by the Secretary of State together satisfied the  Tribunal
        that there was a causal nexus between the applicant's membership of
        a social group and the risk of future persecution.
    26. PO (Nigeria) - I need not comment on this case as this decision was
        set aside on appeal by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  PO  (Nigeria)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 132.
    27. AZ(Thailand): The Tribunal stated:


             133.     The European Union Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29
                  April 2004 on minimum standards for the qualification  and
                  status of third country nationals or stateless persons  as
                  refugees or as persons who  otherwise  need  international
                  protection and the content of the protection granted  (the
                  EU  Qualification  Directive)  expressly  permits   member
                  states to apply standards more favourable to the applicant
                  than the minimum laid down. Article  10(1)(d)  deals  with
                  the issue of a PSG but,  as  was  noted  in  SB  the  only
                  difference between Article 10 (1)(d) and the corresponding
                  Regulation  6  (1)(d)  of  the  Qualification  Regulations
                  (cited above) is that the words 'in  particular'  (in  the
                  first line) have been replaced by 'for  example'.  In  its
                  comments on the Directive, the UNHCR advised that to avoid
                  any protection gaps, member states  should  reconcile  the
                  two  approaches  to   permit   alternative   rather   than
                  cumulative  application  of  the  two  concepts.  This  is
                  referred to in Fornah and K at paragraph 15 where  UNHCR's
                  definition of a PSG is set out.
             134.     Although we were urged by Ms Brewer to find that  the
                  two sub sections should be read as  alternative  concepts,
                  we are unable to accept that. The matter was considered at
                  length in SB where  the  judgment  of  Fornah  and  K  was
                  addressed. It was noted by the Tribunal that  the  remarks
                  of their Lordships were obiter. After lengthy  submissions
                  on the point the Tribunal found that the two sections  had
                  to be read together  and  that  any  other  interpretation
                  would  only  "do  violence"  to   the   adjunctive   "and"
                  (paragraph 71). The Tribunal found:

                  It would also be inconsistent with the insistence  in  the
                  Jurisprudence we have considered that the question  as  to
                  whether the group is a particular  social  group  for  the
                  purposes  of  the  Geneva  Convention   must   always   be
                  considered in the context of the society  in  question....
                  if sub paragraphs (i) and (ii) are alternatives,  then  it
                  may be said that it is possible to identify  a  particular
                  social group without reference to evidence relating to any
                  particular country. For example, it may be  said  that  as
                  'former victims of  trafficking'  or  'former  victims  of
                  trafficking for sexual exploitation' are, per se,  members
                  of a particular social group without the need to  consider
                  the evidence relating to the society  in  question,  which
                  does not seem to us to make sense.  It  is  possible  that
                  former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation  may
                  be members of a particular social group  in  one  country,
                  but not in another (paragraphs 71 and 72).
             135.     Ms Brewer, in her skeleton argument, referred  us  to
                  several judgments which give guidance on how  the  Refugee
                  Convention and  the  provisions  regarding  social  groups
                  should be applied.
             136.     We were referred to  Lord  Bingham's  observation  in
                  Fornah and K (at paragraph 10) that:

                  It  is  well-established  that  the  Convention  must   be
                  interpreted in  accordance  with  its  broad  humanitarian
                  objective and having regard to the  principles,  expressed
                  in  the  preamble,  that   human   beings   should   enjoy
                  fundamental rights and freedoms without discrimination and
                  that refugees should enjoy the widest possible exercise of
                  these rights and freedoms....


             137.     The following observation by Sedley J in Shah  [1997]
                  Imm.A.R.145,153, commenting  on  the  complexity  of  such
                  issues, was cited by Lord Steyn in Islam v.  Secretary  of
                  State for the Home Department Immigration Appeal  Tribunal
                  and Another, Ex Parte Shah, [1999] UKHL 20:

                  Its adjudication is not a conventional  lawyer's  exercise
                  of applying a legal litmus test to ascertain facts; it  is
                  a global appraisal of an individual's past and prospective
                  situation in a particular cultural, social, political  and
                  legal milieu, judged by a test which, though it has  legal
                  and linguistic limits, has a broad humanitarian purpose.


             138.     These views were echoed by Lord Hope in Hoxha when he
                  spoke  about  the  "broad  humanitarian  principles  which
                  underlie the Convention" (paragraph  6),  the  "large  and
                  liberal spirit" that needs to be called for "when a  court
                  is asked to say what the Convention means"  (paragraph  8)
                  and  of  the  Convention  and  the  Protocol  as   "living
                  instruments, to which the broadest effect must be given to
                  ensure  that  they  continue  to  serve  the  humanitarian
                  principles for whose purpose the  Convention  was  entered
                  into" (paragraph 7).


    28. Of those decisions considered by Mr Bandegani to be more favourable
        to the appellant's argument: in FM (Sudan) [2007] UKAIT  60  it  is
        written:


             (4) Nature of Particular Social Group in relation to FGM

             144.     In the present case, the respondent accepted that, if
             there were a real risk of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants
             being subjected  to  FGM,  the  Refugee  Convention  would  be
             engaged, having regard to the opinions of the House  of  Lords
             in K and Fornah. It is nevertheless  necessary  to  categorise
             the nature of the  particular  social  group  into  which  the
             appellants fall. Although  the  position  of  women  in  Sudan
             appears  to  have  markedly  improved  in  recent  years,  the
             evidence as a  whole  shows  that  they  are  the  subject  of
             societal discrimination (see paragraphs 119  and  120  above).
             Such a conclusion also flows from the evidence of  Ms  Maguire
             to the Tribunal in HGMO, as analysed in paragraph 305  of  the
             determination in that case.  The  reason  why  Ms  Maguire  in
             effect did not consider that a Sudanese female returnee  would
             be at real risk of persecution on  return,  was  that  such  a
             returnee would be regarded by the  authorities  merely  as  an
             adjunct of her husband. If that husband was a person  in  whom
             the authorities had a significant adverse interest,  then  the
             female returnee would suffer serious harm.

             145. For present purposes, the Tribunal considers  that  women
             in Sudan constitute a particular social  group  and,  for  the
             reasons given by the House of  Lords  in  K  and  Fornah,  the
             infliction of FGM on a Sudanese woman would be persecution for
             a Refugee Convention reason.


    29. In SK (Liberia) [2007] UKAIT 1 it is written:


             52.  Although the Tribunal, at the reconsideration hearing  on
                  13 February 2006, did not consider refugee  status  to  be
                  relevant, the position has changed since the  delivery  of
                  the opinions of the House of Lords in K and Fornah.  Those
                  opinions lay to rest the difficulties that had  beset  the
                  jurisprudence  relating  to  membership  of  a  particular
                  social group, in the context  of  the  Geneva  Convention,
                  which arose from what was perceived to be a definition  of
                  such a group that was  arguably  not  independent  of  the
                  feared persecution. A group that could only be defined  by
                  reference to the persecution of its  members  was  thought
                  not to be capable of being a particular social  group  for
                  the purposes of Article 1A(2) of that Convention.  But  as
                  Baroness Hale stated:-


                    '113. This is a peculiarly cruel version of Catch 22: if
                    not all the group are  at  risk,  then  the  persecution
                    cannot be caused by their membership of  the  group;  if
                    the group is reduced to those who are  at  risk,  it  is
                    then defined by the persecution alone. But the reasoning
                    is  fallacious  at  a  number  of  levels.  It  is   the
                    persecution, not the fear, which has to  be  "by  reason
                    of" membership of  the  group.  Even  if  the  group  is
                    reduced to those who are currently intact,  its  members
                    share many characteristics which are independent of  the
                    persecution - their  gender,  their  nationality,  their
                    ethnicity. It is those characteristics which lead to the
                    persecution, not the persecution itself which  leads  to
                    those characteristics. But there is no  need  to  reduce
                    the group to those at risk. It is well settled that  not
                    all members of the group  need  be  at  risk.  There  is
                    nothing in the Convention to say that all  members  have
                    to be susceptible. It should not matter why they are not
                    at risk. If the authorities of a particular state have a
                    policy of mutilating all male members  of  a  particular
                    tribe or sect by cutting off their right hands, we would
                    still say that intact members of the tribe or sect  face
                    persecution because of their membership  of  the  tribal
                    sect rather than because of their intactness. ...

                    114. For these  reasons,  the  particular  social  group
                    might best be defined as Sierra Leonean women  belonging
                    to those ethnic groups where FGM is practised:  then  it
                    is quite clear that the reason for  the  persecution  is
                    the membership of that group. But it matters not whether
                    the group is stated more widely, as all  Sierra  Leonean
                    women, or more narrowly, as intact Sierra Leonean  women
                    from those ethnic groups. For all of them, the group has
                    an existence independent of the persecution.'


             53.  As we have already indicated, in  the  present  case,  Mr
                  Saunders for the respondent did not seek to suggest  that,
                  if the appellant could show that she was at real  risk  of
                  FGM in Liberia, she would not  fall  within  a  particular
                  social group analogous to one of those identified by their
                  Lordships in K and Fornah, in the context of FGM in Sierra
                  Leone. Whilst the position of  women  in  Liberia  is,  we
                  find, improving in many respects, in particular as regards
                  the action being taken to punish those  who  commit  rape,
                  there is  nevertheless  sufficient  evidence  of  societal
                  discrimination against women to  make  them  a  particular
                  social group in Liberia. The Tribunal, however, prefers to
                  categorise the particular social group in the present case
                  in the way in which Baroness Hale did at paragraph 114  of
                  the opinions: namely, women in Liberia belonging to  those
                  ethnic groups where FGM is practised. Either way, however,
                  the appellant has to show  that  she  faces  a  reasonable
                  likelihood or real risk  of  having  to  undergo  FGM,  if
                  returned.


    30. FK (Kenya) [2007] UKAIT 41 was overturned on appeal in  FY  (Kenya)
        [2008] EWCA Civ 119 and I make no comment upon it.
    31. In VM (Kenya) [2008] UKAIT 49 it  is written:


           203.   Membership of a social group is a concept that  has  been
               the subject of considerable litigation. The  characteristics
               of a particular social  group  can  be  identified  both  in
               negative and positive form. As extracted  from  the  leading
               case law (including Ward v Canada [1993] 2 SCR 689; Shah and
               Islam [1999] INLR 144,  Montoya - v - SSHD [2002]  EWCA  Civ
               620, and SSHD -v- Skenderaj [2002] EWCA Civ 567)  these  can
               be summarised as follows:

               a. There is no requirement for  there  to  be  a  voluntary,
           associational relationship

               b. Members need not be homogenous nor does the group have to
                  exhibit any particular degree of internal cohesion


               c. A particular social group may  include  large  numbers  of
                  persons.


               d. The group may not be defined simply on basis of  a  shared
                  fear of being persecuted.
                  The persecution must exist independently  of  and  not  be
               used to define the social group.

            204. Following this three categories of the  "particular  social
                 group concept" can be identified:


                a.   Groups   defined   by   an   innate   or   unchangeable
                characteristic;  whatever  the  common  characteristic  that
                defines the group it must be one that  the  members  of  the
                group either cannot change or  should  not  be  required  to
                change  because  it  is  fundamental  to  their   individual
                identities or conscience.


                b. Groups whose members voluntarily associate for reasons so
                fundamental to their human dignity that they should  not  be
                forced to forsake the association

                and

               c.   Groups  associated  by  a   former   voluntary   status,
                  unalterable due to historical permanence.


            205. In the light of all the evidence  that  is  before  us,  in
                 particular, but not  limited  to  that  to  which  we  have
                 specifically referred, bearing in mind  that  the  question
                 whether a person is a member of a particular  social  group
                 is a mixed question of fact and law,  we  find  that  women
                 (and girls) in Kenya  have  the  innate  characteristic  of
                 being female and that the background evidence to  which  we
                 have referred, in particular at paras 168-179 above,  shows
                 that women and girls in Kenya are discriminated against  in
                 the law of the country and in the enforcement of such  laws
                 as do exist, in particular in relation to  protection  from
                 sexual and other violence including rape, FGM and  domestic
                 violence.  We  recall  the  extremely  rare  event   of   a
                 prosecution  relating  to  FGM,  and  the  sentence  of   a
                 probation order in respect of the offence of performing FGM
                 on a girl of 15 years (Amnesty International). Whilst  male
                 circumcision does take place in Kenya,  the  evidence  does
                 not show that either the act or  its  consequences  may  be
                 properly regarded as inflicting serious harm comparable  to
                 that which is inflicted by FGM. We find  that  neither  the
                 criminal  law  nor  the  civil   law   provides   effective
                 protection to women and girls in this regard.


    32. In MD (Ivory Coast) [2010] UKUT 215 it is written:


                  Particular Social Group (PSG)

                  15.  In Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 their Lordships held that in
                  seeking to establish  refugee  status  under  the  Refugee
                  Convention, where a well-founded fear of  persecution  was
                  based on  membership  of  a  particular  social  group,  a
                  claimant had to show that the relevant group consisted  of
                  persons who shared, other than their risk of  persecution,
                  a common  characteristic  that  was  innate  or  otherwise
                  fundamental to identity, conscience  or  the  exercise  of
                  human rights or who were perceived by society as a group.

                  16.  Lord  Bingham  who  gave  the  leading  judgment,  in
                  particular, gave approval to  the  UNHCR's  Guidelines  on
                  International Protection, issued in May 2002 and  set  out
                  his proposed definition of a particular social group, as a
                  group of persons who shared a common  characteristic  that
                  would often be one  which  was  innate,  unchangeable  and
                  which was otherwise fundamental to identity, conscience or
                  the exercise  of  one's  human  rights.   That  definition
                  included  characteristics  which   were   historical   and
                  therefore could not be changed and those  which,  although
                  possible to change, ought not to be required to be changed
                  because they were so closely linked to the identity of the
                  person  or  were  an  expression  of   fundamental   human
                  rights.


    33. Permission was granted in this case to permit the appellant to rely
        upon the unreported decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in DZ  -
        AA/ 02249/2011 in which he dealt with the issue in Section 3 of the
        determination in the following terms:



         3. PSG

            48.   There remains the issue of whether, in  relation  to  the
                  risk arising from the prosecution and punishment  for  his
                  illicit relationship that would be for a Convention reason
                  such as to engage the Refugee Convention and  entitle  the
                  appellant to asylum.  It is not suggested  that  the  risk
                  arising from his prosecution  and  punishment  for  murder
                  engages the Refugee Convention. I now turn to that issue.

            ......

            56.   On  the  basis  of  this  evidence,  I  accept  that  the
                  appellant forms part of a PSG as propounded by Ms Akinbolu
                  in her submissions. I am  persuaded  that  he  shares  "an
                  innate characteristic" with  others  in  his  position  or
                  together with others who have, or are perceived  to  have,
                  transgressed Iranian social mores;  he  shares  "a  common
                  background which cannot be changed".  The  appellant  (and
                  any other person in his position) cannot change  the  fact
                  that they have offended the moral code even  if  they  are
                  subsequently prosecuted and convicted for their behaviour.
                   The persecution through the criminal justice system  does
                  not define the group - which would be fatal to it being  a
                  PSG (see Shah and Islam and K v SSHD; Fornah v SSHD [2006]
                  UKHL 46) - it merely reflects the  potential  response  of
                  the state to some who  are  in  that  group.   It  is  the
                  individual's behaviour and its disapprobation by reference
                  to the moral codes of Iranian society  which  defines  the
                  group.

             57.  The evidence  in  this  appeal  echoes  and  provides  an
                 analogy with the PSG accepted in Shah and  Islam  by  Lord
                 Steyn (at page 645 and with whom  Lord  Hutton  agreed  at
                 pp.658-9) of women who had offended the  social  mores  of
                 Pakistan.  Having accepted the 'wider' PSG  of  "women  in
                 Pakistan" recognised by Lords Hope and Hoffman, Lord Steyn
                 said  this  in  acknowledging  that  there  was   also   a
                 'narrower' PSG established on the evidence (at page 654):
                 "If I had not  accepted  that  women  in  Pakistan  are  a
                 "particular social group," I  would  have  held  that  the
                 appellants are members of a  more  narrowly  circumscribed
                 group as defined by counsel for  the  appellants.  I  will
                 explain the basis of this reasoning briefly. It depends on
                 the coincidence  of  three  factors:  the  gender  of  the
                 appellants,  the  suspicion   of   adultery,   and   their
                 unprotected position in Pakistan. The Court of Appeal held
                 (and counsel for the Secretary of State argued) that  this
                 argument falls foul of the principle that the  group  must
                 exist independently of the persecution. In  my  view  this
                 reasoning is not valid. The  unifying  characteristics  of
                 gender, suspicion of adultery, and lack of protection,  do
                 not involve an assertion of persecution. The  cases  under
                 consideration can be compared with a more narrowly defined
                 group of homosexuals, namely  practising  homosexuals  who
                 are unprotected by a state. Conceptually such a group does
                 not in a  relevant  sense  depend  for  its  existence  on
                 persecution. The  principle  that  the  group  must  exist
                 independently of the persecution has an important role  to
                 play. But counsel for the Secretary of State is giving  it
                 a reach which neither logic nor good sense demands. In  A.
                 v. Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 142  A.L.R.
                 331, 359 McHugh J. explained the limits of the  principle.
                 He said:
                  "Nevertheless, while persecutory conduct  cannot  define
                 the social group, the actions of the persecutors may serve
                 to identify or even cause the  creation  of  a  particular
                 social  group  in  society.  Left-handed  men  are  not  a
                 particular social group.  But,  if  they  were  persecuted
                 because they were left-handed, they would no doubt quickly
                 become recognisable  in  their  society  as  a  particular
                 social group.  Their  persecution  for  being  left-handed
                 would  create  a  public  perception  that  they  were   a
                 particular social group. But it would be the attribute  of
                 being left-handed and not the persecutory acts that  would
                 identify them as a particular social group."
                 The same view is articulated by Goodwin-Gill, The  Refugee
                 in International Law, 2nd ed., (1996) at p. 362. I  am  in
                 respectful  agreement  with  this  qualification  of   the
                 general principle. I would hold that the general principle
                 does  not  defeat  the  argument  of   counsel   for   the
                 appellants.
                 My Lords, it is unchallenged that the  women  in  Pakistan
                 are unprotected by  state  and  public  authorities  if  a
                 suspicion of adultery falls  on  them.  The  reasoning  in
                 Acosta, which has been followed in Canada  and  Australia,
                 is applicable. There are  unifying  characteristics  which
                 justify the conclusion that women such as  the  appellants
                 are members of a relevant social group. On this additional
                 ground I would hold that the women fall within  the  scope
                 of the words "particular social group."

             58   Here too the group shares a unifying  characteristic  and
                 lack of protection from the State.  Indeed,  thorough  the
                 criminal justice system there is actual persecution by the
                 State.

             59   On its face, Art 10.1(d) indent 2 would  also  appear  to
                 require that the group have "a distinct identity" in  Iran
                 "because  it  is  perceived  as  being  different  by  the
                 surrounding society". To the extent this might be  thought
                 to impose an additional definitional requirement  to  that
                 in indent 1, it has been doubted by Lord Bingham in K  and
                 Fornah at [16] as it would propound "a test more stringent
                 than is warranted by international authority".   Likewise,
                 Lord Brown in K and Fornah considered that the  definition
                 in Art 10.1(d) would have to be interpreted "consistently"
                 with the definition of PSG  in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on
                 International Protection (7 May 2002) which defines a  PSG
                 either by reference to a  shared,  common  (often  innate)
                 characteristic or a group  that  is  "cognizable"  in  the
                 society  despite  its   members   not   sharing   such   a
                 characteristic (set out at [15] of Lord  Bingham's  speech
                 in K and Fornah).  Had I been pressed to do  so,  I  would
                 have interpreted the Qualification Directive (and the 2006
                 Regulations) consistently with the doubts expressed in the
                 House of Lords  as  those  provisions  were,  undoubtedly,
                 intended to give effect to the law as  it  was  understood
                 and adopted in a number  of  jurisdictions  in  the  world
                 applying the  Refugee  Convention.   However,  it  is  not
                 necessary for me to do so.  In this appeal, in any  event,
                 I am satisfied that  the  group  to  which  the  appellant
                 belongs is one which, on  the  evidence,  Iranian  society
                 recognises as "setting  them  apart"  and  "different"  by
                 others in society.

             60   For these reasons, I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
                 meets the requirements of Art 10.1(d) and  is  part  of  a
                 PSG.  Further,  the  persecution  that  he  fears,  namely
                 prosecution, conviction and  punishment  for  his  illicit
                 relationship with F, is "for reasons of" his membership of
                 that PSG.




    34. Mr Bandegani also seeks to rely upon a more recent example  in  the
        form of an order of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA  (Sierra  Leone)
        C5/2019/0347 in which that appellant's appeal against a decision of
        the Upper Tribunal in PA/11805/2017 was allowed by consent  without
        determination of the merits of the  appeal  with  the  Court  being
        satisfied the Statement of Reasons  provided  good  and  sufficient
        reason for allowing the appeal. The Statement of Reasons reads:


                i. The Appellant  has  appealed  against  the  determination
                   dated 23 October 2018 of the Upper Tribunal  (Immigration
                   and Asylum Chamber) ("the UT"), in which the UT dismissed
                   the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
                   dated 26 October 2017.
               ii. Permission to appeal was granted by order of the Court of
                   Appeal on 1 August 2019 on all  five  grounds  of  appeal
                   advanced by the Appellant. The Court of Appeal identified
                   as a particularly important point as "whether  those  who
                   are severely mentally ill constitute a particular  social
                   group for the purpose of the Refugee Convention".
              iii. The Respondent accepts  that  the  UT  erred  in  law  in
                   dismissing the Appellant's appeal and  by  setting  aside
                   the determination of the First-Tier Tribunal (Immigration
                   & Asylum Chamber) ("the  FTT")  dated  5  July  2018.  In
                   particular, the  Respondent  accepts  that  the  FTT  was
                   correct in finding that the Appellant is a  member  of  a
                   particular social  group  on  account  of  his  incurable
                   mental illness  and  that  he  would  face  ill-treatment
                   amounting to persecution if  he  is  returned  to  Sierra
                   Leone.
               iv. On that basis the Respondent has agreed to implement  the
                   FTT's decision and grant the  Appellant  refugee  status,
                   subject to satisfactory checks.
                v. For those reasons  the  parties  agree  that  the  appeal
                   should be allowed on the basis set out in the order.



Discussion



    35. Earlier directions provided for the parties to set out  their  case
        in writing, but the appellant's representative sought the right  to
        further address the Tribunal. Accordingly, in accordance  with  the
        Covid - 19 protocol and  with  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  a
        hearing took place on Friday, 22 May 2020.
    36. At that hearing Mr Diwnycz confirmed that Mr Bandegani's assessment
        of the respondent's concessions set out above  is  correct,  namely
        that:


                i. The PSG assessment must  be  made  at  the  date  of  the
                   hearing.
               ii. That the appellant has a "serious illness" or a  "serious
                   condition" and  that  whatever  else  is  stated  by  the
                   respondent it should not  be  taken  as  disparaging  the
                   seriousness of his illness. The respondent has not at any
                   stage  disputed  the  appellant  lacks  capacity  at  the
                   present time and has lacked capacity for years.
              iii. That the expertise of the medical expert is not disputed.
               iv. That the respondent  has  mounted  no  challenge  to  the
                   findings of the First-Tier Tribunal
                v. That the respondent does not dispute that  in  principle,
                   mental illness may constitute a PSG, she accepts that "an
                   incurable  illness  would  logically   be   accepted   as
                   immutable".  Rather "It  is  the  basis  upon  which  any
                   putative  finding  of  immutability  of   the   condition
                   affecting the appellant is made which  is  the  point  of
                   contention".
               vi. The respondent does not dispute any  of  the  submissions
                   made on law in the appellant's written submissions  dated
                   15 November 2019 as summarised at Section I,  other  than
                   those points referred to.

    37. Although Mr Diwnycz confirmed that the appellant is to  be  granted
        leave to remain on Humanitarian Protection grounds,  even  if  this
        challenge fails, meaning this may be seen by some to be  a  sterile
        exercise, it is not. Whilst both Refugee  status  and  Humanitarian
        Protection are a form of  international  protection  granted  to  a
        person in need which result in a grant of  five  years  of  limited
        leave to remain in the UK on a path to settlement after  that,  and
        give most of the same rights to work, study  and  access  benefits,
        refugee status is superior to a grant of humanitarian protection in
        a number of ways. A  person  claiming  an  entitlement  to  Refugee
        status is therefore entitled to  have  the  merits  of  that  claim
        properly considered as recognised in K & Fornah.
    38.  The  five  Convention  reasons  set  out  above,  race,  religion,
        nationality, social group, and political opinion,  are  crucial  as
        without showing that the future risk is because  of  one  of  these
        reasons, a claim to refugee status will fail. The first, third  and
        fifth categories are relatively  self-explanatory.  The  Convention
        reason most open to interpretation is membership  of  a  particular
        social group [PSG].
    39. The Refugee Convention binds signatory States, of which  there  are
        approximately 148 throughout the world. The Qualification Directive
        is binding upon the Member States of the European Union and has the
        express  objective  of  establishing  minimum  standards  for   the
        granting of international protection to third country nationals and
        stateless persons by those Member States, which includes the United
        Kingdom at this time despite no longer being  a  Member  State  and
        where the Regulations are the law in any event. All signatories  to
        the Qualification Directive are also  signatories  to  the  Refugee
        Convention and are therefore bound by the terms of both.


   Mental health and membership of a PSG


    40. Whether a person with mental health issues falls within a PSG is  a
        complex question of fact and law.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the
        burden of proving an entitlement to refugee  protection  rest  with
        the person making that claim.
    41.  Of  importance  is  the  terminology  used.  The  phrase   'mental
        disability' now commonly used in this area  of  work  is  taken  to
        encompass      both      mental      ill      health,      learning
        disabilities/developmental disorders/ neurodiverse conditions,  and
        brain damage, but there are fundamental differences  between  these
        conditions and they should not be confused. There is also  a  range
        of mental health  conditions,  e.g.  depression  /  anxiety,  post-
        traumatic   stress   syndrome,   obsessive   compulsive   disorder,
        personality disorders,  eating  disorders,  schizophrenia,  bipolar
        disorder.  Other  mental  impairments  or  neurodiverse  conditions
        include autism,  learnings  disabilities,  and  'specific  learning
        difficulties' such as dyslexia.
    42. Similarly, the degree of disability in each individual's case  will
        vary enormously and only in a small number of cases  will  it  mean
        there is lack of mental capacity or  behavioural  traits  that  may
        expose that person to a real risk of harm  as  a  result  of  their
        illness  in  their  home  state.  That  requires  a  fact  specific
        assessment.
    43. If an appellant is claiming to belong to a  PSG  based  upon  their
        mental health there must be sufficient cogent evidence to enable  a
        clear finding to be made that  such  a  person  is  suffering  from
        serious mental illness. I use the term 'serious mental illness'  as
        there are a number of mental health issues which can in  themselves
        vary in degree, but which enable a person to function  without  any
        obvious external indicators or risk factors, as noted above.
    44. 'Serious mental illness' includes diagnoses which typically involve
        psychosis (losing touch with reality or experiencing delusions)  or
        high levels of care, and which may require hospital treatment,  the
        most common of which are schizophrenia  and  bipolar  disorder  (or
        manic depression). It is a fact sensitive question  in  every  case
        and the identification of  the  PSG  as  'those  suffering  serious
        mental illness' was not in dispute before me.
    45. It is also not in dispute that the assessment must be made  at  the
        date of the decision or, on appeal, at the date of the hearing: see
        TN  &  MA  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2014]  UKSC  40  at  [77]  "the
        Ravichandran principle applies on the  hearing  of  asylum  appeals
        without  exception"  and   LQ   (Age:   immutable   characteristic)
        Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT 00005 ("LQ") at [6] "...  At the date when
        the appellant's status has  to  be  assessed  he  is  a  child  and
        although, assuming he survives, he will in due course cease to be a
        child, he is immutably a child at the time  of  assessment".   This
        applies to both the existence of serious mental illness,  the  risk
        of persecution arising as a result in the  person's  home  country,
        and the existence, accessibility, and  effectiveness  of  treatment
        for the same in an appellant's home country, and any other  related
        protection issues.


   The correct test for membership of a PSG.


    46. The proper understanding of the term PSG, as used  in  the  Refugee
        Convention, is set out above. The Qualification  Directive  follows
        the same wording to a point but  inserts  the  word  'and'  between
        Articles 1(d)(i) and  (ii)  making  them  conjunctive  rather  than
        disjunctive.  In a statute items are generally joined either by the
        term "and" or the term "or." If  they  are  joined  by  "and,"  the
        statute is conjunctive. If they are joined by "or," the statute  is
        disjunctive. "The Refugee Convention itself contains no  definition
        but, as we have seen, in K & Fornah, the House of Lords  would  not
        have interpreted the term PSG  in  the  RC  consistently  with  the
        definition in the  QD,  in  particular  requiring  the  "and"  and,
        therefore, conjunctive construction of Art 1(d)."
    47. In relation to the  Qualification  Directive  it  is  only  Council
        Directive 2004/83/EC that is under consideration as the UK  is  not
        bound by the recast Directive,  2011/95/EU,  albeit  that  in  both
        documents the test for membership of a PSG is  defined  in  similar
        terms.
    48.  In  May  2002,  the  UNHCR  issued  Guidelines  on   International
        Protection:  Membership  of  a  Particular   Social   Group   ("PSG
        Guidelines") in an  attempt  to  unify  divergent  approaches  (the
        'protected characteristics' approach, and the  'social  perception'
        approach) to the meaning of the phrase 'particular social group' at
        the international level. See Appendix A below for  the  full  text.
        The UNHCR provide the following definition:


        UNHCR's Definition:

        Given the varying approaches, and the  protection  gaps  which  can
        result,  UNHCR  believes  that  the  two  approaches  ought  to  be
        reconciled.

        11. The protected characteristics approach  may  be  understood  to
        identify a set of groups that constitute the  core  of  the  social
        perception analysis. Accordingly, it  is  appropriate  to  adopt  a
        single standard that incorporates both dominant approaches:

        "A particular social group is a group of persons who share a common
        characteristic other than their risk of being  persecuted,  or  who
        are perceived as a group by society. The characteristic will  often
        be one  which  is  innate,  unchangeable,  or  which  is  otherwise
        fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of one's  human
        rights.

        12. This definition includes characteristics which  are  historical
        and therefore cannot be changed, and  those  which,  though  it  is
        possible to change them, ought not to be  required  to  be  changed
        because they are so closely linked to the identity of the person or
        are an expression of fundamental human rights. It follows that  sex
        can properly be within the ambit of the social group category, with
        women being a clear example of a social subset  defined  by  innate
        and immutable  characteristics,  and  who  are  frequently  treated
        differently to men.

        13. If a claimant alleges  a  social  group  that  is  based  on  a
        characteristic   determined   to   be   neither   unalterable   nor
        fundamental, further analysis should  be  undertaken  to  determine
        whether the group is nonetheless perceived as a cognisable group in
        that society. So, for example, if it were determined that owning  a
        shop or participating in  a  certain  occupation  in  a  particular
        society is neither unchangeable nor a fundamental aspect  of  human
        identity,  a shopkeeper or members of a particular profession might
        nonetheless constitute a particular  social group if in the society
        they are recognised as a group which sets them apart."



    49. This definition was considered by the House of Lords  in  Secretary
        of State for the Home Department (Respondent) v. K(FC)  (Appellant)
        Fornah(FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Respondent) [2006] UKHL 46 ('K & Fornah') in which their Lordships
        noted the UNHCR accepted that a particular social group  could  not
        be defined exclusively by the persecution members suffer  or  fear,
        but also accepted the view advanced in the case of Applicant A  and
        accepted by some members of the House in Islam (A.P.) v.  Secretary
        of State for the Home  Department;  Regina  v.  Immigration  Appeal
        Tribunal and Another  Ex  Parte  Shah  (A.P.)  (Conjoined  Appeals)
        [1999] UKHL 20; [1999] Imm AR 283;  [1999]  2  AC  629  ('Shah  and
        Islam') that persecutory action towards a group may be  a  relevant
        factor in determining the visibility of a  group  in  a  particular
        society.
    50. The difficulties created by the use of the word "and" can give rise
        to  protection  gaps  which  is  contrary  to  the  obligations  of
        signatories to the Refugee Convention.
    51. In SB when discussing K & Fornah the Tribunal wrote:

              70. We turn now to consider the wording of regulation  6(1)(d)
                      itself. The words "for example" which introduce  sub-
                      paragraphs (i) and (ii)  of  regulation  6(1)(d)  may
                      cast some light on the meaning to  be  given  to  the
                      word "and" between sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of
                      regulation   6(1)(d).   There   are   two    possible
                      interpretations  of  the  words  "for  example",   as
                      follows:

                  (a)   that  sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  regulation
                           6(1)(d) are separate examples  of  situations  in
                           which a group shall be considered to form part of
                           a particular social group and that the reason for
                           the use of  the  adjunctive  "and"  between  sub-
                           paragraphs (i) and (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d)  is
                           that it was intended to provide the  reader  with
                           two  separate  examples,  each  of  which   would
                           qualify as social  groups  under  the  Protection
                           Regulations; and

                           (b)that the adjunctive  "and",  as  well  as  the
                           words "for  example",  were  used  advisedly  and
                           intentionally, to mean that any particular social
                           group must satisfy two criteria,  the  second  of
                           which  (i.e.  sub-paragraph  (ii)  of  regulation
                           6(1)(d)) is always necessary  whereas  the  first
                           would be satisfied if an individual falls  within
                           any  one  or  more  of  the  five   examples   of
                           particular social groups given  in  sub-paragraph
                           (i)   of    regulations    6(1)(d).    On    this
                           interpretation, given that the five examples  are
                           only examples, a particular social group  may  be
                           shown to exist in other circumstances subject  to
                           eiusdem generis principle of  interpretation,  by
                           reference to the  five  examples  given  in  sub-
                           paragraph (i) of regulation 6(1)(d).

              71. Interpretation  (a)  would  be  supported  by  the  obiter
                      remarks of their Lordships in Fornah and K concerning
                      Article 10 of the Qualification  Directive.  However,
                      it would not only do violence to the adjunctive "and"
                      (this was not an argument which weighed heavily  with
                      us) but  it  would  also  be  inconsistent  with  the
                      insistence in the jurisprudence  we  have  considered
                      that  the  question  as  to  whether  a  group  is  a
                      particular social  group  for  the  purposes  of  the
                      Geneva Convention must always be  considered  in  the
                      context of the society in question (this argument did
                      weigh  heavily  with  us).   On   the   other   hand,
                      interpretation (b) would give meaning not only to the
                      words "for example" and to the adjunctive  "and",  it
                      would also be consistent with the insistence that the
                      question whether a  particular  social  group  exists
                      must be considered in the context of the  society  in
                      question.

              72. In  the  end,  we  decided  that  the  fact  that  it  was
                      emphasised in Shah and Islam and also  Fornah  and  K
                      that  the  question  as  to  whether  a  group  is  a
                      particular social  group  for  the  purposes  of  the
                      Geneva Convention must be decided in the  context  of
                      the  society  in  question  is  decisive.   If   sub-
                      paragraphs (i) and (ii) are alternatives, then it may
                      be said that it is possible to identify a  particular
                      social group without reference to  evidence  relating
                      to any particular country. For  example,  it  may  be
                      said that "former victims of trafficking" or  "former
                      victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation"  are,
                      per se, members of a particular social group  without
                      the need to consider the  evidence  relating  to  the
                      society in question, which does not  seem  to  us  to
                      make sense. It is possible that  "former  victims  of
                      trafficking for sexual exploitation" may  be  members
                      of a particular social group in one country, but  not
                      in  another.  If  it  is  necessary  to  conduct  any
                      examination of the evidence relating to  the  society
                      in which a social group  is  said  to  exist,  it  is
                      difficult to see how anything short of satisfying the
                      requirement  in  sub-paragraph  (ii)  of   regulation
                      6(1)(d) would be consistent with the jurisprudence we
                      have considered. Another example which  supports  our
                      conclusion is the example of the left-handed men used
                      by  McHugh  J  in  Applicant  A   v.   Minister   for
                      Immigration and Ethnic Affairs 71 A.L.J.R. 381,  402,
                      to  explain  the  limits  of  the  principle  that  a
                      particular social group must exist  independently  of
                      the persecution feared. We can use the same  example,
                      to  support  our  conclusion  as   to   the   correct
                      interpretation  of  regulation   6(1)(d).   In   many
                      societies, the attribute of  being  left-handed  does
                      not lead to any persecutory action.  However,  if  in
                      any  particular  society,  left-handed   people   are
                      persecuted because they are  left-handed,  then  (and
                      here we borrow from, and quote, the words of McHugh J
                      himself, see paragraph 79 of the judgment  in  Fornah
                      and K):

                           ".....they would no doubt be quickly recognisable
                      in their society as a particular social group.  Their
                      persecution for  being  left-handed  would  create  a
                      public perception that they were a particular  social
                      group."

              73. Whilst an application of interpretation (b) would lead  to
                      this conclusion, an application of interpretation (a)
                      could lead to the conclusion that left-handed  people
                      may be a particular social group without any need  to
                      examine the  evidence  relating  to  the  society  in
                      question. In our view, that cannot be correct.

              74. Accordingly, and not without a great  deal  of  hesitation
                      having regard to the observations  of  Lord  Bingham,
                      Lord  Hope  and  Lord  Brown  in  Fornah  and  K,  we
                      concluded that  the  adjunctive  "and"  between  sub-
                      paragraphs (i) and (ii) of regulation  6(1)(d)  means
                      what it says: for a particular social group to exist,
                      sub-paragraph (ii) of regulation 6(1)(d) must  always
                      be satisfied. In order for a particular social  group
                      to exist, the group must have a distinct identity  in
                      the relevant society because it is perceived as being
                      different by the surrounding  society.  We  emphasise
                      both that the particular social  group  must  have  a
                      distinct identity as well as the requirement that the
                      distinct identity of the group must arise because the
                      group  is  perceived  as  being  different   by   the
                      surrounding  society.  Although  it  would   not   be
                      necessary  for  the  whole  of  a  given  society  to
                      perceive the group to be different from it, it is not
                      necessary for  us  to  lay  any  guidelines  in  this
                      respect in this case.


    52. A summary of the judgments in K & Fornah reveals the following:


        LORD BINGHAM OF CORNHILL


        The meaning of "a particular social group"


        11.  The four Convention grounds most  commonly  relied  on  (race,
        religion,  nationality  and  political   opinion),   whatever   the
        difficulty of applying them in a given case, leave little room  for
        doubt  about  their  meaning.  By  contrast,  the  meaning  of   "a
        particular social group",  for  all  the  apparent  simplicity  and
        intelligibility of that expression, has been the  subject  of  much
        consideration and analysis.


        12.  The leading domestic authority is the decision of the House in
        R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex p Shah and Islam  [1999]  2  AC
        629. The appellants were  married  Pakistani  women  who  had  been
        forced to leave their homes and feared that, if they were  returned
        to Pakistan, they would be at risk  of  being  falsely  accused  of
        adultery, which could lead to extreme social and penal consequences
        against which the state would offer no effective protection.  Their
        claim for asylum was based  on  the  "membership  of  a  particular
        social group" ground, but different definitions  were  advanced  at
        different stages of the social group in question: pp 632, 644, 649-
        650. By differing majorities the House accepted,  on  the  evidence
        adduced in the case, that the  appellants'  claim  should  succeed,
        either on the basis of their membership of a  wider  social  group,
        that of women in Pakistan (pp 645, 652, 655, 658), or of a narrower
        social group, that of women who had offended against  social  mores
        or against whom there were imputations  of  sexual  misconduct  (pp
        645, 655, 658-659). Lord Millett dissented,  not  as  I  understand
        because he did not consider the  appellants  to  be  members  of  a
        particular social group, but because he did not consider  that  the
        feared persecution would be for reasons of such membership (pp 664-
        665).


        13.   Certain important  points  of  principle  relevant  to  these
        appeals are to be derived from the opinions of  the  House.  First,
        the Convention is concerned not with all cases of  persecution  but
        with persecution which is based on discrimination,  the  making  of
        distinctions which principles of fundamental human rights regard as
        inconsistent with the right of every  human  being:  pp  651,  656.
        Secondly, to identify a social group one must  first  identify  the
        society of which it forms part; a particular social  group  may  be
        recognisable as such in one country but not  in  another:  pp  652,
        657. Thirdly, a social group need not be cohesive to be  recognised
        as such: pp  643,  651,  657.  Fourthly,  applying  Applicant  A  v
        Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs  (1997)  190  CLR  225,
        263, there can only be a  particular  social  group  if  it  exists
        independently of the persecution to which it is  subject:  pp  639-
        640, 656-657, 658.


        14.  In Shah and Islam, the House cited and relied strongly  on  In
        re Acosta (1985) 19 I&N 211, a relatively early  American  decision
        given by the Board of Immigration Appeals.  Construing  "membership
        of a particular  social  group"  ejusdem  generis  with  the  other
        grounds of persecution recognised by the Convention, the Board held
        the expression to refer to a group of persons all of whom  share  a
        common characteristic, which may be one the members  cannot  change
        or may be one that they should not be required to change because it
        is fundamental to their individual identities or  consciences.  The
        Supreme Court of Canada relied on and elaborated this  approach  in
        Attorney-General of Canada v Ward [1993] 2 SCR 689, 738-739, and La
        Forest J reverted to it in his dissent in Chan v  Canada  (Minister
        of Employment and Immigration) [1995] 3 SCR 593, 642-644. The trend
        of authority in New Zealand  has  been  generally  in  accord  with
        Acosta and Ward: T A  Aleinikoff,  "Protected  characteristics  and
        social perceptions: an analysis of the meaning of 'membership of  a
        particular  social  group'"   UNHCR's   Global   Consultations   on
        International Protection, ed Feller, Trk and Nicholson, (2003), pp
        263, 280. The leading Canadian authorities were considered  by  the
        High Court of Australia in Applicant A, above, where the court  was
        divided  as  to  the  outcome  but  the  judgments  yield  valuable
        insights. Brennan CJ, at p 234, observed:


        "By the ordinary meaning of the words used, a 'particular group' is
        a group identifiable by any characteristic common to the members of
        the group and a 'social group' is a  group  the  members  of  which
        possess some characteristic which distinguishes them  from  society
        at  large.  The  characteristic  may  consist  in  any   attribute,
        including attributes of non-criminal conduct or family life,  which
        distinguish the member of the group  from  society  at  large.  The
        persons possessing any such characteristic form a particular social
        group".
        Dawson J (p 241) saw no reason to confine a particular social group
        to small groups or to large ones; a  family  or  a  group  of  many
        millions might each be a particular social group. Gummow J (p  285)
        did not regard numerous individuals with similar characteristics or
        aspirations as comprising a particular social group of  which  they
        were members: there must be a common unifying element  binding  the
        members together before there would be a social group of this kind.


        15.   Increased reliance on membership of a particular social group
        as a ground for claiming asylum prompted the UNHCR  to  convene  an
        expert meeting at San Remo in September 2001, which was followed on
        7 May 2002 by the issue of Guidelines on  International  Protection
        directed to clarifying this ground of claim. Having identified what
        it called the "protected  characteristics"  or  "immutability"  and
        "social perception" approaches, which it suggested  would  usually,
        but not always, converge, the UNHCR proposed:


        "B.  UNHCR's Definition


        10.  Given the varying approaches, and the  protection  gaps  which
        can result, UNHCR believes that the  two  approaches  ought  to  be
        reconciled.
        11.  The protected characteristics approach may  be  understood  to
        identify a set of groups that constitute the  core  of  the  social
        perception analysis. Accordingly, it  is  appropriate  to  adopt  a
        single standard that incorporates both dominant approaches:
        a particular social group is a group of persons who share a  common
        characteristic other than their risk of being  persecuted,  or  who
        are perceived as a group by society. The characteristic will  often
        be one  which  is  innate,  unchangeable,  or  which  is  otherwise
        fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of one's  human
        rights.
        12.  This definition includes characteristics which are  historical
        and therefore cannot be changed, and  those  which,  though  it  is
        possible to change them, ought not to be  required  to  be  changed
        because they are so closely linked to the identity of the person or
        are an expression of fundamental human rights. It follows that  sex
        can properly be within the ambit of the social group category, with
        women being a clear example of a social subset  defined  by  innate
        and immutable  characteristics,  and  who  are  frequently  treated
        differently to men.
        13.  If a claimant alleges a  social  group  that  is  based  on  a
        characteristic determined to be neither unalterable or fundamental,
        further analysis should be  undertaken  to  determine  whether  the
        group is nonetheless  perceived  as  a  cognizable  group  in  that
        society. So, for example, if it were determined that owning a  shop
        or participating in a certain occupation in a particular society is
        neither unchangeable nor a fundamental aspect of human identity,  a
        shopkeeper or members of a particular profession might  nonetheless
        constitute a particular social group if in  the  society  they  are
        recognized as a group which sets them apart."


        The UNHCR accepted that a particular  social  group  could  not  be
        defined exclusively by the persecution members suffer or fear,  but
        also accepted the view advanced in Applicant A and accepted by some
        members of the House in Shah  and  Islam  that  persecutory  action
        towards a group  may  be  a  relevant  factor  in  determining  the
        visibility of a group in a particular society.  It  appears  to  me
        that the UNHCR Guidelines, clearly based on a  careful  reading  of
        the international authorities, provide a very accurate and  helpful
        distillation of their effect.


        16.  EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004, effective as
        of 10 October 2006, is directed to the setting of minimum standards
        among member states for  the  qualification  and  status  of  third
        country nationals or stateless persons as refugees, or  as  persons
        who otherwise need international protection,  and  setting  minimum
        standards for the content of the protection granted.  The  recitals
        recognise the need for minimum standards and common criteria in the
        recognition of refugees, and for a common concept of "membership of
        a particular social group as a persecution ground".  The  Directive
        expressly permits member states to apply standards more  favourable
        to the applicant than the minimum laid down.  Article  10  provides
        (with Roman numerals added to the text):


        "Reasons for persecution
        I  Member States shall take the  following  elements  into  account
        when assessing the reasons for persecution ...


        (d)  a group shall be considered to form a particular social  group
        where in particular:
        [(i)]  members of that group share an innate characteristic,  or  a
        common background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic
        or belief that is so fundamental to identity or conscience  that  a
        person should not be forced to renounce it, and
        [(ii)]  that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country,
        because it is perceived  as  being  different  by  the  surrounding
        society;
        [(iii)]  depending on the circumstances in the country of origin, a
        particular social group might include a group  based  on  a  common
        characteristic of sexual orientation. Sexual orientation cannot  be
        understood to include acts considered to be criminal in  accordance
        with national law of the  Member  States:  Gender  related  aspects
        might  be  considered,  without  by  themselves  alone  creating  a
        presumption for the applicability of this Article."


        Read literally, this provision is in no way inconsistent  with  the
        trend of international authority. When assessing a claim  based  on
        membership of a particular social group national authorities should
        certainly take the matters listed into account. I do not doubt that
        a group should be considered to  form  a  particular  social  group
        where, in particular, the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)
        are both satisfied. Sub-paragraph (iii) is not wholly clear to  me,
        but appears in part to address a  different  aspect.  If,  however,
        this article were interpreted as meaning that a social group should
        only be recognised as a particular social group for purposes of the
        Convention if it satisfies the criteria in both  of  sub-paragraphs
        (i) and (ii), then in my opinion it propounds a test more stringent
        than is warranted by  international  authority.  In  its  published
        Comments on this Directive (January 2005) the UNHCR adheres to  its
        view that the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)  should  be
        treated as alternatives, providing for recognition of a  particular
        social group where either criterion is met and not  requiring  that
        both be met.


        LORD HOPE OF CRAIGHEAD






        34.  In agreement with all of your Lordships, I would  allow  these
        appeals and make the orders proposed by my noble and learned friend
        Lord Bingham of Cornhill. I  should  like  however  to  add  a  few
        comments on the issues raised as to what constitutes a  "particular
        social group" within the meaning of article 1A(2)  of  the  Refugee
        Convention of 1951. I do not wish to depart from  anything  that  I
        said about the meaning of these words, or about the  definition  of
        which they form part, in Islam v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department; R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex p Shah [1999] 2  AC
        629. But there are some additional points that may be worth  making
        in the light of developments following that  judgment  and  on  the
        facts of these appeals.


        35.  The question whether or not the appellants have refugee status
        is not just of theoretical importance to the appellants. They  have
        been given leave to enter the United Kingdom because article  3  of
        the European Convention on Human Rights  forbids  their  return  to
        their home countries for so long as they are at risk of torture  or
        inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment there. So far so good.
        But leave to enter does not give them a right  to  remain  in  this
        country. If their claims for asylum are  recognised,  however,  all
        the benefits of the Refugee Convention will then  be  available  to
        them. The uncertainty that attaches to their present lack of status
        will be replaced by the status which the  Contracting  States  have
        undertaken to accord to a refugee and by all the rights that attach
        to it. This is a very substantial additional benefit which is  well
        worth arguing for.
        ...


        37.  The issue in  Zainab  Fornah's  case  is  essentially  one  of
        definition. It is accepted that the appellant  has  a  well-founded
        fear of being subjected to female genital mutilation were she to be
        returned to Sierra Leone. This is because  she  is  an  intact,  or
        uninitiated, young woman who does not  belong  to  the  only  ethic
        group in that country, the Krio of the  old  Sierra  Leone  colony,
        which does not  participate  in  this  practice.  The  question  is
        whether a particular social group can be identified, for reasons of
        her membership of which she  has  a  well  founded  fear  of  being
        persecuted in Sierra Leone. Female genital mutilation is  practised
        on intact girls and young women who are indigenous to Sierra Leone.
        But it is in the nature of the process that  it  can  be  inflicted
        only once in any female's lifetime. So the question is whether, for
        the purposes of this case, females in Sierra Leone generally can be
        said to constitute "a particular social group" within  the  meaning
        of article 1A(2). If this definition  is  too  wide,  it  would  be
        possible to define the group so as to confine it  to  those  within
        that broader group who are at risk of  persecution.  But  the  more
        qualifications the definition contains the more grounds  there  may
        be for objection. This gives rise to the further question as to how
        the  balance  is  to  be  struck  between  definitions   that   are
        unnecessarily precise and those that are unnecessarily wide.


        38.  Miss Fornah's case, then, raises  again  the  point  that  was
        discussed but did not have to be decided in Shah and  Islam  as  to
        how precise the definition must be to satisfy the  requirements  of
        that article. The Secretary of  State  maintains  that  it  is  not
        possible, for reasons of principle, to identify a particular social
        group the appellant's membership of which gives rise to  her  well-
        founded fear. He says that a group which  consists  of  females  in
        Sierra Leone generally is too widely  drawn  because  many  of  its
        members no longer fear  female  genital  mutilation  as  they  have
        already been initiated. He objects to a group which is defined more
        precisely so as to include only those  females  who  are  still  at
        risk. He says that if this is done it is the  fact  of  persecution
        alone that defines the group, and that  the  definition  of  it  is
        therefore circular. He has other  objections  which  apply  however
        wide or precise the definition is, which I  would  reject  for  the
        reasons given by Lord Bingham and Lord Rodger.
        ...


        41.  I agree with my  noble  and  learned  friend  Lord  Rodger  of
        Earlsferry (see para 75 of his speech) that it is not necessary  to
        show  that  all  members  of  the  social  group  in  question  are
        persecuted before one  can  say  that  people  are  persecuted  for
        reasons of their membership of that group. But does the  fact  that
        the group must be identifiable by  a  characteristic  or  attribute
        common to all members of the group  (see  Gleeson  CJ,  Gummow  and
        Kirby  JJ  in  Applicant  S  v   Minister   for   Immigration   and
        Multicultural Affairs (2004) 217 CLR 387,  para  36)  mean,  as  he
        suggests, that it is necessary that all members of the group should
        be  susceptible  to  the  persecution  in  question?  If  so,  this
        requirement is likely to severely limit the utility of  the  family
        as a particular social group. It has  not  been  satisfied  in  K's
        case. There is no evidence that any other member of her  family  is
        susceptible to the persecution of which  she  has  a  well  founded
        fear.


        ...


        44.  I do not agree with the approach that the Court of Appeal took
        to this issue in Quijano. It is, of course, well  established  that
        the persecution  which  is  feared  cannot  be  used  to  define  a
        particular social group: Applicant A v Minister for Immigration and
        Ethnic Affairs (1997) 190 CLR 225,  264  per  McHugh  J.  But  this
        simply means that there must be some characteristic other than  the
        persecution itself, or the fear of persecution, that sets the group
        apart from the rest of society. This may  be  because  its  members
        share a common  characteristic  other  than  their  risk  of  being
        persecuted, or because they are perceived as a group by society. It
        is the latter approach that defines  the  family  as  a  particular
        social group. Each family is set apart as a social group  from  the
        rest of society because of the ties that link its members  to  each
        other, which have nothing to do with the actions of the persecutor.




        45.  It is universally accepted  that  the  family  is  a  socially
        cognisable group in society: UNHCR position on claims  for  refugee
        status under the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees
        based on a fear of persecution due to an individual's membership of
        a family or clan engaged in a blood  feud,  17  March  2006,  p  5.
        Article 23(1) of the  1966  International  Covenant  on  Civil  and
        Political Rights  states  that  the  family  "is  the  natural  and
        fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection  by
        society and the State." The ties that  bind  members  of  a  family
        together, whether by blood or by marriage, define the group. It  is
        those ties that set it apart from the rest of society.  Persecution
        of a person simply because he is a member of  the  same  family  as
        someone  else  is  as  arbitrary  and  capricious,  and   just   as
        pernicious, as persecution for reasons of race or  religion.  As  a
        social group the family falls naturally into the category of  cases
        to which the Refugee Convention
        extends its protection.


        46.  In Applicant S v Minister for  Immigration  and  Multicultural
        Affairs, paras 67-69 McHugh J was at pains to emphasise that it was
        a mistake to say that a particular  social  group  does  not  exist
        unless it is always perceived as such by the society  in  which  it
        exists. He said that it was not necessary that society itself  must
        recognise the particular social group as a group that is set  apart
        from  the  rest  of  that  society,  or  that  the  persecutor   or
        persecutors must actually perceive  the  group  as  constituting  a
        particular social group. As he put it in para 69:


        "It is enough that the persecutor or  persecutors  single  out  the
        asylum-seeker for being a member of a class whose members possess a
        'uniting' feature or attribute, and the persons in that  class  are
        cognisable objectively as a particular social group."


        In their judgment in paras 17-18 Gleeson CJ, Gummow  and  Kirby  JJ
        appear to disagree with McHugh J in  requiring  recognition  within
        the society subjectively that the collection of  individuals  is  a
        group that is set apart from the rest  of  the  community.  My  own
        preference, with respect, is for  the  more  cautious  approach  of
        McHugh J that it would be a mistake to insist that such recognition
        is always necessary. I agree with him that it  is  sufficient  that
        the asylum-seeker can be seen objectively to have been singled  out
        by the  persecutor  or  persecutors  for  reasons  of  his  or  her
        membership  of   a   particular   social   group   whose   defining
        characteristics exist independently of the words or actions of  the
        persecutor. That is as true in cases where the family is identified
        as the particular social group, as it was in that case where it was
        contended that the particular social group comprised  young,  able-
        bodied Afghan men.


        47.  The reasoning of the Court of Appeal in Quijano requires  more
        of an asylum seeker who claims that the particular social group  of
        which he or she is a member is the family than is required of those
        who claim that the persecution of which they  have  a  well-founded
        fear is for reasons of race,  religion,  nationality  or  political
        opinion. It is, of course, critical to identify what  lies  at  the
        root of the threat of persecution. But it is not necessary to  show
        that everyone else of the same race, for example,  or  every  other
        member of the particular social  group,  is  subject  to  the  same
        threat. All that needs to be shown is that  there  is  a  causative
        link between his or her race  or  his  or  her  membership  of  the
        particular social group and the threat of the persecution of  which
        there is a well-founded fear. The fact that other  members  of  the
        group are  not  under  the  same  threat  may  be  relevant  to  an
        assessment of the question whether the causative link has  actually
        been established. Especially in a case such as the  present,  where
        it is not suggested that any other member of the family is at  risk
        of being persecuted for reasons of membership of  the  family,  the
        evidence of causation will need to be scrutinised  very  carefully.
        But the mere fact that no other member of the  family  is  in  that
        position is not determinative.


        ...


        51.  For these reasons I would answer the questions which  I  posed
        earlier (see para 40) in this way. It is  not  necessary  to  prove
        that the primary member of the family of which the asylum seeker is
        also a member is being persecuted for a Convention reason. Nor need
        it be proved that all other members of the family are  at  risk  of
        being persecuted for reasons of their membership of the family,  or
        that they are susceptible of being persecuted for that reason. This
        approach has the advantage that it is unnecessary to  identify  all
        those who are, and those who are not, to be treated as  members  of
        the family for the purposes  of  article  1A(2).  Questions  as  to
        whether it includes not only the asylum seeker's  sisters  but  his
        cousins and his aunts too are avoided. It  avoids  the  circularity
        that arises where what is said to unite persons into  a  particular
        social group is their common fear of persecution: see Applicant A v
        Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (1997) 190 CLR 225  per
        Dawson J at p 242, McHugh J at p 263.


        52.  In my opinion the UNHCR Guidelines on International Protection
        of 7 May 2002 state the position accurately in para 17:


        "An applicant need not demonstrate that all members of a particular
        social group are at risk of persecution in order to  establish  the
        existence of a particular social group."


        Care is needed in applying this guideline  to  cases  such  as  K's
        where it is contended that the family is a particular social  group
        and the applicant is the only family member who is said  to  be  at
        risk of persecution for reasons of his or  her  membership  of  the
        family. The question of causation in such cases  is  likely  to  be
        critical. In this case however the adjudicator was entitled to hold
        that the causative link had been proved by the facts which he found
        to have been established by the evidence.


        ...


        58.  I agree with this approach. I would avoid attempting to define
        the class so as to confine it to the persons who are likely  to  be
        persecuted. It  is  enough  that  it  should  identify  the  shared
        characteristic - the common denominator - within  the  wider  group
        that reflects the reason why membership of it  gives  rise  to  the
        well founded fear. In Miss Fornah's case one can say that the wider
        group is composed of females in Sierra Leone. But it  is  the  fact
        that she is an uninitiated indigenous female that would make her  a
        member of a particular social group in Sierra Leone, for reasons of
        her membership of which she would be exposed to the risk of  female
        genital mutilation if she were to be returned to that country.


         LORD RODGER OF EARLSFERRY


         73.  A convenient summary  of  the  approach  which  the  case  law
         suggests should be followed  in  identifying  a  particular  social
         group for the purposes of the Geneva Convention is to be  found  in
         the opinion of Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ  in  Applicant  S  v
         Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (2004)  217  CLR
         387, 400, para 36:


         "First, the group must  be  identifiable  by  a  characteristic  or
         attribute common  to  all  members  of  the  group.  Secondly,  the
         characteristic or attribute common to  all  members  of  the  group
         cannot be the shared fear of persecution. Thirdly,  the  possession
         of that characteristic or attribute must distinguish the group from
         society at large."


         BARONESS HALE OF RICHMOND


         Particular social group


         97.  Not all persecution gives rise to a valid asylum  claim.  Very
         bad things happen to a great  many  people  but  the  international
         community has not committed itself to giving them all a safe haven.
         People fleeing national and international  wars,  famine  or  other
         natural  disasters  are  referred  to  as  refugees,  and   offered
         humanitarian aid by the international community, but  they  do  not
         generally fall within the definition in the 1951 Convention. Asylum
         can only be claimed by people  who  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution "for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership
         of a particular social  group  or  political  opinion".  Of  these,
         "membership of a particular  social  group"  has  proved  the  most
         difficult to define, but is increasingly being  used  to  push  the
         boundaries  of  refugee  law  into  gender-related  areas  such  as
         domestic violence, enforced family planning policies, and FGM:  see
         T. Alexander  Aleinikoff,  "Protected  characteristics  and  social
         perceptions: an  analysis  of  the  meaning  of  'membership  of  a
         particular  social  group'"  in  UNHCR's  Global  Consultations  on
         International Protection, ed Feller, Turk and Nicholson (2003),  pp
         263-311.


         98.  As the UNHCR Guidelines on Membership of a  Particular  Social
         Group (published on 7 May 2002, the same day as the  Guidelines  on
         Gender-Related Persecution) point out in paragraph 2,


         "While the  ground  needs  delimiting  -  that  is,  it  cannot  be
         interpreted to render the other four Convention grounds superfluous
         - a proper interpretation must be consistent with  the  object  and
         purpose of the Convention. Consistent  with  the  language  of  the
         Convention, this ground cannot be interpreted as a 'catch all' that
         applies to all persons fearing persecution. Thus, to  preserve  the
         structure  and  integrity  of  the  Convention's  definition  of  a
         refugee, a social group cannot be defined exclusively by  the  fact
         that it is targeted for persecution (although, as discussed  below,
         persecution may be a relevant element in determining the visibility
         of a particular social group)."


         The UNHCR's own Handbook is not particularly helpful. It  says,  at
         paragraph 77, that a particular social  group  "normally  comprises
         persons of similar  background,  habits  or  social  status".  This
         reflects the understanding  in  1951  that  certain  regimes  might
         persecute former members of the landowning, capitalist or bourgeois
         classes. The recognition that gender may  constitute  a  particular
         social group is more recent.
         99.  The 2002 Guidelines, drawn from the  conclusions  of  the  San
         Remo Expert Roundtable, which themselves drew heavily on a previous
         paper by Professor Aleinikoff, identify the  two  approaches  which
         have dominated decision-making in common law  countries.  First  is
         the "protected characteristics" approach, which identifies a  group
         by reference to a uniting characteristic which is either  immutable
         or so fundamental to human dignity that  a  person  should  not  be
         compelled to change it: this stems from the approach taken  in  the
         United States in In re Acosta (1985) 19 I & N 211 and in Canada  in
         Attorney General of Canada v Ward [1993] 2 SCR 689. Second  is  the
         "social perception" approach, which identifies a group by reference
         to a common characteristic which makes them  a  recognisable  group
         and sets them apart from society as a whole: this  stems  from  the
         Australian case of Applicant A v Minister of Immigration and Ethnic
         Affairs (1997) 190 CLR 225. Not  surprisingly,  of  course,  women,
         families and homosexuals can qualify as  particular  social  groups
         under either approach; but the  social  perception  approach  might
         identify "set apart" groups based on a common characteristic  which
         is neither immutable nor fundamental.


         100. The UNHCR believes that the two approaches can be  reconciled,
         and proposes the  following  definition  in  paragraph  11  of  the
         Guidelines:


         "A particular social group is a group of persons who share a common
         characteristic other than their risk of being  persecuted,  or  who
         are perceived as a group by society. The characteristic will  often
         be one  which  is  innate,  unchangeable,  or  which  is  otherwise
         fundamental to identity, conscience or the exercise of one's  human
         rights."


         The Guidelines go on to comment in paragraph 12 that


         "It follows that sex can properly be within the ambit of the social
         group category, with women being a clear example of a social subset
         defined by  innate  and  immutable  characteristics,  and  who  are
         frequently treated differently to men."


         This is repeated in  paragraph  30  of  the  contemporaneous  UNHCR
         Guidelines on Gender-Related Persecution, also resulting  from  the
         conclusions of the San Remo Expert Roundtable, which in  turn  drew
         heavily upon a paper  on  "Gender-related  Persecution"  by  Rodger
         Haines QC, Chairman of  the  New  Zealand  Refugee  Status  Appeals
         Authority. Paragraphs 30 and 31 continue:


         ". . . . Their characteristics also identify them  as  a  group  in
         society, subjecting them to different treatment  and  standards  in
         some countries . . .


         The size of the group has  sometimes  been  used  as  a  basis  for
         refusing to recognise 'women'  generally  as  a  particular  social
         group. This argument has no basis in fact or reason, as  the  other
         grounds are not bound  by  this  question  of  size.  There  should
         equally be no requirement  that  the  particular  social  group  be
         cohesive or that members of it voluntarily associate, or that every
         member of the group is at risk of persecution. It is  well-accepted
         that it should be possible to identify the group  independently  of
         the persecution, however, discrimination or persecution  may  be  a
         relevant factor in determining the visibility of  the  group  in  a
         particular context."


         101. Thus, while the Guidelines stop short of saying directly  that
         women are always a particular social group, they do make  it  clear
         that if a woman is persecuted because she  is  a  woman  and  women
         generally are assigned an  inferior  status  in  the  society,  she
         should qualify for recognition as a refugee.


         102. Of course, much of the harm feared by women, including FGM, is
         perpetrated, not directly by the State, but by non-State agents. In
         paragraph 21, the Guidelines make another important point about the
         causal link ("by reason of") and the ground for the persecution:


         "In cases where there is a risk of being persecuted at the hands of
         a non-State actor (eg husband, partner or  other  non-State  actor)
         for reasons which are related to one of the Convention grounds, the
         causal link is established, whether or not  the  absence  of  State
         protection is Convention related. Alternatively, where the risk  of
         being persecuted at the hands of a non-State actor is unrelated  to
         a Convention ground, but the  inability  or  unwillingness  of  the
         State to offer protection is for reasons of  a  Convention  ground,
         the causal link is also established."


         103. My Lords, each of the guidelines quoted  above  is  consistent
         with, and in some cases directly derived from, the decision of this
         House in Islam v Secretary of State for the Home  Department;  R  v
         Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex p Shah [1999] UKHL 20; [1999] 2  AC
         629. I believe that they represent the correct approach.


         LORD BROWN OF EATON-UNDER-HEYWOOD

         116.  These  two  appeals  raise  questions  as   to   the   proper
         interpretation  and  application  of   just   six   words   in   an
         international treaty: six words (italicised below for  convenience)
         in the definition of "refugee"  in  article  1A  (2)  of  the  1951
         Refugee Convention as someone who "owing to  well-founded  fear  of
         being  persecuted  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,  nationality,
         membership of a particular social group or  political  opinion,  is
         outside the country of his nationality and is unable or,  owing  to
         such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of  that
         country . . . ".


         117. If someone fears persecution because of race, or religion,  or
         nationality, or political opinion, he is entitled  to  asylum.  All
         these concepts have been fully explored in  the  jurisprudence  and
         widely interpreted as appropriate in an international treaty  drawn
         up with broad humanitarian  aims  in  mind.  So  too  a  person  is
         entitled  to  asylum  if  he  fears  persecution  because  of   his
         "membership of a particular social group". (It is only in  relation
         to this category that reference to "membership"  is  necessary:  in
         relation to religion, for example, the  persecutor  may  be  acting
         because of his own religious beliefs; his victim  may  have  none.)
         What, then, is "a particular social  group"?  Notwithstanding  that
         this too has been the subject of a very great deal of juridical and
         academic discussion around the world I was, I  confess,  intent  at
         the conclusion of argument on  these  appeals  on  writing  a  full
         judgment of my own. Having  now,  however,  had  the  advantage  of
         reading the detailed opinions of  each  of  my  noble  and  learned
         friends (with all of whom I am in substantial agreement)  I  really
         cannot think that a fifth fully reasoned  speech  would  contribute
         anything of value to an understanding  of  this  issue.  I  content
         myself, therefore, with but four comments.


         118. First, I entirely accept the definition of a particular social
         group contained in paragraph 11 of the UNHCR 2002 Guidelines as set
         out in para 15 of Lord Bingham's speech. The EU  Council  Directive
         2004/83/EC (the Asylum Qualification Directive) and any Regulations
         brought  into  force  under  it  will,  I  conclude,  have  to   be
         interpreted consistently with this definition.


    53. In summary, in K  &  Fornah  Lord  Bingham  derived  the  following
        principles from the legal authorities, including the  Qualification
        Directive. (1) The Refugee Convention was not  concerned  with  all
        cases  of  discrimination,   only   with   persecution   based   on
        discrimination, the making  of  distinctions  which  principles  of
        fundamental human rights regarded as inconsistent with the right of
        every human being. (2) To identify a social group  the  society  of
        which it formed part had  to  first  be  identified;  a  particular
        social group might be recognized as such in one country but not  in
        another. (3) A social group need not be cohesive to  be  recognized
        as such. (4) There could only be a particular social  group  if  it
        existed independently of the persecution to which it was subject.
    54. Lord Bingham indicated that a particular social group may be formed
        either because its members share a characteristic which  cannot  or
        should not be changed (the protected characteristics  approach)  or
        because they are perceived as having a  distinct  identity  by  the
        surrounding society (the social perception approach).  Lord Bingham
        noted EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC  Article  10(d)(i)  and  (ii)
        which are effectively reproduced at Regulation 6(d)(i) and (ii)  of
        the Qualification Regulations but said that if (i)  and  (ii)  both
        had to be satisfied then the  test  in  the  Regulations  was  more
        stringent than was warranted by international authorities. He  said
        that the Qualification Directive should not be  read  as  requiring
        both features to be present in order for there to be a social group
        for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.   Either  will  do.   I
        note that  Lord  Brown  agreed  with  this  approach.  Lord  Hope's
        definition at [44] is also in line with this  interpretation.  Lady
        Hale  cites  the  UNHCR  guidelines  at  [100]  and  expresses   no
        disagreement.  Only Lord Rodger, in the passages cited, appears  to
        require both an immutable characteristic and the need  for  society
        identity as  a  dual  requirement  by  reference  to  the  majority
        decision in the Australian High Court  case  of  Applicant  S.   It
        appears therefore that this decision goes beyond what the House  of
        Lords said in Shah and Islam.
    55. Lord Bingham also noted the UNHCR's  view  that,  whilst  a  social
        group could not be defined by the persecution,  persecutory  action
        towards a group might be  a  relevant  factor  in  determining  the
        visibility of the group in a particular society.
    56. Lord Rodger of Earlsferry adopted an Australian  proposition  that,
        while it is not necessary for all the members of a social group  be
        persecuted before one can say that people are being persecuted  for
        reasons  of  their  membership  of  that  group,  it  is  generally
        necessary that all the members of the group should  be  susceptible
        to persecution. It was also said that that there was no requirement
        that the persecution be carried out by persons who were not members
        of the social group.
    57. The Upper Tribunal would, of course, be bound to follow  the  ratio
        of the House of Lords' decision in K & Fornah  applying  the  well-
        recognised doctrine of judicial precedent. The views  expressed  in
        the House of Lords were not, however, part  of  the  ratio  of  the
        decision; they were only obiter dicta.    As obiter  that  doctrine
        does not apply but the Upper Tribunal (or indeed any  other  court)
        would, and should, be very reluctant not to follow the  thought-out
        (but obiter) views of a majority of the House of Lords even  though
        not bound by stare decisis to do so.  I find there is clear, highly
        persuasive support in the majority's views in the House of Lords in
        K & Fornah and the clarification provided by the UNHCR to establish
        that the  test  for  a  PSG  under  the  Refugee  Convention  is  a
        disjunctive test:

            "A particular social group is a group of persons  who  share  a
            common  characteristic  other  than   their   risk   of   being
            persecuted, or who are perceived as a  group  by  society.  The
            characteristic will often be one which is innate, unchangeable,
            or which is otherwise fundamental to  identity,  conscience  or
            the exercise of one's human rights.


    58. In relation to the Qualification Directive, in its comments on  the
        proposed amendments to the  Qualification  Directive  published  as
        part of the consultation process, entitled 'UNHCR Comments  on  the
        European Commission's proposal for  a  Directive  of  the  European
        Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  minimum  standards  for  the
        qualification and status of third country  nationals  or  stateless
        persons as   beneficiaries  of  international  protection  and  the
        content  of  the  protection  granted   (COM(2009)551,  21  October
        2009)', it is written:


             6.   Membership of a Particular Social Group (Article 10)

                 In determining whether an applicant can  be  considered  a
                 member of a "particular social group" for the purposes  of
                 the  refugee  definition,   UNHCR   welcomes   the   added
                 requirement  in   Article   10   (1)   (d)   for   gender-
                 related  aspects  to   be   "given   due   consideration",
                 combined with the deletion of the present  statement  that
                 gender creates  no presumption of membership of a   group.
                 This will strengthen the protection of women and girls  in
                 particular.  In 2009, women and girls constituted  47%  of
                 the world's  983,000  asylum-seekers  and   15.2   million
                 refugees,24  and  30.5%  of  all  applicants in EU  Member
                 States.25

                 Nevertheless, the Article should  further  be  amended  to
                 clarify the term "particular social group". Members  of  a
                 particular social group may be subject to persecution  for
                 either   real   or      ascribed    characteristics:    it
                 is     not     necessary      for      the      attributed
                 characteristics to be factual. The  term  should  also  be
                 interpreted  in  a  manner  open  to   the   diverse   and
                 changing  nature  of  groups  in  various  societies   and
                 to  evolving international  human  rights   norms.26   Two
                 main  schools  of  thought  in  international  refugee law
                 theory have emerged as to what  constitutes  a  particular
                 social group within  the meaning of  the  1951  Convention
                 and  are  reflected  in  the  Directive.  The   "protected
                 characteristics  approach"  is  based  on   an   immutable
                 characteristic or  a  characteristic  so   fundamental  to
                 human dignity that a person should  not  be  compelled  to
                 forsake it. The  "social perception approach" is based  on
                 a common characteristic which creates a  cognizable  group
                 that sets it apart from society at large. This means  that
                 people may  require protection because they are  perceived
                 to  belong  to  a  group  irrespective  of   whether  they
                 actually possess the group's  characteristics.  While  the
                 results under the  two approaches may frequently converge,
                 this is not always the  case.  To  avoid  any   protection
                 gaps,  UNHCR  therefore  recommends  that  the   Directive
                 permit   the    alternative,   rather   than   cumulative,
                 application of the two concepts.

          Recommendation: UNHCR recommends amending Article 10  (1)  (d)  to
          replace "and"  at the end of the first subsection with "or".  This
          will clarify that a person  requires   protection  both  in  cases
          where he or she is a member of a particular  group  and  in  cases
          where he or she is perceived to be such.

          24 UNHCR, 2009 Global Trends Refugees, Asylum-seekers,  Returnees,
          Internally Displaced and Stateless
          Persons, Division of Programme Support  and  Management,  15  June
          2010, at:
           http://www.unhcr.org/4c11f0be9.html.
          25 Eurostat, 2009.
          26   See  also  UNHCR,  Guidelines  on  International  Protection:
          Membership of a Particular Social  Group  Within  the  Context  of
          Article 1A (2) of the 1951 Convention  and/or  its  1967  Protocol
          Relating to the Status of Refugees,  7  May  2002,  HCR/GIP/02/02,
          para. 12, at: http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/3d36f23f4.html.'



    59. The difficulties created by the use of "and" are therefore not mere
        semantics but can give rise to protection gaps which is contrary to
        the obligations of signatories to the Convention. Lord Bingham in K
        & Fornah also stated  in  reference  to  Article  10(1)(d)  of  the
        Qualification Directive "If, however, this article were interpreted
        as meaning that a social group  should  only  be  recognised  as  a
        particular social group  for  purposes  of  the  Convention  if  it
        satisfies the criteria in both of sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii), then
        in my opinion it propounds a test more stringent than is  warranted
        by international authority.  In  its  published  Comments  on  this
        Directive (January 2005) the UNHCR adheres to  its  view  that  the
        criteria in sub-paragraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  should  be  treated  as
        alternatives, providing for  recognition  of  a  particular  social
        group where either criterion is met and not requiring that both  be
        met".
    60. In  2009  the  European  Commission  published  a  report  entitled
        "DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on minimum
        standards  for  the  qualification  and  status  of  third  country
        nationals or stateless persons as  beneficiaries  of  international
        protection and the content of the protection granted", in which  it
        is identified as a main problem that the original minimum standards
        adopted  are  vague  and  ambiguous  and  as  a  result  they   are
        insufficient to secure full compatibility with the  evolving  human
        rights  and  refugee  law  standards,  they  have  not  achieved  a
        sufficient level of harmonisation, and they  impact  negatively  on
        the quality and efficiency of decision-making.
    61. The  same  conclusion  was  drawn  with  respect  to  the   Council
        Directive  2005/85/EC   on   minimum  standards  on  procedures  in
        Member States for granting and withdrawing refugee  status ("Asylum
        Procedures Directive").
    62. At paragraph 3 of the report it is written:


         3.  LEGAL ELEMENTS OF THE PROPOSAL

         3.1.     Summary of the proposed action

                  The main objective of this proposal is to ensure

                 -  higher protection standards regarding both the  grounds
                and  the  content  of  the  protection   in    line    with
                international  standards,  and  in  particular   in   order
                to  ensure  the  full and  inclusive  application  of   the
                Geneva  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees
                of 28 July 1951, as supplemented by the New  York  Protocol
                of 31 January 1967 ("Geneva Convention") and  full  respect
                for ECHR and the EU  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  ("EU
                Charter"); and

                -  further harmonisation of protection standards  in  order
                to reduce secondary movements
                in so far as these are due to  the  diversity  of  national
                legal frameworks and decision-making
                practices and to different levels  of  rights  provided  in
                different Member States.


    63. The 'main objective' was equally as applicable to Council Directive
        2004/83/EC and the introduction of an additional  requirement  into
        Article 10(1)(d) of the  Qualification  Directive  is  arguably  an
        introduction of a barrier to protection and an act contrary to  the
        full inclusive application of the Refugee Convention.
    64. In relation to Mr Diwnycz's submission in relation to the immutable
        characteristic argument, there is merit in a submission  this  will
        restrict the potential scope of this  PSG  if  such  issue  becomes
        determinative, as the effect  of  limiting  refugee  protection  to
        persons with an innate  or  immutable  disability  and  the  likely
        limiting of the group of mentally  disabled  who  may  qualify  for
        refugee status, may  only  reflect  the  protected  characteristics
        approach. To be 'immutable' the mental health issue would  have  to
        be one where members of the PSG share a common characteristic which
        an applicant for protection cannot change.
    65. The  difference  is  highlighted  in  the  approaches  adopted.  As
        currently drawn, the Qualification Directive  requires  a  decision
        maker to first consider whether there is  a  common  characteristic
        which can be an innate characteristic, or a common background  that
        cannot be changed,  or  a  characteristic  or  belief  that  is  so
        fundamental to identity or conscience that a person should  not  be
        forced to renounce it.  If this is found to exist on the facts  the
        decision maker is then required to consider whether the  person  or
        persons in that group possessing the common  characteristic  has  a
        distinct identity  in  the  relevant  country  perceived  as  being
        different by the surrounding society. It is only if  both  elements
        are taken together that a person's claim may constitute one of  the
        five grounds for international protection; belonging to a PSG.  The
        cumulative approach means that the  two  criteria  outlined  above,
        respectively 'common characteristics' and 'distinct identity', both
        need to be met. In other words, it is not sufficient  to  establish
        that the group  share  certain  characteristics  or  background  or
        beliefs, this must, at the level of the group, also be visible  for
        others so that the group is identified as being different. As noted
        above UNHCR does not apply a 'cumulative approach' as their  policy
        is that one of the two elements is sufficient.
    66. The CJEU in X,Y,Z v Minister voor Immigratie en  Asiel  (C-201/12),
        intervening parties:
        Hoog Commissariaat van de Verenigde Naties voor de Vluchtelingen (C-
        199/12 to C-201/12), at [44-45] note:
            44      Article 10(1) of the Directive gives a definition of a
            particular social group, membership of which may give rise to a
            genuine fear of persecution.
            45      According to that definition, a group is regarded as a
            'particular social group' where, inter alia, two conditions are
            met.  First,  members   of   that   group   share   an   innate
            characteristic, or a common background that cannot be  changed,
            or share a characteristic or belief that is so  fundamental  to
            identity or conscience that a person should not  be  forced  to
            renounce it. Second, that group has a distinct identity in  the
            relevant country because it is perceived as being different  by
            the surrounding society.
    67. Whilst the above correctly recites the text of Article 10, which is
        not in dispute, there is no  discussion  of  whether  the  same  is
        compatible with the Refugee Convention. In reality the approach  to
        the  definition  of  membership  of  a  PSG  in  the  Qualification
        Directive does not accurately reflect international refugee law  at
        least as understood by the majority of the House of Lords in  their
        obiter comments.
    68. In accordance with the objective of  the  Refugee  Convention,  the
        concept of a PSG should be interpreted in an  inclusive  manner  by
        determining that it exists on the basis  of  either  an  innate  or
        common characteristic of fundamental importance i.e. the  protected
        characteristics approach ('ejusdem generis') or social  perception,
        rather than requiring both.
    69. The European Council on Refugees and Exiles (ecre) also  recommends
        that Member States for the purpose of  defining  a  PSG  apply  the
        protection characteristics  approach  and  social  perception  test
        alternatively instead of cumulatively.
    70. There is a fundamental need for consistency and clarity in decision
        making when dealing with the question of international  protection.
        Signatories to the Refugee Convention are prohibited from  applying
        stricter  criteria  but  can  grant  more   generous   terms.   The
        Qualification  Direction  also  repeats  this   restriction   which
        specifically enforces the fact that the purpose of the Directive is
        to set minimum standards for the qualification and status of  third
        country nationals or stateless persons as refugees  or  as  persons
        who otherwise need international protection and the content of  the
        protection granted.  Although the European Union can make  its  own
        provisions in relation to granting international  protection  those
        provisions, such as those in the  Directive,  cannot  provide  less
        protection than  that  recognised  in  the  Refugee  Convention  as
        clarified by the UNHCR.
    71. The Directive also recognises that consultation with the UNHCR  may
        provide  valuable  guidance  for  Member  States  when  determining
        refugee status according to Article 1  of  the  Geneva  Convention,
        that minimum standards for the definition and  content  of  refugee
        status should be laid down to guide the competent  national  bodies
        of Member States in the application of the  Geneva  Convention  and
        that it is necessary to introduce common criteria  for  recognising
        applicants for asylum as refugees within the meaning of  Article  1
        of the Geneva Convention, all suggesting a close  relationship  and
        common approach to the test to be applied to ascertain if a  person
        is entitled to refugee protection.
    72. Despite this there is a clear  impermissible  divergence.   I  find
        that the correct manner  in  which  Article  10(1)(d)  and  related
        Regulations should be interpreted is by replacing  the  word  "and"
        appearing between Article 10(1)(d)(i) and (ii) with the word  "or",
        creating an alternative rather than cumulative test.
    73. Care also needs to  be  taken  in  relation  to  both  the  Refugee
        Convention and Qualification Directive not to  lose  sight  of  the
        main purpose of the two provisions which is to protect persons from
        being persecuted.
    74. Even if a person is able to satisfy  the  'alternative'  definition
        they  will  not,  without  more,  be  entitled  to   a   grant   of
        international protection. The mere fact of being a member of a  PSG
        is not sufficient to qualify for refugee status. Once membership of
        a PSG has been  established,  the  next  step  is  to  examine  the
        existence of a nexus between such membership and  the  individual's
        fear of persecution, or absence of protection.  The  nexus  between
        the membership of a PSG and the fear  of  persecution  coming  from
        either  the  acts  of  persecution  or  absence  of  protection  is
        essential and is a question of fact in each case.
    75. Whilst some argue persecution is the key and not what constitutes a
        protected ground, such as being a member  of  a  PSG,  the  Refugee
        Convention and Qualification Directive require  a  person  claiming
        the benefit of the same  to  establish  a  causal  link  between  a
        protected characteristic and the persecutory acts. In this way  the
        category of those entitled to relief is limited to those said to be
        most in need. Not all those who face serious harm are  entitled  to
        be recognised as a refugee.


   Mental Health and membership of a PSG


    76. Although  the  Refugee Convention  does   not  specifically    make
        reference   to   people with mental disabilities there is merit  in
        the submission the  "social   group"  category   is   a  broad  and
        flexible concept that should be  read  expansively  and  which  can
        include a category of person who faces a  real  risk  of  treatment
        sufficient to amount to persecution as a result of their  suffering
        serious mental health issues for which it is proved  the  returning
        state is unable to provide adequate facilities to manage the health
        issues in  a  way  which  reduces  any  such  risk  of  persecutory
        treatment to below the Horvath standard,  to  which  the  applicant
        will have access.
    77. If those with a mental disability, as a community, share  a  common
        characteristic or are perceived as a  distinct  group  by  society,
        they should qualify as a PSG under the Refugee Convention. The fact
        such can be included is not disputed by Mr Diwnycz, in principle.
    78. People with mental disabilities can  be  said  to  share  a  common
        uniting characteristic that  sets  them  apart  from  those  within
        society who have no such concerns. People  diagnosed  as  having  a
        mental disability, such as schizophrenia, for   example,   form   a
        cognisable  group  in  terms  of  their   particular   social   and
        medical   status.   Whether they are treated    as    a  cognisable
        group is a question of a fact in each case.  In  many  societies  a
        person with a mental disability will  suffer  no  adverse  reaction
        from the society in which they live unless their behaviour, brought
        about  as  a  result  of  their  mental  illness,  causes  them  to
        transgress social norms or accepted rules  of  social  conduct.  In
        this appeal it is  the  appellant's  disinhibited  behaviour  as  a
        result of his mental health issues which give rise to a  real  risk
        on return to Afghanistan.
    79. Whilst I refer above to 'serious mental illness' I accept  the  key
        issue is how an individual is viewed in the  eyes  of  a  potential
        persecutor making it possible that those suffering a lesser  degree
        of illness may also  face  a  real  risk.   This  requires  a  fact
        specific assessment depending upon the nature of the  illness,  how
        it manifests itself, and country conditions.  It is also  the  case
        that many problems experienced by  those  suffering  mental  health
        issues are  as  a  result  of  ignorance  grounded  in  a  lack  of
        understanding of an individual's mental health problems and how the
        same will, ordinarily, manifest themselves.
    80. The evidence made available fails to establish  there  is  a  clear
        consensus regarding the cause of  mental  disabilities.  There  are
        five  recognised  models  of  mental  health  being   behaviourism,
        biological, psychodynamic, cognitive, and humanistic.  The  medical
        model is a model of health which suggests that disease is  detected
        and  identified  through  a  systematic  process  of   observation,
        description,  and  differentiation,  in  accordance  with  standard
        accepted procedures, such as medical examinations, tests, or a  set
        of symptom descriptions. Such a model enables a clear diagnosis  of
        the nature of a person's mental illness by reference to established
        norms, treating mental disabilities as illnesses in the same manner
         that  physical  disabilities are  illnesses.
    81. The biomedical model assumes  that  depression  originates  from  a
        physiological  abnormality  within  the  brain  and  there  is   no
        significant dissimilarity  between  mental  and  physical  diseases
        (Andreasen, 1985).  This  model  may  make  it  more  difficult  to
        precisely 'label' the cause of a person's presentation even  though
        they are clearly suffering mental illness.
    82.  The  medical  model  is  more  in   line   with   the   "immutable
        characteristics" approach to refugee determination.  The  essential
        element of the psychosocial  model  is  the  cumulative  effect  of
        environmental stressors on the individual in  question  and  not  a
        particular "innate" biological quality.  This, arguably,  makes  it
        more difficult to identify an immutable characteristic.  The  issue
        is further complicated in that some mental disabilities may have  a
        genetic or biological cause which makes the disability in  question
        "immutable."
    83. The UN Convention on the Rights of People  with  Disabilities  2006
        tends towards the social model with this definition:


            'Persons with disabilities include  those  who  have  long-term
            physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which  in
            interaction with various barriers may  hinder  their  full  and
            effective participation in  society  on  an  equal  basis  with
            others.'


    84. A person may suffer serious mental illness which is innate, i.e.  a
        characteristic already present when they are  born,  or  which  has
        been developed since. That illness may also be immutable.
    85. There is nothing fundamentally wrong in law  in  the  Secretary  of
        State asking for proof of the existence of the mental health issues
        of  an  individual  who  is  claiming  a  right  to   international
        protection as a result of facing a real risk as a result  of  their
        mental health problems, and any resultant persecution.  Proceedings
        before the Immigration Tribunals  in  the  UK  are  adversarial  by
        nature in which a party claiming an  entitlement  to  international
        protection  is,  as  a  general  rule,  required  to   prove   such
        entitlement.
    86. Depending on personal circumstances there is nothing  preventing  a
        finding being made that persons living with disabilities, including
        mental health issues, can be considered as either sharing an innate
        characteristic, or as sharing a common background  that  cannot  be
        changed. This is a fact  specific  question.  A  person  unable  to
        secure a firm diagnosis of the nature of their mental health issues
        cannot be denied the right to international protection just because
        a label cannot be given to his or her condition,  especially  in  a
        case where there is a satisfactory explanation for why this is  so,
        as in this case.  Most  treatments  in  the  mental  health  sector
        require a medical diagnosis to  enable  a  doctor  to  prescribe  a
        course of treatment to enable that person to function as best  they
        can. If no treatment is available the condition remains present and
        cannot be changed and is likely therefore to be immutable.
    87. Mr Bandegani submitted that whilst the  issue  of  possible  future
        treatment may be thought relevant to the question how  people  with
        mental or physical disabilities are perceived or treated by society
        in their home countries, it must always be noted (a) the  existence
        of a healthcare system will  usually  say  very  little  about  how
        society  views  or  treats  the  PSG,  and/or  whether  the   state
        discriminates against them generally and/or is willing  to  protect
        them i.e. there may  still  be  deeply-embedded  institutional  and
        social stigma and discrimination against the group  regardless  of,
        for  example,  the  existence  of  a  hospital;  (b)  the  specific
        treatment required  may  not  in  fact  be  available,  accessible,
        affordable, or adequate in any event; (c) the form  that  treatment
        takes in the country in question may itself give  rise  to  a  real
        risk of persecution, serious harm, or other human  rights  breaches
        (including flagrant breaches) such  as  being  detained,  isolated,
        chained,  caged,  beaten,  or   experimented   upon.   As   general
        observations this must be correct but whether  such  factors  exist
        and their impact is, again, fact specific.
    88. Depending on the specific context in the country of origin  and  on
        personal  circumstances,  persons  living  with  a  serious  mental
        illness may be perceived as  being  different  by  the  surrounding
        society and thus, have a distinct  identity  in  their  country  of
        origin. This is a fact specific assessment.
    89. It is also the case that  an  appellant  needs  to  establish  that
        members of a PSG of 'persons living with a disability/mental health
        issues' will be exposed to acts of  persecution,  including  severe
        violations of  human  rights  from  which  there  is  no  effective
        protection.
    90. In relation to the Actors  of  Protection,  under  The  Refugee  or
        Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection   (Qualification)
        Regulations 2006, Regulation 4 states:


           3) In deciding whether  a  person  is  a  refugee  or  a  person
              eligible  for  humanitarian   protection,   protection   from
              persecution or serious harm can be provided by:


                (a) the State; or
                (b) any party or organisation, including  any  international
                organisation, controlling the State or a substantial part of
                the territory of the State.


           4) Protection shall be regarded as generally provided  when  the
              actors mentioned in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) take  reasonable
              steps to prevent the persecution or suffering of serious harm
              by operating an effective legal  system  for  the  detection,
              prosecution and punishment of acts  constituting  persecution
              or serious harm, and the person mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)
              has access to such protection.


           5) In deciding whether  a  person  is  a  refugee  or  a  person
              eligible for humanitarian protection the Secretary  of  State
              may assess whether an international organisation  controls  a
              State or a substantial part of  its  territory  and  provides
              protection as described in paragraph (2).


    91. Of particular relevance to a person with mental  health  issues  is
        the  assessment  of  additional  risks.  In  AW   (sufficiency   of
        protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC) the Tribunal held that (i)
        At paragraph 55 of Auld LJ's summary in Bagdanavicius  [2005]  EWCA
        Civ.1605 it is made clear that the test set out in Horvath [2001] 1
        AC 489 was intended to deal with the ability of a state  to  afford
        protection to the generality of its citizens; (ii)  Notwithstanding
        systemic sufficiency of state protection, a claimant may still have
        a well-founded fear of persecution if authorities know or ought  to
        know of circumstances particular to his/her case giving rise to the
        fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  the
        particular  circumstances  reasonably  require  (per  Auld  LJ   at
        paragraph 55(vi)); (iii)  In  considering  whether  an  appellant's
        particular  circumstances  give  rise  to  a  need  for  additional
        protection, particular account must be taken  of  past  persecution
        (if any) so as to ensure the question posed is  whether  there  are
        good reasons to consider that such persecution (and  past  lack  of
        sufficient protection) will not be repeated.
    92.  Mr  Bandegani  argues  the  Tribunal  should  adopt  the   "social
        perception" test which requires the  decision  maker  to  establish
        whether the PSG is "cognisable" as a group, viewed  objectively  in
        terms of the relevant society, i.e. that  the  PSG  is  defined  by
        external perceptions and is set aside from society, which  requires
        an  objective  assessment  in  light  of  country  conditions   and
        attitudes and that a person's mental  or  physical  disability  may
        meet either limb of Article 10 of the  Qualification  Directive  or
        both, which I accept must be correct in principle. Whether it  does
        is a question of fact.
    93. I find therefore, to the extent that a person with a serious mental
        disability can prove that there is a  real  risk  of  mistreatment,
        sufficient to constitute "persecution," that   they    are    being
        "persecuted" on account of their mental disability, and that  their
        country of   origin   is   either   the   agent of  persecution  or
        is unwilling or unable to offer protection. States who are a  party
        to  the  Refugee  Convention  or  Qualification  Directive   should
        recognize  that  the  mentally   disabled   qualify   for   refugee
        protection.
    94. In Fornah at [13] Lord Bingham  reiterated,  by  reference  to  the
        decision of their Lordships in Shah and Islam  at  [pp  651,  656],
        that:


             "the Convention is concerned not with all cases of persecution
             but with persecution which is  based  on  discrimination,  the
             making of distinctions which principles of  fundamental  human
             rights regard as inconsistent with the right  of  every  human
             being"


    95. Mr Bandegani summaries his position in his written submissions when
        asserting that persons with mental or physical disabilities can  in
        principle form a particular social group by reference to:


                i.  The  correct  approach  to  interpreting   the   Refugee
                   Convention;


               ii. The principles controlling how to define a PSG;

              iii.  The   recognition   of   disability   as   a   protected
                   characteristic in international law;


               iv. The correct approach to the question of  what  is  a  PSG
                   applying binding authority i.e. Fornah, specifically that
                   (a) there can be no objection based on group size: (b)  a
                   PSG can exist, albeit not all members are  at  risk;  (c)
                   the principle that the PSG cannot be  defined  solely  by
                   reference to the feared persecution is   subject  to  the
                   important qualification that acts of persecutors  can  be
                   relevant and can create  a  (societally-recognised)  PSG,
                   provided that the  PSG  is  not  defined  exclusively  by
                   reference to the persecution, and (d) cohesiveness is not
                   a  requirement for the existence of the group;  see  also
                   the UNHCR PSG Guidelines;


                v. The approach taken by  common  law  countries  including:
                   South  Africa,  New  Zealand,  Canada,   the   USA,   and
                   Australia;

               vi. The question  (a)  whether  the  person  with  mental  or
                   physical disabilities faces a real risk  of  persecution,
                   and/or (b) whether the real risk of  persecution  is  "by
                   reason  of"  is  membership  of  the  PSG  are   distinct
                   questions that form part of the decision maker's  overall
                   assessment of  whether  the  person  is  a  refugee,  not
                   whether the person is a member of a  PSG;  see  also  the
                   UNHCR PG Guidelines;


              vii. Binding authority (Fornah) to the effect that Art  10  of
                   the Qualification Directive must  be  read  disjunctively
                   not conjunctively (or not necessarily  so)  in  order  to
                   give effect to the autonomous  meaning  and  humanitarian
                   underpinning of the Convention.  That  is  buttressed  by
                   (a) the position of the UNHCR; and (b) the  line of UTIAC
                   cases applying Fornah; and (c) the UTIAC decision of  DZ.
                   By corollary, those  UTIAC  decisions  that  depart  from
                   precedent through  a  literal  textual  analysis  of  the
                   Qualification Directive  are  wrong  and  should  not  be
                   followed.


         and more specifically:


                  As Lady Hale emphasised in Fornah at  [107],  this  is  "a
                  global  appraisal  in  a  particular   cultural,   social,
                  political and legal milieu, judged by a test which, though
                  it  has  legal  and  linguistic  limits,   has   a   broad
                  humanitarian purpose".


    96. Decisions arising within other common law jurisdictions include:


        South Africa:  A  'particular  social  group'  is  defined  in  the
        Refugees Act 1998 (South Africa), ch. 1, s.  1(xxi).  Social  group
        "includes, among others, a group of persons of  particular  gender,
        sexual orientation, disability, class or caste';


        New Zealand: The Immigration  and  Protection  Tribunal  held  that
        albinism is an characteristic which is  beyond  the  power  of  the
        appellant to change. It  is  an  internal  defining  characteristic
        which serves to define the group independently of the  persecution:
        AC (Egypt) [2011] NZIPT 800015 (25 November  2011),  [111].  Whilst
        albinism is not necessarily a disability, the point is that  it  is
        treated as such in some countries. Albinos are properly  considered
        a particular social group in Egypt;


        The United Kingdom: Albinism is also  treated  as  a  PSG  too:  JA
        (child - risk of persecution) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 00560 (IAC);


        Canada:  In Canada, PSGs based on physical  and  mental  disability
        have been easily recognised.   In  Ampong  v  Canada  (Minister  of
        Citizenship and Immigration) 2010 FC 35, 87  Imm  LR  (3d)  279  at
        [43]19 the court held the executive decision to be unreasonable as:
        "The 2007 Survey on Health  in  Ghana  says  that  persons  with  a
        disability are estimated  to  make  up  approximately  10%  of  the
        population of Ghana. As a result, it is certainly possible that the
        Applicant may belong to a particular social group in Ghana which is
        discriminated against to the point of persecution, either based  on
        discrimination in the delivery of health care,  or  the  cumulative
        effects of  other  sorts  of  discrimination,  including  "multiple
        discrimination, from the home, the community and society  at  large
        and in terms of allocation of resources and opportunities";


         In Liaqat v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)  2005
        FC 893,20  the  appellant  was  diagnosed  with  schizophrenia  and
        depression. At [13] he submitted mental illness is  an  innate  and
        unchangeable characteristic.  The Federal Court of Canada  at  [29]
        accepted the applicant's submission that:  "mental  illness  is  an
        innate and unchangeable characteristic', and that 'even though  its
        severity may fluctuate with treatment, the psychotic depression  is
        a fundamental underlying feature of the  Applicant's  psychological
        condition'.  In  Liaqat,  the  court  noted   that   the   Canadian
        Government:  'appears to concede that the Applicant is a member  of
        a particular social group because of his mental illness and I am in
        agreement  with  the  Respondent';  Liaqat  was  followed  by   the
        Immigration and Refugee Board (Refugee  Protection   Division),  in
        TA5-11242, 9 March 2007, at [8], [11].  It was also followed  in  X
        (Re), 2010 Can LII 97274 (CA IRB). At  [12],  the  panel  accepted:
        "that people who are diagnosed with schizophrenia form a particular
        social group"21;


        The USA: Several circuit courts have  recognised  disability  as  a
        PSG.  In Tchoukhrova v Gonzales, 404 F. 3d 1181,  1189  (9th  Cir.,
        2005),22 the Ninth Circuit noted, at [2] and  [3],  that:  "persons
        with disabilities are precisely the kind of  individuals  that  our
        asylum law contemplates by  the  words  "members  of  a  particular
        social  group.  While  not  all  disabilities   are   "innate"   or
        "inherent," in the sense  that  they  may  be  acquired,  they  are
        usually, unfortunately, "immutable." Id. at 1087,  1093;  see  also
        Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990,  Pub.  L.  No.  101-336  
        2(a)(7) codified at 42 U.S.C.   12101(a)(7)  ("[I]ndividuals  with
        disabilities are a discrete and  insular  minority  who  have  been
        faced with restrictions and limitations, subjected to a history  of
        purposeful unequal  treatment,  and  relegated  to  a  position  of
        political powerlessness  ...  based  on  characteristics  that  are
        beyond the control of such individuals ....").  Because  disability
        constitutes precisely the sort of "immutable  characteristic"  that
        an individual "cannot change," as contemplated by our law, we  have
        no trouble concluding that persons with disabilities can constitute
        a "particular social group" for  purposes of asylum and withholding
        of removal law;


        Similarly, in Kholyavskiy v Mukasey, 540 F. 3d 555, 573 (7th  Cir.,
        2008), the Seventh Circuit accepted  that  the  applicant's  mental
        illness was  an  immutable  characteristic  and  hence  capable  of
        constituting a  PSG:23.   As  noted  above,  the  IJ  and  the  BIA
        determined that Mr. Kholyavskiy's mental illness did not place  him
        in a particular social group because his mental illness was not  an
        "immutable" trait-a  conclusion  which  finds  no  support  in  the
        record. The BIA did not  consider  whether,  if  the  illness  were
        "immutable," Mr. Kholyavskiy's  condition  would  qualify  him  for
        membership in a particular social group";


        Further, the INS (as it then was) has recognized that '[i]n certain
        circumstances (...) persons with  HIV  or  AIDS  may  constitute  a
        particular social group under refugee  law'  (Karouni,  399  F.  3d
        1163, 1171 (9th Cir., 2005));


        Australia: Based on the 'social perception' test the Refugee Review
        Tribunal in 0807028 [2009]  RRTA  720  (11  August  2009)  held  at
        [116]:24 "The Tribunal accepts that people with a psychological  or
        mental  illness  comprise  a  group  which  is  identifiable  by  a
        characteristic or attribute common to all  members  of  the  group.
        That  common  attribute  or  characteristic  is  the  condition  of
        psychological  or  mental   illness.   The   possession   of   this
        characteristic is capable of distinguishing the group from  society
        at large. It follows, with reference to the judgment in Applicant S
        extracted above, that  people  with  a  psychological  illness  may
        comprise a particular  social  group  within  the  meaning  of  the
        Convention. It remains for the
        Tribunal to consider whether the applicant has a well-founded  fear
        of persecution for reason  of  his  membership  of  the  particular
        social group of people with a psychological or mental illness";


        Disability was accepted as the basis of a  PSG  in  Tonga:  1001704
        [2010] RRTA 407 (19 May 2010).


    97. The observations of Lord Brown in Fornah at [121] are apposite: "It
        would be most  unfortunate  if  the  jurisprudence  of  the  United
        Kingdom (out of step with that of most enlightened countries)  were
        available to support a narrow view of the  Convention's  protective
        reach."


The appeal of DH

    98. It is not disputed that the appellant in this appeal  suffers  from
        serious mental health issues and lacks litigation capacity.
    99. The appellant produced for the purposes of  the  appeal  hearing  a
        number of medical reports including an addendum report  written  by
        Dr Thomas, a Consultant Clinical Psychologist, dated 28 April  2019
        in which the 'Summary and Conclusion' section reads:


             90.  [DH] remains at re-examination a manner presenting  in  a
                  significantly chaotic  and  disturbed  manner.  Whilst  at
                  substantive  assessment  in  2015  it  was  impossible  to
                  ascertain clearly whether  this  was  merely  due  to  his
                  external situation of  street  homelessness,  reassessment
                  when he is no  longer  homeless  and  in  the  context  of
                  further documentary evidence,  makes  it  clear  that  his
                  concrete preoccupations with money, property, a girlfriend
                  etc. forms more a picture of psychiatric disturbance  than
                  mere environmental privatisation.


             91.  Whilst the precise nature of  [DH]  psychiatric  disorder
                  cannot, in my view, be accurately described currently  due
                  to his considerable capacity issues, I consider  it  clear
                  that he is suffering from a number of psychotic as well as
                  manic symptoms.  His  symptoms  of  Thought  Disorder  and
                  Delusional Beliefs I consider were particularly  prominent
                  in this assessment. I also consider that [DH] continues to
                  manifest with significant dissociative defensive phenomena
                  to  avoid  facing  the  pain  of  his  past  and   current
                  situation.


             92.  I again consider [DH] psychiatric  presentation  in  this
                  assessment to be plausible, consistent with  psychological
                  research evidence and the Istanbul Protocol  and  that  it
                  would have been extremely  difficult  to  fabricate  to  a
                  trained mental health professional.


             93.  I do  not  consider  that  [DH]  currently  has  capacity
                  according to the Mental Capacity Act of 2005 and concluded
                  that he  lacks  the  capacity  to  litigate  currently  in
                  addition to lacking capacity to manage many aspects of his
                  daily life and functioning. He requires both mental health
                  treatment and medication and a litigation friend to manage
                  his current legal proceedings. He does not  have  capacity
                  to give evidence.


             94.  In  the  event  [DH]  is  removed  from  the  UK  now,  I
                  anticipate that he will be at risk of further  psychiatric
                  deterioration for a number of reasons, largely relating to
                  lack of capacity (e.g. to  work,  find  accommodation,  be
                  self-supporting, seek social support). I  also  anticipate
                  that, based on information I have been given, he may be at
                  increased risk in  Afghanistan,  if  this  information  is
                  correct,  due  to  his  disinhibition  and  likelihood  of
                  presenting himself as being westernised.


   100. A further addendum report has been  provided  written  by  Dr  Lisa
        Wootton, a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, dated 1 February 2019.
         In Section 9 of that report, headed "Opinion and Recommendations",
        Dr Wootton writes:

             I have been instructed to address the following questions:


             Q1 The questions I have been instructed to answer  is  whether
             [DH] has capacity to instruct solicitors in his asylum appeal,
             bearing in mind the high threshold and taking into account:


                   . He was found during his recent inpatient  admission  to
                     have no diagnosable mental illness.
                   . He has some practical abilities, such as being able  to
                     travel from Leeds to London alone (with tickets  booked
                     for him and telephone guidance and his success  was  on
                     the second attempt).

                  a) I remain firmly of the  view  that  [DH]  does  have  a
                     mental  illness.  In  addition  to  the  evidence   and
                     concerns from various professionals which I have listed
                     in my previous reports I think there is  also  evidence
                     from his recent admission that he has a mental illness.
                  b) I have gone through the notes  from  his  admission  in
                     section 4 and include some  footnotes  there.  I  would
                     like to highlight:


                      i) 12 September 2018, he was referred by  Tracey  Webb
                         (social worker/AMHP/Adult Social Care) who  thought
                         his presentation was abnormal,  she  noted  thought
                         disorder and pressure of speech as  well  as  other
                         abnormalities in his presentation. She  thought  he
                         might  have  schizoaffective  disorder.   She   was
                         concerned about risk  and  she  thought  he  needed
                         assessment by the Community Mental Health Team.
                     ii) 20 September 2018, Dr Robinson (Section 12  Doctor)
                         noted   pressured   speech   and   formal   thought
                         disordered and wondered if he  had  hallucinations.
                         Their working diagnosis was "psychotic illness" and
                         she completed a recommendation for admission  under
                         Section  2  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983  (as
                         amended).
                    iii) 22 September  2018,  Ms  Gregory  (Approved  Mental
                         Health Professional) carried out a joint assessment
                         with Dr  Alderson  (Section  12  Doctor)  and  they
                         concluded he had thought  disorder  and  should  be
                         admitted under Section 2 for assessment. They  also
                         assessed  him  as  "clearly"  lacking  capacity  to
                         consent to admission. (The same document  indicates
                         that his public protection officer does  not  think
                         he understands the police's role and his  solicitor
                         does  not  think  he  understands  her  role.)   On
                         admission  he  was   documented   to   be   thought
                         disordered and preoccupied.  Dr  Ahmed  (Foundation
                         Year  2)  also  documented  pressured  speech   and
                         thought disorder.
                     iv) 23 September 2018, he was thought to be  responding
                         to hallucinations.
                      v) 24 September 2018, he was thought to be  responding
                         to hallucinations. He was seen by two  doctors  who
                         thought he was thought disordered and  had  limited
                         insight.
                     vi) 25 September he was thought  to  be  responding  to
                         hallucinations. He thought he was admitted  because
                         he was taking cigarettes from the bin.
                    vii) 29 September he was thought  to  be  responding  to
                         hallucinations.
                   viii) 2 October 2018, it remained difficult to follow his
                         train of thought but  this  was  now  put  down  to
                         language problems,  his  speech  was  described  as
                         pressured and he was described as agitated.


                  c) I would like to take this opportunity to review some of
                     what was written about [DH] in his social service notes
                     as I think  this  highlights  the  ways  in  which  his
                     presentation has changed:


                      i) "[DH] described as an  active  and  sociable  young
                         person who has  built  up  friendships  with  other
                         residents and local people."


                      He is now completely  isolated  with  no  friends  or
                      support network.


                     ii) "[DH]" is described  as  being  polite  and  has  a
                         desire to learn new things and is willing to listen
                         to advice. He presents as being a well balanced and
                         mature young person, who is  realistic  about  what
                         support is available to him."


                      He is now disinhibited, difficult to interrupt and  I
                      do not think anyone would describe him as polite.  He
                      does not listen to others or show an ability to learn
                      and he does not listen to advice or take in advice he
                      is given. He is not able to understand the  roles  of
                      those helping him and the support they are offering.


                    iii) "He has ambitions to go on to university and  is  a
                         diligent student."


                      It is impossible to imagine him as capable  of  going
                      to university at the current time and  his  cognitive
                      assessment put him in the learning disability range.


                     iv) "[DH] is coping well with the change of culture and
                         has friends who share his culture. He does not need
                         an advocate."


                      He does not have any friends now either from his  own
                      cultural   background   or   from   other    cultural
                      backgrounds.  He  has  been   assessed   in   lacking
                      incapacity.


                      v) "[DH] has demonstrated that he has  good  budgeting
                         skills  and  can   look   after   his   own   needs
                         independently."


                      He  has  become  homeless  and  needs  support   with
                      attending appointments and is not able  to  find  his
                      way around easily or proficiently.


                  d) While I accept that his presentation may be atypical, I
                     do not accept that he does not have a mental illness. I
                     have outlined his symptoms and the  concerns  of  other
                     professionals in my previous reports. A total  of  four
                     psychiatrists were of the view that he needed admission
                     under  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983   (amended)   for
                     assessment:  Dr   Aikaterini   Papaspirou   (Consultant
                     Forensic Psychiatrist), Dr Robinson (Section 12 Doctor)
                     Dr Alderton (Section 12 Doctor) and  me.  I  have  gone
                     through the notes from  that  admission  (when  he  was
                     deemed not to  have  a  "diagnosable  mental  illness")
                     carefully in section 4. It appears clear to me that  he
                     did present with symptoms during that  admission  which
                     were  documented  by  a  multitude   of   professionals
                     including doctors. His symptoms  during  the  admission
                     included  thought  disorder,   pressured   speech   and
                     hallucinations  which  would  support  a  diagnosis  of
                     mental illness. Dr  Mahmood  (Consultant  Psychiatrist)
                     concluded he did not have a mental illness. However, Dr
                     Mahmood does not appear to have had/considered  all  of
                     the relevant information. In  particular  he  does  not
                     appear to have been aware of the reports of  him  being
                     observed to appear to be responding to  hallucinations.
                     In addition he does not appear to have considered  what
                     could have caused the marked  decline  in  [DH]  mental
                     state from the time of the social services notes to the
                     time of his admission. Of more concern, he  appears  to
                     have  attributed  [DH]  admission   to   [DH]   seeking
                     secondary gain in the form of avoiding attending  court
                     and getting help with his legal and financial  problems
                     (see entry on 01 October 2018). This seems a  ludicrous
                     suggestion given [DH] did not want to  be  admitted  to
                     hospital and had to be detained under the Mental Health
                     Act 1983 (as amended) in order to enable his admission.
                     In addition it  is  well  established  that  [DH]  asks
                     everyone to help with his legal and financial  problems
                     and has been concluded to be reflection of his lack  of
                     understanding and disorganised  thinking.  I  think  he
                     would now  benefit  from  a  trial  of  treatment  with
                     antipsychotic medication (which he has  never  had)  in
                     order to assess his response to treatment.
                  e) Irrespective of whether he has  a  "diagnosable  mental
                     illness", he can still lack capacity. The criteria  for
                     the Mental Capacity Act (2005) is an impairment of  all
                     disturbance in the functioning of, the person's mind or
                     brain. In this case this could  be  due  to  individual
                     symptoms such as thought disorder as indicated  on  the
                     capacity  assessment  compiled  by  Dr   Alderton   (22
                     September 2018).
                  f) Capacity is also decision specific and therefore, it is
                     possible to have  capacity  in  one  area  but  not  in
                     another.  Therefore,  he  may  have  capacity  to  make
                     decisions about travel and where to  live  but  not  in
                     relation to his asylum appeal case. I  accept  that  he
                     does have some practical abilities. However, I  do  not
                     think these should be overestimated. I note that he  is
                     no  longer  managing  to  live  independently  and   is
                     currently homeless. The reasons for  this  are  unclear
                     and therefore I cannot comment on them. He is  able  to
                     travel to London but he is not able to  travel  by  the
                     most direct route. He was able  to  explain  about  his
                     September 2018 offence and punishment. He was  able  to
                     tell me  his  daily  routine,  in  which  she  accesses
                     services  from  a  couple  of  places.  Despite   these
                     abilities, a number of people  have  expressed  concern
                     about his capacity in a  number  of  other  areas  (for
                     example  his  capacity  to  consent  to  admission   to
                     hospital capacity  to  understand  his  obligations  in
                     relation to  the  Sex  Offenders  Register).  I  cannot
                     comment on his ability to  participate  in  a  criminal
                     hearing that took place in or around 13 September  2018
                     as I do not have the details of this.
                  g) When I assessed him on 23 January  2018,  I  found  his
                     mental  state  to   be   grossly   abnormal.   He   was
                     overfamiliar (trying to give me a hug), he had pressure
                     of speech and he was extremely  thought  disordered.  I
                     also think he had auditory hallucinations  although  he
                     does not  describe  them  as  such  (because  he  lacks
                     insight).
                  h) In terms of the specific assessment of his capacity  to
                     conduct these proceedings (and bearing in mind the high
                     threshold):


                     i) is there an impairment of  all  disturbance  in  the
                     functioning of, the person's mind or brain?


                     Yes, there is a disturbance in the functioning  of  his
                     mind.  He  has  been  assessed  as  being   cognitively
                     impaired. He has pressure of speech, thought  disorder,
                     disinhibition and likely hallucinations. I still  think
                     this is most likely to be schizoaffective disorder.


                     ii) [DH] was not able to explain to me the  details  of
                     his asylum appeal case.  He  did  not  appear  to  have
                     retained information he had previously been given about
                     his case. Although I tried to discuss his case with him
                     and give him information,  he  remained  focused  on  a
                     limited range (of sometimes  irrelevant)  subjects  and
                     was repetitive in  relation  to  these.  He  was  often
                     unable to provide coherent and relevant answers  to  my
                     questions. It was very difficult/impossible to  have  a
                     reciprocal and meaningful dialogue with him. He was not
                     able to take in any new/relevant information and  weigh
                     it against his own preoccupations.


                     iii) It is therefore my opinion that [DH] is unable  to
                     understand  the  necessary  information   about   these
                     proceedings in order to make  decisions.  He  does  not
                     appear to have retained the  information  he  has  been
                     given about the proceedings. He is not  able  to  weigh
                     this information. He also has significant  difficulties
                     with communication (due to  his  pressured  speech  and
                     thought disorder). His  problems  were  so  significant
                     when I saw him that I did not think he could  give  any
                     meaningful instructions. With assistance he is able  to
                     be consulted but only in a very  limited  capacity  and
                     not the necessary extent.


                     iv) I conclude he lacks capacity to  conduct  of  these
                   proceedings.


                   v) Irrespective of him lacking capacity effort should  be
                      made to involve him in the process  and  to  establish
                      his wishes as much as possible.


   101. In a case such as this where there is no specific diagnosis but  in
        which the appellant clearly has a serious mental illness it will be
        contrary to the purpose of  the  Refugee  Convention  to  say  this
        defeats his claim. The reason the medical experts have been  unable
        to engage with the appellant and conclude such a diagnosis is as  a
        result of his mental health problems. The  above  UNHCR  definition
        makes  the  innate  immutable  characteristic  test  part  of   the
        assessment but does not  exclude  a  person  from  the  benefit  of
        protection   if,   for   understandable   reasons,   an   immutable
        characteristic cannot be established but they are able  to  satisfy
        other aspects of the test.
   102. Persons with mental disabilities can fall within the "social group"
        category and, thus, should qualify for refugee protection  if  they
        face a real risk of "persecution" on account  of  their  disability
        from which the state cannot or will not provide protection. This is
        a fact sensitive question.
   103. The appellant also relied on the written opinions of three  country
        experts.  According to the country expert, Dr Mehdi Hakim:

             7.1   A's  mental  health  challenges  and  history  of  sexual
                  disinhibition and alcohol/drug abuse raise the likelihood
                  of A being charged. The kind  of  sexually  inappropriate
                  behaviour which led to his convictions in 2016  and  2018
                  in the UK means he could be imprisoned  for  six  months.
                  Whilst  the  penal  code  contains  provisions   limiting
                  criminal responsibility in the case of  people  who  lack
                  mental capacity [94], practice may be different. There is
                  a reasonable degree of likelihood of A  being  beaten  up
                  [95];
             7.2  Some transgressions such as  drinking  alcohol  are  dealt
                  with according to interpretations of  Islamic  law  which
                  can result in floggings [95];
             7.3  There is strong social stigma attached to  mental  illness
                  and it is sometimes  attributed  to  being  possessed  by
                  demons, leading to individuals being chained up or locked
                  in a cage [95];


          8.  According to the expert report of Dr. Ritu Mahendru:


             7.1   Afghan   society   holds   deeply-embedded   stigma   and
                  discrimination against  individuals  with  mental  health
                  problems [96];
             7.2  There is a lack of institutional protection [96];
             7.3  From her experience of  working  in  Afghanistan  men  who
             perform any kind of
                  sexual act in public, including masturbation and fondling
                  of body parts, would be at high risk of physical violence
                  from  mob  mentality  [96];        In  Afghanistan,   she
                  witnessed men with mental health  problems  being  pelted
                  with stones in broad daylight [96].


   104. In this appeal as a result of DH's mental health, the acceptance by
        Mr Diwnycz of the manner in which  that  manifests  itself  in  his
        actions, country guidance case law for Afghanistan,  acceptance  of
        the consequences for DH if he acts in the manner he has in  the  UK
        on return to Afghanistan (where his mental health will  deteriorate
        further), the acceptance that the ill treatment  DH  is  likely  to
        experience will satisfy the definition of  persecution  from  which
        there is a lack  of  effective  protection  or  treatment  for  the
        appellant in Afghanistan, I find the answer to the  question  posed
        by Mr Bandegani, whether the appellant is a member of a  PSG  as  a
        result of his mental  health  who  is  the  subject  of  prohibited
        treatment  due  to  the  same,  who  will  face  a  real  risk   of
        encountering such treatment on return to Afghanistan,  such  as  to
        entitle him to be recognised as a refugee,  is  "yes".  Accordingly
        the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Decision

   105. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 June 2020






                                   Annex A


                                                                      Distr.
                                                                     GENERAL

                                                               HCR/GIP/02/02
                                                                  7 May 2002


                                        Original: ENGLISH




               GUIDELINES ON INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION:
         "Membership of a particular social group" within the context
      of Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention and/or its 1967 Protocol
                     relating to the Status of Refugees


          UNHCR  issues  these  Guidelines  pursuant  to  its  mandate,   as
          contained in the Statute of the Office of the United Nations  High
          Commissioner for Refugees, and Article 35 of the  1951  Convention
          relating to the Status  of  Refugees  and/or  its  1967  Protocol.
          These Guidelines complement the UNHCR Handbook on  Procedures  and
          Criteria for Determining Refugee Status under the 1951  Convention
          and  the  1967  Protocol  relating  to  the  Status  of   Refugees
          (Reedited,  Geneva,  January  1992).    They   further   supersede
          IOM/132/1989 - FOM/110/1989  Membership  of  a  Particular  Social
          Group (UNHCR, Geneva, 12  December  1989),  and  result  from  the
          Second  Track  of  the  Global  Consultations   on   International
          Protection process which  examined  this  subject  at  its  expert
          meeting in San Remo in September 2001.

          These Guidelines are  intended  to  provide  legal  interpretative
          guidance for governments, legal practitioners, decision-makers and
          the judiciary, as well as UNHCR staff carrying out refugee  status
          determinations in the field.

                   "Membership of a  particular  social  group"  within  the
                    context of Article 1A(2) of the 1951  Convention  and/or
                    its 1967 Protocol   relating to the Status of Refugees

          I.  INTRODUCTION

          1.  "Membership of a particular social group" is one of  the  five
             grounds enumerated in Article  1A(2)  of  the  1951  Convention
             relating to the Status of Refugees ("1951 Convention").  It  is
             the ground with the least clarity and it is not defined by  the
             1951 Convention itself.  It is being  invoked  with  increasing
             frequency in refugee status determinations, with States
             having recognised women, families, tribes, occupational groups,
             and homosexuals, as constituting a particular social group  for
             the purposes of the 1951  Convention.  The  evolution  of  this
             ground has advanced the understanding of the refugee definition
             as a whole.   These  Guidelines  provide  legal  interpretative
             guidance on assessing claims which assert that a claimant has a
             well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of his or
             her membership of a particular social group.


          2.  While the  ground  needs  delimiting-that  is,  it  cannot  be
             interpreted  to  render  the  other  four  Convention  grounds
             superfluous-a proper interpretation must  be  consistent  with
             the object and purpose of the Convention.  1  Consistent  with
             the language  of  the  Convention,  this  category  cannot  be
             interpreted as a "catch  all"  that  applies  to  all  persons
             fearing persecution.  Thus,  to  preserve  the  structure  and
             integrity of the  Convention's  definition  of  a  refugee,  a
             social group cannot be defined exclusively by the fact that it
             is targeted for persecution  (although,  as  discussed  below,
             persecution may be  a  relevant  element  in  determining  the
             visibility of a particular social group).

          3.  There is no "closed list" of  what  groups  may  constitute  a
             "particular social group" within the meaning of Article  1A(2).
             The Convention includes no specific list of social groups,  nor
             does the ratifying history reflect a view that there is  a  set
             of identified groups that  might  qualify  under  this  ground.
             Rather, the term membership of a particular social group should
             be read in an evolutionary manner,  open  to  the  diverse  and
             changing nature of
             groups in various societies and  evolving  international  human
             rights norms.

          4.   The  Convention  grounds  are  not  mutually  exclusive.   An
             applicant may be eligible for refugee status  under  more  than
             one  of  the  grounds  identified  in  Article  1A(2).2     For
             example,  a  claimant  may  allege  that  she  is  at  risk  of
             persecution  because  of  her  refusal  to   wear   traditional
             clothing.  Depending on the  particular  circumstances  of  the
             society, she  may  be  able  to  establish  a  claim  based  on
             political opinion (if her conduct is viewed by the
             State as a political statement  that  it  seeks  to  suppress),
             religion (if her conduct is based  on  a  religious  conviction
             opposed by the State) or  membership  in  a  particular  social
             group.

          II.  SUBSTANTIVE ANALYSIS

          A.  Summary of State Practice

          5.  Judicial decisions, regulations, policies, and practices  have
             utilized varying interpretations of what constitutes  a  social
             group within the meaning of the 1951 Convention. Two approaches
             have dominated decision-making  in  common  law  jurisdictions.



          6.      The  first,  the  "protected   characteristics"   approach
             (sometimes      referred to as  an  "immutability"  approach),
             examines  whether  a  group  is   united   by   an   immutable
             characteristic or by a characteristic that is  so  fundamental
             to human dignity that a person  should  not  be  compelled  to
             forsake it.  An immutable characteristic may be  innate  (such
             as sex or ethnicity) or unalterable for other reasons (such as
             the historical fact  of  a  past  association,  occupation  or
             status).     Human  rights  norms   may   help   to   identify
             characteristics deemed so fundamental to  human  dignity  that
             one ought not to be compelled to  forego  them.   A  decision-
             maker  adopting  this  approach  would  examine  whether   the
             asserted group is defined:  (1)  by  an  innate,  unchangeable
             characteristic, (2) by a past temporary  or  voluntary  status
             that is unchangeable because of its historical permanence,  or
             (3) by a characteristic or association that is so  fundamental
             to human dignity that group members should not be compelled to
             forsake  it.        Applying   this   approach,   courts   and
             administrative  bodies  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions  have
             concluded that women, homosexuals, and families, for  example,
             can constitute a particular social group within the meaning of
             Article 1A(2).

          7.  The second approach examines whether or not a group  shares  a
             common characteristic which makes them a  cognizable  group  or
             sets them apart from society at large. This has  been  referred
             to  as  the  "social  perception"  approach.     Again,  women,
             families  and  homosexuals  have  been  recognized  under  this
             analysis  as  particular  social  groups,  depending   on   the
             circumstances of the society in which they exist.

          8.  In civil law jurisdictions, the particular social group ground
             is generally less well developed.  Most  decision-makers  place
             more emphasis on whether or not a risk  of  persecution  exists
             than on the standard for defining a  particular  social  group.
             Nonetheless, both the protected characteristics and the  social
             perception approaches have received mention.

          9.  Analyses under the two  approaches  may  frequently  converge.
             This is so because groups whose members are targeted based on a
             common immutable or fundamental characteristic are  also  often
             perceived as a social group in their societies.  But  at  times
             the approaches may reach different results.  For  example,  the
             social perception standard


          1 See Summary Conclusions - Membership of a Particular Social
          Group, Global Consultations on
          International Protection, San Remo Expert Roundtable, 6-8
          September 2001, no.2 ("Summary
          Conclusions - Membership of a Particular Social Group").
          2 See UNHCR's Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for Determining
          Refugee Status under the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol
          relating to the Status of Refugees (Reedited, Geneva, January
          1992), paragraphs 66-67, 77; and see also Summary Conclusions -
          Membership of a Particular Social Group, no.3.  might recognize as
          social groups associations based on a characteristic that is
          neither immutable nor fundamental to human dignity-such as,
          perhaps, occupation or social class.


          B.  UNHCR's Definition

          10. Given the varying approaches, and the  protection  gaps  which
             can result, UNHCR believes that the two approaches ought to  be
             reconciled.

          11. The protected characteristics approach may  be  understood  to
             identify a set of groups that constitute the core of the social
             perception analysis.  Accordingly, it is appropriate to adopt a
             single standard that incorporates both dominant approaches:

             a particular social group is a group of  persons  who  share  a
             common  characteristic  other  than   their   risk   of   being
             persecuted, or who are perceived as a group  by  society.   The
             characteristic will often be one which is innate, unchangeable,
             or which is otherwise fundamental to  identity,  conscience  or
             the exercise of one's human rights.

          12. This definition includes characteristics which are  historical
             and therefore cannot be changed, and those which, though it  is
             possible to change them, ought not to be required to be changed
             because they are so closely  linked  to  the  identity  of  the
             person or are an expression of fundamental  human  rights.   It
             follows that sex can properly be within the ambit of the social
             group category, with women being a clear example  of  a  social
             subset defined by innate and immutable characteristics, and who
             are frequently treated
             differently to men.3
          13. If a claimant alleges a  social  group  that  is  based  on  a
             characteristic  determined  to  be   neither   unalterable   or
             fundamental, further analysis should be undertaken to determine
             whether the group is  nonetheless  perceived  as  a  cognizable
             group in that society.  So, for example, if it were  determined
             that owning a shop or participating in a certain occupation  in
             a particular society is neither unchangeable nor a  fundamental
             aspect  of  human  identity,  a  shopkeeper  or  members  of  a
             particular profession might nonetheless constitute a particular
             social group if in the society they are recognized as  a  group
             which sets them apart.

          The role of persecution

          14. As noted above, a particular social group  cannot  be  defined
             exclusively by the persecution that members of the group suffer
             or  by  a  common  fear  of  being  persecuted.    Nonetheless,
             persecutory action toward a group may be a relevant  factor  in
             determining the visibility of a group in a particular society.4
             To use an  example  from  a  widely  cited  decision,  "[W]hile
             persecutory conduct cannot define the social group, the actions
             of the persecutors may serve to  identify  or  even  cause  the
             creation of a particular  social  group  in  society.     Left-
             handed men are not a particular social group.    But,  if  they
             were persecuted because they were left-handed,  they  would  no
             doubt  quickly  become  recognizable  in  their  society  as  a
             particular social group.  Their  persecution  for  being  left-
             handed would create  a  public  perception  that  they  were  a
             particular social group.  But it  would  be  the  attribute  of
             being left-handed and  not  the  persecutory  acts  that  would
             identify them as a particular social group." 5

          No requirement of cohesiveness

          15. It is widely accepted in State practice that an applicant need
             not show that the members of a particular group know each other
             or associate with each other as a group.  That is, there is  no
             requirement that the group be "cohesive."6 The relevant inquiry
             is whether there is a common element that group members  share.
             This  is  similar  to  the  analysis  adopted  for  the   other
             Convention grounds, where there is no requirement that  members

             of a religion or  holders  of  a  political  opinion  associate
             together, or belong to a  "cohesive"  group.   Thus  women  may
             constitute   a   particular   social   group   under    certain
             circumstances  based  on  the  common  characteristic  of  sex,
             whether or not they associate with one another  based  on  that
             shared characteristic.

          16. In addition, mere membership of a particular social group will
             not normally be enough  to  substantiate  a  claim  to  refugee
             status.  There may, however,  be  special  circumstances  where
             mere  membership  can  be   a   sufficient   ground   to   fear
             persecution.7


          3 For more information on gender-related claims, see UNHCR's
          Guidelines on International Protection:
          Gender-Related Persecution within the Context of Article 1A(2) of
          the 1951 Convention and/or its 1967  Protocol relating to the
          Status of Refugees (HCR/GIP/02/01, 10 May 2002), as well as
          Summary

          Not all members of the group must be at risk of being persecuted

          17. An applicant need  not  demonstrate  that  all  members  of  a
             particular social group are at risk of persecution in order  to
             establish the existence of a particular social group.8 As  with
             the other grounds, it is not necessary to  establish  that  all
             persons in the  political  party  or  ethnic  group  have  been
             singled out for persecution.  Certain members of the group  may
             not be  at  risk  if,  for  example,  they  hide  their  shared
             characteristic, they are not known to the persecutors, or  they
             cooperate with the persecutor.

          Relevance of size



          18. The size of the purported  social  group  is  not  a  relevant
             criterion in determining  whether  a  particular  social  group
             exists within the meaning of Article 1A(2).  This  is  true  as
             well for cases arising under the other Convention grounds.  For
             example, States may seek to  suppress  religious  or  political
             ideologies that are widely shared among members of a
             particular  society-perhaps  even  by   a   majority   of   the
             population;  the  fact  that  large  numbers  of  persons  risk
             persecution  cannot  be  a  ground  for  refusing   to   extend
             international protection where it is otherwise appropriate.

          19. Cases in a number of jurisdictions have recognized "women" as
             a particular social group. This does not mean  that  all  women
             in the society qualify for refugee  status.   A  claimant  must
             still demonstrate  a  well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted
             based on her membership in the particular social group, not  be
             within one of the exclusion grounds, and  meet  other  relevant
             criteria.

          Non-State actors and the causal link ("for reasons of")

          20. Cases asserting  refugee  status  based  on  membership  of  a
             particular social group frequently involve claimants  who  face
             risks of harm at the hands of non-State actors, and which  have
             involved  an  analysis  of  the  causal  link.   For   example,
             homosexuals may be victims of  violence  from  private  groups;
             women may risk abuse from their husbands or partners.     Under
             the Convention a person must have a well-founded fear of  being
             persecuted and that fear of being persecuted must be  based  on
             one (or more) of the
             Convention grounds. There is no requirement that the persecutor
             be a  State  actor.   Where  serious  discriminatory  or  other
             offensive acts committed by the local  populace,  they  can  be
             considered as persecution if they are  knowingly  tolerated  by
             the authorities, or if the authorities refuse, or prove unable,
             to offer effective protection.9


          21. Normally, an applicant will allege that the person  inflicting
             or threatening the harm is  acting  for  one  of  the  reasons
             identified in  the  Convention.   So,  if  a  non-State  actor
             inflicts or threatens persecution based on a Convention ground
             and the State is unwilling or unable to protect the  claimant,
             then the causal link has been established.  That is, the  harm
             is being visited upon the victim for reasons of  a  Convention
             ground.

          22. There may also arise situations where a claimant may be unable
             to show that the harm inflicted or threatened by the  non-State
             actor is related to one of the five grounds.  For  example,  in
             the situation of domestic abuse, a wife may not always be  able
             to establish that her husband  is  abusing  her  based  on  her
             membership in  a  social  group,  political  opinion  or  other
             Convention ground. Nonetheless, if the State  is  unwilling  to
             extend
             protection based on one of the five grounds, then  she  may  be
             able to establish a valid claim for refugee status:   the  harm
             visited upon her  by  her  husband  is  based  on  the  State's
             unwillingness to  protect  her  for  reasons  of  a  Convention
             ground.

          23. This reasoning may be summarized as follows.  The causal  link
             may be satisfied: (1) where there  is  a  real  risk  of  being
             persecuted at the hands of a non-State actor for reasons  which
             are related to one of the Convention grounds,  whether  or  not
             the failure of the State to protect the claimant is  Convention
             related; or (2) where the risk of being
             persecuted at the hands of a non-State actor is unrelated to  a
             Convention ground, but the inability or  unwillingness  of  the
             State to offer protection is for a Convention reason.

          Conclusions of the Expert Roundtable on Gender-Related
          Persecution, San Remo, 6-8 September
          2001, no.5.
          4 See Summary Conclusions - Membership of a Particular Social
          Group, no.6.
          5 McHugh, J., in Applicant A v. Minister for Immigration and
          Ethnic Affairs, (1997) 190 CLR 225, 264,
          142 ALR 331.
          6 See Summary Conclusions - Membership of a Particular Social
          Group, no.4.
          7 See UNHCR's Handbook, paragraph79.
          8 See Summary Conclusions - Membership of a Particular Social
          Group, no.7.
          9 See UNHCR's Handbook, paragraph 65.








