
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

R (on the application of BAA and Another) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (Dublin III: judicial review; SoS's duties) [2020] UKUT 00227
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype for Business    |Judgment promulgated          |
|On 21 and 22 May 2020                         |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the application of
                 BAA (a child by his litigation friend, taa)
                                     TAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicants:    Ms M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Bhatt Murphy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masood, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                  Legal Department

(1) Article 17(2) of Regulation 604/2013 of the European Parliament  and  of
the Council ("Dublin III")  confers  a  discretion  on  a  Member  State  to
examine an application for  international  protection  "in  order  to  bring
together any family relations, on humanitarian grounds, based on  family  or
cultural considerations".  Although  the  discretion  is  wide,  it  is  not
untrammelled: R (HA & others) (Dublin III; Articles 9 and 17.2) [2018]  UKUT
297 (IAC). As in the case of any other discretionary power of the  Secretary
of State in the immigration field, Article 17(2) must  be  exercised  in  an
individual's favour, where to do otherwise  would  breach  the  individual's
human rights (or those of some other person), contrary to section 6  of  the
Human Rights Act 1998.

(2) The Secretary of State's Article  17(2)  decisions  are  susceptible  to
"ordinary"  or  "conventional"  judicial  review  principles,  of  the  kind
described by Beatson  LJ  in  ZT  (Syria)  v  SSHD  [2016]  1  WLR  4894  as
"propriety  of  purpose,  relevancy  of  considerations  and  the   longstop
Wednesbury unreasonableness category" (para 85).

(3) Where a judicial review challenge involves an  allegation  of  violation
of an ECHR right, such as Article 8, it is now an established  principle  of
domestic United Kingdom law that the court or tribunal  must  make  its  own
assessment of the lawfulness of the decision, in human rights terms. If,  in
order to make that assessment, the court or tribunal needs to make  findings
of fact, it must do so.

(4)  Nothing in paragraphs (1) to (3) above is  dependent  upon  Article  27
(remedies) of Dublin III applying to the facts of  the  case.  Nevertheless,
what the Upper Tribunal held in R (MS) (Dublin  III;  duty  to  investigate)
[2019] UKUT 9 (IAC) regarding  the  scope  of  Article  27  is  correct  and
nothing in the Court  of  Appeal  judgments  in  MS  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1340
suggests otherwise. The reference to a "transfer  decision"  in  Article  27
encompasses a refusal to  take  charge  of  a  Dublin  III  applicant.  That
includes a refusal to take charge under Article 17(2).

(5)  It would be  remarkable  if  the  Secretary  of  State's  investigatory
responsibilities were materially narrower in an  Article  17(2)  case  which
concerns an unaccompanied minor and his or her  best  interests,  than  they
would be in respect of any  other  take-charge  request  under  Dublin  III.
Where the  request  under  Article  17(2)  raises  issues  that  involve  an
asserted family life within Article 8  ECHR/Article  7  of  the  Charter  of
Fundamental Rights, then, in the normal course of events, the  Secretary  of
State's  degree  of  engagement  with  the  relevant  United  Kingdom  local
authority should be no less than in the  case  of  any  other  unaccompanied
minor, where the take-charge request is made under Article 8 of  Dublin  III
on the basis that the relation in the United  Kingdom  is  a  sibling  or  a
"family member" or "relative" as defined.

(6) Even in Article 17(2) cases, the principles of procedural  fairness  may
mean that the Secretary of State may be required to  provide  an  indication
or gist to an applicant or his alleged United Kingdom relation,  of  matters
of concern that may lead to a refusal to take charge of the applicant:  R  v
SSHD ex parte Fayed [1998] 1 WLR 763; R (Balajigari) v  SSHD  [2019]  1  WLR
4647. This is, however, an area where one cannot  lay  down  hard  and  fast
rules. Even where Article 8 ECHR  is  in  play,  there  may  be  exceptions.
Furthermore, the process must not become so elaborate as to defeat  the  aim
of expeditious decision-making, particularly where  the  best  interests  of
minors are concerned.

(7) The references  to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the  Secretary  of
State's Dublin III Guidance (18 April  2019)  do  not  render  the  Guidance
unlawful. Those working in the  immigration  field  know  that  the  use  of
"exceptional" in the context of Article 8 ECHR is not to be used as  setting
a particular (high) threshold but, rather, as predictive of the  outcome  of
the application of the principles of  proportionality  to  the  facts  of  a
particular case. Nothing in the Guidance  suggests  its  author  is  telling
caseworkers to do anything other than follow the settled law on this topic.





                                  JUDGMENT

   Covid-19: This judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the
 parties' representatives by email, release to BAILII and publication on the
 Courts and Tribunals Judiciary website. The date and time for hand-down is
               deemed to be 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday 23 June 2020



A.  INTRODUCTION

 1. The first applicant, BAA  ("A1")  is  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    child (now aged 17).  He left Syria, the country  of  his  nationality,
    making his way to Greece, where he currently resides in a hostel.

 2. A1 claimed asylum in Greece.  He told the authorities there that he had
    been forcibly recruited at the age of 13 to fight with the Kurdish Army
    against ISIS.  A1 said he was ill-treated by the Kurdish Forces.

 3. On 7 October 2019, Greece requested the United Kingdom to  take  charge
    of A1's asylum claim, pursuant to Article 17(2) of Regulation  604/2013
    of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  (the  Dublin  III
    Regulation).  The request stated that A1's cousin, TAA  ("A2")  resides
    in the United Kingdom and that A1 wished to be reunited with him.

 4. The respondent refused Greece's request on  5  November  2019.   Greece
    asked the respondent to reconsider.  Having  done  so,  the  respondent
    again refused on 16 January 2020  to  exercise  her  discretion  under
    Article 17(2).  Greece made a further request for reconsideration.  The
    respondent considered that this request was  not  formally  within  the
    scope of the Dublin  III  Regime.  The  respondent  told  Greece  "your
    request for re-examination is an invalid request. Nonetheless,  the  UK
    has taken this opportunity to consider the evidence provided to her and
    reassess her previous decisions to date in the form of a  supplementary
    response". The outcome was, however, that the respondent refused  again
    to take responsibility pursuant to Article 17(2) for the  consideration
    of A1's asylum claim and, thus, for A1 to be transferred to the  United
    Kingdom for that purpose.

 5. On 3 February 2020, the applicants filed an  application  for  judicial
    review of the respondent's decisions of November 2019 and January 2020.
     Permission to bring judicial review proceedings  was  granted  by  the
    Upper  Tribunal  on  18  March  2020.   By  consent,  the  grounds   of
    application were subsequently amended in order to encompass a challenge
    to the respondent's decision of April 2020.

 6. Certain other elements of the amended grounds were not  agreed  by  the
    respondent but, by order dated  4  May  2020,  I  gave  the  applicants
    permission to rely upon the amended grounds, as submitted.

B.  THE HEARING

 7. The hearing took place on 21 and 22 May 2020, by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. I conducted the hearing from court 4 at Field House. Counsel,
    A2 and members of the public  attended  remotely  via  video.  Although
    there were some intermittent issues  regarding  sound  on  21  May,  no
    substantial technical problems were encountered during the hearing  and
    I am satisfied counsel were able to make their respective cases by  the
    chosen means. I am grateful  to  Ms  Knorr  and  Ms  Masood  for  their
    detailed and clear oral and written submissions.

 8. At the hearing, Ms Knorr, on behalf  of  the  applicants,  applied  for
    permission to adduce  a  witness  statement  of  A2  (who  had  already
    produced two such statements).  This latest statement seeks to  address
    two matters: the contention in Ms Masood's skeleton  argument  that  A2
    had met A1 for the first time in Greece in June 2019; and that  A1  was
    recorded by the Greek authorities as saying that A1  was  2  years  old
    when A2 left Syria.

 9. For the respondent, Ms Masood objected  to  the  introduction  of  A2's
    third statement.  I decided de bene esse to admit this statement and to
    rule later on its admissibility.

10. Ms Masood applied for permission  to  adduce  a  supplementary  witness
    statement of Ms Julia Farman of the European Intake Unit, UK Visas  and
    Immigration, in which Ms Farman seeks to explain the policy of the EIU,
    with regard to requests under Article 17(2) on whether and, if so, when
    the EIU would  request  a  family  assessment  from  a  relevant  local
    authority in the United Kingdom.  Although Ms Knorr  did  not  formally
    object to the admission  of  Ms  Farman's  supplementary  statement,  I
    decided to treat it in the same way as the third witness  statement  of
    A2.

11. In the event I decided to admit both statements.  Whilst  cognisant  of
    the need to maintain the  requisite  degree  of  procedural  rigour  in
    judicial review proceedings, I decided to admit the statements, in  the
    light of my conclusion that Article 27 of Dublin III applies, so as  to
    ensure that the requirements of EU Law for the proceedings  to  provide
    an "effective remedy" for proper compliance with Dublin III; but  that,
    in any event, the proceedings involve the determination of human rights
    within the ambit  of  ECHR  Article  8/Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights
    Article 7.  I concluded that neither the applicants nor the  respondent
    were, thereby, placed at any procedural disadvantage.

C.  LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE

12. The Annex to this judgment sets out  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Dublin III Regulation, the two Implementing Regulations  and  the  Home
    Office Guidance on Dublin III.

D.  LEGAL ISSUES

13. Before embarking  upon  an  examination  of  the  detailed  grounds  of
    challenge to each of the three  decisions  of  the  respondent,  it  is
    necessary to address a number of general issues.

(1) The nature of Article 17(2) and its place within the Dublin III system

14. Article 7 of Dublin III establishes a hierarchy of  criteria.   At  the
    top of that hierarchy sit unaccompanied  minors.   Article  8  provides
    that where a family member or a sibling of the unaccompanied  minor  is
    legally present in a Member State, it is that Member State which  shall
    be responsible for examining the minor's application for  international
    protection.  "Family members" are  defined  by  Article  2.  Article  8
    provides that it must be in the best interests of the minor to have his
    or her claim examined by the Member State in which such a family member
    or sibling is legally present.

15.  Article  8(2)  places  responsibility  (again,  subject  to  the  best
    interests of the minor) on the State in which  a  relative  is  legally
    present, where that relative can take care of  the  minor.   Article  2
    defines  "relative"  as  the  applicant's  adult  aunt  or   uncle   or
    grandparent (subject to certain procedural requirements).

16. The effect of Article 8(4) is that, in the absence of a family  member,
    sibling or relative, the Member State responsible for  the  examination
    of the minor's application for international protection  shall  be  the
    one where the unaccompanied minor has lodged their application;  again,
    provided that is in the best interests of the minor.

17. Importantly, as Ms Knorr points out, Article 8(4) departs significantly
    from the mechanism of Dublin III, as it applies to adults, in  that  an
    unaccompanied minor who has been present in  Member  State  A  but  who
    travels to Member State B  and  makes  an  application  there,  is  not
    subject to any general requirement to return to Member State A in order
    to have the application considered.

18. Article 17(2) concerns a request by one Member  State  to  another  for
    that other Member State  to  exercise  its  discretion  to  examine  an
    application for international protection, whether made by  a  minor  or
    adult,  "in  order  to  bring  together  any   family   relations,   on
    humanitarian  grounds  based  in  particular  on  family  or   cultural
    considerations".   This  judicial  review   is   concerned   with   the
    respondent's decision-making under Article 17(2).

19. The expression "family relations" is undefined in Dublin  III.   It  is
    clearly wider than "family members" and "relative".  It does,  however,
    require there to be some relationship that is of a "family", as opposed
    to merely a social, nature.  This is so, even though Article 17(2) goes
    on to speak about the humanitarian grounds for  bringing  together  the
    family relations being based on "family or cultural considerations".

20. The words "even where that other Member State is not responsible  under
    ... Articles 8 to 11 and 16"  make  it  plain  that,  although  "family
    relations" can include "family members" and "relatives", Article  17(2)
    is not to be invoked in their cases, since  they  are  covered  in  the
    hierarchy set out in those other Articles.

21. Unlike Articles 8 to 11 and 16, where, subject to  the  best  interests
    requirement, the presence in an EU  State  of  "family  members"  or  a
    "relative" is legally  determinative  of  that  State's  obligation  to
    examine an asylum claim, in the case of Article 17(2),  the  obligation
    of examination does not arise unless and until the EU State decides  to
    exercise its discretion and become responsible.

22. What this means is that the other provisions  of  Dublin  III  and  the
    Implementing Regulations are relevant in an Article 17(2) case, only to
    the extent that those provisions  do  not  concern  the  mechanism  for
    establishing pre-existing responsibility.  As a result, the  provisions
    which deal with the identification, etc of family members, siblings  or
    relatives have no application to Article 17(2).

23. Thus, contrary to  Ms  Knorr's  submission,  Article  3  of  the  First
    Implementing Regulation has no  bearing  on  Article  17(2);  nor  does
    Article 5.  Although Article 13(2) and  (3)  of  that  Regulation  were
    relevant, in relation to Dublin II, they have now been subsumed  within
    Article 17(2) of Dublin  III  itself  and  do  not  call  for  separate
    consideration.   So  far  as  the  Second  Implementing  Regulation  is
    concerned, the provisions added by  it  to  Article  12  of  the  First
    Implementing Regulation are to do  with  family  members,  siblings  or
    relatives, none of whom are relevant in the case of Article 17(2).

24. Ms Masood submitted that, read correctly  in  its  own  terms,  Article
    17(2) contains a very broad discretion.  In support, she pointed to the
    judgment  of  the  First  Chamber  of  the  CJEU  in  MA  &  Others   v
    International  Protection  Appeals  Tribunal  &  Others  (C-661/17  (23
    January 2019)).  Albeit speaking about Article 17(1), the Court said as
    follows:-

         "58. It is clear from the wording of Article 17(1)  of  the  Dublin
             III Regulation that that provision is optional in  so  far  it
             leaves it to the discretion of each Member State to decide  to
             examine an application  for  international  protection  lodged
             with it, even if that examination is  not  its  responsibility
             under the criteria defined by that regulation for  determining
             the Member State responsible.  The exercise of that option  is
             not, moreover, subject to any particular  condition  (see,  to
             that  effect,  judgment  of  30  May  2013,  Halaf,  C-528/11,
             EU:C:2013:342, paragraph 36).   That  option  is  intended  to
             allow each Member State to decide, in its absolute discretion,
             on  the  basis  of  political,   humanitarian   or   practical
             considerations, to agree to examine an asylum application even
             if it is not responsible under the criteria laid down in  that
             regulation  (judgment  of  4  October  2018,  Fathi,  C-56/17,
             EU:C:2018:803, paragraph 53).

         59.  In the light of the extent of the discretion thus conferred on
             the Member States, it is for the  Member  State  concerned  to
             determine the circumstances in which  it  wishes  to  use  the
             option conferred  by  the  discretionary  clause  set  out  in
             Article 17(1) of the Dublin III Regulation and to agree itself
             to examine an application  for  international  protection  for
             which it is not responsible under the criteria defined by that
             regulation.

         60.  That finding is also consistent, first, with the  case-law  of
             the Court relating to optional provisions, according to  which
             such provisions afford wide discretionary power to the  Member
             States (judgment of 10  December  2013,  Abdullahi,  C-394/12,
             EU:C:2013:813, paragraph  57  and  the  case-law  cited)  and,
             second,  with  the  objective  of  Article  17(1),  namely  to
             maintain the prerogatives of the Member States in the exercise
             of the right to grant international protection (judgment of  5
             July 2018, X, C-213/17, EU:C:2018:538, paragraph  61  and  the
             case-law cited).

         61.  In the light of all the foregoing considerations,  the  answer
             to the first question is that Article 17(1) of the Dublin  III
             Regulation must be interpreted as meaning that the fact that a
             Member State, designated as 'responsible' within  the  meaning
             of that regulation, has notified  its  intention  to  withdraw
             from the European Union in accordance  with  Article  50  TEU,
             does  not  oblige  the  determining  Member  State  to  itself
             examine, under the discretionary clause  set  out  in  Article
             17(1), the application for protection at issue."

25. It is, however, in my view plain that the discretion afforded to an  EU
    State by Article 17(2) is not as wide as the respondent contends in the
    present proceedings.  Unlike Article 17(1), Article 17(2) involves  two
    Member States. Member State A triggers the mechanism by  asking  Member
    State B to take  responsibility  for  an  applicant  for  international
    protection.  If Member State B refuses the request, it must "state  the
    reasons on which the refusal is based".  No practical purpose would  be
    served by the  requirement  to  give  reasons,  if  the  Article  17(2)
    discretion were so wide as to be unchallengeable.

26. Furthermore, Recital (39)  to  Dublin  III  makes  it  plain  that  the
    Regulation respects fundamental rights, as set out in  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union.   Recital  (39)  specifically
    mentions Article 7 of the CFR (Respect for Private  and  Family  Life),
    which parallels Article 8 of the ECHR. It  also  mentions  Article  24,
    which provides that in "all actions relating to children, whether taken
    by  public  authorities  or  private  institutions,  the  child's  best
    interests must be a primary consideration".

27. In R (on the application of HA & Others) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department (Dublin III; Articles 9 and  17.2)  [2018]  UKUT  00297
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Rintoul  and  UTJ  Rimington)  concluded
    that,  whilst  the  Article  17(2)  discretion  is  wide,  it  is   not
    untrammelled.  It was, the Tribunal found,  necessary  to  consider  an
    Article 17(2) application "through the lens of  Article  7  CFR  and/or
    Article 8 ECHR, taking account of the best interests of  a  child".   I
    respectfully concur.

(2) Does Article 27 apply to Article 17(2)?

28. Article 27 (Remedies) provides that  the  applicant  for  international
    protection shall have the right to an effective remedy, in the form  of
    an appeal or review, in fact and in law, against a  transfer  decision,
    before a court or tribunal.  Given its position within Dublin  III,  it
    is hard to see why Article 27 does not encompass appeals or reviews  of
    negative decisions under Article 17(2).   It  would,  for  example,  be
    remarkable if a negative decision under Article 17(2),  which  gave  as
    its reason that the refusing State declined to exercise its  discretion
    in favour of a particular racial group, could avoid legal challenge, on
    the basis that Article 27 does not apply to it.

29. Once that point is accepted,  as  I  consider  it  must  be,  then  the
    principle of effective remedy is established as regards Article  17(2).
    As we shall see, this will be relevant when we come to examine Ground 2
    of the applicants' challenge  to  the  respondent's  decisions  in  the
    present case, which concerns Article 7 CFR/Article 8 ECHR.  However, as
    we shall also see, it is not essential for the applicants that  Article
    27 applies, in order for them to rely upon and make good that ground.







(3) The scope of judicial review of Dublin III decisions

30. Before me, there was no issue between Ms Knorr and Ms Masood that, like
    any other public law decision, a decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    an Article 17(2) request is susceptible to challenge on ordinary United
    Kingdom public law grounds.

31. In R (ZT (Syria)) v Home Secretary [2016] 1  WLR  4894,  the  Court  of
    Appeal rejected the respondent's suggestion that Article 17  of  Dublin
    III might not be subject to challenge on such grounds:-

         "85. A further reason for rejecting Mr Eadie's  submission  in  its
             absolutist form is Article 17 of the  Dublin  III  Regulation.
             Since the relevant officials in the second member  state  have
             power  to  assume  responsibility  in  a  case  in  which  the
             Regulation assigns it to another member state,  it  cannot  be
             said that it is never open to an individual  to  request  that
             state to do that.   Mr  Eadie  suggested,  or  came  close  to
             suggesting, during the course of the hearing that a refusal to
             exercise the power  under  article  17  was  not  justiciable.
             That, in my judgment, is unsound in principle and  also  finds
             no support in  the  authorities.   Abdullahi  v  Bundesasylamt
             (Case C-394/12) [2014] 1 WLR 1895  recognised  only  that  the
             second member  state  has  a  wide  margin  of  discretion  in
             deciding whether to  assume  responsibility  pursuant  to  the
             provision in the Dublin II Regulation that is  the  equivalent
             of article 17.  In a context in which the  exercise  of  power
             relates to relations between  two  member  states  as  to  the
             operation  of  a  treaty  arranging  for  the  allocation   of
             responsibility for examining applications for  asylum  between
             member states, this is clearly correct.  There will be a  wide
             range of relevant considerations  for  the  decision-maker  to
             take into account: see all the factors that the UT stated were
             relevant to the assessment of proportionality.  But subject to
             the effective scope of judicial review being narrower for this
             reason,  the  exercise  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  her
             discretion is subject to the ordinary public law principles of
             propriety of purpose, relevancy  of  considerations,  and  the
             longstop  Wednesbury  unreasonableness  category   (Associated
             Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corpn [1948]  1  KB
             223) and, because of  the  engagement  of  article  8  of  the
             European  Convention,  the  intensity  of  review   which   is
             appropriate in the assessment of the  proportionality  of  any
             interference with article 8 rights."  (Beatson LJ)

32. The applicants contend that the respondent's decisions are, for various
    reasons, infected by public law errors of the kind described by Beatson
    LJ. Ground 2 is, however, of a different nature. It  alleges  that  the
    decisions are incompatible with  A1  and  A2's  protected  family  life
    rights under Article 7 CFR/Article 8 ECHR. In  order  to  determine  if
    this is so, Ground 2 submits that the Upper Tribunal "must  assess  for
    itself whether the ongoing interference with the applicants'  right  to
    family life under the CFR/ECHR is proportionate,  if  necessary  taking
    into account evidence that was not before the decision-maker".

33. As I understand her, Ms Masood's submission regarding Ground 2 is  that
    the nature of the challenge articulated in Ground 2 remains  rooted  in
    Beatson LJ's "ordinary public or principles of  propriety  of  purpose,
    relevancy   of   considerations,   and    the    longstop    Wednesbury
    unreasonableness category", albeit acknowledging what he  describes  as
    the "intensity of review demanded in the human  rights  context".   The
    logic of this submission means it  is  not  limited  to  challenges  to
    Article 17(2) discretionary decisions.  It applies to all challenges to
    Dublin III decisions of the respondent.

34. In order to address this issue, it is necessary to  examine  in  detail
    the judgment of the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Grubb and UTJ Blum)  in  R  (on
    the application of MS)  (a  child  by  his  litigation  friend  MAS)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin  III;  duty  to
    investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009 (IAC).  The Upper Tribunal's judgment in
    MS was appealed to the Court of Appeal: [2019] EWCA Civ 1340.  Although
    the respondent's appeal was dismissed on the ground that the  challenge
    to the relevant part of the Upper Tribunal's judgment was academic, and
    did not satisfy the criteria for the Court to engage substantively with
    the matter, the judgments of Hickinbottom LJ  and  the  Master  of  the
    Rolls will nevertheless need to be examined.

35. The applicant in MS claimed  asylum  in  France,  which  requested  the
    United Kingdom to take charge of the examination of his claim,  on  the
    basis that MS  had  an  older  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent did not consider MS and  the  individual  in  question  were
    brothers.  It therefore rejected the request, in a number of decisions,
    which were challenged by way of judicial review in the Upper  Tribunal.



36. The Upper Tribunal found what I shall describe as  conventional  public
    law errors in each of  the  three  decisions  of  the  respondent;  and
    quashed them.  At paragraph 171 of  its  judgment,  the  Tribunal  then
    engaged with another ground of challenge, based on the submission of MS
    that the Tribunal "should, for itself, decide  whether  the  'criteria'
    for  determining  responsibility  in  Article  8  of  the  Dublin   III
    Regulation are met on the facts".

37. As advanced by Ms Kilroy, MS's case was predicated  on  Article  27  of
    Dublin III requiring there to be an effective remedy, in fact and  law,
    in respect of the respondent's decisions  in  MS's  case.   Before  the
    Upper Tribunal,  the  respondent  took  the  stance  that  a  "transfer
    decision" in Article 27 did not include the rejection of a take  charge
    request.

38.  The  Upper  Tribunal  rejected  the  respondent's  submission  that  a
    "transfer decision" did not include  a  refusal  to  take  charge.   At
    paragraph 187, the Upper Tribunal noted that Recital (19) to Dublin III
    recognises the need for an "effective remedy in  respect  of  decisions
    regarding transfers ..."  (Upper  Tribunal's  emphasis).   Furthermore,
    the decisions of the Grand Chamber in Ghezelbash v Staatssecretaris van
    Veiligheid en Justite (Case C-63/15) and Mengestead  v  Bundersrepublik
    Deutschland (Case C-670/16) acknowledged both the  breadth  of  Recital
    (19) and the judicial  remedy  envisaged  in  Article  27.   The  Upper
    Tribunal was in "no  doubt  that  the  Grand  Chamber  contemplated  an
    individual being entitled to challenge the correctness  in  application
    of the "criteria" to determine which Member State is responsible  under
    the Dublin III Regulation whether the effect of the decision led to the
    individual's transfer to another Member State or, as in this case, left
    him or her in the Member  State  in  which  he  or  she  currently  was
    present" (paragraph 188).

39. At paragraph 190, the Upper Tribunal noted  that,  in  Ghezelbash,  the
    Grand Chamber had affirmed that the effective remedy covered  questions
    of both fact and law.  There was no suggestion that a court or tribunal
    determining whether  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  had  been  correctly
    applied was limited to determining the legality of the  decision  based
    upon public law principles.  On the other hand, the Advocate General in
    Ghezelbash, in her opinion at paragraphs 90 and 91, had  found  it  was
    for the national court's procedural rules to govern  the  intensity  of
    the review process and its outcome.  The effectiveness  of  a  judicial
    review guaranteed by Article 47 nevertheless required an assessment  of
    whether there was a "sufficiently solid factual basis" for the transfer
    decision.

40. At paragraph 193, the  Upper  Tribunal,  whilst  finding  the  Advocate
    General's opinion to be "far  from  an  unambiguous  statement  of  the
    approach that Ms Kilroy invites us to take", held that it provided some
    support for the view that a challenge was not  restricted  to  legality
    alone,  as  regards  the  requirement  for  the  decision  to  have   a
    "sufficiently solid factual basis".  The Upper Tribunal concluded  that
    the application of Article 27 meant that an individual "must  have  the
    ability to challenge the  application  of  the  criteria  not  only  as
    legally wrong, but also as factually wrong" (paragraph 193).

41. The Upper Tribunal, however, was at some pains to point  out  that  its
    conclusion on Article 27 was compatible with domestic public  law.   At
    paragraph 194, citing cases from Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14  to  R
    (Al-Sweady & Others) v Secretary of State for Defence [2009] EWHC  2387
    (Admin), by way of Anisminic v Foreign Compensation Commission [1969] 2
    AC 147, the Upper Tribunal observed  that,  whilst  fact-finding  in  a
    judicial review, including by reference to post-decision evidence,  was
    rarely  undertaken,  it  was  not  unknown;  and  that  there  was  "no
    insurmountable  procedure  or  obstacle  to  a  factual  enquiry  being
    undertaken in judicial review proceedings" (paragraph 195).  Indeed, in
    some cases involving "precedent fact", the judicial review  proceedings
    inevitably had to take this form: R v SSHD, ex parte Khawaja [1984]  AC
    74 and R (A) v Croydon LBC [2009] UKSC 8.

42. All this led the Upper Tribunal to the following conclusion:-

         "200.    In our judgment, the approach in the Croydon case provides
                a strong, and indeed  compelling,  basis  for  the  approach
                taken by the CJEU in respect of Art 27  of  the  Dublin  III
                Regulation and which we analysed above. The  application  of
                the hierarchy criteria in  the  Dublin  III  Regulation,  in
                particular in this case whether MAS and MS are brothers,  is
                a 'hard-edged' fact.  As  the  CJEU  jurisprudence  signals,
                whether  those  criteria  have  been  correctly  applied  is
                intended ultimately to be a factual issue  for  a  court  or
                tribunal to be determine.
         201. Although we were invited  to  treat  the  application  of  the
                hierarchy criteria as being a 'precedent' or 'jurisdictional
                fact', it is unnecessary for us to decide that  issue  given
                our view, based upon the CJEU's jurisprudence of  the  scope
                of Art 27.  Suffice it to say, that  there  may  not  be  an
                altogether easy  analogy  between  cases  where  the  "fact"
                arises prior to, and in order to  give  jurisdiction  to,  a
                decision-maker to exercise the power or duty vested in  that
                decision-maker and cases involving  the  hierarchy  criteria
                under the Dublin  III  Regulation  where  the  criteria,  in
                effect, are likely to occupy  the  whole  of  the  decision-
                making required of the relevant State,  here  the  requested
                State in accepting a TCR.  But, as we say, it is unnecessary
                for us to decide this issue and we do not."
43. Crucially for our  purpose,  beginning  at  paragraph  202,  the  Upper
    Tribunal engaged with the  proposition,  advanced  by  MS,  that  where
    Article 8 of the ECHR and/or Article 7 of the  CFR  is  in  issue,  the
    nature of any judicial review is  different  from  the  situation  that
    pertains when those or any other human or fundamental rights are not in
    play:-

         "202.    Ms Kilroy also prayed in  aid  of  her  argument  that  we
             should decide the factual issue of the relationship between MS
             and MAS, the case law concerning a court or tribunal's role in
             determining whether a decision has  breached  an  individual's
             human rights.  She, of course, placed reliance upon Art  8  of
             the ECHR and  Art  7  of  the  CFR,  in  particular  (but  not
             exclusively)  the  procedural/fairness  dimension   of   those
             provisions.  She reminded us that  Art  47  of  the  CFR  also
             creates an obligation to provide  "an  effective  remedy"  for
             breaches of the CFR.

         203. It  is  now  well-recognised  that  an  "intense"  review  or,
             arguably, merits assessment arises in cases where the judicial
             review claim is that the decision in determining  whether  the
             challenged decisions are contrary to section 6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 (see, e.g., R (Nasseri v SSHD [2009] UKHL  23,
             Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (no. 2) [2013] UKSC 38 and 39 ,  and
             R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v SSHD  [2014]  UKSC  60)  .   The
             court or tribunal must, for itself, determine whether a breach
             of the relevant Convention right has occurred.

         204. The principle was encapsulated by Underhill LJ in R(Caroopen &
             Myrie) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, where he  stated  at  [73]
             that:
                    "...  where  the  issue  raised  by  a  judicial  review
                  challenge is whether there has been a breach of Convention
                  rights, the Court cannot confine itself to asking  whether
                  the decision-making process was defective but must  decide
                  whether the decision was right."
         205. That language - whether the decision was "right" - echoes  the
             approach of the  CJEU  to  scope  of  the  'effective  remedy'
             required by Art 27 of the Dublin III Regulation.
         206. In Belfast City Council v Miss Behavin' Ltd    [2007]  UKHL 19
             Lady Hale said, at [31]:
                  "The role of the court in  human  rights  adjudication  is
                  quite different from the role of the court in an  ordinary
                  judicial review of administrative action. In human  rights
                  adjudication, the court  is  concerned  with  whether  the
                  human rights of the claimant have in fact been  infringed,
                  not  with  whether   the   administrative   decision-maker
                  properly took them into account."
         207. Consequently, where a breach of Art 8 is  alleged,  the  court
             must for itself determine whether the challenged decision is a
             proportionate interference with the individual's art 8 rights.
              It is not constrained only to determine whether it  has  been
             lawfully applied (see, e.g. Miss Behavin' Ltd  and  R  (SB)  v
             Governors of Denbigh High School [2006] UKHL 15).  It was this
             approach which was adopted by the UT in the HA case (at  [53]-
             [56]).
         208. We do not consider that this approach is limited to the  issue
             of proportionality under Art  8.2.   It  must  also  apply  to
             establishing that the right, upon which reliance is placed, is
             actually engaged.  We accept this approach must be applied  to
             Art  8,  whether  relied  upon  for  its  procedural/fairness'
             dimension or substantively.  It was not  suggested  before  us
             that any different approach should be applied  in  respect  of
             Art 7 of the CFR.   Whether,  therefore,  family  life  exists
             between MAS and MS based upon their  claimed  relationship  as
             brothers is also a matter  which  a  court  or  tribunal  must
             determine for itself.  We reject  Mr  Lewis'  submission  that
             this, in effect, puts the 'cart before the  horse'.   Only  if
             the right is engaged can the court indulge in a merits review.
              To say otherwise would effectively remove from the  court  or
             tribunal in cases where 'engagement' was the,  or  an,  issue,
             determination of a vital part of the individual's  claim  that
             his Art 8 right was breached.  We see no basis in the case law
             for it.  Indeed, in the Al-Sweady case, a strongly constituted
             Divisional Court (Scott Baker LJ and Silber  and  Sweeney  JJ)
             made plain that the factual enquiry extended in that  case  to
             the underlying facts of one individual's claim  under  Arts  2
             and 3, namely whether he had been killed on  the  battle-field
             or, as he alleged, in a camp  under  the  control  of  British
             forces in Iraq (see [16]).  The  Court  accepted  that  cross-
             examination of witnesses was necessary in order for the  Court
             to resolve that 'hard-edged' factual issue.  Mutatis  mutandis
             , we conclude, so it was in this case for us  to  resolve  the
             'hard-edged' issue of fact of whether MAS and MS  are  related
             as claimed as an aspect of their reliance upon Art  8  of  the
             ECHR (and Art 7, CFR)."
44. At paragraph 210, the Upper Tribunal therefore decided "Issue IV in the
    applicant's favour".

45.  In view of what transpired when MS reached the Court of Appeal, it  is
    necessary to see what Issue IV comprised and its relationship with  the
    three previous issues.  At paragraph 86, the Upper Tribunal  summarised
    the principal legal issues as follows:-

         "86. We can summarise the principal legal  issues  raised  in  this
             case as follows:
             I.   Is the Secretary of State under a duty to investigate the
                  relevant circumstances when considering a  TCR  under  the
                  Dublin III Regulation?
             II.  If there is such a duty, what is the proper scope of that
                  duty?  Does any duty include a duty to  facilitate  and/or
                  secure the obtaining of a DNA sample from an individual in
                  the requesting state?
             III. If there is such a duty, does that duty continue once the
                  Dublin III Regulation process is concluded?
             IV.  How should a court or tribunal approach  a  challenge  in
                  judicial review proceedings to a refusal to accept a  TCR?
                  Is it restricted to considering  a  challenge  based  upon
                  public law principles or is  it  required  to  decide  for
                  itself whether the criteria for determining responsibility
                  under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  have  been  correctly
                  applied?"
46. The Upper Tribunal determined Issues I, II and III  in  favour  of  the
    applicant.  Having done so, it applied its findings in those issues  to
    the facts and circumstances of the  three  decisions  under  challenge.
    The Upper Tribunal found that those decisions fell  to  be  quashed  on
    conventional public law principles.   It  was  at  this  point  in  its
    judgment that the Upper Tribunal turned to examine Issue  IV.   In  the
    light of its conclusion on that matter, it made findings  of  fact,  by
    reference to evidence adduced at the hearing (including oral evidence),
    upon which it held, on the balance of probabilities, that  MS  was  the
    brother of the individual present in the United Kingdom.

47. We can now look at what happened in the Court of  Appeal.  Hickinbottom
    LJ introduced the case as follows:-

         "5.  The tribunal gave the Secretary of State permission to appeal
             to this court on two grounds, as follows.


             i)   The tribunal erred in holding that, for the  purposes  of
                  article 27 of Dublin III, "transfer decision" includes the
                  rejection of a take  charge  request,  which  involves  no
                  transfer.  Therefore, it is submitted that the requirement
                  of article 27, that an asylum applicant should  have  "the
                  right to an effective remedy, in the form of an appeal  or
                  a review, in fact and law, against  a  transfer  decision,
                  before a court or tribunal", does not apply in  this  case
                  where there has been no decision to transfer MS.

             ii)  Even if "transfer decision" does include a rejection of a
                  take charge request, the tribunal erred in  proceeding  on
                  the basis that the tribunal itself must  determine,  as  a
                  matter of preliminary fact, whether  the  relevant  Dublin
                  III criteria (including  any  required  relationship)  are
                  met.
         I will call these "Ground 1" and "Ground 2" respectively."
48. By the time the matter came before the Court of Appeal, a DNA test  had
    established that MS and the other individual were, indeed, brothers and
    the Secretary of State accepted that fact. MS therefore contended that,
    although the Upper Tribunal had been right  to  hold  that  Article  27
    applied, the matter was academic  and  the  Court  should  dismiss  the
    appeal on that basis.

49. At paragraph 13, Hickinbottom LJ described Ground 1 as "narrow, turning
    upon the proper construction of Article  27".   Hickinbottom  LJ  noted
    that Ground 2 was "effectively conceded by the Secretary  of  State  in
    the course of the hearing before us".  The Secretary of State  accepted
    that, if Article 27 of Dublin III applies, the domestic  Court,  "which
    is conducting the Article 27 review of  the  transfer  decision  should
    (i.e. is able  to  and  required  to)  determine  whether  there  is  a
    'sufficiently solid factual basis' for it, the  quotation  coming  from
    the opinion of Advocate General Sharpston in [Ghezelbash]".  Therefore,
    if the Secretary of State failed on Ground  1  "he  therefore  conceded
    Ground 2 by accepting that the Tribunal did not err in its approach  to
    the factual question  of  whether  the  relevant  Dublin  III  criteria
    (including any required relationship) had been met".

50. At paragraph 40 of his judgment, Hickinbottom LJ observed that,  before
    the Upper Tribunal, "the core issue with regard to lawfulness  was  the
    extent to which the Secretary of  State  had  an  'investigative  duty'
    which extended to facilitating and securing  the  provision  of  a  DNA
    sample from an asylum applicant in France".  He then noted the  reasons
    why the Upper Tribunal had quashed the three decisions of the Secretary
    of State.  At paragraph 41, Hickinbottom LJ said this:-

         "41. The tribunal therefore found the three decisions unlawful  and
             quashed them without reference to article 27  of  Dublin  III.
             No reference to that provision was made until, having  quashed
             the decisions, the tribunal dealt with the  submission  by  Ms
             Kilroy (who also appeared below) that article  27,  read  with
             article 47 of the  Charter,  applied  to  a  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State to reject a take  charge  request;  and  it
             required the tribunal to determine for itself whether  MS  met
             the relevant criteria in Dublin III notably that he  is  MAS's
             brother."

51. Hickinbottom LJ proceeded to set out  the  competing  arguments  of  Ms
    Giovannetti (for the Secretary of State) and Ms Kilroy (for MS) on  the
    Article 27 issue.  At paragraph 53, he said that "I see the force in Ms
    Kilroy's submission on the substantive issue  of  the  construction  of
    article 27 in Ground 1".  However, because he found that the matter was
    "now entirely academic as between the parties,  I  would  exercise  the
    court's discretion not to determine it".

52. Sir Terence Etherton MR gave a short judgment, with which both  of  the
    members of the Court agreed.  He did so in order "to add  ...  a  short
    amplification of the place of  article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  ordinary
    domestic law principles of judicial review in the proceedings below and
    on this appeal" (paragraph 59).

53. At paragraph 60, the Master of the Rolls noted  that  MS's  grounds  of
    judicial review:-

         "... stated that the Secretary of State owed a domestic duty to act
         compatibly with article 8 of the ECHR pursuant to section 6 of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998, and those duties  existed  alongside  Dublin
         III and were not subsumed or replaced by it".

54. At paragraph 62, the Master  of  the  Rolls  noted  Ms  Giovannetti  as
    accepting "that there could be judicial review under ordinary  domestic
    law principles even if the alleged unlawfulness arose under Dublin  III
    itself".

55. The remainder of the judgment needs to be set out in full:-

         "63. It is apparent from the judgment  of  the  tribunal  that  its
             decision to quash the Secretary of State's refusal  to  accept
             France's take charge requests was made on that basis (see  the
             way the tribunal summarises MS's case  in  paragraphs  44  and
             45).  The issue of article 27 arose only in the context of the
             subsequent  question  whether,  having  concluded   that   the
             decisions of the Secretary of State  should  be  quashed,  the
             tribunal should decide for itself  whether  the  criteria  for
             determining responsibility under article 8 of Dublin III  were
             met on the facts.

         64.  Hickinbottom LJ has set out  in  paragraph  5  above  the  two
             grounds of appeal.  In her arguments for dismissing the appeal
             on the footing that it is  academic  Ms  Kilroy  relied  upon,
             among other things, the right to  challenge  refusals  by  the
             Secretary of State of take charge requests as infringements of
             article 8 of the ECHR, irrespective of rights and  obligations
             under Dublin III,  applying  ordinary  domestic  law  judicial
             review principles and also bearing in mind  the  Secretary  of
             State's acceptance on the appeal that (1)  there  is  residual
             power in judicial review proceedings to make findings of fact,
             and (2) when called upon  to  determine  whether  there  is  a
             breach of article 8 of the  ECHR,  the  court  has  to  decide
             proportionality for itself, and it may be required to  resolve
             issues of disputed fact.

         65.  ZT (Syria) and RSM (Eritrea), cited in the Grounds of  Defence
             and in the arguments before us on the appeal, are not relevant
             to that line of argument and are  plainly  distinguishable  on
             their facts as cases in which the applicants were  seeking  to
             bypass or override express procedures under the Dublin process
             which would otherwise have applied.

         66.  Ms Giovannetti, perhaps rather surprisingly in view of the way
             matters proceeded in the tribunal below and the concession  by
             the Secretary of State on Ground 2 of the appeal, urged us  to
             express no view about the application of ordinary domestic law
             principles of judicial review in a case such  as  the  present
             one as, she emphasised, that is not the subject of the  notice
             of appeal.  It is  sufficient,  therefore,  to  conclude  this
             description of the way the issue arose in this case and on the
             appeal by recording that nothing was said to  us  to  indicate
             that the tribunal was wrong to approach the case as it did, by
             reviewing the Secretary of State's decision on  the  basis  of
             ordinary judicial review principles."

56. As can be seen from the above recitation of the judgment of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MS, it is by no means  apparent  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    determined Issue IV in the applicant's favour  and  embarked  upon  the
    resulting fact-finding exercise to establish whether he and his alleged
    sibling were, indeed, brothers, only because  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    decided, for other reasons, to quash the challenged decisions.  As  the
    Master of the Rolls observed, that was certainly not the way  in  which
    MS had put the challenge in his  judicial  review  grounds,  where  the
    Article  8  ECHR/section  6  HRA  duties  were  described  as  existing
    "alongside Dublin III".

57. The fact that the Upper Tribunal chose to address Issue IV  only  after
    it had addressed the  other  grounds  of  challenge  that  led  to  the
    quashing of the decisions is explicable in terms of  the  structure  of
    the judgment. But that does not mean the Upper Tribunal regarded  Issue
    IV as relevant only because it  had  quashed  the  decisions  on  other
    grounds.  There is no statement in the judgment  that  even  begins  to
    suggest this. On the contrary, as we have seen, the Upper Tribunal  was
    concerned to justify its  conclusions  on  Issue  IV  by  reference  to
    domestic case law including, importantly, the House of Lords  judgments
    in Denbigh High School and Miss Behavin' as well  as  the  judgment  of
    Underhill LJ in Caroopen.  There would have been no  point  in  such  a
    justification if Issue IV were not regarded by the Upper Tribunal as  a
    free-standing ground of challenge.

58. As I read the judgment of the Master of the Rolls, he was concerned  to
    make the point, so far as he was able to do so in the light of the  way
    in which matters unfolded in  the  Court  of  Appeal,  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MS was not wrong to approach the case in the way it did "on
    the basis of ordinary judicial review principles".  It  is  plain  from
    paragraph 64 of his judgment that the  Master  of  the  Rolls  regarded
    those principles as encompassing the determination by the  Tribunal  of
    issues of proportionality, wherein  "it  may  be  required  to  resolve
    issues of disputed fact".

59. The principle that issues of disputed fact may require to be decided in
    judicial  review  proceedings  involving  a  human  rights  ground   of
    challenge has been emphatically confirmed by the judgment of  Underhill
    LJ in R (Balajigari) v Home Secretary [2019] 1 WLR  4647;  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 673.  The case involved the nature of a judicial review  against  a
    decision of the respondent that an individual had acted dishonestly  in
    respect  of  financial  information  provided,  respectively,  to   the
    respondent and to Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.  Where  Article  8
    was in  play,  and  the  issue  involves  the  proportionality  of  the
    respondent's decision, Underhill LJ was in no doubt that the allegation
    (of dishonesty) had to be determined by the Tribunal, by means  of  its
    own factual investigation:-

         "104.    If such an article 8 challenge  does  proceed  by  way  of
             judicial review in the UT, and the claimant's article 8 rights
             are found to have been engaged, the tribunal will, as  already
             noted,  have  to  consider  for  itself  whether  the  alleged
             dishonesty on the part of the claimant  has  been  proved  and
             whether removal is  proportionate,  which  in  most  cases  is
             likely to be determined by the  question  of  dishonesty.   It
             will not be confined, as would usually be the case and  as  in
             these proceedings thus far, to reviewing the facts only on the
             ground of irrationality. This is because, where  a  claim  for
             judicial review includes a pleaded ground that  the  Secretary
             of State's decision either does or would  violate  article  8,
             that amounts to an allegation that there has been or  will  be
             unlawful conduct contrary to section 6 of the 1998 Act.   That
             allegation has to  be  adjudicated  by  the  tribunal  on  its
             merits: it is an argument based on illegality and  not  simply
             irrationality.  For a recent summary of the law in this regard
             see R (Caroopen) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2017] 1 WLR 2339, paras 68-83, per Underhill LJ."

60. At paragraphs 68 to 83 of Caroopen, Underhill LJ undertook an  analysis
    of the case law, including Denbigh High School, Naseri, Bank Mellat  No
    2, Miss Behavin' and Lord Carlile's case, similar to that undertaken by
    the Upper Tribunal in MS. Indeed, as we have seen, at paragraph 204  of
    its judgment, the Upper Tribunal cited the passage at paragraph  73  of
    Caroopen, where Underhill LJ held that, in  challenges  of  this  kind,
    "the Court cannot confine itself to asking whether the  decision-making
    process was defective but must decide whether the decision was right".

61.  It  is,  therefore,  established  that  in  a  judicial  review  which
    challenges a decision on the ground that  it  actually  or  potentially
    violates a person's protected human right, the court or  tribunal  must
    determine that  issue  for  itself  (albeit  ascribing  weight  to  the
    decision-maker's expertise and statutory or other relevant  functions).
    Where there is  a  dispute  as  to  the  primary  facts  that  must  be
    ascertained before that issue can be determined, the court or  tribunal
    must resolve that dispute.

62. The legal principle I have just stated is part of our domestic  law  of
    judicial review. It has been reached by the  domestic  courts  applying
    section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  which  prohibits  a  public
    authority from acting incompatibly with an ECHR right.  Where  an  ECHR
    right is in play, this legal principle is not dependent on  Article  27
    of Dublin III or, indeed, any other piece of EU  legislation  regarding
    the availability of an effective  remedy,  even  where  the  challenged
    decision is made under EU law. Nor  is  the  principle  dependent  upon
    there being some other public law error in the impugned decision.

63. The fact that a decision of the respondent,  which  is  otherwise  free
    from public law error, may fall to be quashed, as a result of  a  fact-
    finding exercise of the kind undertaken in MS  and  the  present  case,
    needs to be seen in context. In most instances, there is unlikely to be
    any dispute as to the primary facts.  The  issue  in  contention  will,
    rather, be about what weight should be ascribed to  particular  factual
    elements in order to strike the proportionality  balance.   A  decision
    which is free from public law error, where the  evidence  available  to
    the respondent does not disclose a reason why the decision might be  in
    breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, will not get past the
    "permission" stage on judicial  review.  Although  there  is  no  legal
    requirement for there to be an independent public law error, a  genuine
    dispute as to primary facts is likely to arise only where there has, in
    practice, been some such error, such as a breach of procedural fairness
    (as in Balajigari).

64. Before attempting a summary of the position, it is necessary to  return
    to what the Upper Tribunal said at paragraph 208 of MS.   Although  the
    issue of whether a decision is contrary to section 6 of  the  1998  Act
    will usually arise in  the  context  of  whether  the  decision  was  a
    proportionate interference with a right that is accepted to exist,  the
    primary fact-finding which may be necessary is not limited to the issue
    of proportionality but must, as the Upper Tribunal  held  in  paragraph
    208, "also apply to establishing that the right, upon which reliance is
    placed, is actually engaged".  In that case, the issue was  whether  MS
    and the alleged sibling were brothers.  If they were not, then  Article
    8(1) would not have been engaged.  If they  were,  then  not  only  was
    Article 8 engaged; on  the  facts  of  the  case  the  refusal  of  the
    respondent to take charge was plainly  unlawful  in  terms  of  Article
    8(2).

65. In the present case, as we shall see, a similar approach  is  required.
    A1 must show, on balance, that he enjoys a family life with  A2.   That
    does not merely require  showing  that  A1  and  A2  have  the  alleged
    relationship of  cousins.   It  also  involves  demonstrating  that  an
    Article 8(1) family life exists between them.  The factors that will be
    relevant in determining that question, whilst closely related to issues
    of proportionality under Article 8(2), are, nevertheless,  conceptually
    distinct.

66. It is time to draw these threads together:

    (1)  Although Article 17(2) of Dublin III confers a wide discretion  on
    the respondent, it is not untrammelled.

    (2) As is the case with any other discretionary power of the respondent
    in the immigration  field,  Article  17(2)  must  be  exercised  in  an
    individual's  favour,  where  to  do   otherwise   would   breach   the
    individual's human rights (or those of some other person), contrary  to
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

    (3)   An  Article  17(2)  decision  is  susceptible  to  "ordinary"  or
    "conventional" judicial review principles, of  the  kind  described  by
    Beatson LJ in paragraph 85 of ZT  (Syria)  as  "propriety  of  purpose,
    relevancy   of   considerations,   and    the    longstop    Wednesbury
    unreasonableness category".

    (4) Where the judicial  review  challenge  involves  an  allegation  of
    violation of an ECHR right, such as Article 8, it is now an established
    principle of domestic United Kingdom law that  the  court  or  tribunal
    must make its own assessment of the  lawfulness  of  the  decision,  in
    human rights terms.

    (5) If, in order to make that assessment, the court or  tribunal  needs
    to make findings of fact, it must do so.

    (6)  None of the above is dependent  upon  Article  27  of  Dublin  III
    applying to the facts of the case.

    (7)  Nevertheless, what the Upper Tribunal held  in  MS  regarding  the
    scope of Article 27 is correct and  nothing  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgments in that case suggests otherwise. The reference to a "transfer
    decision" in Article 27 encompasses a  refusal  to  take  charge  of  a
    Dublin III applicant. That includes a  refusal  to  take  charge  under
    Article 17(2).

(4) The legality of the Secretary of State's Dublin III Regulation  Guidance
(18 April 2019)

67. The applicants contend that the respondent's Guidance to Caseworkers is
    unlawful.  Ms Knorr  submitted  that  the  references  to  "exceptional
    circumstances", and to it being "rare and on an exceptional basis" that
    a regulation 17(2) request would be accepted, involved the  setting  of
    an unlawful threshold.

68. I do not accept this criticism.  Since Huang v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, those working  in  the  immigration
    field have known that the  use  of  "exceptional"  in  the  context  of
    Article 8 ECHR is not  to  be  used  as  setting  a  particular  (high)
    threshold but, rather, as predictive of the outcome of the  application
    of the principles of proportionality to the facts of a particular case.
     There is, in my view, nothing in the Guidance that suggests its author
    is telling the respondent's  caseworkers  to  do  anything  other  than
    follow the settled law on this topic.  My conclusion is  reinforced  by
    the statement in the Guidance that the situations  where  it  would  be
    appropriate to exercise discretion will be "rare".   The  juxtaposition
    of  "rare"  and  "exceptional"  within  the  sentence  containing  that
    statement makes plain the correct approach is being applied.

69. It is also necessary to make the  following  point.   Although  Article
    17(2) relates to the bringing together of "family relations", the  fact
    that this may be "on humanitarian grounds based  ...  on  ...  cultural
    considerations"  makes  it  clear  that  the  ambit  of  Article  17(2)
    encompasses cases that may elicit a  favourable  response,  even  where
    Article 8 ECHR/Article 7  CFR  is  not  engaged.   Just  as  Ms  Masood
    correctly points out that the Guidance covers applicants who may not be
    children (whether or not accompanied), the fact that it extends  beyond
    the classic Article 8 scenarios must be borne in mind, when reading it.

70. As can be seen from the extensive extracts from the Guidance set out in
    the  Annex  to  this  judgment,  it  does,  contrary  to   Ms   Knorr's
    submissions, appropriately reference the best interests of children.  I
    therefore  reject  the  challenge  to  its  validity,  insofar  as  the
    applicants allege a deficiency in this regard.

71. I do not accept  that  the  Guidance  errs  in  law  in  requiring  the
    requesting EU State to demonstrate what the  exceptional  circumstances
    or compassionate factors are said to be.  I agree with Ms Masood it  is
    plain from Article 17(2) that the requesting State needs  to  cite  the
    humanitarian grounds upon which it relies and provide "all the material
    in the possession of the requesting Member State to allow the requested
    Member  State  to  assess  the  situation".   That   is   clearly   not
    incompatible with the requirement in Article 17(2)  for  the  requested
    Member State then to carry out "any necessary  checks  to  examine  the
    humanitarian grounds cited".

72. Although, as I have earlier held, Article 12 of the First  Implementing
    Regulation (as amended by the Second Implementing Regulation) does  not
    formally apply to a request under Article 17(2) of Dublin  III,  it  is
    clear that the relevant local authority in the United Kingdom, in whose
    area the alleged relation resides, still needs to be  involved  in  the
    process; not least in  order  to  determine  whether  an  unaccompanied
    minor's best interests would be served by reuniting the minor with that
    individual.  For the respondent, Ms Masood accepts as much.

73. Ms Knorr took issue with the reference in the Guidance  to  caseworkers
    in Article 17(2) cases acting "consistently with the immigration  rules
    and policies on family  members,  for  example  the  Immigration  rules
    Appendix FM  -  Family  Members".   I  see  no  problem  here.   Acting
    consistently with the immigration rules,  in  particular  Appendix  FM,
    entails being aware of  the  elements  of  those  provisions  that  are
    intended to ensure compliance with  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under the ECHR.  It also entails being aware of the fact that,  as  was
    finally settled by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC  60,  the  respondent's  caseworker
    must still conduct an Article 8 exercise outside the rules,  to  ensure
    that, on the particular facts,  section  6  of  the  1998  Act  is  not
    breached.

74.  In  considering  the  challenge  brought  by  the  applicants  to  the
    respondent's Guidance, I have had regard to their criticisms of the way
    in which the respondent's caseworkers reached the  decisions  that  are
    challenged in these proceedings.  Although, as I shall explain, I agree
    with the criticisms levelled at those decisions, I  do  not  find  that
    they are indicative of any failing in the Guidance itself.

75. For these reasons, I reject the applicants' challenge to the Guidance.

(5) Duty of investigation; involvement of relevant local authority

76. In MS, the Upper Tribunal  followed  the  judgment  in  R  (MK,  IK)  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Calais:  Dublin  III
    Regulation - investigative duty) (IJR) [2016] UKUT 00231, holding  that
    an EU State considering a take-charge request under Dublin  III  has  a
    duty to investigate the basis  upon  which  the  request  is  made  and
    whether the requirements of Dublin III are met.  I have  no  hesitation
    in endorsing that conclusion, insofar as it applies to  Article  17(2).
    There is, in my view, no principled reason why it should not; and I did
    not understand Ms Masood to argue to the contrary.

77. Although Article 17(2) lacks some of  the  formal  requirements  as  to
    verification etc, which derive from the  Implementing  Regulations,  it
    would be remarkable if the respondent's investigatory  responsibilities
    were materially narrower in an Article 17(2)  case  which  concerns  an
    unaccompanied minor and his or her best interests, than they  would  be
    in respect of any other take-charge request.

78. But this is not to say that the precise  nature  of  the  investigatory
    obligation bears no relationship with the nature of the request to take
    charge made under  Article  17(2),  and  the  information  supplied  in
    connection with it.  Given the breadth of Article 17(2), there may well
    be some cases in which what  the  respondent  and,  by  extension,  the
    relevant local authority, are expected to do  would  be  less  than  in
    other  cases.   Where,  however,  the  request   in   respect   of   an
    unaccompanied minor raises issues that involve an asserted family  life
    within Article 8/Article 7, then, in the normal course of  events,  the
    respondent's degree of engagement with  the  relevant  local  authority
    should be no less than in the case of  any  other  unaccompanied  minor
    where the take-charge request is made under Article 8 of Dublin III  on
    the basis that the relation in the United Kingdom is  a  sibling  or  a
    "family member" or "relative", as defined.  Unless  the  respondent  is
    satisfied that the relevant  local  authority's  assessment  could  not
    possibly  cast  any  relevant  light  on  whether  the  alleged  family
    relationship exists,  or  upon  the  alleged  humanitarian  grounds,  I
    consider that, in an  Article  8/Article  7  case  of  this  kind,  the
    respondent should seek an assessment from the relevant local authority.

79. Ms Julia Farman, of the European Intake Unit, UK Visas and Immigration,
    has filed two statements in the current proceedings.  She is  the  Head
    of the EIU, a position she has held  since  2016,  when  the  Unit  was
    created.   Ms  Farman  says  in  her  first  statement  that  a  family
    assessment is requested from the local authority only "once the  family
    link has been established", since the purpose of the assessment "is  to
    ascertain the ability of an individual in the UK  to  take  care  of  a
    minor and, if necessary, to  source  appropriate  accommodation  should
    they qualify under the terms of the Dublin  III  Regulation".   In  her
    supplementary witness statement, which I decided  to  admit,  she  says
    that, in the context of Article 17(2), the EIU will  request  a  family
    assessment  "only  once  we  are  satisfied  that  the  claimed  family
    relationship has been established and the requirements of Article 17(2)
    have been met (i.e. it has been  decided  to  exercise  the  discretion
    under Article 17(2) on the basis of  the  humanitarian  grounds  and/or
    cultural considerations".  The purpose of the assessment is, therefore,
    to address whether there would  be  "any  overarching  safeguarding  or
    security concerns that would mean the transfer  would  not  be  in  the
    child's best interests".

80. As will be  apparent,  I  do  not  consider  these  statements  of  the
    respondent's practice to be compatible with the requirements of  Dublin
    III, as they bear on the issue of Article 7 CFR/Article 8  ECHR,  where
    the best interests of an unaccompanied minor are at issue.   There  are
    likely to be circumstances in which information from the relevant local
    authority, deriving from direct engagement  with  the  asserted  United
    Kingdom relation, will inform the making of the respondent's  decision,
    both as to the existence of the claimed relationship and as to the  way
    in which the Article 17(2) discretion should be exercised.

81. Although I  have  rejected  the  specific  challenges  brought  by  the
    applicants to the respondent's Guidance,  it  may  be  useful  for  the
    respondent to consider adding  a  provision  to  that  Guidance,  which
    reflects what I have held at paragraph 78 above.




(6) "Minded to refuse" communications

82. In MS, the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  the  respondent's  public  law
    obligation to act fairly may  require  that  an  individual  knows  the
    "gist" of what is being said against him or her, so as to  be  able  to
    make representations and/or adduce evidence, before the actual decision
    is taken.  The Upper Tribunal cited, in this regard,  the  judgment  of
    Lord Phillips MR in R (Q & Others) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] QB 36.   The  Upper  Tribunal  considered  that  this
    domestic obligation was not  inconsistent  with  Dublin  III.   On  the
    contrary, it was "patently focussed on  enhancing  or  maintaining  the
    integrity of the system  in  reaching  lawful  and  correct  decisions"
    (paragraph 124).

83. Ms Masood points out that "what fairness demands is  dependent  on  the
    context of the decision, and this is to be taken into  account  in  all
    its aspects" (R Doody) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [1994] 1 AC 531, per Lord Mustill.  Thus, Ms Masood submits, the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in MS, which was that the applicant  in  that  case
    should have been informed  of  the  respondent's  concerns  before  the
    refusal decision was issued, cannot  and  should  not  bind  the  Upper
    Tribunal in this case.  On the contrary, Ms Masood submits that in this
    Article 17(2) case, neither common law fairness nor Dublin III required
    the respondent to inform A1 or A2  of  the  reasons  why  she  was  not
    satisfied that  there  were  no  humanitarian  grounds  for  exercising
    discretion in A1's favour.

84. In Balajigari, Underhill LJ undertook a  comprehensive  review  of  the
    case law regarding procedural fairness, as it bears on the question  of
    whether a person is entitled to some form of  advance  notification  of
    the decision-maker's adverse thinking.  At paragraph 45,  Underhill  LJ
    referred to the judgment of Singh LJ in R (Citizens UK) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] 4 WLR 123.

85. In that judgment, Singh LJ derived from Doody the principles  that  the
    standards of fairness are not immutable and that what fairness  demands
    is dependent on the context.  Nevertheless, fairness "will  very  often
    require that a person who may be adversely  affected  by  the  decision
    will have an opportunity to make  representations  on  its  own  behalf
    either before the  decision  is  taken  with  a  view  to  producing  a
    favourable result; or after it is taken, with a view to  procuring  its
    modification; or both".  Since the person affected  usually  could  not
    make worthwhile representations without knowing what factors may  weigh
    against his interests, "fairness will very often  require  that  he  is
    informed of the gist of the case which he has to answer" (paragraph  69
    of Citizens UK).

86. At paragraph 48, Underhill LJ cited R v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department ex parte  Fayed  [1998]  1  WLR  763.   That  case  involved
    applications for naturalisation  by  brothers  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom, which were refused on the basis of concerns about  their  good
    character. Those concerns were not, however, raised with the applicants
    or even disclosed at the time of the decisions.  Underhill LJ  regarded
    the judgment in ex parte Fayed as  instructive,  in  the  context  with
    which the court was concerned in Balajigari.   The  applicants  had  no
    legal entitlement to a favourable decision; nor any pre-existing right,
    which was adversely affected by a public decision.  Although  they  had
    applied for a discretionary benefit to be conferred upon them, this did
    not prevent the Court of Appeal in ex parte Fayed  from  holding  that,
    where the Secretary of State had concerns, these needed to  be  put  to
    the applicant before a concluded  decision  was  taken  to  refuse  the
    application.

87. At paragraph 51, Underhill LJ noted the seriousness of  the  allegation
    made against Mr Balajigari; namely, that he had  acted  dishonestly  in
    relation to financial matters.  The consequences of refusal  were  also
    likely to be very serious (paragraph 53).

88. At paragraph 55, Underhill LJ concluded that, where  the  Secretary  of
    State was minded to refuse indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of
    an applicant's dishonesty or other reprehensible conduct, the Secretary
    of State was required as a matter of procedural  fairness  to  indicate
    clearly to the applicant that he had that suspicion; and  to  give  the
    applicant an opportunity to respond, both as regards the conduct itself
    and as regards any other reasons relied on as regards "undesirability".
     Any  response  had  to  be  taken  into  account  before  drawing  the
    conclusion that there had been such reprehensible conduct.

89. At paragraph 60, Underhill LJ held that, unless the circumstances of  a
    particular  case  made  it   impracticable,   the   ability   to   make
    representations only after a decision had been taken "will  usually  be
    insufficient to satisfy the demands of common law procedural fairness".
     The rationale for this result lay in the fact that it is conducive  to
    better decision-making because it ensures the decision-maker  is  fully
    informed at the point when a decision is still at  a  formative  stage.
    It also shows respect for the individual whose interests are  affected.
    Furthermore, "human nature being  what  it  is,  a  decision-maker  may
    unconsciously and in good faith tend to be defensive over the  decision
    to which he or she has previously come".

90. At paragraph 61, Underhill LJ held that "more fundamentally,  it  is  a
    central feature of the administrative review procedure  [which  applied
    in Mr Balajigari's case] ... that the reviewer will  not  consider  any
    evidence that was not before  the  original  decision-maker  except  in
    certain specified cases".  That meant the applicant would normally only
    be able to assert that he or she had been dishonest but  would  not  be
    permitted to adduce evidence in support of that  assertion.   Underhill
    LJ considered that this  limited  type  of  legal  review  "is  clearly
    inadequate here" (paragraph 61).

91. I do not accept Ms Masood's submission that, in  Article  17(2)  cases,
    domestic common law fairness principles mean the  respondent  is  never
    required to provide an indication or  gist,  to  an  applicant  or  his
    alleged United Kingdom relation, of matters of concern that may lead to
    a refusal to take charge of the applicant.   No  principled  basis  has
    been advanced for this proposition.  Like Underhill LJ in Balajigari, I
    find ex parte Fayed is instructive.  The power to refuse naturalisation
    is no less wide than the power conferred by Article 17(2).  The present
    case also shares similarities with the position of Mr  Balajigari.   As
    we shall see, the consequences of  refusal  could  well  have  profound
    consequences for A1.

92. Even more importantly, like Mr Balajigari, A1's Article 8  ECHR  rights
    are potentially  at  issue.   In  an  Article  17(2)  case,  where  the
    requesting State has advanced a case that raises the issue of Article 8
    and,  if  established,  the  prospect  of  serious   (and   potentially
    disproportionate) consequences if family reunion  is  not  effected,  I
    find that the respondent is potentially under a  duty  to  provide  the
    requesting  State  and  the  applicant  with  an  indication   of   the
    respondent's concerns.  Whilst the ability of the requesting  State  to
    seek reconsideration from the requested State  of  an  initial  adverse
    decision may diminish or  even  remove  the   potential  obligation  in
    respect of the initial decision, as a general matter there is likely to
    be an actual obligation to give the necessary indication,  prior  to  a
    second refusal, where the concerns harboured by the requested State are
    not ones that have been ventilated by it.

93. It must be emphasised that this is an area where one  cannot  lay  down
    hard and fast rules.  Even in a case in which  Article  8  ECHR  is  in
    play, there may be  exceptions.   Furthermore,  the  process  must  not
    become so elaborate as to  defeat  the  aim  of  expeditious  decision-
    making, particularly where the best interests of minors are  concerned.
    I agree with Ms Masood that one is not necessarily looking for the sort
    of detail one might find in,  for  example,  a  "Reasons  for  Refusal"
    letter accompanying a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain or to refuse a human rights claim.  On the  other  hand,  it  is
    difficult to see what legitimate purpose is served where the respondent
    has a specific concern that the requesting State or relevant individual
    may be able to address but which - because no forewarning  is  given  -
    has to be addressed  in  judicial  review  proceedings,  with  all  the
    expense and effort these entail.

94. I do not consider that Ms Masood  can  distinguish  Balajigari  on  the
    basis that the reconsideration process  referred  to  by  Underhill  LJ
    prevents additional evidence from being put forward, after the decision
    is made.  On the contrary, the logic of this submission seems to be  to
    favour judicial review as the  forum  for  resolving  matters,  when  a
    relatively simple administrative step could have done so.

E.  THE RESPONDENT'S DECISIONS

95. I now address each of the three decisions of the respondent.

(1) Decision of 5 November 2019

  96.   The initial take-charge request  from  Greece  included  the  United
      Kingdom residence permit of  A2  (who  lives  in  Glasgow),  his  bank
      statements and tenancy agreement, photographs of A1  and  A2  together
      when A2 went to visit A1 in Greece, evidence of A2's  travel  to  that
      country and A1's consent to the request.

  97.   The request described how, during an examination with  A1,  he  said
      that his cousin, A2, resided in the United  Kingdom  as  a  recognised
      refugee.  A1 said his father was dead and his mother and two  siblings
      were in Syria.  Three more siblings were in Lebanon and two more  were
      missing.  The caseworker, Ms Tsaknaki, drew attention to the  findings
      in the best interests assessment report, that A1 had suffered from the
      kidnapping and death of his father and had himself been  a  victim  of
      physical violence.  A2 had helped  him  resettle  in  Greece  and  had
      visited him there, as well as keeping in daily contact with  him.   A2
      was willing and able to take A1 under  his  care.   Ms  Tsaknaki  drew
      attention to the importance of the best interests  of  the  child,  as
      articulated in Dublin III.

  98.   Greece supplied the following further information.  Before the  loss
      of A1's father, the family was living in a place  in  Syria  and  A1's
      uncle had a house next door.  After the  death  of  A1's  father,  the
      family moved to another place.  The whole family of A1 was taken  care
      of by his paternal uncle, the father of A2.

  99.   A1 himself described being conscripted into what he described as the
      army.  After going on leave, he burnt his military clothes and he  and
      his family left for the home of his  maternal  uncle.   He  then  left
      Syria.  A1 described escaping from  the  army  many  times  and  being
      beaten, after his family had been  threatened  and  beaten  to  reveal
      where A1 was.  The assessor noted that life  was  extremely  difficult
      for A1 as a child.  He seemed to have suffered  a  lot  in  the  past.
      After the loss of his father, his maternal uncle  initially  took  the
      role of a father figure, followed by A2.

 100.   Asked about his relationship with A2 while in Syria, A1 was recorded
      as saying that:

          "our relationship in Syria was very good, although  he  [A2]  left
         when I was about 2 years old.  It was a long time ago but  we  were
         family, and we were talking on the phone with every chance.   After
         my compulsory military conscription, we lost contact, I had no  way
         to communicate with him.  When I got to Turkey we talked again.  He
         advised me through my travel and was expecting me to come to Greece
         to visit me".

 101.  A1 described that when he arrived in Athens he called  A2  and  after
      ten days A2 appeared in  front  of  him.   A2  stayed  in  Athens  for
      fourteen days.  He found A1 an apartment and paid for everything.   He
      also organised meetings with a lawyer and a social worker  and  bought
      A1 clothes and shoes.  With A2's help, A1 got an asylum card.

 102.  Asked about his current relationship with A2,  A1  said  "he  is  the
      person who protects me and he helps me with everything I need ...   He
      is like a father to me".  A2 repeated that last phrase in section 4 of
      the form.

 103.   A2 was recorded in the form as saying that A1:

          "is like a son for me.  Since he left Syria I am trying  to  help.
         I promised to his mother that I will protect him and do  everything
         to keep him safe.  From the first moment he reached Greece,  I  was
         here to help him, find a house for him and do  everything  to  make
         him happy".

 104.   A2 said that coming with him to the United  Kingdom  "would  be  the
      best thing for him, he is a  young  boy  without  family,  how  is  it
      possible for him to live without his family?".

 105.    The  form  included  an  assessment  by  Othon   Christophilis,   a
      psychologist.  He described in detail the problems faced by A1  whilst
      in Syria.  Although A1 had witnessed death and other traumatic events,
      he was not able to talk openly about these yet.  The psychologist said
      that A1 was "focussed on his education" in Greece.   However,  A1  had
      shown "signs of cognitive and memory difficulties".  These had not yet
      been assessed.  Overall, the psychologist deemed it necessary  and  in
      A1's best interests "to live in a  safe,  secure,  loving  and  caring
      environment that  would  help  him  fully  reintegrate  into  society,
      develop the skills that would help him cope with the traumatic  events
      that he had experienced and acquire all the necessary knowledge he did
      not have an opportunity to learn".  The recommendation was that A1  be
      reunited with A2 in the United Kingdom, since A2 "seems to be the only
      person that can provide [A1] with such an environment".

 106.  The Greek assessor concurred.  The assessor described the  cousin  as
      being extremely cooperative in having responded to  anything  that  A1
      requested.  A1 "refers to his cousin by defining  him  as  his  family
      now, and emphasising how important the family is to any human  being".
      The assessor considered that staying in a home with a  family  member,
      A2, who had been a  role  model  for  A1  would  be  "the  appropriate
      environment for the child, to deal with the  traumatic  stress  he  is
      suffering from and will also help him to evolve  his  social  skills".
      In summary, it was considered that it would be in A1's best  interests
      to move to the United Kingdom with his relative who would provide  him
      "with the most  appropriate  environment  to  begin  his  life  as  an
      [adolescent]".

 107.   The EIU notified Glasgow City Council of the "transfer notification"
      from Greece.  Glasgow City Council Social Work Department  replied  on
      29 October 2019 to ask if the EIU would:

          "process via the referral process by going to Social Care direct".
          The same day, the EIU responded to say that "the case has not been
         allocated to a  caseworker  yet,  however,  we  have  forwarded  an
         initial  notification  to  yourself  for  your  information   only.
         Therefore the actual referral process will be dealt at another time
         when the family link has been established.  If  you  feel  that  we
         should contact the Social Care direct, I will be  grateful  if  you
         would forward their contact email and telephone number for  further
         communication".

 108.   The EIU documents sent to Glasgow City Council stated:-

             "The Home Office is NOT  requesting  completion  of  a  Family
             Assessment at this time.

             However should you hold any evidence to  assist  in  verifying
             the claimed family link or possess any other information  that
             you  believe  should  be  considered   when   assessing   this
             application, please do forward this within 14 days.  ...

             The European Intake Unit will contact you further should it be
             satisfied that the claimed family link has been  demonstrated.
             At  this  point  we  will  request  completion  of  a   Family
             Assessment on the UK relative which will assist with the  best
             interests consideration and the decision on this application."

109. Also on 28 October, A2 was sent a letter by the  EIU,  stating  that  a
    request had been made by Greece  for  A1  to  join  A2  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  A2 was sent with the letter a questionnaire, in which he  was
    asked to provide as much detail as possible, and return it to  the  EIU
    no later than 11 November 2019.

110. It is common ground that A2 completed and returned  the  questionnaire.
    It is dated 29 October 2019.  It appears to have been received  by  the
    EIU no later than 11 November 2019.  In it, A2 set out  a  family  tree
    showing that A2's father was the brother of A1's father.   A2  gave  an
    undertaking, as  requested,  to  care  for  A1.   He  gave  details  of
    communications between them.  He also gave details of the name, address
    and telephone number of A1's mother.  A2 described his income  (derived
    from state benefits).

111. Disclosed in connection with the present proceedings is an email  of  4
    November 2019 from the EIU caseworker to the  senior  caseworker.   The
    caseworker described how the Home Office interview record  for  A2  had
    been viewed "and there was no mention of either applicant's parents  as
    the sibling [sic]  to  claimed  cousins.   Therefore  relationship  not
    established.  Furthermore, the family tree anagram  provided  with  BIA
    from Greece does not mention his claimed UK relative to be  a  paternal
    or maternal relative".

112. The decision of 5 November 2019 stated that A2 was  not  considered  to
    fall under the category of "relative" as  described  in  Article  8  of
    Dublin III.  Reference was then made to Article 17(2).  Although it was
    noted that Greece had said the best interests of A1 would  be  to  join
    A2, the decision said: "However no evidence  has  been  provided  which
    would support the assertion that  their  relationship  would  have  the
    strength to compare to that of a  sibling  relationship".   The  letter
    ended by saying that "additionally, the applicant's claim and  evidence
    provided do not have merit to warrant discretion of the criteria needed
    in the exceptional case  of  a  17.2  application".   Accordingly,  the
    request was refused.

Discussion

113. I have no hesitation in finding that the decision of  5  November  2019
    is legally flawed.  The alleged requirement to  show  that  the  family
    relationship for the purposes of Article 17(2) should be of a  strength
    to compare with that of siblings finds no support in Dublin III, or any
    published  Guidance  to  which  my  attention  has  been   drawn.    On
    examination, the reasoning of the decision letter is simply incoherent.
     If what was meant was that the relationship of cousins is not the same
    as the relationship between siblings, that  is  plainly  obvious.   The
    relationships are different.  If, however,  what  was  meant  was  that
    cousins cannot have a bond that  is  as  strong  as  the  bond  between
    siblings then that is, again, wrong.  Many siblings have  strained  or,
    indeed, non-existent bonds.  By contrast, it is far from  inconceivable
    that cousins who have, for instance, grown up  together  might  have  a
    relationship of real strength.

114. The final part of the letter, referring to the claim and  evidence  not
    having merit to warrant discretion, takes the respondent no further.

115. The respondent cannot rely on the GCID email of  4  November.   On  the
    contrary, this makes the mistake that one of  the  applicant's  parents
    should be the sibling of A2.  It was, of course, A2's  father  who  was
    the sibling of A1's father, making them first cousins.

116. The grounds contend that the decision of 5 November  2019  is  unlawful
    because  it  was  made  without  the  benefit  of  a  local   authority
    assessment.  As I have found, in  Article  17(2)  cases  there  may  be
    circumstances in which a  lawful  decision  might  be  reached  without
    calling for such an assessment.

117.  That  is  not,  however,  the  position  here.   Leaving   aside   the
    respondent's apparent confusion about what familial  relationship  was,
    in fact, in issue, the  materials  from  Greece  that  accompanied  the
    initial take-charge request,  although  somewhat  sparse,  nevertheless
    raised the issue of there being an Article 8 family life between A1 and
    A2, as cousins, by reference to the emotional and  material  dependency
    of A1 upon A2.  Given that there is no  question  but  that  A1  is  an
    unaccompanied minor, there was no reason for the respondent  to  depart
    from her normal policy, as set out in the Guidance,  of  requesting  an
    assessment.  As I have already held, I consider that  the  practice  of
    the respondent in Article 17(2) cases,  as  disclosed  in  Ms  Farman's
    statements, is incompatible with  the  respondent's  obligations  under
    Dublin III, the ECHR and the CFR.  Such an assessment could  have  shed
    light on the relevant issues in this case.

118. The decision is irrational, takes account of irrelevant matters,  fails
    to  take  account  of  relevant  ones,  was  reached   without   proper
    investigation and was contrary to the respondent's policy.

119.  I quash the decision of 5 November 2019.




(2) Decision of 16 January 2020

120. Following the communication to Greece of the respondent's  decision  of
    5 November 2019, Greece  supplied  two  further  reports,  respectively
    dated 15 and 18 November 2019  from,  respectively,  Ms  Makrynioti,  a
    social worker, and Mr Christofilis, the psychologist who had opined  in
    the earlier submissions.


121. Ms Makrynioti's report noted that A1 had been forced to  join  the  PKK
    Party of Kurdistan.  He had tried to escape and  disobey  their  orders
    but had been ill-treated, as had his family.  Initially homeless  after
    his arrival in Greece, A2 had arrived and  supported  him  as  much  as
    possible.  Ms Makrynioti described A2's interest as "pure and real  and
    I can vouch that he care as deeply about his  nephew  (sic)  because  I
    have met him in person".  A1 was said  to  need  support  "in  all  the
    factors of his life".  His experiences had left him "an irresolute  and
    weak person.  He is very frightened and isolated.  He is unable to take
    care of himself and it is not easy for him to trust anyone  apart  from
    members of his family".


122. Ms Makrynioti described A1 as  being  "calm  and  peaceful  around  his
    cousin and this is something I witnessed with my own  eyes".   Overall,
    she strongly recommended their unification as the best option for  A1's
    well-being and prosperity.


123. Mr Christofilis's report described A1's clinical presentation as  being
    "very preoccupying for the psychosocial team".  A1 had  "absolutely  no
    interaction with  other  beneficiaries  of  the  shelter".   He  showed
    "serious cognitive difficulties and memory issues".   Specifically,  A1
    was "unable to process and retain new  information".   Mr  Christofilis
    said that it was not possible to tell if these problems pre-existed  or
    were the result of his three-year captivity  in  the  Kurdish  military
    camp.  Whenever they touch on the sensitive issue during  sessions,  A1
    became "overwhelmed by his emotions  and  presents  a  physical  stress
    response".


124. Mr Christofilis deemed it necessary that A1 "lives in a  safe,  secure,
    loving and caring environment which will  help  him  fully  reintegrate
    into society, develop skills that will help him cope with the traumatic
    events he has experienced and acquire all the  necessary  knowledge  he
    did not the opportunity to learn".  According to Mr Christofilis,  this
    necessitated reunification with A2 "who seems to  be  the  only  person
    that can provide [A1] with such an environment".


125. The GCID notes contain a note of 8 January 2020 from an EIU  caseworker
    to the senior caseworker.  Having noted that Greece had requested a re-
    examination of A1's case, the caseworker said that  it  "falls  outside
    the family relationships as defined in  the  Regulation".   The  senior
    caseworker replied by email to say: "This is approved".


126. The decision of 16 January 2020 noted the reports of the social  worker
    and  the  psychologist,  stating  that  these  had  been   taken   into
    consideration.  The letter then said:-

         ".   We have considered  the  social  worker's  and  psychologist's
             report but we note they do not comment on the health situation
             of the applicant from their arrival in Greece, to show that he
             was not entitled to healthcare or it was not available.

         .    Although the report states that  [A1]  is  exhibiting  serious
             cognitive  difficulties  and  memory  issues  that  cannot  be
             attributed only to the lack of knowledge and  skills  acquired
             at a young age, it also states that  it  is  not  possible  to
             establish if this is a pre-existing condition.  Even with  the
             psychological report  itself,  this  does  not  amount  to  an
             exceptional case or humanitarian grounds to  apply  discretion
             and  accept  your  Take  Charge   re-examination.    Also   as
             previously stated, the UK relative is a cousin.  A cousin does
             not meet the relatives' definition of the Regulation.

         .    It is noted the psychologist report does not  evidence  why  a
             change of Member State will improve the current situation  for
             the applicant.

         .    It is our position that electing to be transferred to  another
             Member State is in itself not a humanitarian ground."



Discussion


127. As with the previous decision, Ms Masood did  her  formidable  best  to
    defend the decision of 16  January.   I  nevertheless  find  myself  in
    agreement with Ms Knorr that the letter of  16  January  is  profoundly
    problematic.


128. The question of whether A1 was entitled  to  healthcare  in  Greece  is
    entirely beside the point.  The clear thrust of the  reports  was  that
    A1's cognitive and behavioural problems made it particularly  important
    for him to enjoy the supportive  relationship  which  his  cousin,  A2,
    could offer on more than  the  intermittent  basis  that  was  possible
    whilst A1 remained in Greece.


129. It is, I find, difficult to understand what  is  meant  by  the  bullet
    point that refers to  it  not  being  possible  to  establish  if  A1's
    difficulties are the result of a pre-existing condition.  The focus  of
    attention should have been on A1's best interests,  taking  account  of
    his documented difficulties, whether they were "pre-existing" or not.


130. So far as the reference to a cousin is concerned, I do not accept  that
    this can be explained by reference to the caseworker's attempt to deal,
    not only with Article 17(2) but also Article 8(2).  Either the maker of
    the 16 January 2020 decision was of the view  that  a  relationship  of
    cousins was not a family relationship that came within  Article  17(2),
    or she failed to turn her mind  to  whether  such  a  relationship  was
    within the scope of that provision.  Either way, the resulting decision
    is legally flawed.  The email exchange of 8 January  2020  leaves  both
    possibilities open.  Once again,  the  exchange  does  not  assist  the
    respondent.


131. The penultimate bullet point suffers from the defect,  just  described,
    wherein the respondent takes no proper account of what the  authors  of
    the reports were actually saying.  The final bullet point is  true,  so
    far as it goes, but that is not far enough to save the decision.


132. The decision is irrational, takes account  of  irrelevant  matters  and
    fails to consider those that were relevant.


133. I quash the decision of 16 January 2020.

(3) Decision of 20 April 2020


134. As I have previously  mentioned,  this  decision  was  made  after  the
    commencement of the judicial review  proceedings  challenging  the  two
    earlier decisions.  The respondent, rightly in my view, chose to engage
    with the submissions from Greece, which led  to  this  third  decision,
    rather than treating those  submissions  as  invalid.   Such  a  course
    would, in the circumstances, merely have resulted in  Greece  making  a
    new Article 17(2) request.  The respondent, in effect, makes  her  main
    stand in these proceedings on the basis of the 20 April decision.


135.  A  significant  amount  of  further  evidence  was  supplied  to   the
    respondent, following the second refusal.  There  was  a  report  by  a
    child psychiatrist, Dr Vasiliki, dated 17 January 2020.  This confirmed
    the psychologist's assessment of A1's problems.  Dr Vasiliki identified
    depressed  mood,  anxiousness  and  avoidance  of  discussing  specific
    matters in A1's past.  A1 also had difficulties recalling details and a
    generally  low  level  of  mental  capacity,   together   with   memory
    difficulties and a low level of learning capacity.  Her conclusion  was
    that it was "necessary for [A1's] well-being to be taken care [of] by a
    family member due to serious medical care [sic]".


136. In addition, A2 had sent, by email to A1's shelter in  Greece,  a  copy
    of A1's grandfather's family book, which showed the grandfather's first
    child was A2's father and the second child was A1's father.  Also  sent
    was A2's father's passport and ID, pointing  out  his  name;  and  also
    extracts from the family book of A1's father, along with  the  father's
    ID and copy of military service book.


137. Both A2 and A2's  brother,  IAA,  provided  witness  statements.   A2's
    witness statement gave details  of  how  A1  was  related  to  A2.   It
    described their family history, including that the families of  A1  and
    A2 grew up together and that  both  families  were  supported  by  A2's
    father, after A1's father died.  A2 had taken IAA to live with  him  in
    Glasgow when IAA arrived in the United Kingdom in 2016.  IAA lived with
    A2 until IAA turned 19, when he moved to a flat of his own, one  minute
    away from A2.  A2's other  brothers  live  in  Glasgow,  about  ten  to
    fifteen minutes away.  The statement continued:-

         "We are a very tight family unit and I  love  my  brothers  dearly.
         They all very much want [A1] to  join  us  in  the  UK.   [IAA]  is
         particularly close to [A1] and they call each other  via  WhatsApp.
         I think they have a kinship because they are quite close in age and
         lived next door to each other for so many years."


138. A2 described visiting A1 in Athens in June 2019  and  the  arrangements
    he made for A1's welfare whilst A2 was there:-

         "It was very difficult to leave [A1] and he cried when I left  him.
         He told me that he felt like a stranger in  a  country  he  doesn't
         know.  I have always thought of [A1] as vulnerable because  of  his
         traumatic experiences in the army and because of  his  difficulties
         with reading and writing; however in that moment when I left him in
         Athens he seemed particularly vulnerable.  He is only a  child  and
         can't look after himself."


139.  A2  described  A1's  reaction  to  the  respondent's  second   refusal
    decision.  It came to A1 as a tremendous shock and he "was devastated".
     He "cried and said something like 'I am lost I am done it's over'".


140. A2 said that he feels "a huge responsibility  towards"  [A1].   He  had
    promised A1's mother that he would look after him and felt  it  is  his
    duty to do so.  A1 was in poor health and was quite a nave child.   A2
    wants to keep him safe.  A2 considered that his brothers and  he  could
    provide A1 with the family that he desperately needs.  A2 has  a  spare
    bedroom in his flat that A1 could use.  Social Services in Glasgow  had
    already confirmed that A2 was capable of  looking  after  his  brother,
    IAA.


141. IAA's statement describes how, when they were  all  young,  his  family
    and that of A1 lived close to each other in Syria.  A1 and IAA were  of
    similar ages and grew up together.  They would play  together  everyday
    and do everything together.  A1 was like "a brother to me.  The  family
    had to separate in later years due to the conflict in Syria.  [A1]  was
    forced to join the army and suffered terribly.  [A1] and I did not  see
    or speak to each other very much during those years".


142. IAA described in his statement the  family  situation  in  Glasgow,  in
    terms similar to those employed by A2.  IAA is studying at college  and
    hopes to go to university to study engineering.  IAA and  his  brothers
    "are all here waiting for  [A1]  and  want  to  offer  him  safety  and
    security.  In my view [A1] needs this very much ...  I  think  I  could
    help him and think it is important that we, as a family,  support  each
    other".


143. Ms Olivia Anness of Bhatt Murphy Solicitors  provided  a  statement  in
    which she described her telephone conversation with A1,  regarding  the
    respondent's second refusal.  A1 told Ms Anness that he  had  been  "so
    worried that he had not eaten anything since he  heard  the  news.   He
    said it was the worst news he had  ever  received".   The  prospect  of
    living his life alone without A2 felt meaningless to him.


144. The respondent's decision letter  of  20  April  2020  is  considerably
    longer and more detailed than its predecessors.  It makes it clear that
    the decision is concerned only with Article 17(2).


145. The letter states that "some documentary evidence has been provided  to
    evidence the claimed link of first cousins".  The letter then, however,
    goes on to note that the name of the father of  A1,  described  in  the
    statement of A2, does not appear from the translated information in the
    family book and ID documents.  Accordingly "it has not been possible to
    verify the familial relationship between [A1] and  [A2]".   The  letter
    states that the respondent would request "that further translations  of
    all the documents be provided in order for us to  fully  consider  this
    evidence".  As matters stood, however, "[this] time  it  has  not  been
    possible to verify the claimed family link from the evidence provided".




146. Because the family link was not established to the satisfaction of  the
    respondent, the accompanying reports did not, according  to  her,  take
    matters any further.


147. The letter continued, however, that "regardless of the above  position"
    the respondent had, in fact, considered the  evidence  and  information
    submitted but concluded that "even if it was in fact corroborated  that
    the two parties were related as claimed as  first  cousins,  discretion
    would not be exercised in the applicant's  favour  given  the  specific
    facts of the case".


148.  The  first  reason  for  reaching  that  conclusion   was   that   the
    psychological conditions of A1 were "historic.  The  evidence  has  not
    established a clear causal link between the applicant's conditions  and
    his separation from the UK sponsor".


149. The pedopsychiatric report, which did not make "a  confirmed  diagnosis
    of PTSD or epilepsy", concluded that  A1  needed  to  transfer  to  the
    United Kingdom; but the reports did not elaborate on how  the  sponsor,
    A2, would be able to respond to the serious needs or  indeed  what  the
    needs were.


150. The letter noted that it was not explained how A2 would be in a  better
    position than professionals in Greece to provide for the care needs  of
    A1.


151. Even if the respondent were  to  accept  that  A1  and  A2  were  first
    cousins, the letter stated that it was not accepted they shared  family
    life within the meaning of Article 8.  In order for such family life to
    exist, there needed to be "elements of dependency involving  more  than
    the 'normal emotional ties' as outlined in Kugathas".


152. On the issue of dependency and,  hence,  whether  Article  8(1)  family
    life exists between A1 and A2, the letter had this to say:-

         "Whilst it is accepted that there may be some degree  of  emotional
         ties, a natural concern and affection between a minor and his adult
         cousin, it is not accepted that there is evidence in this  case  of
         elements of dependency involving more  than  the  normal  emotional
         ties.

         The UK sponsor has been residing in the UK since  2013.   The  best
         interests assessment submitted in support of a take charge  request
         detailed that the UK sponsor left Syria when  the  above  applicant
         was aged just 2.  The ties built in this period are not  likely  to
         have been significant given the age of the applicant.

         The best interests assessment suggests  that  after  the  UK  based
         sponsor left Syria, the applicant and UK based sponsor spoke on the
         phone.  But there is no evidence of  dependency  on  the  UK  based
         sponsor during this period involving more than the normal emotional
         ties between family members.

         After the applicant left Syria, and arrived in  Turkey,  and  later
         Greece, again they have maintained contact by phone.  We note  that
         the UK based sponsor visited the applicant in Athens in June  2019,
         helped him  find  accommodation  and  provided  him  with  material
         assistance,  including  money.   It  is  not  accepted  that   this
         establishes dependency involving more than normal  emotional  ties,
         even when considered in the context of the issues described in  the
         pedopsychiatric report and psychological report.

         Given it is not accepted that there is family life between the  two
         parties the rejection of the take charge request does not result in
         a breach of the applicant's  Article  7  CFR  and  Article  8  ECHR
         rights."

153. Before examining the legality of the decision of 20 April 2020,  it  is
    convenient to describe further evidential material, adduced after  that
    decision.  WAA made a witness statement.  He is the brother of  A2  and
    IAA.  He lives in Glasgow, having  been  granted  refugee  status,  and
    works as a self-employed delivery driver.  As well  as  confirming  the
    family relationship, WAA  describes  his  family  as  living  with  and
    helping A1's family.  This included sharing their crops and money.  IAA
    was close to A1 and they would play together.  When  the  family  heard
    that A1 was in Athens, they raised money to pay for A2  to  visit  him.
    WAA  described  how  he  and  his  brothers  feel  that  A1   "is   our
    responsibility, so we were all very upset and worried  for  [A1]  after
    the refusals".  The brothers would "all support [A1] as much as we  can
    if he were able to come to the UK.  We would help him to develop skills
    so that he can study and find a job and build a life  here.   We  would
    look after him just like we looked him in Syria after his father died -
    we would do exactly the same.  We are family".

154. A similar witness statement was filed by RAA, another brother of A2.

155. Ms Anness provided a further statement dated 28 April  2020,  in  which
    she explained that translations of the family  books  could  have  been
    provided,  so  as  to  satisfy  the  respondent  of  the  first  cousin
    relationship between A1 and A2, had the applicants known that they were
    required by the respondent.

156. Finally, there is a report from Peter Horrocks, an  independent  social
    worker, produced on 9 May 2020.   He  conducted  interviews  by  remote
    video means with A1,  A2,  RAA,  WAA  and  IAA,  as  well  as  with  Mr
    Christofilis.

157. Mr Horrocks's interview with A2 is  significant,  in  that  it  touches
    upon the issue of whether A1 was only 2 years old when A2  left  Syria.
    According to Mr Horrocks's report, A2 said that A1 would have been aged
    about 9 or 10 when A2 left Syria: "In  the  best  interests  assessment
    [A1] states he was aged about 2 years old when [A2] left  and  that  is
    clearly incorrect".  A1 would play with IAA all the time and they would
    spend most of their time playing together.  A2 would see A1  every  day
    during this period and sometimes A1 would sleep over in their house  or
    vice versa.  The houses of the two families were isolated from the rest
    of the village by about a kilometre.  A2 said that,  because  of  their
    family background, the Kurds saw the  families  as  Arabs,  whilst  the
    Arabs  saw  them  as  Kurds.   The  result  of  this  was  that   their
    interactions were with "extended families as  opposed  to  other  local
    residents and this was relevant in terms of the children's playmates as
    well".

158. Mr Horrocks's interview with A1 was problematic.  A1 was in  tears  and
    very distressed.  A1 told Mr Horrocks that he could not live  where  he
    was.  The other young  people  swore  at  him  and  beat  him  up.   A1
    emphasised that he wanted to be with his family.

159. Mr Horrocks concluded  that  A1  and  A2  were  paternal  cousins.   He
    further concluded that there "is a big difference in the importance and
    meaning of the family between the UK and Syria and  they  have  a  very
    different concept whereby in Syria, the  extended  family  has  a  much
    greater  importance".   Asked  to  comment  on  the  strength  of   the
    relationship/level of dependency between A1 and A2, Mr Horrocks  stated
    that the evidence he had gathered "underpins the  important  nature  of
    [A1's] relationship and level of  dependency  on  his  extended  family
    members".  A1 was "desperate to be reunited with his family members  in
    the UK.  He considers [A2] to be like a father and his other cousins to
    be his brothers and they see him in the same way".   A1  had  grown  up
    alongside his cousins "almost  in  a  large  family  unit  and  from  a
    historical, social,  cultural  and  family  perspective  they  are  his
    brothers".

160. Mr Horrocks considered that the experiences of IAA,  when  he  came  to
    live with A2, were "a first-hand account of [A2's]  abilities  to  meet
    all aspects of [A1's]  practical  and  emotional  care  needs.   In  Mr
    Horrocks's professional  opinion,  A2  "has  both  the  experience  and
    knowledge to care for [A1] and to meet all aspects of his practical and
    emotional care needs".  A1 will be treated by his cousins in the United
    Kingdom as his brothers.

161. So far as best interests were concerned, Mr Horrocks found that A1  "is
    a very vulnerable and damaged young person, whose current situation  is
    contributing to a deterioration in his mental health,  because  of  the
    refusal of his application for unification with his family in the  UK".
    A  contributing  factor  was  A1's  "fixation   on   the   outcome   of
    reunification and his refusal to make  any  efforts  to  integrate  and
    interact with other residents and staff in the  hostel".   Mr  Horrocks
    considered that this fixation  had  some  form  of  cognitive/emotional
    element, whereby A1 was unable to accept any alternative outcome.  This
    meant that further refusal  would  lead  to  a  deterioration  of  A1's
    emotional situation and would compound his mental health  difficulties.
    Overall, Mr Horrocks shared the findings of the reports from the  Greek
    professional that it was "strongly  in  [A1's]  best  interests  to  be
    reunited with  [A2]".  A1  faced  "most  certainly  the  likelihood  of
    suffering harm to his emotional,  his  physical,  his  social  and  his
    educational development and a very high risk that  this  harm  will  be
    long term and permanent".

162. I have referred to the third witness statement  of  A2,  filed  at  the
    hearing, which I have decided to admit  into  evidence.   In  this,  A2
    clarifies what is indicated in Mr Horrocks's report;  namely,  that  A1
    was not 2 when A2 left Syria, but, rather, around 9 or 10 years old.

Discussion

163. I find the letter of 20 April 2020 suffers  from  the  defect  that  it
    raises, for the first time in the  respondent's  decisions,  the  issue
    that Greece has not shown that A1 and A2 are  first  cousins.   The  20
    April decision does so on a narrow basis, which could readily have been
    addressed, had the respondent seen fit to raise it with  Greece  and/or
    the  applicants.   This  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  it  was
    satisfactorily dealt with by the subsequent material, as Ms Masood very
    properly acknowledged.  Indeed, she told me  on  instruction  that  the
    familial relationship was now accepted by the respondent.

164. I consider that this  is  a  paradigm  example  of  a  situation  where
    procedural fairness required the respondent  to  alert  the  applicants
    and/or Greece to her concerns, before proceeding to  make  a  decision.
    In so finding, I am aware of the fact that the respondent  is  entitled
    to  expect  evidence  accompanying  an  Article  17(2)  request  to  be
    "coherent, verifiable and detailed", as described in the  Guidance.   I
    am further aware that it is not for the respondent  to  assume  general
    responsibility  for  the  translation  of   documents.    Nevertheless,
    particularly in the light  of  the  history  of  this  matter  and  the
    narrowness of the point in issue, it  was  plainly  necessary  for  the
    respondent to give an advance indication  of  her  thinking.   This  is
    particularly so, given that this thinking had markedly changed so that,
    for the first time, the existence of the cousin relationship was  being
    called into question.

165. This error will not, however, be material if there is  nothing  legally
    wrong with the alternative finding in the letter of 20  April,  on  the
    basis that A1 and A2 are related as claimed.

166.  The  respondent's  treatment  of  the  pedopsychiatric  report  is,  I
    consider, legally flawed.  It  suffers  from  similar  deficiencies  to
    those contained in the earlier decisions, in that it adopts  the  wrong
    focus, thereby leading the respondent to consider  what  is  irrelevant
    and ignore what is relevant.  The question is not  whether  or  how  A2
    would clinically address the psychiatric and cognitive conditions, from
    which A1 suffers.  Rather, given  those  conditions,  the  question  is
    whether it would be in A1's best interests to be living with a  person,
    A2, whom he trusts and regards as a father figure, alongside the  other
    cousins, who regard him as  members  of  their  family.   Although  the
    evidence in that regard has further developed since  the  date  of  the
    decision, even on the evidence available to the decision-maker in April
    2020, the treatment of the reports is so deficient  as  to  be  legally
    flawed.

167. This brings me to the final element of the 20 April  decision;  namely,
    the conclusion that Article 8(1) family life does not exist between  A1
    and A2.  As we have seen, the writer of the  decision  alights  on  the
    statement in the original material submitted by Greece, that A1 said he
    was 2 years old when A2 left Syria.  If that were right, there might be
    legitimate cause for questioning the existence of family life, in terms
    of Article 8(1)/Article 7, as between the cousins.  In  particular,  it
    would be hard in such a scenario  to  see  how  A1  could  legitimately
    regard A2 as a father figure, and equally hard  to  see  how  A2  could
    legitimately see himself in that role.  If, on the other hand,  A2  had
    left A1's orbit when the latter was 9 or 10 years old, the position  is
    likely to be very different.  In particular, there  would  be  a  ready
    explanation  for  A2's  high  level  of  communications  with  A1  and,
    especially, for A2's decision to go to Athens and spend  his  own  time
    and the family's money helping A1.

168. The problem for the respondent is that the  issue  regarding  A1's  age
    has been raised by her in a decision that was generated only after  the
    commencement of judicial review  proceedings.  This  matter  could  and
    should have been raised by her much earlier. In all likelihood it would
    have been, but for the serious errors of approach contained in the  two
    earlier decisions. In particular, in the light of  what  I  have  found
    regarding the failure of the respondent to ask for  a  local  authority
    assessment before taking the 5 November 2019 decision, it is  a  matter
    which is highly likely to have been dealt with in such  an  assessment.
    The respondent's alternative  finding  is,  therefore,  itself  legally
    erroneous.

169. For these reasons, I quash the decision of 20 April 2020.

(4) Ground 2

170. Irrespective of the public law errors I have identified  in  the  three
    decisions of the  respondent,  I  need  to  consider  whether,  on  the
    totality of the evidence before me in these proceedings, including  the
    witness statements that post-date the third decision and the report  of
    Mr Horrocks, (i) whether Article 8(1) ECHR/Article 7  CFR  family  life
    has been shown to exist, on the balance of  probabilities,  between  A1
    and  A2;  and,  if  so,  (ii)  whether  the   decisions   represent   a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights.  For the reasons I
    have given, Ground 2 is not dependent upon my having found  independent
    legal errors in the decisions, of a "conventional" public  law  nature,
    which led me to quash those decisions.  As the Upper Tribunal concluded
    in MS, in deciding Ground 2  I  am  not  confined  to  looking  at  the
    evidence which was before the respondent when she  made  the  decisions
    that are under challenge.

171. I see no reason to give Mr Horrocks's report only limited weight.   The
    fact that he undertook his interviews by remote video means is not,  in
    the circumstances, a reason to discount or diminish his  findings.   Mr
    Horrocks  is  well-versed  in  the  advantages  and  disadvantages   of
    conducting interviews by these means. There is nothing  in  his  report
    that suggests he was materially impaired in reaching his conclusions by
    speaking with A1 and the others only by video link.

172. Mr Horrocks, in his interview with A2, explained the age  at  which  A1
    would have been when A2 left Syria.  A2 also told Mr  Horrocks  details
    about the situation of the families in Syria  which  strongly  supports
    the earlier evidence.  The fact that  the  families  were  regarded  as
    neither Kurdish nor Arab by the local community,  and  so  drew  in  on
    themselves in what might be described as a  small  compound  comprising
    their two houses, isolated from the rest of the village,  has  much  to
    say about the claimed relationship between A1 and A2 and  the  latter's
    brothers.  It provides a clear rationale for A1's current view of,  and
    relationship with, A2 and his brothers; and vice versa.

173. I find, on the totality  of  the  evidence,  that  family  life  exists
    between A1 and A2, for the purposes of Article 8(1)/Article 7.

174. Each of the decisions is, therefore, legally  flawed,  being  based  on
    the incorrect factual assumption that such protected family  life  does
    not exist.

175. As I have earlier explained, although the existence of family  life  is
    conceptually separate from whether there has  been  a  disproportionate
    interference with the right to respect for it,  on  the  facts  of  the
    present case the two are closely intertwined.   The  extreme  emotional
    dependency that A1 has on A2 is not only a factor that helps  establish
    the existence of family  life  between  them.   It  also  goes  to  the
    question of whether the respondent's decisions,  refusing  to  exercise
    discretion  under   Article   17(2),   represent   a   disproportionate
    interference with that family life.

176. I find that each of the decisions, including that  of  20  April  2020,
    constitutes  such  a  disproportionate  interference.   The  first  two
    decisions do not begin to address the balancing exercise inherent in  a
    proportionality exercise.  The third decision likewise  fails  in  this
    regard, because it  wrongly  assumes  that  no  protected  family  life
    exists. The totality of the evidence shows, on balance, that A1 and  A2
    have a very close bond; that A2 occupies the position of  father-figure
    for A1; and that A1 needs the support of A2 and the latter's  siblings.
    To deny reunion in those circumstances would amount to  an  unjustified
    interference with the Article 8/Article 7 rights of A1  and  A2.  I  so
    find, having full regard to the provisions of the immigration rules  on
    which the respondent relies and, more generally, to the  importance  of
    maintaining the system of immigration controls.

177. I have assessed the proportionality of the interference  on  the  basis
    that A1's admission to the United Kingdom pursuant to Dublin III is not
    for the purpose of settlement, or  even  as  a  possible  precursor  to
    settlement, but for the purpose of having A1's  asylum  claim  examined
    and decided by the respondent. Each of  the  parties  alights  on  that
    point as an argument in their favour. I consider that  the  applicants'
    argument is to be preferred. It is a commonplace  of  human  experience
    that a person's need for the support of their family is  likely  to  be
    greatest at times of challenge for that person. Being in  a  supportive
    environment, of the kind that A2 and his siblings would provide,  while
    A1 undergoes the application process is, on the facts of this case,  of
    extreme  importance  to  A1's  wellbeing.   To   deny   him   this   is
    disproportionate.

178. Each of the decisions, accordingly, falls to be quashed on Ground 2.

F.  REMEDY

179. The final matter to address is the issue of remedy.  Ms  Knorr  submits
    that mandatory relief is appropriate, since the only  rational  way  in
    which the respondent could react to the evidence now before her, is  to
    exercise her discretion under Article 17(2) in favour of A1's admission
    to this country in order to be united  with  A2.   This  is,  in  other
    words, a case where human rights considerations turn  the  respondent's
    discretionary power into a duty.

180. I note that, at paragraph 84 of its judgment,  the  Tribunal  in  HA  &
    Others cited Padfield v Minister of  Agriculture,  Fisheries  and  Food
    [1968] AC 997 as authority for the proposition that "a court should not
    compel any authority to do more than consider the exercise of  a  power
    which is merely permissive and does not impose an obligation  to  act".
    Padfield was, however, a case decided well before the enactment of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  In the field of  human  rights,  there  may  be
    circumstances in which a court or tribunal will be fully satisfied that
    an administrative discretion cannot  be  lawfully  exercised  otherwise
    than in a particular way.  I do not, therefore, consider  the  Padfield
    doctrine to stand in the way of Ms Knorr's submission.

181. It is, however, necessary for  me  to  consider  whether,  despite  the
    findings I have made on the evidence before me, it would be appropriate
    to deprive  the  respondent  of  the  ability,  acting  in  the  public
    interest, to  check  whether  there  is,  as  matters  now  stand,  any
    circumstance that may affect the exercise  of  Article  17(2)  in  A1's
    favour.  I remind myself, in particular, of the need to give effect  to
    the best interests of A1.  I am also aware, of course, that  the  local
    authority has not had the opportunity of confirming,  from  its  expert
    standpoint, A2's ability to take charge of and care for A1.   The  fact
    that we are without such an assessment is  due  to  the  fault  of  the
    respondent is nothing to the point, save that it means there is  now  a
    pressing need to act with extreme expedition, given A1's  circumstances
    in Greece.

182. Accordingly, I decline to make a mandatory order. However, as  well  as
    quashing the decisions, I consider it appropriate to make a declaration
    that each of the decisions was unlawful as it breached A1's  Article  8
    ECHR/Article 7 CFR rights.

183. I will hear counsel on the form of the order, if  the  same  cannot  be
    agreed.

184. Likewise, I invite submissions on the issue of damages.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  applicants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the applicants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                      Signed: Mr Justice Lane             Date: 23 June
                      2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                    ANNEX


    Dublin III Regulation

    Recitals

    "(13)    In accordance with the 1989 United Nations Convention  on  the
         Rights of the Child and with the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  of
         the European Union, the best interests of the  child  should  be  a
         primary  consideration  of  Member  States   when   applying   this
         Regulation.  In assessing the best interests of the  child,  Member
         States should, in particular, take due account of the minor's well-
         being and social development, safety  and  security  considerations
         and the views of the minor in accordance with his or  her  age  and
         maturity, including his or her background.  In  addition,  specific
         procedural guarantees for unaccompanied minors should be laid  down
         on account of their particular vulnerability.

    (14) In accordance with the European Convention for the  Protection  of
         Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms  and  with  the  Charter  of
         Fundamental Rights of the European Union, respect for  family  life
         should be a primary consideration of Member  States  when  applying
         this Regulation.

    (15) The processing together  of  the  applications  for  international
         protection of the members of one family by a  single  Member  State
         makes it possible to ensure  that  the  applications  are  examined
         thoroughly, the decisions taken in respect of them  are  consistent
         and the members of one family are not separated.

    ...

    (17)  Any  Member  State  should  be  able   to   derogate   from   the
         responsibility  criteria,  in  particular   on   humanitarian   and
         compassionate grounds, in order to bring together  family  members,
         relatives or any other family relations and examine an  application
         for international protection lodged with it or with another  Member
         State, even if such examination is not its responsibility under the
         binding criteria laid down in this Regulation.

    ...

    39.  This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and  observes  the
         principles which are acknowledged, in particular, in the Charter of
         Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union.   In  particular,  this
         Regulation seeks to ensure full observance of the right  to  asylum
         guaranteed by Article 18 of the  Charter  as  well  as  the  rights
         recognised under Articles  1,  4,  7,  24  and  47  thereof.   This
         Regulation should therefore be applied accordingly.

    (40) Since the objective of this Regulation, namely  the  establishment
         of  criteria  and  mechanisms  for  determining  the  Member  State
         responsible  for  examining  an   application   for   international
         protection lodged in one of the Member States  by  a  third-country
         national or a stateless person, cannot be sufficiently achieved  by
         the Member States and can therefore, by reason  of  the  scale  and
         effects of this Regulation, be better achieved at Union level,  the
         Union may adopt  measures  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of
         subsidiarity as set out in Article 5  of  the  Treaty  on  European
         Union (TEU). In accordance with the principle  of  proportionality,
         as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what
         is necessary in order to achieve that objective.

                                 Article 2 -
                                 Definitions

    For the purposes of this Regulation -

         "...

         (g)  family members' means, insofar as the family  already  existed
             in the  country  of  origin,  the  following  members  of  the
             applicant's family who are present on  the  territory  of  the
             Member States:

             -    the spouse of the  applicant  or  his  or  her  unmarried
                partner in a stable relationship, where the law or  practice
                of the Member State concerned treats unmarried couples in  a
                way comparable to married couples under its law relating  to
                third-country nationals,

             -    the minor children of couples referred to  in  the  first
                indent or of the  applicant,  on  condition  that  they  are
                unmarried and regardless of whether they were born in or out
                of wedlock or adopted as defined under national law,

             -    when the applicant is a minor and unmarried, the  father,
                mother or  another  adult  responsible  for  the  applicant,
                whether by law or by the practice of the Member State  where
                the adult is present,

             -    when the beneficiary of  international  protection  is  a
                minor and unmarried, the father,  mother  or  another  adult
                responsible for him or her whether by law or by the practice
                of the Member State where the beneficiary is present;

         (h)  'relative' means  the  applicant's  adult  aunt  or  uncle  or
             grandparent who is present in the territory of a Member State,
             regardless of whether the applicant was  born  in  or  out  of
             wedlock or adopted as defined under national law;

         (i)  'minor' means a third-country national or a  stateless  person
             below the age of 18 years;

         (j)  'unaccompanied  minor'  means  a  minor  who  arrives  on  the
             territory of the  Member  States  unaccompanied  by  an  adult
             responsible for him or her, whether by law or by the  practice
             of the Member State concerned, and for as long as he or she is
             not effectively taken into the  care  of  such  an  adult;  it
             includes a minor who is left unaccompanied after he or she has
             entered the territory of Member States;

         ...







                                  Article 3
   Access to the procedure for examining an application for international
                                 protection

         "1.  Member States shall examine any application for  international
             protection by a third-country national or a  stateless  person
             who applies on the territory of any one of them, including  at
             the border or in the transit zones.  The application shall  be
             examined by a single Member State,  which  shall  be  the  one
             which  the  criteria  set  out  in  Chapter  III  indicate  is
             responsible.

         2.   Where no Member State responsible can  be  designated  on  the
             basis of the criteria listed in  this  Regulation,  the  first
             Member  State  in  which  the  application  for  international
             protection was lodged shall be responsible for examining it.

             Where it is impossible to transfer an applicant to the  Member
             State primarily designated as responsible  because  there  are
             substantial grounds for  believing  that  there  are  systemic
             flaws in the asylum procedure and in the reception  conditions
             for applicants in that Member State, resulting in  a  risk  of
             inhuman or degrading treatment within the meaning of Article 4
             of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union,
             the determining Member State shall  continue  to  examine  the
             criteria set out in Chapter III in order to establish  whether
             another Member State can be designated as responsible.

             Where the transfer cannot be made pursuant to  this  paragraph
             to any Member State designated on the basis  of  the  criteria
             set out in Chapter III or to the first Member State with which
             the application was lodged, the determining Member State shall
             become the Member State responsible.

         ...

                                  Article 6
                            Guarantees for minors

         1.    The  best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be   a   primary
             consideration for Member States with respect to all procedures
             provided for in this Regulation.

         2.   Member States shall ensure that  a  representative  represents
             and/or assists an unaccompanied  minor  with  respect  to  all
             procedures   provided   for   in   this    Regulation.     The
             representative shall have the qualifications and expertise  to
             ensure that the best interests of the  minor  are  taken  into
             consideration during the procedures  carried  out  under  this
             Regulation.  Such representative  shall  have  access  to  the
             content of the relevant  documents  in  the  applicant's  file
             including the specific leaflet for unaccompanied minors.

             This paragraph shall be  without  prejudice  to  the  relevant
             provisions in Article 25 of Directive 2013/32/EU.

         3.   In assessing the best interests of the  child,  Member  States
             shall  closely  cooperate  with  each  other  and  shall,   in
             particular, take due account of the following factors:

             (a)  family reunification possibilities;

             (b)  the minor's well-being and social development;

             (c)  safety and security considerations, in  particular  where
                  there is a risk of the  minor  being  a  victim  of  human
                  trafficking;

             (d)  the views of the minor, in accordance with his or her age
                  and maturity.

         4.   For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State  where
             the   unaccompanied   minor   lodged   an   application    for
             international protection shall,  as  soon  as  possible,  take
             appropriate action to identify the family members, siblings or
             relatives of the  unaccompanied  minor  on  the  territory  of
             Member States, whilst protecting the  best  interests  of  the
             child.

         ...

                                  Article 7
                            Hierarchy of criteria

         1.   The criteria for  determining  the  Member  State  responsible
             shall be applied in the order in which they  are  set  out  in
             this Chapter.

         ...

                                  Article 8
                                   Minors

         1.   Where the applicant is  an  unaccompanied  minor,  the  Member
             State responsible shall be that where a  family  member  or  a
             sibling  of  the  unaccompanied  minor  is  legally   present,
             provided that it is in the best interests of the minor.  Where
             the applicant is a married minor whose spouse is  not  legally
             present on the territory of  the  Member  States,  the  Member
             State responsible shall be the Member State where the  father,
             mother or other adult responsible for the  minor,  whether  by
             law or by the practice of that Member  State,  or  sibling  is
             legally present.

         2.   Where the applicant  is  an  unaccompanied  minor  who  has  a
             relative who is legally present in another  Member  State  and
             where it is established, based on an  individual  examination,
             that the relative can take care of him  or  her,  that  Member
             State shall unite the minor with his or her relative and shall
             be the Member State responsible, provided that it  is  in  the
             best interests of the minor.

         ...

         4.   In the absence of a family member, a sibling or a relative  as
             referred  to  in  paragraphs  1  and  2,  the   Member   State
             responsible shall be that where the  unaccompanied  minor  has
             lodged his or her application  for  international  protection,
             provided that it is in the best interests of the minor.

         ...

                                 Article 17
                            Discretionary clauses

         1.   By way of derogation from Article 3(1), each Member State  may
             decide to examine an application for international  protection
             lodged with it by a  third-country  national  or  a  stateless
             person, even if such examination  is  not  its  responsibility
             under the criteria laid down in this Regulation.

             The Member State which decides to examine an  application  for
             international protection  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall
             become the Member  State  responsible  and  shall  assume  the
             obligations  associated  with   that   responsibility.   Where
             applicable, it shall inform, using the  'DubliNet'  electronic
             communication network set up under Article  18  of  Regulation
             (EC) No 1560/2003, the Member  State  previously  responsible,
             the Member State conducting a procedure  for  determining  the
             Member State responsible or the Member State  which  has  been
             requested to take charge of, or to take back, the applicant.

             ...

         2.   The Member State in which  an  application  for  international
             protection is made and which is carrying out  the  process  of
             determining the Member State responsible, or the Member  State
             responsible,  may,  at  any  time  before  a  first   decision
             regarding the substance is taken, request another Member State
             to take charge of an applicant in order to bring together  any
             family relations, on humanitarian grounds based in  particular
             on family or cultural considerations, even  where  that  other
             Member State is not responsible under the criteria  laid  down
             in Articles 8 to 11 and 16. The persons concerned must express
             their consent in writing.

             The request to take charge shall contain all the  material  in
             the possession of the requesting Member  State  to  allow  the
             requested Member State to assess the situation.

             The requested Member  State  shall  carry  out  any  necessary
             checks to examine the humanitarian grounds  cited,  and  shall
             reply to the requesting Member  State  within  two  months  of
             receipt  of  the  request  using  the  'DubliNet'   electronic
             communication network set up under Article  18  of  Regulation
             (EC) No 1560/2003.  A reply refusing the request  shall  state
             the reasons on which the refusal is based.

             Where  the  requested  Member  State  accepts   the   request,
             responsibility  for  examining  the   application   shall   be
             transferred to it.

         ...

                                 Article 22
                      Replying to a take charge request

         1.   The requested Member State shall make  the  necessary  checks,
             and shall give a decision on the request to take charge of  an
             applicant within two months of receipt of the request.

         2.   In the procedure for determining the Member State  responsible
             elements of proof and circumstantial evidence shall be used.

         ...

         4.   The requirement of proof should not exceed what  is  necessary
             for the proper application of this Regulation.

         5.   If there is no formal proof, the requested Member State  shall
             acknowledge its responsibility if the circumstantial  evidence
             is coherent, verifiable and sufficiently detailed to establish
             responsibility.

         ...

                                 Article 27
                                  Remedies

         1.   The applicant or another person  as  referred  to  in  Article
             18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an  effective  remedy,
             in the form of an appeal or a review,  in  fact  and  in  law,
             against a transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.

         ..."

    Commission  Regulation  (EC   (1560/2003)   (The   first   Implementing
    Regulation)

    ...

                                 "Article 3
                    Processing requests for taking charge

         1.   The arguments in law and in fact set out in the request  shall
             be examined in the light of the provisions of Regulation  (EC)
             No 343/2003 and the lists of proof and circumstantial evidence
             which are set out in Annex II to the present Regulation.

         2.   Whatever the criteria and provisions  of  Regulation  (EC)  No
             343/2003 that are relied on, the requested Member State shall,
             within the time allowed by  Article  18(1)  and  (6)  of  that
             Regulation, check exhaustively and objectively, on  the  basis
             of all information directly or  indirectly  available  to  it,
             whether its responsibility for examining the  application  for
             asylum is established.  If the checks by the requested  Member
             State reveal that it is responsible under at least one of  the
             criteria  of  that  Regulation,  it  shall   acknowledge   its
             responsibility.

         ...

                                  Article 5
                               Negative reply

         1.   Where, after checks are  carried  out,  the  requested  Member
             State considers that the evidence submitted does not establish
             its  responsibility,  the  negative  reply  it  sends  to  the
             requesting Member State shall state full and detailed  reasons
             for its refusal.

         2.   Where the requesting Member State feels that such a refusal is
             based on a misappraisal, or where it has  additional  evidence
             to put forward, it may ask for its request to be  re-examined.
             This option must be exercised  within  three  weeks  following
             receipt of the negative  reply.  The  requested  Member  State
             shall endeavour to reply within two weeks. In any event,  this
             additional procedure shall not extend  the  time  limits  laid
             down  in  Article  18(1)  and  (6)  and  Article  20(1)(b)  of
             Regulation (EC) No 343/2003.

         ...

                                 Article 12
                            Unaccompanied minors

         1.   Where the decision to entrust the  care  of  an  unaccompanied
             minor to a relative other than the  mother,  father  or  legal
             guardian  is  likely   to   cause   particular   difficulties,
             particularly where the adult  concerned  resides  outside  the
             jurisdiction of the  Member  State  in  which  the  minor  has
             applied  for  asylum,  cooperation   between   the   competent
             authorities  in  the  Member   States,   in   particular   the
             authorities  or  courts  responsible  for  the  protection  of
             minors, shall be facilitated and the necessary steps taken  to
             ensure that those authorities can decide, with full  knowledge
             of the facts, on the ability of the adult or adults  concerned
             to take charge of the minor in a way  which  serves  his  best
             interests.

             Options now available in the field of cooperation on  judicial
             and  civil  matters  shall  be  taken  account  of   in   this
             connection.

         2.   The fact that the duration of procedures for placing  a  minor
             may lead to a failure  to  observe  the  time  limits  set  in
             Article 18(1) and (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC)  No
             343/2003 shall not necessarily be an  obstacle  to  continuing
             the procedure for determining the Member State responsible  or
             carrying out a transfer.

                                 Article 13
                                 Procedures

         1.   The initiative of requesting  another  Member  State  to  take
             charge of an asylum seeker on  the  basis  of  Article  15  of
             Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003 shall  be  taken  either  by  the
             Member State where the application for  asylum  was  made  and
             which is carrying out a  procedure  to  determine  the  Member
             State responsible, or by the Member State responsible.

         2.   The request to take charge shall contain all the  material  in
             the possession of the requesting Member  State  to  allow  the
             requested Member State to assess the situation.

         3.   The requested Member  State  shall  carry  out  the  necessary
             checks to establish, where applicable,  humanitarian  reasons,
             particularly of a family or  cultural  nature,  the  level  of
             dependency  of  the  person  concerned  or  the  ability   and
             commitment of  the  other  person  concerned  to  provide  the
             assistance desired.

         ..."







    Commission implementing  Regulation  (EU)  No.  118/2014  ("The  second
    Implementing Regulation")

         "...

                                  Article 1
                  Amendments to Regulation EC No. 1560/2003

         Regulation (EC) No. 1560/2003 is amended as follows:

         ...

         (7)  In Article 12, the following paragraphs are added:

             '3.  With a view to facilitating  the  appropriate  action  to
                  identify the family members, siblings or relatives  of  an
                  unaccompanied  minor,  the  Member  State  with  which  an
                  application for international protection was lodged by  an
                  unaccompanied minor  shall,  after  holding  the  personal
                  interview pursuant to Article  5  of  Regulation  (EU)  No
                  604/2013 in the presence of the representative referred to
                  in Article 6(2) of that Regulation, search for and/or take
                  into account any information  provided  by  the  minor  or
                  coming from any other credible source  familiar  with  the
                  personal situation or the route followed by the minor or a
                  member of his or her family, sibling or relative.

                  The authorities carrying out the process  of  establishing
                  the Member State responsible for examining the application
                  of an unaccompanied minor shall involve the representative
                  referred to in Article 6(2) of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013
                  in this process to the greatest extent possible.

             4.   Where in the application  of  the  obligations  resulting
                  from Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013, the  Member
                  State carrying out the process of establishing the  Member
                  State responsible for  examining  the  application  of  an
                  unaccompanied minor is in possession of  information  that
                  makes it possible to start identifying and/or  locating  a
                  member of the family, sibling  or  relative,  that  Member
                  State shall consult other Member States,  as  appropriate,
                  and exchange information, in order to:

                  (a)  identify family members, siblings or relatives of the
                      unaccompanied minor, present on the territory of  the
                      Member States;

                  (b)  establish the existence of proven family links;

                  (c)  assess the capacity of a relative to take care of the
                      unaccompanied minor, including where family  members,
                      siblings or relatives of the unaccompanied minor stay
                      in more than one Member State.

             5.    Where  the  exchange  of  information  referred  to   in
                  paragraph 4 indicates that more family  members,  siblings
                  or relatives  are  present  in  another  Member  State  or
                  States, the Member State where the unaccompanied minor  is
                  present shall cooperate with the relevant Member State  or
                  States, to determine the most appropriate person  to  whom
                  the minor  is  to  be  entrusted,  and  in  particular  to
                  establish:

                  (a)  The strength of the family links  between  the  minor
                      and  the  different   persons   identified   on   the
                      territories of the Member States;

                  (b)   the  capacity  and  availability  of   the   persons
                      concerned to take care of the minor;

                  (c)  the best interests of the minor in each case.

             6.   In  order  to  carry  out  the  exchange  of  information
                  referred to in paragraph 4, the standard form set  out  in
                  Annex VIII to this Regulation shall be used.

                  The requested Member State shall endeavour to reply within
                  four  weeks  from  the  receipt  of  the  request.   Where
                  compelling evidence indicates that further  investigations
                  would lead to more  relevant  information,  the  requested
                  Member State will inform the requesting Member State  that
                  two additional weeks are needed.

                  ...

    Home Office: Dublin III Regulation  Version  2.0:  Transferring  asylum
    applicants into and out of the UK where responsibility for examining an
    asylum claim lies with the UK  or  with  another  EU  Member  State  or
    Associated State (18 April 2019)

                                 "Background

         ...

         The Dublin III Regulation  is  consistent  with  the  principle  of
         family unity in accordance with the  European  Convention  for  the
         Protection of Human Rights, the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  and
         the best interests of the child.  The provisions  on  family  unity
         and the best interests of  the  child  are  primary  considerations
         which may result in the State responsible for examining the  asylum
         claim being the State where an asylum claimant's family members  or
         relatives, as defined in the Dublin  III  Regulation,  are  legally
         present or resident (depending on the circumstances of  the  case).
         The determination of responsibility for examining an  asylum  claim
         based on family links  does  not  anticipate  the  outcome  of  the
         examination of the claim, only that the merits of that  claim  will
         be examined by the responsible Dublin State.

         The criteria determining  responsibility  also  reflect  the  basic
         principle that the State which played  the  greatest  part  in  the
         applicant's presence in the area to which the Dublin III Regulation
         applies should normally be responsible for  examining  his  or  her
         asylum claim.

         The  Dublin  III  Regulation  gives  Dublin  States  discretion  to
         derogate from the responsibility criteria.  It does so through  the
         'discretionary clauses', which permit a Dublin State to examine  an
         asylum claim lodged with it, or when asked  to  do  so  by  another
         Dublin State, even if such examination is  not  its  responsibility
         under the Regulation's responsibility criteria. A Dublin State  may
         ask another Dublin State to accept  responsibility  for  an  asylum
         claim to bring together family relations  on  humanitarian  grounds
         based in particular on family or cultural considerations  in  cases
         where the strict application of  the  Regulation  would  keep  them
         apart.

         ...




                              Policy intention

         The policy intention is to deliver a fair and effective Dublin  III
         Regulation transfer process both into and  out  of  the  UK,  which
         supports the principles enshrined within the Dublin III  Regulation
         by:

         .    applying its criteria and mechanisms so that an  asylum  claim
             is examined by a single responsible State

         .    reinforcing the principle that asylum seekers should claim  in
             the first safe country and as soon as they enter the territory
             of the Dublin States

         .     ensuring  fair,  objective  criteria  are  applied   in   the
             determination of responsibility for examining asylum claims

         .    ensuring consideration of the principles of  family  unity  in
             respect  of  determining  the  Dublin  State  responsible  for
             examining an asylum claim

         .    ensuring respect for family life and the best  interest  of  a
             child are a primary consideration when applying the Dublin III
             Regulation

         ...

         .    allowing for derogation from the responsibility  criteria,  on
             humanitarian  grounds,  in  order  to  bring  together  family
             relations and examine a claim  for  international  protection,
             even if such examination is not the responsibility  under  the
             binding criteria laid down in the Dublin III Regulation

         .    ensuring that the fundamental human rights of  those  who  are
             subject to  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  procedures  are  not
             breached

         .    ensuring cases are dealt with as  expeditiously  as  possible,
             particularly in cases involving unaccompanied children

                     Application in respect of children

         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
         requires the Secretary of State to make arrangements  for  ensuring
         that immigration, asylum and nationality functions  are  discharged
         having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of
         children who are in the UK.

         Although section 55 does not apply to children outside the  UK  the
         statutory guidance, Every  Child  Matters:   Change  for  Children,
         clarifies the approach to be taken by requiring staff to take  into
         account the spirit of the duty and to abide by any international or
         local agreements that are in place.  The application of the  spirit
         of the duty means that when a claim or request  has  been  received
         that requires a response you must be alert to any indications  that
         the child may be in need of assistance, support or protection  from
         harm that may be best provided by the authorities  in  the  country
         where the child is present.  If  this  is  the  case  and  wherever
         possible the normal providers of relevant services to  children  in
         that country should be informed where  there  are  safeguarding  or
         welfare needs that require attention.

         The requirement to abide by any international or  local  agreements
         in place means just that.  When considering a 'take charge' request
         under the Dublin III Regulation, the presumption must be that those
         making the request are doing  so  having  taken  into  account  the
         safety and welfare needs,  and  well-being  in  the  form  of  best
         interests of the child who is the subject of the request.  However,
         acting in a way that takes account of these interests is  a  shared
         responsibility at this point and you must carefully consider all of
         the information and evidence provided as to how  a  child  will  be
         affected by a decision and this must be  addressed  when  assessing
         whether  an  applicant  meets  the  criteria  in  the  Dublin   III
         Regulation.  In addition, you must demonstrate  that  all  relevant
         information and evidence provided about the  best  interests  of  a
         child, such as a sibling or other relative, in  the  UK  have  been
         considered.  This is required  as  a  particular  obligation  under
         section 55 as well as by the more general provisions of the  Dublin
         III Regulation.  You must  carefully  assess  the  quality  of  any
         evidence provided. Original documentary evidence from  official  or
         independent sources must be given  more  weight  in  the  decision-
         making process than unsubstantiated statements about a child's best
         interests.

         ...

             Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union

         Article 24 of the Charter concerns children.  It reads:

             'Children shall have the right to such protection and care  as
             is necessary for their well-being.   They  may  express  their
             views freely.  Such views shall be taken into consideration on
             matters which concern them in accordance with  their  age  and
             maturity.  In all actions relating to children, whether  taken
             by public authorities or  private  institutions,  the  child's
             best interests must be a primary consideration.   Every  child
             shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis a personal
             relationship and direct contact with both his or her  parents,
             unless that is contrary to his or her interests.'

                     European Convention on Human Rights

         Not all  Dublin  State  human  rights  obligations  are  explicitly
         covered by the responsibility criteria set out in  the  Dublin  III
         Regulation, but these broader human rights obligations  must  still
         be taken into account when applying the Dublin III Regulation.  The
         European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) provides  the  framework
         for ensuring the rights and fundamental freedoms of individuals  in
         European signatory states.

         ...







                     Article 17 - Discretionary clauses

         Article 17(1) is known as the 'sovereignty clause'.  It  permits  a
         Dublin State  to  decide  to  examine  a  claim  for  international
         protection lodged with it even if it is  not  responsible  for  any
         other reason laid down in the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   In  other
         words, this provision concerns a situation where,  for  example,  a
         claimant is in the UK and has lodged a  claim  here  and,  although
         another Dublin State is responsible for examining the claim,  there
         are exceptional compassionate  circumstances,  such  as  individual
         human  rights  considerations,  that  justify   the   exercise   of
         discretion to examine the asylum claim in the UK.

         ...

         Article 17(2) also concerns the  exercise  of  discretion,  but  in
         different  circumstances.   It  makes  specific  reference  to  the
         situation where either a Dublin State carrying out the procedure to
         determine responsibility or the  responsible  Dublin  State  itself
         may, at any time before a first decision on the  substance  of  the
         protection claim is made, request another  Dublin  State  to  bring
         together any family relations  on  humanitarian  grounds  based  in
         particular on family or cultural considerations.  For  this  reason
         this provision is sometimes  known  as  the  'humanitarian  clause'
         (compared to the 'sovereignty clause', above).

         Unlike  the  terms  'family  member'  and  'relative',   the   term
         'relations' is not defined  in  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   The
         reference to family and cultural considerations  in  Article  17(2)
         allows Dublin States to exercise their discretion to bring together
         individuals who are part of an extended family group recognised  in
         other cultures.  The persons concerned must consent in writing.

         In all Article 17 cases - either the sovereignty clause in 17(1) or
         the humanitarian clause in 17(2) - the evidence submitted with  the
         request to exercise discretion must  be  coherent,  verifiable  and
         detailed.  Situations in which it would be appropriate to  exercise
         discretion to examine the claim(s) in the UK when  the  UK  is  not
         otherwise responsible will be rare and  on  an  exceptional  basis.
         Any decisions to exercise discretion must be agreed  by  a  manager
         (minimum SEO).

         ...

                           Unaccompanied children

         Unaccompanied children may lodge an  asylum  claim  in  one  Dublin
         State when they have family in another Dublin State.  In such cases
         the Dublin III Regulation provides that the State  responsible  for
         examining the asylum claim will be that where  the  family  member,
         sibling or relative (as defined in the Dublin  III  Regulation)  is
         legally present, provided this is in  the  best  interests  of  the
         child (and that in cases involving relatives, that the relative  is
         able to take care of the child).  The purpose of  the  transfer  is
         for the asylum claim to be examined on  its  merits  and  does  not
         anticipate the outcome of the consideration of the asylum claim  or
         permission to remain in that State.

         In 2013 the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) ruled  in
         MA and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department C-648/11
         that where an unaccompanied child with no  family  members  legally
         present in the territory of a Dublin State  has  lodged  an  asylum
         claim in more than one Dublin  State,  the  Dublin  III  Regulation
         should be interpreted so that responsible State  is  the  State  in
         which the most recent claim for asylum is lodged and this is in the
         best interests of the child.  Although there is provision  for  the
         transfer of unaccompanied children  this  is  only  appropriate  in
         family related circumstances where the  bringing  together  of  the
         child with his  or  her  family  member,  sibling  or  relative  is
         considered to be in the best interests of the child. Any case where
         there is evidence that it may  be  in  the  best  interests  of  an
         unaccompanied asylum-seeking child to request that  another  Dublin
         State accept responsibility for examining his or her  asylum  claim
         on family grounds must be discussed with  a  senior  caseworker  in
         TCU, who may then wish to seek further advice from Asylum Policy.

         ...

        Family tracing: special provisions for unaccompanied children

         Article 6 of the Dublin III Regulation  concerning  guarantees  for
         minors (children) provides that for the purposes  of  applying  the
         provisions relating to responsibility for examining an asylum claim
         the Member State where the unaccompanied child has  lodged  his  or
         her claim shall take appropriate action to identify family members,
         siblings or relatives on the territory of the Dublin  States.   The
         Commission Implementing Regulation includes  a  specific  form  for
         this purpose.  The aim of  the  standardised  information  exchange
         related to unaccompanied children is, in line with the child's best
         interest as a primary consideration, to identify the child's family
         members, siblings or relatives present  on  the  territory  of  the
         Dublin States, establish  the  existence  of  proven  family  links
         between them, to assess the capacity of a relative to take care  of
         the child and where relevant, determine the most appropriate person
         to whom the child is to be entrusted.

         ...

                              Rejected requests

         In the event of a negative reply to a  take  charge  or  take  back
         request, it is open  to  the  requesting  State  to  challenge  the
         refusal if it feels that the refusal was based on  a  misappraisal,
         or when it has additional evidence to put forward, by  asking  that
         its formal request be re-examined.  This  must  be  done  within  3
         weeks of the receipt of the negative reply.  The  requested  Dublin
         State shall strive to reply to a re-examination  request  within  2
         weeks.  However, a lack of an answer within 2 weeks is not the same
         as accepting the request as acceptance by default is  not  possible
         at this stage in the procedure.  Further information on this can be
         found in Article 5(2) of the Implementing Regulation  1560/2003  as
         amended by Implementing Regulation 118/2014.

         ...

              Dublin process: requests for transfer into the UK

         ...

         Both Articles 8(1) and 8(2) require the transfer to be in the  best
         interests of the child. The best interests of the child must always
         be a primary consideration when applying the Regulation  in  family
         unity cases.  When  assessing  a  child's  best  interests,  Dublin
         States should cooperate with  each  other  taking  due  account  of
         factors such as family  reunification  possibilities,  the  child's
         well-being   and   social   development,   safety   and    security
         considerations and the views of the child in accordance with  their
         age and maturity, and background.

         The European Intake Unit (EIU) will work with the  local  authority
         in which the family member, sibling or relative  of  the  child  is
         residing.  Local authorities will  be  requested  to  undertake  an
         assessment with the family or relative(s) once the family link  has
         been established, in addition to  the  checks  undertaken  by  EIU,
         which will inform a recommendation to EIU as to whether the request
         should be accepted or rejected.  The checks and  assessment  to  be
         undertaken  by  the  local  authority  will  be  outlined  in   the
         Department for Education's forthcoming Friends and Family Guidance.
          All decisions on whether to accept a request to take charge  of  a
         child's asylum application (and so accept the transfer of  a  child
         to the UK) will be the responsibility of the Home Office;  however,
         these  decisions  will  be   informed   by   the   assessment   and
         recommendation provided by local authorities.

         ...

      Unaccompanied children: notifying local authorities and or social
                                  services

         You must ensure that both local authority  children's  social  care
         services at the child's point of entry and where the child's family
         member, sibling or relative reside are  notified  of  the  transfer
         request under the Dublin III Regulation.  This must be done as soon
         as possible after the formal request to  take  charge  is  received
         from the requesting State.

         You must engage local authorities'  children's  social  care  teams
         throughout the process, seeking their advice in  every  case.   You
         must keep accurate records of what information is relayed,  who  is
         spoken to, when and  by  whom.   Article  12  of  the  Implementing
         Regulation  1560/2003,  as  amended  by   Implementing   Regulation
         118/2014 refers to the role  of  authorities  responsible  for  the
         protection of children  having  full  knowledge  of  the  facts  to
         consider the ability of the  adult  or  adults  concerned  to  take
         charge of the child in a way which serves their best interests.

         Article 12 also acknowledges that there may be cases  where  family
         members, siblings, or relatives stay in more than one Dublin State,
         in which case  the  State  in  which  the  child  is  present  must
         cooperate with the State(s) concerned to determine:

         .    the strength of the family links between  the  child  and  the
             different persons identified across the Dublin States

         .    the capacity and availability of the persons concerned to take
             case of the child

         .    the best interests of the child in each case

         ...

         When considering a request to transfer an  unaccompanied  child  to
         the UK under the Dublin III Regulation,  you  must  adhere  to  the
         spirit of the section 55 duty and  careful  consideration  must  be
         given to their safeguarding and welfare needs  in  assessing  their
         best  interests.   You  must  work  with  local   statutory   child
         safeguarding agencies in the UK in order  to  develop  arrangements
         that protect children  and  reduce  the  risk  of  trafficking  and
         exploitation.

         The re-establishment of family links would normally be regarded  as
         being in accordance with the section 55  duty,  but  this  may  not
         always  be  the  case.   Whilst  a  non-exhaustive  list,  the  re-
         establishment of family links  would  not  be  in  accordance  with
         section 55, for example, if it is identified that:

         .    the safety of the child or their family will be jeopardised

         .    the child has a well founded fear of relevant family members

         .     the  relevant  family  members  are  the  alleged  actors  of
             persecution within the claim for asylum which has not yet been
             finally determined

         .    the child is a recognised or potential victim  of  trafficking
             in which the family were knowingly complicit

         .    the child has shown  to  have  been  previously  exploited  or
             abused or neglected by their family, or claims  to  have  been
             previously exploited or abused or neglected  by  their  family
             and this has not been conclusively discounted

         ...

      Sponsorship undertaking in cases involving unaccompanied children
                  (Article 8 of the Dublin III Regulation)

         A sponsorship undertaking form must be sent to their family  member
         or relative in the UK and  representative  (where  notification  is
         given) as soon as a transfer request  is  received.   Five  working
         days must be given to complete and return the form.  If it  is  not
         returned  within  this  time  limit  you  must  pursue  return   by
         telephone, if a number is available, or by sending a further letter
         requesting a response.

         Whilst not a legal requirement of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  or
         Implementing Regulation,  the  sponsorship  undertaking  form  will
         require the family to state clearly whether they  are  willing  and
         able to receive the child.  It will bring to the attention  of  the
         UK   family   member   or   relative,   their    obligations    and
         responsibilities, and it will provide them the opportunity to raise
         any issues or questions about their obligations or responsibilities
         prior to a child's arrival.

       Confirming the status of the family member, sibling or relative

         Under Article 8 of the Dublin III Regulation you must be  satisfied
         when considering a transfer request that the parties are related as
         claimed and that the claimant's family member, sibling or  relative
         is legally present in the UK.  Where the subject of the request  is
         an unaccompanied child in addition to the family member, sibling or
         relative's legal status  in  the  UK  having  been  confirmed,  the
         transfer must also be in the child's best interests.

         ...




                   Dependency and discretionary provisions

         ...

         Article 17 is a discretionary clause which sits outside of  Chapter
         III of the  hierarchy  criteria.   It  allows  a  Dublin  State  to
         exercise discretion and examine an asylum claim even if it  is  not
         its responsibility under the criteria laid out in  the  Dublin  III
         Regulation. Article 17(2) is relevant to family unity  cases  where
         an applicant for asylum is in another Dublin State (a formal asylum
         claim must have been lodged) and there are family relations in  the
         UK.  Article 17(2) can only be applied if all  persons  give  their
         consent and a formal request by  the  Dublin  State  in  which  the
         applicant is present/the responsible State, must be made  before  a
         first decision on the claim for asylum is taken.

         Article 17(2) provides that a Dublin State may (at any time  before
         a first decision regarding the substance is taken) request  another
         to take charge of an applicant  in  order  to  bring  together  any
         family relations  on  humanitarian  grounds.   Written  consent  is
         required from the persons concerned in Article 17(2) as part of the
         request.

         Where an Article 17(2) request  is  received  from  another  Dublin
         State,  caseworkers  should  consider   whether   there   are   any
         exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate  factors  which   may
         justify the UK exercising discretion and  accepting  responsibility
         for the claim, notwithstanding that the UK is not bound  to  do  so
         under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   There  may  be   exceptional
         circumstances raised by the evidence  submitted  with  the  request
         from the other Dublin State which  would  result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the applicant or their family relations.  It
         is  for  the  requesting  Dublin  State  to  demonstrate  what  the
         exceptional circumstances or compassionate  factors  are  in  their
         case:  the  evidence  submitted  with  the  request   to   exercise
         discretion must be coherent, verifiable and detailed in  line  with
         the Dublin III Regulation's general provisions on evidence.

         Each request must be decided on its individual  merits  .  However,
         situations in which it would be appropriate to exercise  discretion
         will be rare and on an exceptional basis.  In  considering  whether
         or not to exercise discretion caseworkers should  act  consistently
         with the Immigration Rules and  policies  on  family  members,  for
         example the Immigration Rules Appendix FM - Family Members.

         Caseworkers must discuss with a senior caseworker  any  case  where
         the exercise of discretion under Article 17(2) may  be  appropriate
         before accepting a request.

                         Confirming the relationship

         ...

         The onus is on the applicant and their  qualifying  family  member,
         sibling, relative or relations in line with the relevant provisions
         in the Dublin III Regulation (Articles 8-11, 16  and  17(2)  Dublin
         Regulation (EU) No. 604/2013) in the UK to prove their relationship
         and satisfy you that they are related as claimed.

         ...

         In addition  to  elements  of  proof,  circumstantial  evidence  or
         indicative evidence may also be submitted with a transfer  request,
         such as:

         .    verifiable information from the applicant:

             O    any documents an applicant wishes to rely upon should  be
                  provided   in   English,   or   accompanied   by   English
                  translations

             O    the onus is on the requesting Dublin State to provide the
                  translation, however you have the  discretion  to  arrange
                  for an untranslated document  to  be  translated  at  Home
                  Office expense where this is justifiable in the individual
                  circumstances of the case - the expectation is  that  this
                  will be justified only in rare, exceptional cases and only
                  after consultation with a senior caseworker

         .    statements from the family members concerned

         .     statements  or  information   from   the   authorities   with
             responsibility for the child in the requesting Dublin State

         .    reports or confirmation of the information by an international
             organisation such as UNHCR, International Committee of the Red
             Cross or Save the Children

         ...

         As above, you must be  satisfied  that  the  applicant  and  family
         member, sibling, relative or relations in the  UK  are  related  as
         claimed  if  the  UK  is  to  accept  a  request   to   acknowledge
         responsibility for examining an  asylum  claim  lodged  in  another
         State. The applicant and their UK-based qualifying  family  member,
         sibling or relation should provide  sufficient  evidence  to  prove
         their relationship  and  satisfy  you  that  they  are  related  as
         claimed.   You  must  consider  whether,   on   the   'balance   of
         probabilities'(the  civil  law  standard),  there   is   sufficient
         information to accept that the parties are related as claimed.   In
         other words, you must decide whether,  after  looking  at  all  the
         evidence, it is more likely than not that  the  applicant  and  the
         person in the UK are related as claimed.

         ...

         You  must,  having  considered  the  evidence  submitted   by   the
         requesting State  (proof  or  circumstantial  evidence,  as  above,
         including information provided  on  standard  forms  which  aim  to
         establish the proven family link and the  dependency  link  between
         the applicant and his or her child, sibling or parent, as  well  as
         to establish the capacity of the person concerned to take  care  of
         the dependent person), information contained in Home Office records
         and evidence submitted by the person in the UK, be  satisfied  that
         the parties are related as claimed.



         You must be mindful of the difficulties that  people  may  face  in
         providing  documentary  evidence  of  their  relationship.    Those
         fleeing conflict zones or dangerous situations may not have time to
         collect supporting documents  and  may  not  realise  they  may  be
         required.  However, depending on the circumstances and  country  of
         origin it may well be possible for documents to be  sent  by  post,
         faxed or emailed.

         ..."

